
LECTURES 
on the 
PHILOSOPHY 
of 
WORLD HISTORY 
Volume 1: Manuscripts of the Introduction 
and The Lectures of 1822-3 


GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH HEGEL 
LECTURES ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
WORLD HISTORY 
VOLUME 1 
MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
AND 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Edited and Translated by 
Robert F. Brown and Peter C. Hodgson 
with the assistance of 
William G. Geuss 
CLARENDON PRESS • OXFORD 

OXFORD 
\1NI'f'BUITI' ...... 
Great Clamtdoo Street, Ox:fOl'd ox2 6DP 
OxfOJd Universitr Prt:8ll is a departllle.ot of tbt University of Oxford. 
11 furthers the UDinnity's objective of escdlaw;e in research, scholarship, 
aod education by publisbiog worldwide iD 
Osford New York 
Aucldaud Cape Town Dares Salaam HOD& K.oag ICanchi 
Kuala Lmnpur Madrid Mclboumt Mexico City Nairobi 
New Delhi S1wJcbai Taipei TMooto 
W.rh offica iD 
~ 
AIISiria Brui.l Chile Cud! Republic: Fraaa Greecz 
Gaatalail Huapry Italy Japan Poland PonupJ. SiDgapon 
Solnh Xona Swiaerlaad 'IhRi1ad Turkey Uba.i~~e V~et~~am 
Qdocd if a ~trade mad: of ODord Univcrsiry Pn:ss 
iD lbe UK. aDd iD artaiD ocher counuies 
Pllbliabcd in lbe Uait.ed State5 
by Oxford UDivaairy Pressluc., New York 
lbinoiWDe is a tnnslatiooof G. W. F. Hegel, vone-,~tripu II (JBl6-18J1J, 
edited by Wallc:r Jacdake (YOI.. 18 of Gnmnmelu Wri.t, 
~ 1995 by Felix Meiller Verlag GmbH, Hamblzrsl, 
pp. 121-207; and G. W. F.lqd, Vor~esN..,. iiber d# PhilosopbW Jn 'llehg~u. 
&rlirl. JB22-l82J, ediud by Karl HeiQz Ikiog, Karl Brehotu, and Hoo Nam Seelmum 
('1'01. 12 of Vorbmfll'l: .1\Jugeriblte Nllt:huhri(ters tllfJ ~. 
© 1996 by fdix MeiDu Verlag GmbH, Hamburg). 
© ~When F. Brown and Petu c. Hodpoa 2011 
The mont righl:5 of lbe author have beat alllialed 
Daubaa riP& Oxfud Uniwniry l'ral (maker) 
Pint pablisbed 2011 
AU rigbu raerved. No part of chis publicatioo _,be~ 
SIOred in a mrienl S}'Slenl, or traDSIIIitred., iD 8llf form or by any IDC:aD$, 
wicbomlhc prior- permisllioa. iD wriDDg of Oxford Univusirr Pr-. 
or as apressl.y pernUtud by law, or IDider ta1D5 agned with lbe appropriate 
~apbia rigbts arpoizatioll.. Euqairiea c:oiiCa"D.iDg reproductioo 
OIIISide die scope of lbe above sbould be san tolhc Rights [)epanmeot, 
Odanl Uoivc:niry Pr-. at lbe address above 
Yoa IDUil DOt ciltula12 tbi& book in aay adler ~or 
rover 
md you IIIIISI illlpoee 1be -
coadilioo oo any acquiier 
Britisb Lihnuy Caraloguillg in Publicatiolll Dara 
Dua available 
Ubrary of Coogras Cataloging io Publicarioo Data 
Data available 
Tn-t by SPI PDblisber Sa-vias, Pondichury, India 
Printed in Great Britaill 
oa acid-free paper by 
MI'G Books Group, Bocbin aad Kmg\ Lf'ID 
.IS8N 9'78-4-19-9601~7 
1 ) s 7 9 10 8 ' .. 2 

PREFACE 
With this book an entirely new verston of Hegel's Lectures on the Philoso-
phy of World History is made available to the English-reading public. Earlier 
editio~ in both Gennan and English, amalgamated various manuscript and 
lecture sources into an editorially constructed text that obscured Heget•s 
distinctive presentation in each of the five series of lectures he delivered on 
this topic. The present edition, based on Gennan critical editions, publishes 
Hegel's surviving manuscripts of his Introduction to the lectures, and then 
presents the full transcription of the first series of lectures, that of 1822-3. A 
second, later volume will publish the transcription of the last series, that of 
1830-1, together with selections from intervening years. The Editorial 
Introduction surveys the history of the texts and provides an analytic sum-
mary of them, enabling the structure of Hegel's presentation to stand out 
clearly; and editorial footnotes introduce readers to Hegel's many sources 
and allusions. The volume concludes with a glossary and a bibliography. For 
the first rime an edition is made available that pennits critical scholarly 
study. Presented in this way, the Weltgeschichte becomes more accessible 
than in the past. 
German pagination is provided in the margins. Foe the manuscripts of 
the Introduction, our source is Vorlesungsmanuskripte II (1816-1), edited 
by Walter jaeschke, Gesammelte Werke, xviii (Hamburg: Felix Meiner 
Verlag, 1995), 121-207. For the transcription of the Lectures of 1822-3, 
the source is Vorlesungen uber die Philosopbie der Weltgeschicbte, Berlin, 
1822-3, transcribed by K. G. J. von Griesheim, H. G. Hotho, and F. C. H. V. 
von Kehler; edited by Karl Heinz Dring, Karl Brehmer, and Hoo Nam 
See~ Vorlesungen: Ausgewiihlte Nachschrifun und Manuskripte, 
xii (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag, 1996), 3-521. 

PREFACE 
The editors, Robert F. Brown and Peter C. Hodgson, are deeply indebted 
to the assistance provided by William G. Geuss in reviewing and correcting 
the sections we translated and in initiating the translation of one of the 
sections. Our collaborative work has greatly improved the quality of the 
translations. Readers for the Press also reviewed the translation and made 
several helpful suggestions, for which we are grateful. Our thanks go to 
Walter Jaeschke for answering several questions and for providing a prelim-
inary typescript of the transcription by Karl Hegel of the Lectures of 1830--1. 
vi 

CONTENTS 
Editorial Introduction 
The Lectures on the Philosophy of World History 
Manuscripts of the Introduction 
The Transcriptions of the Lectures 
Previous Editions and This Edition 
Analytic Summary of the Texts 
Manuscript: Introductory Fragment, 1822, 1828 
Manuscript: Introduction, 1830-1 
Transcription of the Lectures of 1822-3 
Introduction: The Concept of World History 
The Course of World History 
The Oriental World 
The Greek World 
The Roman World 
The Germanic World 
MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
l 
1 
2 
5 
6 
11 
11 
12 
20 
20 
31 
31 
43 
50 
55 
Introductory Fragment, 1R22, 1828 
67 
Introduction, 11UO-l 
78 
A. The General Concept of World History 
79 
B. The Actuali7.ation of Spirit in History 
86 
a. The General Definition of Spirit as Intrinsically Free 
87 
b. The Means of Spirit's Actualization: Passions, 
Interests, Ideals 
89 
c. The Material of Spirit's Actualization: the State 
l 00 
d. The Constitution 
104 
C. The Course of World History 
1 07 

CONTENTS 
a. The Principle of Development 
b. The Stages of Development 
c. The Beginning of World History 
d. The Course of Development of World History 
Loose Sheets 
Also Spectacles of Endless Complexities 
C. Course [of World History) 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
INfRODUCTION: THE CONCEPT OF WORLD HISTORY 
The Types of Treatment of History 
Original History 
Reflective History 
Philosophical World History 
The Idea of Human Freedom 
The Fabric of World History 
The Concept of Spirit 
The Beginning of History 
The Progress of History 
The End of History 
H urn an Passions and the Divine Idea 
The Nature of the State 
The State and the Actualization of Freedom 
The Constitution of the State 
The State and Religion, An, Science, and Culture 
The State and Geography 
The Division of World History 
THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
The Oriental World 
China 
The Historical Records of China 
The Shu-Jing 
The Main Elements in Chinese Historv 
Characteristics of the Chinese State 
, 
The Moral Sphere, Subjective Freedom, and their Violation 
Ethical Customs 
The Sciences 
VIII 
107 
110 
11 1 
118 
127 
128 
133 
LH 
133 
136 
140 
146 
146 
147 
152 
155 
166 
169 
177 
177 
1 81 
184 
191 
205 
211 
211 
211 
211 
11.'1 
119 
123 
232 
1r 
BH 

CONTENTS 
Art 
Religion 
India 
The Principle of India 
The Region of India 
The Castes 
Civil Legislation 
The Religious Sphere 
The State and its History 
Astronomy and Art 
India in the Framework of World History 
Buddhism and Lamaism 
Persia 
The Principle of the Persian Empire 
The Geography of Ancient Persia 
The Zend People, Language, and Books 
lhe Religion of Light 
Assyria and Babylonia 
Sources for Persia and the Persian Empire 
The Medes and the Chaldeans 
The Founding of the Persian Empire by Cyrus 
Features of the Persian Empire 
Phoenicia 
"Ibe Religion of Astarte and Adonis 
The jewish Religion 
Egypt 
The Land of Enigmatic Marvels 
Egyptian History 
Features of the Land and Life of Egypt 
Religion and the Cyde of Nature 
Animal Worship 
How tht• F.gyptiam Envisaged Spirit 
Art and Arrhitt·rturt· 
The Dead and lmmortalit)· 
Privatt· or Particular Purpost· 
Transition to Grct·ce 
ix 
243 
243 
251 
251 
255 
257 
265 
273 
281 
290 
291 
295 
304 
304 
305 
307 
310 
316 
321 
322 
324 
326 
330 
331 
332 
334 
334 
336 
339 
343 
349 
]55 
357 
359 
363 
366 

CONTENTS 
The Greek World 
The Periods of Greek History 
The Origins of The Greek Folk Spirit 
Who Are the Greeks? 
The First Social and Political Organization 
Greek. Culture and Art 
Greek. Religion 
The Constitution of Greece 
The Maturity of The Greek Spirit 
The Persian Wars 
Athens versus Sparta 
Decline And Fall 
The Peloponnesian War 
The Emergence of Thought 
The End of Greek Life and the Age of Alexander the Great 
The Roman World 
The Roman Spirit 
Introduction 
The Origins of Rome 
Marriage and the Social Order 
Roman Religion, Utility, and the Aristocracy 
The Periods of Roman History 
The Formation of Roman Power 
Early Kings, Patricians, and Plebeians 
Expansion and Conquest 
The World-Dominion of Rome 
Rome's Place on the World Stage 
The Emperors: One Will Dominates AJI 
The Arrival of Christianity 
The Truth of the Idea 
The Appearance of the Idea 
Consequences of Christianity for Life and the State 
The Downfall of Rome 
The Germanic World 
Introduction 
The Idea and Historical Particularity 
The Beginning of Europe: Three Groups of Nations 
The Periods of The History of The Gennanic World 
I 
371 
372 
373 
373 
377 
382 
387 
399 
404 
405 
407 
413 
414 
415 
420 
426 
426 
426 
427 
428 
433 
436 
437 
437 
441 
442 
442 
445 
447 
447 
450 
457 
460 
461 
461 
461 
464 
467 

CONTENTS 
The Preparation of The Early Middle Ages 
469 
Commonality and Individuality 
469 
The Triumph of Panicularity 
473 
The Abstract Unity of Islam and its Challenge to Europe 
474 
The Middle Ages 
478 
The Empire of Charlemagne 
4 78 
Medieval Christianity 
479 
Political Developments: Relations between Church and State 482 
The Quest for the Presence of Christ in the Church 
488 
The Crusades 
4 92 
The Tum to the External World and Nature 
494 
The Transition To Modernity 
500 
~ 
500 
The Corruption of the Church 
501 
The Reformation 
503 
The Constellations of Europe after the Reformation 
507 
The History of Modernity 
509 
The Worldly Existence of the Modem Church: Wars of Religion 509 
The Formal Universality of Thought: The Natural Sciences 
514 
The Turn to Concrete Acruality: The Enlightenment 
517 
Conclusion 
521 
GLOSSARY 
SIBUOGP.APHY 
NAME INDEX 
SUBJECT INDEX 
523 
533 
545 
553 


EDITORIAL 
INTRODUCTION 
TilE LECll.JRES ON TilE PIDLOSOPHY OF WORLD HISTORY 
Hegel lectured on the philosophy of world history for the first time in the 
winter semester of 1822-3 in Berlin.1 The lectures were repeated on four 
occasions, in 1824-5, 1826-7, 1828-9, and 183~1. World history was the 
last discipline of Hegel's system to become the topic of lectures, with the 
exception of chose on the proofs of the existence of God, but thereafter they 
had a secure place in the two--year cycle of his lectures. These were also 
among the most popular of his lectures, for they served as an introduction to 
his thought and addressed other parts of his system as well, such as the 
philosophy of righ~ the philosophy of spirit, the philosophy of art, and the 
philosophy of religion. Prior to 1822-3, Hegel ueated world history in 
the context of his lecrures on the philosophy of right, where it comprised 
the third and final section of his discussion of the state. These lectures were 
published as a textbook in 1820-1,2 and thereafter Hegel developed philos-
ophy of world history into a full topic in its own right. Hegel's other major 
historical work, his lectures on the history of philosophy, also attained their 
final form during the Berlin period. 3 
1. Information for this first section is derivoi from me '&litorischer Bericht' in Georg \Vdhdm 
Friedrich Hegd. VorleSJingmrtlnJI.Skripte II (1816-1831), ed. Waltef Jaeschkc; Gesammelt41 Wn.e, 
xviii (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag. 1995), Jn-87; and from the 'Vorbcmerkung' and 'Anhang' 
iD Vorlestmger. Uber die Philosophie der Wehgeschicbte {Berlin l822J1823), cd. Karl Heinz Ilting, 
Karl Brehmer. and Hoo Nam Seelmaon. Vorlesungen: AMSgewiJhlte Nachscbri{um Nnd Manu-
sltripte, xii (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag. 1996), pp. vii-x. 527-36. Our tramla.tioos a.re &om 
these two edns. 
2. Ekmmts of the Phil0$ap/ry of Right, ed. Allm W. Wood. t& H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1992); see§§ .341-60 on world bisrory. 
l. l..ectMres on the History of Philosophy, 1825-6, 3 vols., eel. Robert F. Brown. tr. R. F. 
Br0WD aod j. M. Stcwan (Oxford: OlU'I.!Ddoo Press. 2006, 2009; a 1st ecln.. of vol. ili was 
publisbcd by the University of CaJifomia Press iD 1990). Hegel first lectwed OD the history oi 
1 

EDITO Rl AL INTRODUCTION 
Auditors' transcriptions (Nachschriften) exist for all of Hegel's lectures 
on world history, but his own manuscripts survive for only a fragment of the 
Introduction, used in 1822 and 1828, and for most of the Introduction in 
1830-1. The present edition, as explained more fully below, translates the 
manuscript materials and the transcription of the first lectures (1822-3) in 
this first volume, while a second volume will contain the transcription of the 
last lectures (1830-1) and selections from intervening years. 
MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTIO~ 
The Manuscript of 1822, 1828 
This manuscript consists of three sheets; the first sheet is in the Hegel 
Collection of the Staatsbibliothek PreuGischer Kulturbesitz in Berlin; the 
second two sheets are in the Deutsches Literaturarchiv of the Schiller-
Narionalmuseum in Marbach. The two sets of sheets are clearly connected 
and form a unitary whole, even though, through uncertain circumstances, 
they were separated and found their way to different locations. 
At the top of the first sheet Hegel wrote the date of the beginning of his 
lectures in 1828, 30 October 1 828; and, adjacent to this notation, the date of 
the beginning of the lectures in 1822, 31 October 1822. The two dates might 
suggest that Hegel wrote this manuscript for the earlier lectures and then at a 
later time revised it. But the order in which he wrote the dates, as well as 
differences in the quality and color of the ink, indicate that the extant sheets 
come from the later lectures. The earlier date was most likely copied from an 
earlier (and now lost) notebook, which served as a prototype for the prepa-
ration of the notes for 1828-9. Nonetheless, the manuscript agrees in 
content with the beginning of the lectures of 1822-3, except for marginal 
additions. It covers only the first two of three types of historiography. 
original and reflective history. before breaking off. In the Introduction ro 
the lectures other than those of 1822-3 and 1828-9, the varieties of hisrori-
ography are not discussed as such, and the Introduction begins with the 
philosophical concept of world histo~·. 
philosoph,· in Jena, 1805--6. The lecture-s were repeated eight times, and a tenth series had just 
begun pnor to his sudden death in 1831. Dunng the Berlin period ( 1818-1), Hegel also lectured 
regularly on log~c and metaphysics, philosophy of nature, philosophy of spirit, philosophv oi 
an, and philosoph~· of relig10n, and once on the proofs of the existence of God. 
4. The manuscript materials have been ed. and publ. bv Walter jaeschke in the work cited m 
n. 1 (pp. 111-2131. 
· 
2 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTIOI'< 
The Manuscript of 1830-1 
This manuscript has been in the Hegel Collection of the Staatsbibliothek 
since the end of the nineteenth century. It contains the date of the beginning 
of the lectures, 8 November 1830. The manuscript is very carefully prepared 
and evidences a great deal of editing and revision, so that it almost has the 
quality of a fair copy. In terms of both diction and care of composition it was 
apparently intended to serve as the preliminary stage of a publication, even 
though reports are lacking of a plan for publication such as exist for the 
proofs of the existence of God. 5 Despite its highly edited condition, the 
manuscript is not complete. A comparison of the manuscript with transcrip-
tions of the lectures of 1830-1 shows that at several significant places 
(marked as such in our translation), Hegel presented shorter or longer 
passages in the lectures that drew on earlier preparatory materials and for 
which today there is no extant manuscript. At other places the manuscript 
has passages that are not used for the lectures at all, and passages that differ 
from parallels in the lectures. Toward the end of the Introduction there is a 
diminishing agreement between the manuscript and the transcriptions, until 
in the last section (on 'the course of world history') they diverge completely. 6 
Hegel's announced topic for the winter semester of 1830-1 was not, as it 
had been previously, Philosophiam historiae universalis, but Philosophiae 
historiae universalis partem priorem. Thus he intended to lecture on only the 
first part of the philosophy of world history, and by this he in all likelihood 
meant the Introduction that preceded the historical presentation. Hegel 
apparently intended to reverse the tendency of the more recent lectures, 
which his son Karl Hegel described as reducing the philosophical and 
abstract aspects, expanding the historical material, and popularizing the 
whole. 7 However, Hegel in fact did not follow through with this plan and 
again lectured on the whole of the Weltgeschichte. We can only assume that 
he did not proceed as quickly as expected with the revision of the Introduc-
tion, and thus it was not possible for him to devote the entire course to 
introductory and conceptual maners. Hegel's Berlin rectorate fell during the 
5. On possible motives for a publication, see the Manuscript of 1830--1, n. :-"2. 
6. For a detailed comparison of the manuscript with Karl Hegel's transcription of tht 
lectures, see Walter Jaeschke, 'Das Geschriebene und das Gesprochene: Wilhelm und Kar: 
Hegel iiber den Begriff der Philosophie der Weltgeschichte', Hegei-Studien, 44 (Hamburg: 
Felix Meiner Verlag. 2009), 13-44. Jaeschke believes it is possible that the main source for 
the actual lectures was not the extant manuscript but other now-lost material~. 
7. See Karl Hegel's Preface to the 2nd German edn. of 1840, tr. John Sibree in 1857 as Thr 
Philosophy of History, with a new introduction by C. J. Friedrich !New York: Dover Pubhca· 
tions, 1956), pp. xi-xii_ 
3 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
preceding year (1829-30), and his numerous publication plans-a new 
edition of the Science of Logic, a revision of the Phenomenology of Spirit, 
a work on the Proofs of the Existence of God-made it impossible to 
undertake a thorough revision of the beginning of the philosophy of world 
history lectures. The writing of the manuscript probably occurred only in the 
weeks immediately preceding the beginning of the winter semester, that is, in 
October 1830; and, in place of the expansion of the Introduction that Hegel 
intended, his version in 1830-1 is shorter than that of 1822-3. 
Loose Sheets 
Two sets of loose sheets relate to the philosophy of world history. The first of 
these, contained in the Berlin Staatsbibliothek, beginning with the words 
'Also Spectacles of Endless Complexities', is written on the back of a single 
quarto sheet, which on the front has a notice by Eduard Gans on the current 
state of the july Revolution in France, dated 5 August 1830. This fragment 
relates to Hegel's preparation of his manuscript of the Introduction to world 
history. It represents a preliminary stage of the middle section of the manu-
script, in which Hegel discusses the means by which freedom is actualized in 
the world. Its themes are recognizable in corresponding passages of the 
manuscript. The motif of struggle and of the mutual destruction of particu-
lar passions is, to be sure, not found in the existing manuscript. But compar-
ison with the transcriptions of the lectures of 1830-1 shows that Hegel 
treated these themes, including his famous reference to the 'cunning of 
reason', immediately following the discussion of world-historical indivi-
duals, notably Caesar. In our edition this occurs at the transition from 
page 165 to 166 of the German text. 8 Since the fragment is one of several 
preliminary pieces to the manuscript, it is probable that Hegel wrote it at the 
beginning of his preparation for the lectures of 1830-1, namely in September 
1830. 
The second of the loose sheets, 'Course [of World History)', is owned by 
the Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, Florence. It is written on the back of a 
letter from Hegel to Friedrich Wilken, dated 27 November 1829. The 
fragment corresponds to the beginning of Part C, 'The Course of World 
History', in the 1830-t manuscript. But it is not a preliminary draft of this 
material as formulated in the manuscript; rather it contains themes found in 
the actual delivery of the lectures. 
8. See below, Manuscript of the Introduction, 1830-1, n. 44. 
4 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
THE TRANSCRIPTIONS OF THE LECTURES 
The Lectures of 1822-3 
Two excellent transcriptions exist of this first course of lectures: those 
prepared by Karl Gustav Julius von Griesheim (located in the Berlin Staats-
bibliothek) and by Heinrich Gustav Hotho (owned by the Bibliotheque de 
Sorbonne, Paris, the Victor Cousin Collection). Griesheim provides a care-
ful, complete, and reliable fair copy of Hegel's lectures, while Hotho's 
transcription was written down during the course of the lectures with 
many abbreviations and some obscurities. According to the German editors 
of the edition we have translated,9 Hotho is better at providing the language 
and philosophical conceptuality of Hegel without interjecting his own point 
of view, while Griesheim has fewer details and more summaries that reflect 
his own view. However, an astonishing amount of nearly verbatim agree-
ment exists between Griesheim and Hotho. Hotho serves as the guiding text 
(Leittext) for our edition, but the extensive agreement with Griesheim makes 
it possible to employ both sowces in the construction of a continuous, 
'integral' text, which approximates as closely as possible to what Hegel 
actually said. Where necessary, reference can be made to a third transcrip-
tion, that of Friedrich Carl Hermann Victor von Kehler (Staatsbibliothek), 
which is not complete and comprises only twenty-three quarto pages; Kehler 
also transcribed the 1824-5 lectures. 
In his first lectures on the philosophy of world history, Hegel devoted 
considerable attention not only to the Introduction but also to the Oriental 
World (China, India, Persia, Egypt), which comprises nearly half the volume 
following the Introduction. He shared the growing interest in Asia of the 
1820s and studied much of the available literature, acquiring a knowledge 
that he utilized also for lectures on the philosophies of art and religion and 
on the history of philosophy. Toward the end of his lectures he ran out of 
time and as a consequence his treatment of the Germanic world was com-
pressed. This imbalance was redressed in later lectures. 
From these lectures we learn that Hegel's treatment of geography (at least 
in 1822-3) is systematically anchored in his discussion of the state as one of 
its essential features, rather than the topic being treated separately or rele-
gated to an appendix, as in earlier editions. The state as the bearer of history 
has nor only a spiritual-cultural aspect but also a natural aspect, and in this 
9. VorleSJmgen uber die Philosophie der Weltgeschichu (seen. 1 ), 527-8, 531. For details on 
the methods of the German editors, see pp. 532-6. 
5 

EDITORIAl INTRODUCTION 
way it is the unity of spirit and nature. Historical events are objectifications 
of spirit in interaction with nature, yielding the history of the consciousness 
of freedom. The latter, as we shall explain below, also constitutes a theodicy, 
for the progress of freedom is the work of God in history. 
The Lectures of 1830-1 
Hegel's last lectures on the philosophy of world history were completed only 
a few months before his death in November 1831. A transcription by the 
philosopher's son, Karl Hegel, is in the possession of the Hegei-ArchiY 
(Ruhr-Universitiit, Boch~). and it will serve as the basis for our second 
English volume when the transcription is published in the Gesammelte 
Werke a few years from now, along with selected materials from intervening 
years. As we have indicated, these lectures provide a more balanced treatment 
of the four major 'worlds' or •realms' comprising world history (Oriental, 
Greek, Roman, and Germanic). 
We could have elected to hold our translation of Hegel's manuscript of the 
Introduction to the lectures of 1830-1 for this second volume, where it 
would appear along with the transcription of these lectures. However, 
there are good reasons for presenting all the manuscript materials together 
in a single volume, as is the case with the German critical edition ( Gesam-
melte Werke, vol. xviii). And the uncertainties involved in the delay led us to 
proceed with its publication now. 
PREVIOUS EDITIONS AND THIS EDITION 
Previous Editions 
Eduard Gans, a former student and friend of Hegel, was the first editor to 
work with these materials. His edition appeared in 1837 as volume ix of 
the Werke, an 18-volume edition prepared by an 'association of friends 
of the deceased'. Gans's edition was based principally on transcriptions of 
later lectures, especially those of 1830-1, but he also made use of Hegel\ 
lecture manuscript of 1830.
10 After his death, a second edition of the Werke 
appeared in 1840, edited by Karl Hegel, who added to what Cans had done 
10. See Gans's Preface to the 1st edn. in the reprint of the 2nd edn. in the fubiliiumSilusgabe. 
ed. Hermann ~l?'kner. xi IStuttgan: fL Frommans Verlag, 3rd edn., 19491 .. 14-15. Gans made 
use of transcnpnons of all the lecture series, but especially that of Karl Hegel for 1830-1. 
6 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTIOI'o< 
by introducing materials from earlier lectures. 11 John Sibree translated Karl 
Hegel's edition into English in 1857, and it remained the only English source 
for over a hundred years. 
In 1917 Georg Lasson published a 4-volume edition of the Welt-
geschichte. 12 The first volume of his edition, containing the Introduction 
(under the title Die Vernunft in der Geschichte) was revised by Johannes 
Hoffmeister in 1955, and the latter was translated by H. B. Nisbet in 1975. 13 
As the German editors of the new edition point out, all these earlier editions 
obscure the conception of the individual lectures and mask the changes 
Hegel introduced. They had the principal goal of producing an editorially 
constructed unitary text, of making 'a book out of lectures', 14 rather than of 
providing a critical source for study of the Weltgeschichte. 
According to his notes on the composition of the text, Lasson published in 
his first volume Hegel's 1830 manuscript of the Introduction. He interwove 
passages from the manuscript with parallel texts from the transcriptions, 
distinguishing the manuscript by larger type. For the transcriptions he used 
Griesheim as the source for the lectures of 1822-3, Kehler for the lectures of 
1824-5, and Stieve for 1826-7. Apparently unaware of Karl Hegel's tran· 
scription of the lectures of 1830-1, he assumed that Hegel lectured only on 
'Part One' in the final year. Where the lecture transcriptions available to 
Lasson paralleled the printed text of the second edition of the Werke, Lasson 
corrected the printed text in light of the transcriptions; but he found numer-
ous sections in the printed text for which no parallels existed in his tran-
scriptions, and these he reproduced exactly as they appeared in the published 
version. Thus Lasson's edition, apart from the manuscript, was an amalgam 
of diverse materials with no identification of sources and no distinction 
between lecture series. 15 
11. See Karl Hegel's Preface, The Philosophy of History, tr. Sibree, pp. xi-xii Uubiliium.sau>-
gabe, 16-201. He praised the lectures of 1822-3 as being the richest in philosophical conceptu-
ality, and he drew the Griesheim and Hotho transcriptions into his edn. 
12. Vorlesungen uber die Philosophie der Weltgeschichte (Leipzig: Verlag von Felix MemeL 
1917-20); i. Die Vernunft in der Geschichte (2nd edn., 1920; 3rd edn .. 1930); ii. Dre onenta-
lische Welt; iii. Dw griechische and die romische Welt; iv. Die germanische Welt. 
13. Die Vemunft 111 der Geschichte, ed. Johannes Hoffmeister (Hamburg: Verlag von Fein. 
Meiner, 1955 L uctures on the Philosophy of World History. Introduction: Reason in Histor)·. 
tr. H. B. Nisbet with an Introduction bv Duncan Forbes (Cambridge: Cambridge Universin 
Press, 1975). The remaining vols. of the Lasson edn., containing the main body of the text, were 
not translated. A tr. of the Introduction, based mainly on the Karl Hegel edn., was publ. b' 
Roben S. Hanman as Reason in History (New York: Bobbs-Merrill Co .. 1953i. 
14. This ts the goal announced by Gans Uubiliiumsausgabe. 12 •. 
15. Reason in History, 221-6. 
7 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
Hoffmeister made only minor changes to Lasson, although he recognized 
that the whole needed to be re-edited. In addition to following Hegel's own 
subdivisions in the 1830 manuscript of the Introduction, he made use of the 
sheets containing what he called 'The Varieties of Historical Writing', realiz-
ing that this material constituted the beginning of the lectures in 1822 and 
1828. 16 Consequently, Hoffmeister placed it at the beginning of the volume, 
designating it the 'first draft' of the Introduction, followed by the 'second 
draft • of 1830. In both cases the manuscript materials were printed in italic, 
and they were interwoven with passages from the transcriptions in roman 
type. 
17 The 'geographical basis of world history' and the 'division of world 
history' remained in the appendix. As indicated, it is this edition that was 
translated by Nisbet in 1975; and until now it has remained the best source 
for Hegel's Introduction in English. 
This Edition 
The underlying principle of the critical edition of Hegel's lectures is that the 
transcriptions must be treated separately and published as independent units. 
Obviously, it is impractical to edit and translate transcriptions of all five of 
Hegel's series of lectures on Weltgeschichte. A selection must be made, and 
here the principal criterion is the reliability and intrinsic value of the sources. 
The two best transcriptions are those by Griesheim and Hotho of the first 
series, 1822-3; and the possibility of constructing an integral text based on 
both sources makes this an obvious choice. Karl Hegel's transcription of the 
lecrures of 1830-1 is also reliable, and its inclusion will make it possible for 
the critical edition to publish the first and the last lecture series, with selec-
tions from intervening years. 18 Added to this is the fact that the manuscripts 
of the Introduction are from the first and the last series. 
16. Lasson did not have access to the manuscript fragments of 1822 and 1828 for his 1st edn. 
but only to indications from the Werke edns. and from the transcription of 1822-3 that the 
lntrodu..Lion had begun differently in this year. He provided an edited version of the material, 
•alling it a "special introduction', placing it after the 'general introduction' based on the 1830-1 
manuscript. When the 1822 and 1828 fragmmts became available, he added them as 'addenda' 
to later edns. of his work but did not alter the 'special introduction', so the same material 
lppeared twice, at rwo different places. 
17. Reasonm History, 5-9. 
18. This is the plan for vol. xxvii of tbe Gesamme/te Werke, which will be issued in two or three 
pan-volumes. 1be fust part-volume will contain the transcription of the lectures of 1822-3, based 
on Griesheim and Hotho. The editorial principles for preparing this volume may differ from those 
used by llnng, Bre~r, and Seelmann in vol. xii of the Vorleszmg-a series also published by 
Maner Verlag and 1mended as preliminary to the treatmmt of the lectures in the Gesammelte 
Werke. 1be sccood pan -volume will contain Karl Hegel's transcription of the lectures of 1831}...1. 
8 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
Considerable agreement exists between Walter jaeschke's edition of the 
manuscripts of the Introduction in volume xviii of the Gesammelte Werke 
and the earlier work of Lasson and Hoffmeister on these materials. Conse-
quently we have been helped by H. B. Nisbet's translation of the manuscripn 
in Reason in History. However, our translation differs from his in many 
ways, large and small, and we always follow Jaeschke's critical text and 
annotations. For the transcription of the lectures of 1822-3 in volume xii of 
the Vorlesungen, there is no precedent in English, although parallel passages 
are found in the Sibree translation of the second Werke edition. 
Ow translation is a collaborative effort. The work of each of us has been 
read and corrected by the other two. The German editors of the lectures of 
1822-3 provide detailed annotations for the sections on China, India, and 
Persia, but very few for the remainder of the work where (they claim) Hegel 
draws upon well-known sources. We have extensively supplemented 
the annotations for these other sections and have provided additional anno-
tations for China, India, and Persia.19 The German editors of both the 
manuscripts and the transcriptions include a detailed apparatus on the 
construction of the text. We have not translated the apparatus except at a 
few places where there is a significant bearing on meaning or where we 
prefer an alternative reading of the main text. We have held bracketed 
insertions to a minimum, not reproducing the many brackets used by the 
editors of the transcription to complete sentences grammatically. In the 
manuscripts we indicate Hegel's frequent use of emphasis by means of 
italics; elsewhere italics are found sparingly. We have provided the subhead-
ings for the 1822-3 lectures. Pagination of the German texts is in the 
margins, with the page breaks marked by vertical slashes. 
Our translation principles follow those originally worked out for the 
Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion. 20 These principles are in brief: ( 1) 
to achieve uniformity in the translation of key terms, we have worked from a 
and a third part-volume may contain selections from other lecture series. Hegel's lecrure manu-
scripts have been published in vol. xviii of the Gesammelre Werke (see above, n. 1 ). Drawing 
upon vol. xviii of the Gesammelre Werke and vol. xii of the Vorlesungen, we are able to proceed 
now with the translation of the first vol. of our English edn. 
19. For this purpose we have relied in pan on The Oxford CLJssitAJI Dictioru~ry, 2nd edn .• ed. 
N. G. L. Hammon and H. H. Scullard (Oxford: Oxford Universit)' Press, 1977), and on The 
Neu/ Columbia Encyclopedia, ed. William H. Harris and .Judith S. levy _INew York and 
London: Columbia llniversirv Press. 1975). We also have drawn on resources trom the mtemet. 
20. Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion, ed. Peter C. Hodgson, tr. R. F. Brown. P. C. Hod~. 
andj. M. Stewart, 3 vols. (Oxford: Oarendon Press, 2007). j_ 52-8. Originally publ. by the UruversJO 
of California Pnss, 1984-7. 
9 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
glossary, which is modified from that used for the Philosophy of Religion 
and the History of Philosophy, and is printed at the back of the volume; 
(2) we have not sacrificed precision for the sake of fluency and believe that 
the more precisely Hegel's thought is rendered the more intelligible it gener-
ally becomes; (3) we have attempted to preserve a sense of the spoken word 
and of Hegel's oral delivery; (4) we have used a 'down' format and have 
avoided capitalizing common Hegelian terms such as 'idea' and 'spirit'; (5) 
we have employed gender-inclusive references to human beings and wher-
ever possible to God. 
We conclude these preliminary remarks by noting that what follows after 
the Introduction is not a history in the sense of a chronological account of 
events but rather a cultural and political portrayal of various 'worlds', a 
'portrait' of what is distinctive about each of several great civilizations 
(Chinese, Indian, Persian, Egyptian, Greek, Roman, and Germanic or Euro-
pean), and why Hegel thinks they constitute a meaningful progression in the 
development of spirit, truth, and freedom, viewed on a large scale. For the 
purpose of philosophical portraiture, the medium of oral lectures is ideally 
suited. Duncan Forbes claims, in his Introduction to Reason in History/- 1 
that Hegel's philosophy 'is best approached in the spirit of Plato's, as 
something that is in danger of being destroyed or distorted if it is written 
down'. Forbes points out that Hegel was in fact reluctant to publish, and 
that only four of his books were published during his lifetime. To give these 
publications a definitive priority over his spoken lectures, with which he was 
almost exclusively occupied during the last decade in Berlin, is to treat his 
philosophy as a dosed book, whereas it was an attempt to 'think life', 
dialectically yet concretely, holistically yet with shrewd insight into detail-
and it is precisely the details that occupy most of the Weltgeschichte. The only 
way to appreciate this kind of thinking, says Forbes, is to 'watch it at work' on 
the podium. Once it ceases to be thinking and becomes thought, once it stops 
speaking and is reduced to an editorial amalgam (as with older editions of 
the lectures), it ceases to be a living process and becomes a system. The 
principal goal of Hegel's philosophy is to permit thinking to remain open, 
fluid, and continuous. 
Our analysis of the texts attempts to honor that intention. In this 
analysis, references to foomotes are to those belonging to the texts of the 
various units under discussion, not to the note sequence in the Editorial 
I ntrod ucrion. 
21. Re~~Son m History, pp. xiii-xiv. 
10 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
ANALYTIC SUMMARY OF THE TEXTS 
MANUSCRIPT: INTRODUCTORY FRAGMENT: 1822, 1828 
By way of indicating what is distinctive about a philosophical history of the 
world, Hegel begins his lectures in 1822 and 1828 by surveying three varieties 
of historiography: original history, reflective history, and philosophical history. 
Originafl2 history is written by historians such as Herodotus and Thucy-
dides who have themselves witnessed, experienced, and lived through some 
of the events they describe. They transposed things that merely happened 
and existed externally (res gesta) into the realm of intellectual representation 
by constructing narrative and poetic23 accounts (historia). It is the historian 
who does this, who fashions a whole out of what has passed away, thereby 
investing it with immortality, giving it 'a more exalted and better soil than 
that transient soil in which it grew'. Original historians, however, do this 
only with events that for the most part are contemporaneous with them and 
that belong to their own world, the world in which they themselves are 
participants, leaders, authors. Such historians are immersed in the material 
and do not rise above it to reflect on it. They have written the 'bibles' of their 
peoples,24 and through them the material comes to us, fresh and alive. 
Refleaive histo,Y.5 goes beyond what is present simply to the author; it 
depicts what was present not only in time but also in the life of spirit. It 
includes everything written by those whom we customarily call historians. 
22. 1be Gennan is urspriirrglich, which can also be translated 'primeval' or 'primordial'. For 
analyses of Hegel's discussion of the varieties of historiography, see George Dennis O'Brien, 
Hegel on Reason and History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975); and Burleigh Taylor 
Wilkins, Hegel's Philosophy of History (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1974). 
23. While Hegel claims that poetry, legends, and folksongs do not belong to original history 
because they are the product of an 'obscure' consciousness, it is clear that he uses epic poetry 
such as the Mahabharata and Homer to help construct the worlds of India and Greece. He even 
says that Homer is the Grundbuch of Greece. 
24. The Holy Bible of jews and Christians is an example of such an original history. Peoples 
invest such histories with divine inspiration. which is a way of recognizing their archetypal 
llllponance in constituting identiry. 
25. Reflective history (reflektierende Geschichte) is to be distinguished from speculative 
history, which is in fact philosophical history. The subtypeS of reflective history are universal, 
pragmatic, critical, and specialized (for the latter two, see the beginning of the Lectures of 
1822-3 ). Hoo Nam See I mann argues that the three main types of history (original, reflective, 
(lhiiCWlphical) correspond to Hegel's underlying logical structure: original or immediate unity, 
separation or reflection. and re-established unity on a higher, mediated level. See Weltgeschichte 
.ns I eke der merJSchlichen Freiheit: Hegels Geschichtsphilosophie in der Vorlesung von 1822123 
(doctoral dissertation, University of Saarland; Saarbriicken. 1986), 7-14. 
11 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
The author comes to the material with his own spirit, which likely is 
different from the spirit of the content itself; and everything depends on 
the maxims and representational principles that the author applies to the 
content and ro the style of his writing. 
Hegel distinguishes between several modes of reflective history. The first 
consists of surveys of a people or country or even the world as a whole, 
which are compilations from the accounts of original historians and other 
sources. When the reflective historian attempts to depict the spirit of the age 
about which he writes, it is usually his own spirit that is heard (compare an 
original historian such as Polybius with a compiler such as Livy). No more 
than such a writer can we transpose ourselves completely and vividly into 
the times of the past; so, for example, as much as we admire Greece and find 
its life congenial, we cannot truly sympathize with the Greeks or share their 
feelings. As an example of a historian who endeavors to compile individual 
traits and to portray them in a faithful and lifelike manner, Hegel introduces 
a reference to Leopold Ranke (see note 25) when he revises his notes in 
1828-9. He does not have a high opinion of Ranke, who in his judgment 
offers an assortment of details of little interest, with little or no reference to 
political concerns and general purposes. 
The second mode consists of pragmatic history, of which Hegel is both 
critical and appreciative. On the one hand, the historian can, like an amateur 
psychologist, take up moral questions, deriving motives not from the concept 
of the thing itself but from particular inclinations and passions, and offering 
hortatory reflections. On the other hand, this pragmatism can be a rational 
history, which focuses on a totality of interests such as a state, a constitution, 
or a conflict. Here the historian reflects on how a people becomes a state, what 
the ends of a state are, what institutions are needed to bring true interests to 
actuality, and what sort of necessity is at work in history. 
The manuscript breaks off at this point, without completing reflective 
history or addressing philosophical history. For the continuation we must 
refer to the transcription of the lectures of 1822-3. 
MANUSCRIPT: INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
Instead of surveying the varieties of historiography, Hegel begins the lectures 
in 1830-1 by remarking that •the philosophy of world history is nothing 
other than the contemplation of it by means of thinking'. But this raises the 
question as to whether thinking should not be subordinated to what exists. 
12 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
to what is given empirically. 'Philosophy by contrast is assumed to have its 
own thoughts, produced by speculation from out of itself without reference 
to what is. With such thoughts it supposedly approaches history as a mate-
rial to be treated; it does not leave it as it is but arranges it in accord with 
thought and constructs a history a priori.' The aim of history, so it is said 
(by historians such as Ranke?), is simply to discover 'what happened'. 
To refute the claim that philosophy imports its thoughts into history is the 
purpose of the first section of Hegel's Introduction. 
A. The General Concept of World History 
The sole conception that philosophy brings with it is the admittedly auda-
cious claim that reason governs the world and that world history is a rational 
process. From the point of view of history itself, this is a presupposition. But 
philosophy, by speculative cognition, proves that reason (and with it, God) is 
substance and infinite power-both the material of all natural and spiritual 
life and the infinite form that activates this content. Such reason is its own 
presupposition, the absolute final end; it is the activation and bringing forth 
into world history of both the natural universe and the spiritual realm. 
Nothing is revealed in the world except the divine reason, its honor and 
glory: this may be presupposed as demonstrated. The demonstration is 
provided by the whole of philosophy, including the science of logic, the 
philosophy of nature, and the philosophy of spirit, one of whose compo-
nents is Hegel's Weltgeschichte. Thus the presupposition is also the result of 
the inquiry we are about to undertake. What will make itself evident from 
the consideration of world history itself is that a rational process has been 
taking place in it, 'that world history is the rational and necessary course of 
world spirit'. This presupposition and result, this 'speculative cognition', can 
be described as Hegel's metahistory; and every historian has a metahistorical 
perspective, whether acknowledged or not.26 
26. See Hayden White, Metahistory: The HistoriCJJI Imagination in Nineteenth-Centu?' 
EUTope (Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973), ch. 2. Hegels 
metahistorical perspective is stated abstractly and from a bird's eye perspective in Elements o( 
the Philosophy of Right, §§ 341-4; in the details of the Weltgeschichte, he comes down 10 eanh. 
The metahistorical perspective does not exclude historical and humanist perspecuves. ln fact. 
Geist for Hegel assumes three basic shapes: that of human individuals, that of peoples or nanons 
( Vo/ksgeister), and that of universal or world spirit ( Weltgeist, which is a form ofabsoluter Ger.st 
or God). The three are reciprocally dependent on each other. God is the ontologiCal ~ound. but 
th. 
d · 
1· 
· 
· 
he • h. k' commun1rv of human 
IS groun 1s of such a nature that it requires acrua 1zauon m t 
t IC 
., 
Sittlic.hkeit (ethical life) because the triune God is absolute in~ubjectivity. See Alan ~anen. 
Hegel's Idea of Freedom (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), ch. 1; and Rudolf J. S.eben. 
13 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
But history must also be taken as it is, and we must proceed in a historical, 
empirical fashion. Hegel's empiricism is manifestly evident from the Welt-
geschichte, which pursues the minutest details of analysis and accords great 
attention to the framework provided by nature. Hegel accuses the profes-
~ional historians themselves of introducing a priori fictions into history, such 
as claims about an original, primeval people who lived in perfect insight and 
wisdom. But truth does not reside on the superficial plane of the senses; in 
regard to everything scientific (wissenschaftlich), 'reason may not slumber 
.md must employ meditative thinking.n Whoever looks at the world ratio-
nally sees it as rational too.' 
The conviction that reason has governed and continues to govern the 
world is not ours alone. Hegel cites philosophical precedents going back to 
Anaxagoras and Socrates. The alternative is to attribute everything to 
chance, as Epicurus did (and as many others have done in modernity and 
postmodernity). The conviction about reason also assumes another form, 
that of our own religious faith that the world is not given over to chance and 
external, contingent causes, but is ruled by providence. 'Divine providence is 
the wisdom that has the infinite power to actualize its purposes, that is, the 
absolute, rational, final purpose of the world.' This is spiritual power, not 
physical power, and it interacts with finite spirits freely; it does not coerce 
them but, as we shall see, works both in a positive fashion as a lure and in a 
negative fashion at cross-purposes to narrow human interests. Most people 
believe that the providential plan is hidden from our eyes, that it is presump-
tuous to want to know it. It is allowed to appear only here and there in 
particular cases. But we should not be content with this 'petty commerce' on 
the part of faith in providence. Rather, the ways of providence are its means, 
its appearance in history, and they lie open before us. 
At this juncture Hegel is led to consider the question as to whether it is 
possible to know God. In a comment remarkably prescient of the posnnod-
em suspicion of religion on the part of philosophy, he says that he has chosen 
not to avoid this question of knowing God in order 'to allay any suspicion 
that philosophy shies away from or should shy away from mentioning 
religious truths, or that it circumvents them because it does not, so to 
Hegel's Philosophy of History: TheologiC<JI, Humanistic, and Scientific Elemmts (Washington. 
DC: llniversily Press of America, 1979) . 
.!7. The reference lo 'meditativr thinking' (Nachdenken) is an aspeCl of Hegel's mystical 
perspecuv.e~ 1.e; h1s ratronal mysticism or 'Hermeticism'. See Glenn Alexander Magee, 'Hegel 
.llld MysuCJSm, m The Cmabrldge Comparaon to Hegel and Nineteenth-Century Philosophy, 
ed. Fredenck C. Be1ser (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008), ch. 10. 
14 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
speak, have a good conscience about them'. With this he advances one of his 
central theological claims. 'In the Christian religion God has revealed god-
self; i.e., God has given it to humanity to know what God is, so that God is 
no longer something hidden and concealed.' Along with this revelation 
comes a theodicy, a justification of God's ways in the world. We are able 
to comprehend the horrendous evils of the world as negated through the 
negation of the negative. How this is accomplished will be examined shonly. 
B. The Actualization of Spirit in Histocr8 
World history takes place in the realm of spirit (Geist), and the actualization 
of spirit is what constitutes history. This actualization occurs in three (or 
four) main stages . ..!9 The Orientals did not know that spirit, the human being 
as such, is intrinsically free; with them, only one is free, the despot. The 
consciousness of freedom first arose among the Greeks, but they, like the 
Romans, knew only that some are free (adult male citizens for Greeks, rulers 
and aristocrats for Romans), and their beautiful freedom depended on 
slaves. The Germanic or European nations, through Christianity, were the 
first to know, in principle, that the human being as human is free, that 
freedom of spirit constitutes humanity's inherent nature. The application 
of this principle to actuality is the long and arduous process that is history 
itself. 30 In Hegel's famous formulation: 'World history is the progress of the 
consciousness of freedom'. History involves the 'education of the human 
race',31 but to what? To freedom-not directly, but as a result. Hegel notes 
the immense difference between the principle as it is intrinsically and what it 
is in actuality, and the immense labor required of spirit to achieve the 
principle. But freedom contains 'the infinite necessity within itself to bring 
itself to consciousness and to actuality'. The question then becomes: what 
means does it employ for its actualization? 
28. Hayden White observes that Hegel views the historical field as both a 'synchronic 
ttructure' and a 'diachronic process' (Metahistory, 106). The first comprehends history as a 
lpectacle of purpose; the second comprehends it as a process of development. The present 
>ect1on is concerned with purpose (the actualization of spirit in history), while the next section 
,"The Course of World History') presents development as a meaningful process. 
29. See Philosophy of Right, §§ 352-3. The typology of stages of the consciousness of 
freedom is already found in Hegel's 1820-1 lectures on the history of philosophy (Hisrory of 
Philosophy, i. 181, 195). 
30. In the Germanic World (1822-3), Hegel says that the spirit oi the modem era is that of 
freedom, and that 'the ages prior to our age have faced hut one lahor, have had hut one ta-.k, and 
that has been to incorporate this principle into actuality' (below, p. 506). 
31. We know from the Philosophy of Right,§ 343, that Hegel's reference here is to Lessing's 
EdJ.cotion of the Hllm47J Race (sec n. 31 of the text). 
15 

ED ITO RIAL INTRODUCTION 
Hegel's answer focuses on two instruments: human passions and divine 
ideals. The first represents a negative means, the second a positive or affir-
mative means. History shows that the actions of human beings proceed from 
their needs, passions, and interests, although individuals sometimes pursue 
limited goodness and other virtues. Passions, private interests, the satisfac-
tion of selfish impulses are the most powerful forces in history because 
they do not heed the limitations of justice and morality. They are not just 
irrational instruments but reason governed by emotions, self-interest, fear, 
and greed. Hegel testifies eloquently to the destruction wrought by these 
passions, to the immensity of evil, the untold miseries of individual human 
beings, the misfortunes that have befallen even the finest creations of culture. 
the transience of everything. • As we look upon history as this slaughterhouse 
in which the happiness of peoples, the wisdom of states, and the virtues of 
individuals are sacrificed, our thoughts are necessarily impelled to ask: to 
whom, to what final purpose, have these monstrous sacrifices been made?' 
Hegel does not answer this question conceptually or in the fonn of logic. 
He begins by noting that passions are necessary because they provide the 
volition and energy by which anything happens at all. To accomplish some-
thing, our own interests must be at stake. But all the individual activities by 
which individuals satisfy their own ends •are at the same time the means and 
instruments of a higher and wider purpose, which they know nothing of but 
unconsciously carry out'. He provides examples of how human action can 
produce an effect entirely different from that intended: a man, out of revenge 
(whether justified or not), sets fire to someone else's house, but the fire 
spreads, destroys much property, costs many lives, and the arsonist, rather 
than being vindicated, is punished for a crime; or Caesar, by opposing his 
rivals out of self-interest, gained undivided sovereignty over the Empire, thus 
accomplishing not merely his own negative end but the end for which his age 
was ready. At this point a break occurs in the manuscript, one filled by 
the first of the Loose Sheets and the orally delivered lectures of 1830-1 
(see note 44). It is from the very conflict and destruction of particular 
interests that the universal emerges. This is what we may call the cunning 
of reason: it makes use of the passions for its own purposes and is not 
scathed or damaged by them; indeed, it brings itself forth through them. 
The conceptual truth behind the metaphor is that reason, because it is 
spiritual and not physical or natural power, must work negatively; it over-
comes opposition and evil not directly, not by intervention in natural pro-
cesses, but indirectly, by letting evil combat evil, letting passions wear 
themselves out. Reason in its 'cunning' subverts human intentions, has the 
power of apparent weakness (not of •force' or •violence'), and brings good 
16 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
out of evil. The deep tragedy of history is that in the process many are 
sacrificed and a terrible price is paid for human freedom. But the vision is 
ultimately tragicomic, for good does come out of evil, however imperfectly, 
and reconciliation is accomplished through conflict. 32 
The second instrwnent is positive. Morality, ethical life (Sittlichkeit), and 
religion are means that are suitable to their ends because they are governed by 
the divine principle of reason, the divine idea of freedom. In fulfilling rational 
ends, individuals not only fulfill their own particular ends but also 'partici-
pate in that rational end itself'. The term 'participation' suggests that the 
divine idea functions as a 'lure' that draws human actions to higher ends; it 
has the power of 'persuasion', not coercion. This language of process philos-
ophy is not found in Hegel, but he is moving toward it. He is interested in 
human responsibility combined with divine initiative, but acknowledges that 
the development of this theme would require a complete treatise on freedom. 
The great project of history is that of overcoming the difference between and 
achieving the unification of the subjective side (the knowing and willing 
individual) and the objective, substantial side (the universal final end). 
The institution through which this project is carried out is principally the 
state-the institution that bears all other hwnan institutions: laws, morality, 
32. It can hardly be said that Hegel makes light of evil, but the question remains as to whether 
his tragicomic perspective is one that can be embraced by a post-Holocaust, terrorist-afflicted, 
environmentaUy destructive nuclear world. We have experienced what seem like irredeemable 
horrors. Have the problems become so immense that philosophicaJ hope and religious faith are 
destroyed? But to concede to evil is to let it defeat us. See Emil L. Fackenheim, God's Presence in 
History (New York: New York University Press, 1970). See also Eberhard]iingel's comment: 'In 
making what one will of Hegel's c~~m~ing of reason (a not very humanly-reassuring expression), 
one ought not, in any event, to overlook the fact that Hegel does not rationalize away "the total 
mass of concrete evils" in world history. Quite the contrary, he takes it so seriously that it calls 
for reconciliation, indeed, reconciliation on the part of the self-divesring God .... This reconcil-
iation takes place in the course of history itself. "Indeed, there is no arena in which such a 
reconciling knowledge is more urgently needed than in world history." And where such 
reconciling knowledge takes place is the point at which world-historical "consideration" 
becomes "a theodicy, a justification (Rechtfertigung) of God". For the judgment of the world 
t Weltgericht), which takes place in world history conceived as theodicy, it means that this is not 
a iudgment for the purpose of retribution (Verge/tung) but instead a iudgment in the service of 
reconciliation ( Versohnung). God justifies godself not by exercising retribution but instead by 
reconciling.' Eberhard Jiingel, • "Die Weltgeschichte ist das Weltgericht" aus theologischer 
Perspektive', in Rudiger Bubner and Walter Mesch (eds.), Die Weltgeschicht~ Weltgeri_cht? 
St~ntgarter Hegel KongrefJ 1999 (Stuttgart: Klen-Cotta, 2001 ), 25.Jiingel's quotations are !rom 
the Manuscript oi 1830--1 (see below, pp. 85--6). Hegel introduces the concept of the "cunning of 
reason' in The Science of Logic, u. A. V. Miller (london: George Allen & Unwin, 1969), 746--7, 
where he contrasts 'cunning' (List) with the 'force' or 'violence' (Gewalt) that would result if 
reason intervened directly in natural processes. On world history as 'world judgment', see 
below, pp. 166, 463 incl. n. 2. 
17 

EDITORIAl INTRODUCTION 
family, civil society, culture, art, religion. World history is about the spiritual 
IO(alitics called states, each of which constitutes a unique Volksgeist. Hegel 
is concerned at this point to refute misconceptions about the state. The first 
trror is the opposite of the conception that the state is the actualization of 
~om; it is the view that humans are free by nature, but that in society and 
~ 
state this natural freedom must be restricted (Hobbes, Rousseau, Kant. 
Fichtc; sre note 61 ). The second misconception concerns patriarchy, which is 
~rded as providing the circumstances in which juridical and ethical con-
l-ems are satisfied. However., the patriarchal condition is based on the family 
~lationship, which is the earliest form of ethical life, while the state is the 
second. consciously developed form. The bond that binds individuals moves 
&om love (the family) to service (patriarchy) to citizenship (the state). 
1'he conditions of citizenship are spelled out by a state's constitution or 
srsmn of government (Verfassung). Hegel notes that, in determining the 
distinction between ruler and ruled, constitutions have been classified as 
those of moNJrchy, aristocracy. and democracy; and the question has been 
raistd as to which is best in securing the end of the state, which is the 
~alization of freedom. The answer cannot be aristocracy, where the 
locus is on the education of princes or rulers alone· nor can it be that of 
pure subjective free will. Oligarchy and anarchy are' not true options. The 
~~tal definition of freedom 'has led to the widespread theory that the 
r~IJC 15 the only just and true constitution'. However, Hegel adds that 
advocates of republican government 'have seen that such a constitution, 
evm though it may be the best, in actuality cannot be introduced everv-
~· 
and that, because lnmuJns are what they are one must make do wi~h 
a i!QXf degne f freed 
' 
. 1._._ of the 0 
om. As a consequence, under these circumstances and 
m 1611' 
moral 
di . 
f 
be the 
con tJon ° the people, the monarchical constitution 
may 
most workable OPU? , Thus H 
l' 
f 
f 
. 
. 
I 
monarch is based 
·. 
ege s pre erence or a constuut1ona 
y 
on pragmattc as well as theoretical considerations. 
C. Thr ~of 
World HistorvJJ 
History 110( only has a 
hr : 
. . 
. 
prognss.es H. ...... -L . sync oruc Structure; It IS also a diachronic process: It 
••u uut;~• nme. According to H 
1 thi 
I · 
tbere.timofspirit ·cha 
. 
ege 
s progression occurs on y m 
only an eternally. 
~e5mnature,nomatterhowdiversetheyare,exhibit 
• 
recumng cycle. In natur th 
· 
h. 
h 
sun. In accord with the . 
e 
ere 1s not mg new under t e 
hinarchy ot inA--.~_ SCI~ 0
~ his time, Hegel understood nature to be a 
·---tJQ•ucrJt, coeXIsting lev 1 
. 
· 
e s, not an evolutiOnary process wtth 
33- Ser n. 72 of the Man 
· 
uscnpt. 
18 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTIOI\ 
higher stages coming later in time. Darwin's soon-to-be formulated theory of 
evolution would require that Hegel's view of nature as purely repetitive be 
modified and that 'history' be applied to nature, although in a profoundly 
different sense than to spirit. 
The history of spirit is one of progressive development. Spirit does not 
drift about in the external play of contingencies but rather makes use of 
contingencies for its own purposes. 'Spirit in itself is opposed to itself; it has 
to overcome itself as the genuine and hostile hindrance to its purpose.' Thus 
development within spirit is 'a hard and ceaseless conflict with itself', nor a 
harmless and conflict-free process of emergence as in organic life. The end of 
spiritual development is spirit itself in its essence, the concept of freedom. 
Because the development comes through conflict, its trajectory has not been 
one of steady advance but rather one of retrogression and destruction as well 
as of progression and rebirth. Here Hegel repeats his typology of stages in 
the history of the consciousness of freedom, noting that spirit starts from 
what is only a possibility and attains its goal as a result of the travails of 
histon-. 
Repeating, too, his critique of the notion of an original paradisiacal 
human condition-and adding a critique of politically conservative theories 
of an original revelation of all knowledge-Hegel says that we take up 
history at the point where rationality begins to appear in worldly existence, 
where it steps forth into consciousness, volition, and deed. The prehistory 
prior to the formation of family and tribal life lies outside our interest. With 
the discovery of Sanskrit and the Indo-European linguistic connection. we 
know that tribal peoples spread outwards from Asia and developed in 
disparate ways from a primordial kinship. 'History' begins with the writing 
of historical narrative, the historia rerum gestarum, which we assume ap-
pears more-or-less simultaneously with the happenings themselves, the res 
gestae. This narrative takes the form of family memorials and patriarchal 
traditions, but 'it is the state that first supplies a content that not only lends 
itself to the prose of history but helps to produce it'. 
The development of spirit's consciousness of freedom forms a sequence of 
stages-stages in the 'self-developing shape of freedom'. One must be famil· 
iar with this concept philosophically in order to grasp it empirically. Ad· 
vances in this shape occur on a higher plane than that of individual morality. 
Therefore the deeds of the great human beings, the individuals of world 
history, appear justified not only in their own frame of reference but also 
from the standpoint of the larger world. Each stage of world histo~· must 
develop into a political state, where the arts and sciences of culture flourish. 
including eventually philosophy. Philosophy in the form of the 'reflective 
19 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
understanding' attacks the 'sacred and profound elements that were naively 
introduced into the religion, laws, and customs of peoples, and debases and 
dilutes them into abstract and godless generalities. Thought is then impelled 
to become thinking reason, and to seek and accomplish in its own element 
the undoing of the destruction that it brought upon itself.' The work of 
the understanding ( Verstand) is destructive; that of speculative reason 
( Vernunft) is constructive. 
The manuscript of 1830-1 continues for a few more pages with reOec-
rions on thought and freedom, unity and diversity, Eastern and Western 
culture, and the like. It breaks off before reaching a conclusion. 
TRANSCRIPTION OF lliE LECfVRES OF 1822-3 
Introduction: The Concept of World History 
The Types of Treatment of Hjstory 
The first few pages of the transcription of the lectures of 1822-3 parallel what 
is said in the introductory fragments of 1822 and 1828 about original history 
and reflective history. Expanding 'on his discussion of pragmatic historiogra-
phy, Hegel remarks that moral lessons and judgments are often regarded as 
the essential purpose of the study of history. 'But the fate of peoples and the 
overthrow of states occur on a different plane than that of morality, a higher 
and broader one. '34 For this reason, 'history and experience teach that people 
generaUy have not learned from history', and the formative power of history 
is something other than the reflections derived from it. 
In his oral lectures Hegel addresses two additional modes of reflective 
history, critical (reflection on the writing of history) and abstractive or 
specialized (special histories within a universal outlook, such as me histories 
of an, science, government, Ia w, navigation). The latter forms a transition to 
the final type of historiography. 
The point of view of philosophical world history is not that of a particu-
lar, abstract universal but of a concrete universal, which is. the 'guiding soul 
of events'. This guide is not a mythical figure like Mercury but is the idea; 'it 
is spirit that guides the world, and its guidance is what we wish to learn 
about'. This universal is infinitely concrete and utterly present, for spirit is 
eternally present to itself. The spirits of peoples ( Volksgeister) are the totaliry 
34. See also~ of the~ 
of Ri!bt, f 345. 
20 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
of the one world spirit ( Weltgeist). Thinking is the self-production of spirit. 
Spirit's highest goal is to know itself; this achievement, however; is its demise 
and marks the emergence of a different stage and a new principJe. World 
history is the matrix in which this transition comes a bout. 
The first category of history is that of change or alteration ( Veri:inder-
ung}-the constant supplanting of one individual or one civilization by 
another. When viewing 'the ruins of ancient splendor', a profound sadness 
comes over us, a sense that everything passes away and nothing endures. But 
at the same time alteration and decline entail the creation and emergence of 
new life. That new life arises out of death is the radical idea of Oriental 
metaphysics, its greatest conception. The phoenix builds its own funeral 
pyre but arises anew from the ashes, rejuvenated. However, this image 
applies only to natural life, not to spirit. The Western conception is that 
spirit comes forth not merely rejuvenated in its old form but rather elevated 
and transfigured, purified and elaborated. Thus the conception of simple 
alteration becomes that of spirit, which radiates its energies in all directions. 
Its activity has the most varied results: sometimes it shines with beauty and 
freedom; sometimes it is mere dominion and power; sometimes all one's 
strength produces only tiny results; other rimes an insignificant event has 
enormous consequences. 
We grow weary from the press of details and ask: what is the purpose of 
aU these events and their enormous cost? Beneath the din and noisy appear· 
ances of history, we wonder whether there is concealed 'an inner, silent, 
secret working'. Thus we arrive at the third category of history (beyond 
alteration and new life), that of reason, the conception of a final end within 
itself. Such a final end 'governs and alone consummates itself in the events 
that occur to peoples', and therefore we find 'reason in world history'. 
Philosophical world history is more an exposition than a demonstration of 
this proposition, for in history reason simply proves itself. When it comes to 
proof, Hegel acknowledges the hermeneutical circle: 'In order to recognize 
reason in history or to know history rationally, we must surely bring reason 
along with us; for the way in which we look upon history and the world is 
how it in tum looks to us.' History as such is empty; 'nothing is to be learned 
from it if we do not bring reason and spirit with us'. 
If we do not bring reason, we must at least bring faitb-'the faith that 
there is an actual causality an history, and that intelligence and spirit ace nor 
given over to chance'. Our faith is thar a 'divine will and final purpose rule in 
history•, that 'God governs the world'. But when it comes to more specific 
matters, we refrain from inquiring about the providential plan, for God's 
ps-ovidence is said ro be inscrutable and inexhaustible. To this "humility' we 
21 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
must juxtapose what the Christian religion is about: that God's nature and 
essence are revealed to humanity, that we know what God is, that we have 
the obligation to know God. 
Hegel summarizes his philosophy of providence in a condensed formula-
tion that is reminiscent of Aristotle: 35 
[The] final end is what God has willed for the world. To this end everything is 
sacrificed on the altar of the world; this end is what is operative and enlivening. 
What we know about it is that it is what is most perfect, and God wills the most 
perfect; what God wills can only be God godself and what is like unto God, God's 
will. God's will is not distinguished from God, and philosophically we call it the idea. 
In his discussion of the Greek World, Hegel fleshes out this view slightly. 36 
He compares the Christian category of providence with that of fate for the 
Greeks. In the case of both Christians and Greeks, the connection of parti· 
cularities to the universal is incomprehensible, for destiny 'unfolds on a soil 
that must be called contingent in respect to particular purposes'. These are 
particularities such as the life-journey of each individual. 'But Christians 
have the view that all these particularities serve for the best, that God guides 
all these contingencies and leads them to the best outcome .... The Greeks 
lacked this view just because what is particular, the end of individuals, was 
not taken up into God.' The Christian focus on the value of 'the this'-a 
theme to which we shall return-makes all the difference. 
At the beginning of the Germanic World, Hegel remarks that providence 
is 'a veiled inner power that achieves its end and prevails via the recalcitrant 
volition of the peoples-so that what it achieves and what the peoples desire 
are often at odds'. And his concluding words are: 'What is happening and 
has happened does not just come from God but is God's work.' 37 The 
question remains, how does God work? 
The Idea of Human Freedom 
We consider the idea-the divine idea-in the element of human spirit: it is 
the idea of human freedom. Freedom is the way in which the idea brings 
35. Aristotle, Metap~·sic.s 1072b 18-30 tThe Basic Works of Aristotk. ed Richard McKeon 
!New York, 1941) •. 8_80). Hegel quotes tlus passage at the end of the Encyclopedia of the Philo· 
sophicalSOences. § :J77 I see Hegel's Philosophy of MIM, tL WiUiam Wallace and A. V. Miller 
IOxlord: Clarendon Pres.!.. 197] ). 315 ). As an abstract formulation it IS also reminiscmt ol 
lnbniz's theodic~. 
36. See below, pp. 397-8. 
37. See below, pp. 465, 521. 
22 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
itself forth, displayed in a series of ethical shapes whose sequence constitutes 
the course of human history. Here we grasp the idea in the concrete shape of 
spirit, not as the logical idea. At this point Hegel introduces his famous 
metaphor of the weaving of crossed threads: 
Two elements are salient: first. the idea itself as abstract; and second, the human 
passions. The two together form the weft and the warp38 in the fabric that world 
history spreads before us. The idea is the substantial power, but considered for itself it 
is only the universal. The passions of humanity are the arm by which it actualize~ 
itself. These are the extremes; the midpoint at which these elements are bound 
together, by which they are reconciled, and in which they have their living unification. 
is ethical freedom. 
There follows a section on the concept of spirit. Spirit as such is thinking; 
it is consciousness and self-consciousness, and it is what distinguishes us 
from animals. It gives us a measure of control over drives and passions. and 
it enables us to orient our action toward goals. This means that spirit is onl~· 
what it makes of itself; it has its being and concrete existence only as a result. 
not as what is initial and immediate. Animals are born nearly complete. but 
human beings must cast off the natural aspect and be nurtured, disciplined. 
and educated. The most sublime example of this quality of spirit, claims 
Hegel, is found not in human beings, who are finite creatures, but in God. 
In God, howeve~ it is not a mere example but the truth itself, of which 
everything else is but an example. For Christianity, God is spirit: 'Father' 
(the abstract universal), 'Son' (the object that cleaves itself, posits an other 
to itself that is just as immediately God's own self), and 'Spirit' (the self· 
possessing, self-knowing unity of the first two, being-present-to-self-in-the· 
other). The whole is spirit, and as spirit God is for the first time the true. 
the complete. The Trinity makes the Christian religion the revealed and 
only true religion. If Christianity lacked the Trinity, thought might find 
more truth in other religions. The Trinity is the 'speculative element" in 
Christianity, the idea of reason in it. 39 
Hegel next takes up a lengthy discussion of the history of spirit, a history 
that unfolds in three stages: the beginning of history, the progress of history. 
and the end of history. At the beginning of history, we find a natural stare. 
which is a state of bondage and sensuous desire if by 'nature' we mean a 
condition of immediacy, not the concept or essence of a thing. Hegel refutes 
38. Seen. 19 of the text. On the idea of human freedom in general, see Panen. He~!e/5 Idea o! 
Freedor.n.c~. 2-6. 
39. The full elaboration of God as T riniry is found in vol. iii of the Lectures on the Philosoph 
of Religion. 
23 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
the popular view, held by Schelling and Schlegel and others of his time, based 
on the biblical story and other creation myths, that the original condition 
was one of beautiful innocence and pure knowledge. The assumprion here, 
he notes, is that humanity could not have developed from 'animal stupor'. 
This assumption is correct, but humanity could well have developed from 
human stupor, and that is just what we find at the beginning. Spirit is already 
imprinted on the human, but it must develop; it is an infinite energeia and 
entelecheia that discovers itself in its labor, brings forth its concept, and this 
production comes last, not first. (From a post-Darwinian perspective, of 
cowse, the 'development' of spirit starts much earlier than Hegel thought, 
in the long transition between 'animal' and 'human'. Hegel is vague about 
when human beings first appeare~ but his view does not entail a theory of 
'special' creation.) 
Second, the progress or progression (Fortgang) of history occurs in time. 
The quality of the negative is intrinsic to time because things come into being 
and pass away. 'The abstract <:ontemplation of being and nonbeing is time' 
(see note 29). Here we enter into a consideration of change or alteration. 
Whereas in nature nothing changes, for nature instead constitutes a hierar-
chy of levels, spirit constantly changes and climbs a 'ladder of stages'. But 
because the peoples as spiritual configurations are also creatures of nature, 
some of the shapes that we see in history as a succession in time also stand 
perennially alongside one another in space. Thus today we find three major, 
long-existing configurations: the principle of the Far East (nature), the 
principle of the Islamic world (absolute antithesis), and the principle of 
Christian Western Europe (spirit's knowledge of its own depths). But other 
peoples, such as the Greeks, Romans, and Germanic tribes, have long dis-
appeared. This variation introduces an element of contingency into an 
otherwise necessary process. 
Every people goes through specific moments of progress or of cultural 
formation. The categories employed by Hegel are development (Entwick-
lung), refinement (Bildung), over-refinement ( Uberbildung), and decline 
( Verbildung). In the first moment of the history of a people, that of Bildung, 
the people lives for the sake of its work, bringing forth and enacting its inner 
principle. The second moment, that of Uberbildung, is the source of a 
people's destruction: spirit, having achieved itself, no longer needs its activ-
ity and has lost the highest interest of life in goals not yet fulfilled; it lives 
with its habitual routine, which leads to narural death. The way is now open 
for the final moment, that of Verbildung, when spirit prepares its own 
downfall and the coming forth of a new life. The transition (Ubergang) to 
a new cuJtural form is the work of thought itself, in whose negativity 
24 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
everything is dissolved and existent being is superseded. For this reason 
thought is suppressed as something that is politically dangerous. With the 
emergence of new forms of determinacy, the universal is becoming increas-
ingly concrete. A previous particularity, such as being merely a citizen of 
Athens, 'melts under the light of thought, as snow melts under the sun'. 
When a new work is at hand, world history makes the uansition to a new 
Gestalt, for no people can be epoch-making more than once. Such is the 
'tribunal of history', as each age in succession is judged by and appropriated 
into the hard project of freedom's actualization (see note 32). 
Finally, there must be an end of history: if only new principles constantly 
emerged, world history would have no purpose leading to a goal. But 
religion and reason recognize a goal because they ace seeking what is 
genuinely true, what subsists in and for itself and is not merely transient. 
The religious final end is expressed as follows: 'that human beings should 
attain eternal peace, that they should be sanctified'. This goal is proper for 
the individual, but it does not concern us in the here and now because it 
represents a future, otherworldly end. Thus Hegel continues: 'What consti-
tutes the way to the goal is no mere means but directly the absolute thing-
that-history-is~about, the absolute history in which individuals are only 
single moments'. The thing-that-history-is-about, expressed religiously, is 
'the glorification and honor of God'. 
Spirit's absolute is the absolute of everything. the divine being. Spirit's pwpose, its 
absolute drive, is thus to gain a consciousness of this being such that it is known a5 
the one and only actual and true being through which everything happens and 
proceeds-to know that everything must be arranged, and is actually arranged. in 
accord with it, and therefore that it is the power that guided and guides the course of 
world history, the power that rules and has ruled it .•.• The individual spirit has its 
glory in glorifying God. This is not its particular honor; ratber its honor comes from 
knowing that its self-feeling is the substantial consciousness of God, that its action is 
to the honor and glory of God, the absolute. In this knowledge the individual spirit 
has attained its truth and freedom. 
Thus the end is achieved not in some timeless eternity or chronological 
future, but in every temporal now when spirit comes to this recognition of 
God. How it is that the divine power guides and rules the world is addressed 
in the final subsection of this part of the Introduction. 
Human passions are the instrument for the rule, power, and dominion of 
the divine idea. Passions are what make each person what he or she is. and in 
history we have before us a 'colorful din' of passions. The connection 
between the idea and the passions has two aspects: firsr, it is found 
25 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
intrinsically in the concep4 in the idea itself; second, the question concerns 
its actual workings. As for the idea itself, we recall what has been said about 
the Trinity. Initially, the idea is what posits itself as over against itself and 
makes this ideal object its own: this is the eternal life of God within itself, 
before the creation of the world; it is the logical nexus and does not yet have 
the mode of reality. Then the idea goes forth from itself into antithesis, 
positing distinctions on their own account~ positing the finite other, whose 
extremity of freedom reflects the divine freedom. 
This is the point at which the passions come into play; they are the means 
by which the idea is actualized. Individuals who achieve harmony and 
reconciliation with the idea are called 'happy'. But •world history is not a 
soil of happiness; in history the periods of happiness are blank pages, for the 
object of history is, at least, change'. In history there may be satisfaction-
the satisfaction of universal purposes that transcend individual desires-but 
not happiness, at least not for world-historical individuals. Thus world 
history is principally a realm of conflict, and this conflict is embodied by 
the great historical figwes, the •heroes', who grasp the new universal that is 
coming on the scene and tum it to their purposes. They are perspicacious, 
ahead of their times, perceiving the new thing that needs to be done. 'They 
desire and do what is correct and right, although what they do appears to 
be ... their own passion, their own free will because others do not yet know 
it. t40 The necessity of the idea becomes ethical only through the passion of 
historical human beings. Because the great figures 'are driven unresisringly 
to do what they do, they are satisfied. They have not been happy; for their 
work has perhaps become bitter to them, or at the moment they achieved 
their goal they have died or were murdered or exiled .... Their entire life was 
a sacrifice.' This is the tragic dimension of world history. In this section 
Hegel discusses principally the negative aspect of the connection between 
the idea and passions---the way in which the idea uses the passions against 
their own immediate ends to achieve a higher end. 
The affirmative aspect of the connection appears in the next section, 
for it is the state that unifies the idea and the subjective will in the form 
of a rational, ethical whole. The state as such is 'the idea as human 
freedom'. 
40. ~are also, presumably, antiheroes, world-historical criminals, who embrace what is 
u~ly ew, dan~ and destructive. At least Hegel's theory does not rule this out. Antiheroes 
ultimately 6ud their ends and JlleUlS used against lbcu and are destroyed by them. 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
The Nature of the State 
World history is the history of states, not of individuals. Art, religion, 
scientific knowledge, and other cultural products are comprehended within 
the state. The nature of the state is that in it freedom becomes objective to 
itself and does not simply remain subjective free will. The state is an ethical 
whole, not an abstraction over against individuals but that in which indivi-
duals live; it is an organism in which everything is end and means simulta-
neously. In a formulation subject to misinterpretation, Hegel says that the 
stare, as the actualization of freedom, 'is the idea as it is present on earth'; 
this is not a deification of the state but an indication of its critical role in the 
freedom project. The family also is an ethical whole, but in the family love is 
the means by which individuals relate to one another. The ethical whole of 
the family is subsumed under that of the state, and in the state the relation-
ship of individuals is one of citizenship and laws. 
Hegel explores three aspects of the nature of the state as the actualization 
of freedom: its constitution (its inner nature), its relationship to the spiritutJI 
world (religion, art, science, and culture), and its relationship to the physical 
world (geography and climate) (see notes 43, 47). 'Constitution' (Ver{as-
nmg) refers to the principles by which a system of government is organized; 
it can assume a written form, but such is not necessary. Since 'the best and 
most complete state is the one in which the greatest degree of freedom 
prevails', the question becomes which type of constitution promotes the 
greatest degree of freedom. By 'freedom' we do not mean subjective free 
will ( Willkur), for such a view presupposes that the government and the 
people (as individuals) constitute two sides that must be balanced and 
limited. There is 'something malignant' in this notion, for the idea of the 
state is precisely that of an organic Wiion between the universal and the 
panicular, the government and the people. 
Three forms of constirution are distinguished, depending on how this 
union is construed: compulsory unity, a loose unity in which the union itself 
is a secondary matter, and a unity in which 'the spheres, subsisting indepen-
dently, find their efficacy only in the production of the universal'. These 
translate into three great world-historical epochs: the Oriental empires 
(massive, undivided, substantial unity), the Greek and Roman empires 
(democracy and aristocracy), and the modern European or Germanic 
world. The latter represents a •second monarchy• (see note 46), by which 
Hegel means not an absolute monarchy but a constitutional monarchy in 
which the sovereign has limited though important powers vis-a-vis the 
27 

EDITORIAl INTRODUCTION 
executive branch, the representative assembly, and the courts. These consti-
tutions succeed one another in history in such a way that the earlier princi-
ples are subsumed in the later ones. Hegel's idea of a constitutional 
monarchy is similar to a parliamentary system with a head of state, a 
president or sovereign, who has symbolic or representative but not executive 
power. For him, of course, the head of state is not elected but hereditary, and 
the choice of delegates in the assembly is made by 'corporations' and social 
groups ('estates') rather than by direct vote.41 
Under the category of the relationship of the state to spiritual matters, 
Hegel discusses first a content that is the universal in and for itself, the 
infinite. This content is the concern of religion, art, and speculative science 
or philosophy. The center point of this knowledge is religion, and in this 
respect art and science can be viewed as 'forms and aspects' of religion. In a 
repudiation of Kant, Hegel says that 'the human being is infinite in cogniz-
ing, limited in willing'. The instrument of cognizing, reason ( Vernunft) or 
thought (consciousness and self-consciousness), constitutes the openness of 
the human being to the universal and humanity's very participation in the 
universal. Thus Christianity reveals that 'God is the unity of human and 
divine nature' and that 'the unity ... of the divine and the human is the 
genuine idea of religion', whereas the understanding ( Verstand) makes the 
divine idea into an abstraction, a being beyond the human against which 
humans futilely bun their heads. Such an analysis yields two types of 
religion: a religion of separation Uudaism, Persian and Islamic dualism) 
and a religion of unity (Hindu incarnation, Greek art, and Christian theol-
ogy where the speculative truth of divine-human unity is grasped). Religion 
sets forth the principle of the state in its truth, and in this respect it is rightly 
said that 'the state rests on religion'. The state as a determination of the 
divine nature itself-that aspect of the divine that is present on earth as 
ethical freedom--derives from religion and does not supersede it. 
The finite aspects of human culture represent the real as opposed to the 
ideal sphere of the state: customs and practices, law, property, family and 
marriage, satisfaction of needs, empirical sciences. These too are a subject of 
world history. 
41. See Elements of the Philosophy of Right, §§ 2 7 5-319; and Lectures on Natural Right arui 
Political Science: The First Philosophy of Right, Heidelberg 1817-1818, transcribed by Peter 
Wannenman, ed. the Staff of the Hegel Archives with an Introduction by Otto Ptiggeler. u. 
J. M~ehael Stewan and Peter C. Hod~n (Berkeley and Los Angeles: Universitv of California 
Press, 1 995), §§ 127-58. 
. 
28 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
The third aspect of the nature of the state is its relationship to the physical 
world. Here it is most important to appreciate, in Hegel's conception, the 
systematic position of the state in its external natural setting, that is, irs 
geography (see note 55). As Hegel himself remarks, 'world history is spirit 
in the element of worldliness~ thus we must also recognize the natural and 
the corporeal in it. The natural and the spiritual form one shape, and this 
is history.' Thus the one shape of history includes an essential natural 
dimension, and Hegel describes in detail how geography and climate affect 
the formation of human cultures, east and west, north and south. He was 
quite familiar with the science of geography in the early nineteenth century, 
and he put this knowledge to good effect. 
However, Hegel's conception of nature, while organic (a hierarchy of 
related levels), is almost entirely static. He refers to the fact that 'in the 
north the earth is continental in scope, with a wide breast, while in the south 
the shapes taper into points'. He would have been astonished to learn that 
this 'wide breast' was once pan of a super-continent, Pangaea, that for 
millions of years the continents have drifted back and forth, and that for 
just as long natural species have been evolving. For him the present arrange-
ment of the 'old world' -three continents positioned around the Mediterra-
nean Sea, which both sunders them and facilitates communication-is a 
necessary relationship and constitutes a 'rational totality'. Howeve.; in 
nature everything is as fluid as in human history (over a much longer scale 
of time), and the extension of history to nature might be viewed as simply an 
extension of Hegel's fundamental conception. But 'natural history' is funda-
mentally different from human history, which is a history of spirit, con-
sciousness, and freedom-cuegories that do not apply to nature. 
For one who thinks so obviously from a Western and Eurocentric perspec-
tive, Hegel devotes enormous attention to Asia. In part this focus reflects the 
exhilaration of new discovery, but in pan too it reflects the fact that human 
culture arose in Asia before it did in Europe. Hegel would have been sur-
prised to learn that homo sapiens first appeared in Africa, but he is certainly 
correct that states first appeared in Asia, and his Weltgeschichte is a history of 
states. We cannot go back further in history than written documents will take 
us, and such documents are the product of states. Hegel is always interested 
in transitions; howeve~ the first transition encountered by history is nor from 
nature to spirit (that transition is buried in prehistorical depths) bur from 
tribal and family life ('patriarchy') to the state and its institutions. This 
transition occurred in Asia and gradually spread to the West. 
The section on the state and geography is quite lengthy; we believe that 
readers will find it to be of interest and need no further guidance. 
29 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
The Division of World History 
Wor)d history unfolds through four (or five)42 stages, which are compared 
with stages in the life of the human being: the phylogenetic replicates the 
ontogenetic and vice versa. We have to begin, claims Hegel, where the state 
is still internally oppositionless, that is, where subjectivity has not yet come 
intO its own. This represents an immediate form of ethical life and constitu-
tes the infancy or childhood of history. Here the state is based on patriarchal 
family relationships, and it appears historically as the Oriental empires, each 
with a single ruler or absolute principle. 
The second shape is the boyhood of the world in which the states are in a 
constant tussle with each other and with themselves (the Egyptians, for 
example, are 'impulsive boys'). However, conflict and suuggle cause a self-
concentration into individuality, which grows into the age of youth; here 
Greece comes into prominence. This is the realm of beautiful freedom and of 
ethical unity as individual personality; but it is fragile and momentary: the 
Greeks 'intuited' their unity, whereas the Romans 'reflected' it. 
With the Romans we enter upon the adulthood of life with its demanding 
labor and the sacrifice of individuality to universality. An empire such as the 
Roman, in which subjectivity is outwardly reconciled with substance and 
individuals are subjugated to abstract universality, seems to be eternal. But, 
notes Hegel, its successo~ the Holy Roman Empire, expired in 1806 with the 
renunciation of the imperial title by the last of the Habsburgs to hold it. The 
transition to the next principle (a transition that occurred over several 
centuries) is to be seen as the internal struggle between parricuJar subjectiv-
ity and abstract universality. The struggle must end with the victory of 
subjective singularity, and the latter assumes the form of spiritual reconcili-
ation. Now a spiritual realm (the church) stands over against the worldly 
one (the state). 
At this point the fourth stage is attain~ that of old age. This is the realm of 
the Germanic or European peoples, 43 in which the enormous antithesis 
between the spiritual and the worldly realms is resolved. The principle of this 
age is free spirit subsisting for itself, the unity of subjective and objective truth, 
the Chmtian principle. But at first the reconciliation is only implicit (the 
Reformation and Protestantism); it must realize itself in the world through 
42. The variation depends on whether 'boyhood' is co110ted as a separate stage. 
43. Hcgd believed that the 50-QIJed Germanic priuciple pervaded most of Europe; thll5 be 
used the terms as roughly equivaleot. Set IL 79. 
30 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
a process of secularization that constitutes modernity. 'Spiriruality and free-
dom have, and find, their concept and their rationality in worldliness: 
In a brief final summary the stages are reduced to three: the substantial 
immediacy of ethical life (the Oriental world), the antithesis of subjectivity 
and abstract universality (the Greek and Roman worlds), and the Wliry 
of subjectivity with universality (the Germanic world). The process of over-
coming the antithesis constitutes the great work of world history. Stated so 
baldly, the principle has little meaning; but Hegel puts flesh on these bones. 
lbe Cowse of World History 
The Oriental World 
We begin with the East, where the dawn of spirit occurs, while its setting or 
'descent into itself' happens in the West.44 Our cultural·historical analysis 
also moves from East to West: we start with China; tum next to India and its 
rivers, the Ganges and the Indus; then move on to the Middle East, Persia, 
the Tigris and the Euphrates. Finally, after a detour through North Africa 
fEgypt), we continue on a westerly course to Greece, Rome, and Europe. 
Temporal and geographical ca.ordinates are synchronized; spirit moves 
through time hom East to West. This is the metanarrative on which Hegel 
plots world history. The funue of the plot remains open, with hints of the 
rise of America and Russia. 
China 
Hegel, who engages in a fundamental way with China,45 notes that China 
bas astonished Europeans ever since it became known. It is self.contained, 
bas reached a high level of culture independendy of foreign ties, and is the 
only world empire that has lasted from the most ancient times up to the 
present day. It is vast in expanse with a very large population; its government 
is weD-regulated, just, benevolent, and wise; and it has written documents 
that go back thousands of years. Rut the principle of this empire has never 
changed, nor has an alien principle ever been imposed on it, so in this sense it 
bas no history; everything is forever the same. 
Each people has original books that contain its myths and ancient tradi-
tions. Homer is such a book for the Greeks, as the Bible is for us. The 
Chinese named such books Jing-the principal ones being the Yi·jing and 
44. See o. 1 oi The Oriental World/Cbioa. 
45. Seen. 2 on Hesel's swrcn. 
31 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
the Shu-iing. The latter was translated into French by missionaries, so in 
Hegel's day it was accessible to those who did not read Chinese. It begins irs 
narrative with Yao of the Xia dynasty in the third millennium before Christ 
(see note 15) and contains the work of court historians. Prior to these wrinen 
documents, history disappears into unrecorded time. 46 
Hegel refers to 'Fo, a divine figure, whom people in eastern India call 
:Buddha,. Distinct &om him is Fo-hi or Fu-hi (Fuxi), to whom the invention 
of the Gua is attributed. The Gua consist of certain arrangements of lines, 
and meditation on these lines is found in the Yi-;ing. The straight line is the 
simple material from which all things are consriruted, and the broken line is 
the distinction of this simplicity. Various combinations of these lines repre-
sent the speculative philosophy of China. 
As to the ancient history of China, separate warring kingdoms were 
eventually unified under a single emperor. What is 'factually historical' 
commences with Yu (or Yao) of the Xia dynasty in 2201 BC (see note 31). 
Hegel is struck by the coincidence of this date with the historical beginnings 
of other empires, for all of which he gives precise years: Egypt (2207), 
Assyria (2221), and India 12204). Struggles with river flooding and the 
maintenance of dikes for rice cultivation were major preoccupations of the 
Chinese from the beginning. China was conquered twice by Mongols and 
Tatars, but was not long under their dominion. The Great Wall was built ro 
keep out the Manchu-Tatars but it did not su(;ceed. The Manchu emperors 
were among the ~and under them China reached its greatest extent, 
ranging as far as the Caspian Sea and Siberia. 
The Chinese state is similar to European institutions in its ethical life and 
art. But its principle rests wholly on patriarchal or family relationships. 
Hegel identifies several characteristics of the latter. First, strict rules and 
instructions govern all family relationships: children have a total duty to 
parents; marriage is monogamous but husbands may own concubines; the 
father alone has possessions while children have none; families must honor 
their ancestors. Second, the entire state rests on the person of the emperor 
and his hierarchy of officials, who rontrol everything in accord with strict 
moral codes and laws as determined by the emperor and overseen by the 
mandarins. Third, there are no castes and no aristocracy of binh or wealth 
among citizens. At one time state public propeny was apponioned to 
patresfamilias, but private propeny now exists with laws governing 
46. 1l1e sciencr of archaeology was just getting under way in Hegel's tim£ and prior to dtt 
19th ant. wu confiDed priocipally to Greek aad Roman civilizatiou. 
32 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
inheritance. Anyone can sell himself as a slave, and parents can sell children; 
women, children, and concubines of criminals can be enslaved. 
In the patriarchal principle, the legal sphere is not separated from the 
moral aspect, so that no internal moral autonomy exists. Rather, detailed 
regulations govern all aspects of life, the violation of which incurs very strict 
punishment. The government that issues such legislation takes the place of 
one's own inner being, and by doing so the principle of subjective freedom is 
annulled. This freedom, this intangible sphere of inwardn~ respect for this 
inviolable zone, are essential to the European principle but lacking here. 
Thus, when a crime is committed, the entire family undergoes punishment, 
which is totally contrary to the recognition of individual moral responsibil-
ity. Goods can be confiscate~ and corporal punishment such as flogging is 
common. Hegel remarks that the Chinese have been governed as an •under-
age people', which fosters an ethics of dependency and the principle of 
vengeance. 
In ancient times the Chinese were famous for their scientific knowledge, 
but, like everything else, it has been controlled by the emperors and the 
court, so that the free soil of inwardness on which alone intellect flourishes is 
lacking. Nonetheless, the Chinese did make great strides in particular 
sciences such as physics (the magnet and compass), astronomy, the circula-
tion of fluids, and mechanical devices for caJculating (they use a binary 
rather than a decimal system). Their written language is hieroglyphic, not 
me expression of sounds by letters of the alphabet, and it is extremely 
complicate~ requiring the learning of many thousands of characters and 
their combinations; but the spoken language is meager and monosyllabic. 
The Chinese are skilled in the mechanical arts but lack the creative power 
of spirit. They make beautiful landscape paintings and ponraits, which are 
lacking, however, in subtlety of light and shadow. They excel at horticulture 
and gardens. 
Hegel concludes with a discussion of Chinese religion,
47 noting that 
missionary reports (our principal source) are suspect because the mission-
aries' own religion is an obstacle to fair reporting. The ancient patriarchal 
religion is simply that humans pray to God as the ruler of earth and 
heaven-God who is one, eternal, benevolent, and just, rewarding goodness 
47. Hegel treats tht Oriental religiom fO£ the first time in a significant way in his 1814 
philosophy of religion lectures. Here he discusses the religions of China, India, Persia, and 
Egypt. all under the general rubric of the religion of oature. See Lectllru orr the Philosophy of 
R#!ligion. ii. 233-381. Religioo, as we bave already seen. is also a cmoal topit: of the present 
lectuas. 
33 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
and punishing evil. In its abstractness this religion excludes the richness and 
profundity of nature and spirit. They call their supreme being 'Tian' or 
heaven, but they do not simply worship nature. 'No people can be said to 
have taken what is simply sensible to be the divine, since it is necessarily 
spirit's nature not to stop short with its natural aspect, but to proceed to 
something inward. All pure religions involve a metaphorical transposition 
from the sensible into thought.' With thought. conceptions of the universal 
arise, but here the universal lacks determinacy. The emperor is called 'son of 
heaven', and he alone presents offerings on behalf of his people during the 
four seasonal festivals. The religion is not exclusive, so Jews, Muslims, and 
Christians are accepted so long as they do not incite rebellion. The Chinese 
also revere 'Shen' or spirits, similar to Greek dryads, the souls of natural 
things, arranged in hierarchical ranks. Temples to the Shen are found every-
where, and superstition subjugates the inner spirit of the people. 
Particular sects are found, one of which is that of Lao-Tse (Laozi). By 
withdrawing into self through study, the more profound devotees become 
Shen themselves through strenuous discipline, initiating an elevation of 
human beings to the divine. According to Lamaism, 'the emperor's private 
religion', divinity has its concrete existence in a living human being. Such a 
belief 'is linked to the religion of the Buddha'. The religion of Fo (which may 
or may not be the same as that of Buddha) holds to metempsychosis, 
according to which all shapes (humans, stars, etc.) are only forms or revela-
tions of the One, the absolute. Followers of this religion locate what is 
supreme in nothingness: they elevate themselves by renunciation of all 
sensation, seeking utter emptiness. From these compressed remarks, we 
recognize the confusion and misinformation in Hegel's early characteriza-
tion of Chinese religion. 
India 
Hegel engaged with India for the first time in a significant way in these 
lectures. German scholars had confined themselves to the language, art, 
religion, and philosophy of India and had arrived at a romantic, idealizing 
interpretation. Hegel relied on the English sources because they acquired 
their information from first-hand experience, but he also adopted the largely 
negative judgment fonned by the British. He was blind to their bias because 
it confirmed his own suspicions not only about moral and philosophical 
issues but also about the inability of the Indians to organize life politically 
(and for Hegel political organization is the actual bearer of historyl. 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
Whereas the Chinese remained cut off, India 'has been receptive toward 
the rest of the world' and 'appears as an effective link in the chain of world 
history .... It has been a source of wisdom, science, and culture, as well as oi 
natural treasures.' Thus all nations have beaten a path to India and all have 
attempted to acquire a foothold there. 
Hegel begins with some general remarks about the 'principle' of India. 
This is a land of dreaming fantasy in which rationality, morality, and 
subjectivity are nullified. It is also a land of extremes-oscillating between 
a wild, sensuous imagination and a totally inanimate abstraction of inward-
ness. It lacks a history in the sense of chronological records of actual events. 
It advances on the Chinese in that the determinacy that hitherto had been 
posited externally becomes inward, but its idealism is one of sheer imagina-
tion devoid of reason and freedom. It allows no free being-for-self of sub-
jects, and no distance between subject and object. Its fundamental intuition 
is that of an absolute substantiality that constitutes the essence of all things. 
This is not a pantheism of thought (as with Spinoza) but a pantheism of 
representation, which imports sensible material directly into the universal. 
'The divine is grasped in finite form, the finite spun out extravagantly. '48 
This rendering of God in sensuous form can have two meanings. In the 
first, that of Hinduism proper, the representation of unity is universal, and 
the entire sensible realm, without exception, is divinized. In the second, 
that of Buddhism or Lamaism, the rendering of God concentrates to 'an 
immediately present focal point'. 
The discussion turns next to 'the region of India'. Its main features are the 
river basins of the Ganges and the Indus, with mountains to the north and 
west. The name 'Indian' derives from the Indus River, but it is not known 
whether the people called themselves 'Indians' or even had a common name 
for themselves. Alexander the Great came as far as the Indus, and the British 
in tum arrived some twenty-one hundred years later (at Delhi). In India, 
everything necessary for a state is lacking, above all the principle of freedom~ 
in China the state is the totality, but in India there is just a people without a 
state and without an ethical life. The government is an unprincipled, lawles!\ 
despotism. Asia as a whole is the breeding ground of despotism, and if the 
ruler is evil, despotism becomes tyranny. The Indians are nonetheless a 
48. Somewhat later in this discussion Hegel distinguishes between 'the One·. Brahman. 
which is be~·ond all concept and representation and is invisible, eternal, omnipresent. and 
omnipotent, and the representation of this One in numerous gods, whJCh are wor.;h•pc.-d 1n 
specific sensual shapes. So his summary at this point seems unbalanced. 
35 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
people of ancient culture because the feniliry of the river valleys made for an 
easy existence and from early times produced a communal life. 
Hegel devotes considerable attention to the system of castes, which 
correspond to four occupations that are foWld in every society in one fonn 
or another. These are the intellectual class (priests, scholars, scientists), the 
practical class (government and military leaders), the manufacturing and 
agricultural class, and laborers and servants; to these is appended (in India) a 
fifth, ignoble caste. The distinctive feature about India is that these become 
natural distinctions, based on birth, and cannot be chosen freely. They 
entirely dominate Hindu life and become a permanent, despotic arrange-
ment in which the highest group (the Brahmans) assumes the status of 
divinity while the lowest (the Pariahs or Chandalas, see note 8) is reduced 
to subhuman status. Persons who are neglectful of their duties can become 
ourcastes and lose all legal protections. Detailed regulations governing the 
castes are found in the Laws of Manu. Hegel notes in particular the degraded 
status assigned to women, who are the property of their fathers and hus-
bands. Human life in general has no inherent ethical value, and without free 
will there can be no proper political life, no freedom of a political state, but 
only capricious despotism. 
In Hegel's view, Hindu religion is composed of two extremes: on the one 
hand a singular absolute substance, Brahman, into which everything 
vanishes, and on the other hand an indeterminate multiplicity of sensuous 
images (natural phenomena, animaJs, deities) and a cultus that is an 'unbridled, 
licentious sensuality' (young women placed in the temple as sexual objects, 
and so on)- The Hindus do have worthy views of the one substance: it is 
beyond all conception and understanding and is invisible, eternal, omnipotent, 
and omniscient; hut it lacks consciousness, and thus self-consciousness 
cannot know itself in relating to it. Renunciation is the supreme virtue, a self-
mortification even unto death; this is a liberation that has a merely negative 
significance. 
We have defined the Hindu principle as withdrawal from self and com-
plete lack of freedom in the positive sense_ Without self and freedom, 
nothing good is possible: the state, purpose, rational and ethical life. The 
political condition as the Europeans found it was a host of principalities 
ruled by Muslim and Hindu dynasties. No laws governed their succession, 
so the history of the Indian realm is a ceaseless interplay of uprisings, 
conspiracies, violence, and brutal episodes. Only in their epic poems are 
there traces of an earlier splendor, which proves to be a fantasy world, 
although conditions flourished under a few individual kingdoms. The entire 
36 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
ethical situation is determined by the caste distinctions that seem to have 
been in place already at the time of Alexander the Great. The Hindus have 
no historical perspective and are incapable of historiography; everything 
for them blurs into extravagant images lacking intelligibility. Because they 
have no subjective sense of history, they have no objective sense either. 
Where does India stand in the framework of world history? Whereas 
China as the patriarchal whole has oneness as its basic characteristic, the 
Indian principle is the second element of the idea, that of distinction. Both 
are necessary, and in this sense India represents a world-historical advance. 
Moreover, distinction and difference must go outward, and thus India is 
connected with the rest of the world, while China remains isolated. India 
has always been an object of desire, e5pecially by peoples of the West. The 
ancient Indian language, Sanskrit, lies at the basis of all the Indo-European 
languages (a recent discovery in Hegel's time), and this fact indicates an 
ancient and widespread dispersal of tribes from India and Persia. 
The section on India ends with a discussion of Buddhism and Lamaism. 
In note 106 we indicate the reasons for Hegel's limited and unsuccessful 
treatment of the most widespread and influential of Asian religions. Confu-
sion abounds in Hegel's discussion of the historical circwnstances of Buddha, 
who is the 'other• to Brahrni and Brahman. Buddhism is a more humane 
religion than Hinduism, and the Buddhist's God is a living human being. 
Buddha attained nirvana, 'a condition of supreme abstraction in which spirit 
was immersed within itselr, a condition of bliss. While Buddha was a histor-
ical figure, the lamas are human beings who are 'revered as God present 
today'; when one lama dies, the new one is found in an infant selected by 
Priests. Thus a chain of living incarnations of God continues uninterruptedly. 
Persia 
Ancient Persia was much more involved in the external connections of world 
history than were China and India; but, while the Chinese and Indian worlds 
are still contemporaneous with us, the Persian world has long vanished. In 
Penia we find a true empire comprised of many diverse peoples, extending 
from the Indus River ro the Mediterranean and Black Seas. Ethnic groups 
within the empire persisted in their autonomy and yet were dependent on a 
point of unity that held them in equilibrium. Thus the principle of the 
Persian Empire is the combination of the preceding principles, exemplifying 
both a unification of the whole (the Chinese principle) and the distinction of 
peoples (the Indian). In Hegel's treatment, Persia is composed of four main 
37 

EDITORIAl INTRODUCTION 
ethnic and geographical divisions: the Zend people in Bactria, the Assyrian 
and Babylonian peoples, Media or Persia proper, and Syria (see note 5). 
Anquetil du Perron's discovery and publication of the ancient religious 
book of the Zend people, the Zend-Avesta, introduces us to the injunctions 
of Zoroaster and the religion of the ancient Persians, which is still found 
today in isolated dusters. Hegel names this religion the 'religion of light', for 
light involves the higher, spiritual element worshiped by the Persians. This is 
a nature worship but not an idolatry of natural objects. Light is 'this 
universal, simple, physical essence that is pure like thought'. In the intuition 
of light, 'the soul goes within itself and rhus also makes the object seen 
within itself; this being-within-itself of the pure object, of the light, is then 
immediately thought, or the spiritual as such'. But because of light's sensible 
natw::e, 'free thought is not yet the free foundation'. Directly opposite to light 
is darkness, the great antithesis in Persian religion, its dualism-the absolute 
antithesis of good and evil, light and darkness, Ormazd and Ahrirnan. Hegel 
considers this dualism to be superior to the absolute pantheism of the 
Hindus, but it is still the natural mode of expressing opposition. The unity 
from which the two sides originate is uncreated time, which itself is only an 
abstract unity. Profound metaphysical characteristics adhere to Ormazd: he 
is not fire as such but the fluidity of fire; his light is the excellence of all 
creation; he is love, the basic seed of all good, the gift of knowledge, the 
ground of actuality and possibility, the source of everything living. One 
serves Onnazd and reveres light by planting trees and growing crops, by 
avoiding impurity, by obeying the laws, and by panaking of Horn, a plant 
juice that is consumed along with unleavened bread-a ritual that (says 
Hegel) mirrors our Christian sacrament of the Lord's Supper. 
The wealthier part of the empire is on the western side, namely Babylonia 
and Assyria in the river region of the Euphrates and the Tigris. Here we find 
agricultural and city life displacing nomadic existence. We know little about 
the spiritual customs other than that the worship of nature is Wliversal. 
Hegel makes a point about the subordinate status of women (each woman 
of Babylon had to sit in the temple and offer herself once to a stranger, and 
maidens were married annually by auction). It is not a general Oriental 
practice that women should have a voice in the choice of a husband; this is 
found only later in Europe. Communal, not individual, values prevail. 
Hegel turns next to Persia prope~ for wb..ich he is dependent on Greek and 
Jewish SOUI'ces and Persian epic poems such as the Shahnameh of Firdawsi. 
Cyrus, a Persian from the house of the Achaemenids and related to tbe 
Median royal line, consolidated the empire in the sixth century BC, and 
38 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
through a series of wars became the most powerful ruler in the world. The 
empire he created was a loose union of peoples who were allowed to retain 
their own characteristics and individual identity. This allowance for individ-
uality was one of the great features of Cyrus, who was a brutal conqueror 
but magnanimous in victory. 'The Persian, the worshiper of the light, of 
purity, hovers tolerantly over the whole, free of animosity and hostile 
particularity.' The successors of Cyrus continued this policy, but a thousand 
years later there appeared the fanaricism of Islam, which produced the 
complete opposire, the destruction of all difference~. 
Under 'Syria' Hegel considers the Semitic peoples who lived along the 
eastern coast of the Mediterranean. Whereas Central Asian peoples wor-
shiped narure as a power over them, the Phoenicians conquered the mosr 
savage of natural powers, the sea, and used it to colonize and to engage in 
extensive commerce. 4
!:1 The religion of Astarte and Adonis infuses a higher 
spiritual element. Adonis both dies and is reborn, so that anguish and 
suffering are not devalued as in Hinduism but affirmed as an essential 
element of hwnan experience, and indeed of the deity's experience. Suffering 
is discovery of the negative, but in it is contained the infinite affirmation, the 
sense of self, the positive factor. Here we find anticipations of Hegel's 
tceannent of the so-called 'religion of anguish' in the 1831 philosophy of 
religion lectures (see note 89). 
Finally, Hegel turns to the jewish religion. Israel's significance at this stage 
in hisrory is not in its being an independent stare, and thus Israel does nor 
constitute its own realm of world history, but its religion is far advanced over 
othee5 of the Persian Empire. Its God is grasped pwely as thought: in lscael 
the light of the Persians has been completely spiritualized and has blossomed 
as thought. Thus human beings can relate themselves positively to this object 
and find themselves in it. 'The moment of the overturning of the Oriental 
principle commences at this point, the moment of the changeover from 
nature to spirit.' But this religion has not yet given universality to irs 
principle; it is still bound to locality, to the jewish people alone. Its thought 
is absuact, not yet concrete. But a new self-consciousness has emerged and 
new tasks are posed. Before turning to Greece, we must examine Egypt 'as 
the [first} land to which is relegated the carrying out of this task'. We note 
here that the connections Hegel is pursuing ace not historical but typological 
and philosophical. There is no direct line of influence from Persian to jewish 
49. The Phoeniciaos are also credited with tbe invention of tbt alphabe1. but Hegel does nor 
mention it here. He alludes to it, however. io his discussion of Greece (below, p. 376). 
39 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
to Egyptian and Greek religion, but rather stages in the consciousness of 
spirit. 
Egypt 
Egypt occupies an intermediary position between the Oriental and Western 
worlds: it was conquered by the Persians under Cambyses, its traditions are 
indigenous to North Africa, and it had a powerful effect on the Greeks. It 
addresses but does not resolve the 'task' of liberating spirit from its natural 
and animal forms; rather everything for it remains an enigma (Riitsel). The 
symbol of the enigma, and of Egypt itself, 'is the sphinx, this twofold figure, 
half animal and half human, and indeed female. lt symbolizes the human 
spirit that tears itself away from the animal domain, that frees itself from the 
animal and casts its gaze about but has not yet completely grasped itself, is 
not yet free, does not yet stand on its own two feet.' Moreover, 'the language 
of Egypt is still hieroglyphic; it is not yet the word itself, not yet script'. 50 We 
lack a literature, and our knowledge of how they thought is dependent on 
ancient sources, principally Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus. 
Their priests told Herodotus that the Egyptians were the first human 
beings, and indeed their civilization is very ancient, with communal life 
first appearing in the upper Nile valley, principally at Thebes. Later, com-
mercial activity shifted into central Egypt (Memphis) and then the delta 
(Sais). Egypt's geographical locale is the long and narrow Nile valley, which 
is subject to flooding twice a year. Floods are the only source of water for 
agriculture, and Egyptians mastered the an of irrigation. Herodotus claimed 
that they were the most rational of all the peoples he had observed, with 
their well-ordered society and monumental achievements, but that they do 
all things the opposite from how other peoples do them (e.g. men attend to 
household matters whereas women engage in external affairs and thus are 
not in seclusion). 
It would seem that this tranquil people must have a comparably tranquil 
religion. 51 Instead we find 'an ardent, active, laboring spirit, ... a people 
aglow and afire', pressing toward an 'objectification within itself that, 
however, does not attain the free self-consciousness of spirit. There is still 
an iron band around the eyes of spirit.' Egypt remains within the bounds of a 
nature religion for which everything is a symbol of something else. The 
50. Hegel was unaware that in 1821 a beginning had been made in deciphering the Rosetta 
Stone. 
51. See the discussion of Egyptian religion, tbr 'religion of the enigma', in Hegel's 1824 
Lectures on the Philosophy of R.eligion, ii. 35~81. 
40 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
principal symbols are the sun (Osiris) and the earth and moon (Isis). Osiris 
and Isis rule in a cyclical process that is related to the Nile: fertility and 
growth are followed by drought and desolation. Osiris is buried in the earth 
and becomes lord of the dead before he is reborn in the next cycle. 
Animal worship plays a principal role in Egyptian religion. The incom· 
prehensibility of the divine appears in the soul of the animal, its vitality and 
intelligence, which remain impenetrable for humans. With a truly spiritual 
religion, the incomprehensibility vanishes, for spirit is self-understanding, 
self-transparency, presence to self and freedom. The mystery of the divine 
remains concealed in animal life, and this is why, for example, the flight of 
birds could serve as an oracle for the Greeks. The Egyptians worshiped A pis 
and other oxen as well as cats, ibises, and crocodiles. They read the signs of 
the dung beetle and the scarab. Respect for living things is found among all 
ancient peoples, for whom truth is something •over there', something 
beyond human spirit. At the same time, the Egyptians were resistam to 
this unselfconscious state and downgraded animal vitality to a symbol of 
something else. They accomplished this by juxtaposing animal figures, for 
example, a snake with the head of a bull or ram, or a lion's body with a 
crocodile's tail and a ram's head. The juxtaposition signals the symbolic 
nature of the figures. More explicit are animal bodies reduced to sphinxes 
from which a human head emerges. But the appropriate sensible figure of the 
spiritual, as the Greeks discovered, is the human figure, not a hybrid. 
Egypt knows only the struggle of spirit to free itself from nature. The 
principle of this •African spirit ... is precisely to endure such harshness 
and to overcome it, whereas the Indians take their own lives'. This spirit 
expresses itself in the great labor that produced wondrous works of art and 
architecture-works that we still admire after three thousand years. In 
higher religions art is subordinate, but in Egypt art is the necessary means 
of self-representation. Its medium cannot be intellectual but rather the 
hardest of natural materials, stone, into which are carved hieroglyphs and 
sculptures, and from which are constructed the most massive structures, 
requiring an advanced knowledge of mechanics. Hegel then writes: 
With other peoples, the work of their effort is subjugation or domination of other 
peoples. The vast and abundant realm of the Egyptians' deeds is, in contrast. their 
works of art. Works of annihilation endure in memory, but we still possess the 
[actual) works of the Egyptians, though only in ruins. One hundred thousand men 
were engaged for ten years in the Trojan War, and what they accomplished. the 
endeavor of the Trojan War, was the devastation of Troy. The chief result 1s the 
futility of both sides, of the besieged and the besiegers. What the Egyptians presented. 
and left behind them is a far loftier achievement, a positive one that, albeit in ruins. is 
' 
41 

EDITORIAl INTRODUCTION 
still something more or less indestructible and enduring. These are works of the 
greatest kind. 
This statement not only is a tribute to the Egyptians but also offers a rare 
glimpse into Hegel's attitude about the incessant warfare that has plagued 
human civilization from the outset. The suffering and devastation of war 
represent a gigantic exercise in futility, which can only be described as tragic 
and makes of history a 'slaughterhouse'. Hegel views warfare as something 
tragically inevitable until such time that spirit has advanced beyond this 
primitive mode of competition. 
A novel aspect of the work of the Egyptians is their dedication to the dead 
and to the underworld in particular, because the souls of mummified bodies 
live on. Theirs is not a true belief in the immortality of the soul, which is 
something alien to the Oriental character. Immortality of the soul means that 
the inwardness represented by the soul is infinite of itself. The Egyptians did 
not know 'that spirit has a higher, eternal purpose, and that, reflected within 
itself, spirit is inherently infinite'. For them the dead are given a continuation 
by embalming, whereas with true immortality the preservation of the body is 
completely nonessential. The Egyptian orientation is to vitality in the present, 
to the particularities of life's sensual pleasures. Their energy is not yet 
directed to the universal, and spirit does not yet come to be for itself, although 
it is struggling toward it. 'That this particularity is also explicitly ideal is what 
must now come forward as the joyous, free, cheerful spirit, and this is the 
spirit of Greece.' 
The transition to Greece is one of the most critical of the Weltgeschichte. 
Hegel quotes Herodotus to the effect that 'the Egyptians are impulsive boys 
who lack the ideality of youths and who will become youths only by means 
of the ideal fonn'-an incorrect citation, but one that fits Hegel's stages in 
the maturation of spirit. Spirit must break free from the self-enclosed night 
of nature; the Egyptians are absorbed in this labor, but the Greeks complete 
it. The fruit borne by the goddess at Sais is, according to the Greeks, the sun, 
Helios. This sun is the Greek spirit, or light, and Apollo is the god of light. At 
his chief temple are inscribed the words, 'Human being, know thyself!' 'This 
knowledge is what is primary, and the labor of the world, the striving of 
every religion, ascends to it; there is no inscription more sublime than this.' 
The Oriental principle must give way to self-knowledge, which in turn 
requires political freedom. 
Over against Greece stood Persia. The Persian intuition of light as the 
principle of unity was authentic, but unity was not interconnected organi-
cally with the elements of particularity. In Greece an authentic integration 
42 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
came about through the deepening of spirit within itself, whereas Persia sank 
back into Asian opulence and military dominance. Greece and Persia were 
drawn into an inevitable conflict, one in which Greece suffered a near-death 
experience but ultimately triumphed. 
The Greek World 
The world spirit now moves beyond childhood to the age of youth, and it 
finds its home in Greece. Two youths exemplify the spirit of Greece: the first 
is Achilles, the poetic creation of Homer, who is the great literary source for 
the intuition of the Greek people; and the second is Alexander the Great, the 
actual youth, whose conquest of the East brought the age of youth to its end. 
It is the concept of youthfulness that is important for Hegel, its vitality and 
immaturity, its enthusiasm for life combined with an inability to achieve 
universal goals. Greece offers a concrete yet sensuous spiritual vitality, a 
spirituality that still has sensuous presence and that highlights the beautiful 
human form, the individual human being. 'The Greek world has as its 
foundation the Oriental world; it starts out from the divinity of nature but 
reconstructs it, giving it spirituality as its inner soul.' 
The Periods of Greek History 
The three periods that mark the history of the Greek people are especially 
clear in the case of the Greeks because they are the first to enter into the 
concrete nexus of world history. The periods are: the beginning; a retrospec-
tive contact with an earlier world-historical people (for the Greeks, the 
Persians); and a prospective contact with a later empire (the Romans). The 
ficst period is the first formation of a people up to a condition of sufficient 
maturity that it can come into contact with the people that precedes it. Here 
a struggle occurs between indigenous and alien elements, and when they 
have been unified a people's distinctive vigor is marshaled. The second 
period is that of a people's triumph. Bur when this people turns too much 
ro external relations and accomplishments, it lets internal matters slip and 
falls into disunity and conflict; it disintegrates into a real and an ideal 
existence, the latter being the realm of critical thought. So the seeds of 
destruction are planted precisely at the point of triumph, and the destruction 
is wrought partly by thought. The third period is that of decline and fall, 
which culminates in contact with the next world-historical people, a people 
called upon to construct a higher stage of the Weltgeist. We find these three 
43 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
periods replicated in the history of the Roman and Germanic peoples, but 
with distinctive twists in each case. 
The geographical characteristics of Greece (its islands, rugged coastlines, 
interior mountains, and dependence on the sea for connection) are such as to 
lend themselves to the creation of a spirit of •self-subsistent individuality', 
which can be unified not by a beneficent (or despotic) patriarchy but only by 
law and spiritual custom. 
The Origins of the Spirit of the Greek People 
This spirit, free and beautiful, could emerge only gradually out of the mixture 
of heterogeneous elements. Some of the original tribes and peoples were 
entirely non-Greek, and we cannot say with certainty which ones were origi· 
nally Greek in origin. The uniqueness of the Greek spirit is foWld in how it 
assimiJates what is foreign: colonists arrived from Asia Minor; Phoenicia, 
Egypt, the Black Sea, and the Mediterranean, creating the 'Greek' identity 
out of •Hellenic' tribes. From this foreign lineage famous dynasties were 
established, which founded enduring centers of power in the form of cities 
and citadels established near or on the coastlines. These circumstances art 
described in the Homeric poems, which show that birth and lineage are one 
aspect but that a 6gure must establish. his own authority, and that relationships 
were familial rather than patriarchal. The Greeks were united just once, under 
Agamemnon, but it was his reputation and power that persuaded the chieftains 
and peoples to go to war. Later the Greeks were no longer politica1ly united, not 
even against the Persians.SZ 
What truly united the Greeks was their a.dture by which they became a 
world-historical people and distinguished themselves from other peoples 
whom they called 'barbarians'. 'Each of us feels at home, and takes pleasure, 
in the realm of Greek culture, art, and science .... It is here~ with Greek 
culture, that there begins the conscious connection of the chain of cultural 
tradition. We come from the Romans, who were educated by the Greeks.' 
Under the peaceful conditions established among the various Greek associa-
tions and COmmWlities, individuals were able to thrive in their quest for 
excellence. The drive to manifest joyful self-awareness progressed into fine 
art.' Art arises from ... a labor that is free of need and consistS in the fact that 
i.ndividua1s make themselves into something9 that they ... exhibit ... rhe 
character of universality.' The physical body is fonned into a work of art 
52.. Despite what lR says here:, Hegel later remarks that a second, partial unificarion dHi ocaar 
wheD Sparta joined Aabens to defat the Persians at Salamis and Plataea in 480-4 79 .c. 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
through garments and attire; then games and dances celebrate the beauty of 
the human form, and songs express the individual subject. 
At this point Hegel introduces a lengthy discussion of Greek religion. 53 
Religion is concerned with what is essential. and this essentiality for the 
Greeks is not something exterior and natural but interior and human: it is 
the beautiful human shape, comprehended in its freedom. 'God is for hu-
mans their own essence. Humans conceive God to be in a positive relation-
ship to them, as their "other" to immediate contingency and finitude, as 
their essence and substantiality.' However, for the Greeks this essentiality is 
the beautiful, which means that it is spirit in its sensible manifestation and 
thus in its finitude, whereas the true essence is infinite. Beauty is the unity of 
sensibility with spirituality~ and free beauty is what constitutes the divine 
for the Greeks. The principle of free thinking has not yet been conceptua-
lized, and so the freedom of spirit is still associated with the human-natural 
form. 
We confront two questions. First~ why is it that the Greeks do not yet 
worship the absolute in spirit, why is it that spirit does not yet appear to 
spirit in the spirit? Second, why is it that the God of the Greeks does not at 
the same rime appear to them in the flesh, even though they possess divinity 
in human shape? The answer to the first question is that God does not appear 
to the Greeks in pure thought, as what is nonsensuous, for the Greeks are 
still closest to the Oriental principle. Subjectivity here is still only emergen~ 
and spirit is not yet one with itself in thought. God cannot yet be revered in 
spici~ and spirit is not yet the knowing of spirit. The answer to the second 
question is tha~ while Greek religion is anthropomorphic, it is not antb.co-
pomorphic enough: it does nor know God in an immediate human existence, 
as a this. 54 It knows God in the beautiful shape of the human, as it is 
fashioned in marble or other media, but it cannot conceive of God as 
actually becoming human, appearing in and as the subjectivity of a single 
human being. Thus, against Schiller, Hegel contends that 'the Christian God 
is much more thoroughly human' than the gods of Greece. 
The Greek gods are not merely natwal powers but are essentially spiritual 
individuality, which for them is what is essential and supreme. But the latter 
is not yet established as free individuality, and spirit is not yet comprehended 
53. Compare his treatment of Grn:k religion in rht: 1821 LectMres on the Philosophy of 
Religion. ii. 141-52. 160-89. 
. 
. 
54. The 'this' is a theme of ~teasing imponaace a5 Hegel's lecrures progress, rexhing II!> 
culmination in the Christian doctrine of incarnation as found in the medieval church and m thr 
Rrformatioo. See tbe Greek World, no. 3(;, 43; and tbe Germanic World, n. 28. 
45 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
in the spirit; it is not yet subiect in addition to substance. The Greeks start 
with nature, but natural divinity is sublated in spiritual progress. This 
sublation constitutes the difference between the Titans, who were nature 
deities, and the Olympian gods, who overthrew them. The 'resonance' of the 
natural powers is preserved in the new gods. Thus Apollo is the knowing god 
but has the resonance of being the god of light, and Poseidon is partly the 
resonance of the nature god Oceanus. This resonance represents the Oriental 
legacy in Greek consciousness. On the one hand, the Greeks took their gods 
from Asia and Egypt, but on the other hand their labor, their cultural work, 
was the transformation of this alien element. 
The resonance echoes in the Greek mysteries and oracles. The mysteries 
derive from an old nature religion with the presumption that ancient and 
venerable sources reveal the truth of all that follows. To address particular 
concerns or to know what one must do in the future, one must consult the 
oracles. In this respect, Greek religion is still superstitious. The Christian, by 
contrast, 'is confident that his particular destiny and welfare, temporal and 
eternal, is an object of God's care .... The Greeks did not and could not 
arrive at this view; for it is only in the Christian religion that God has 
become a this and has taken the character of the this into the character of 
the divine concept.' With their trust in God's care and providence7 Christians 
can decide and resolve things for themselves and do not need to consult an 
oracle. The Greeks lack infinite subjectivity and have to rely on an exterior 
source. 
Closely connected with the oracles is the Greek view of fate-a fate that 
mysteriously governs individual events and must be accepted for what it is. 
Hegel at this point makes important remarks regarding his own view of 
providence: 
The category of providence, or faith, for Christians stands opposed to what we call 
fate for the Greeks. In other respects, however, for Christians as well as for Greeks the 
connection of panicularities to the universal is something incomprehensible and 
misunderstood. Destiny unfolds on a soil that must be called contingent in respect 
to panicular purposes; ... but Christians have the view that all these particularities 
serve for the best, that God guides all these contingencies and leads them to the best 
outcome. Thus they assume that God's object is what is best for them. The Greeks 
lacked this view just because what is particular., the end of individuals, was not taken 
up into God. They accepted individual events as they happened and where they found 
them, but they did not have the conception that what is best for them would be a 
final end, that as a 'this' they would be an end. So they were just left with the 
thought, ... 'That's how it is, and humans must submit to it'. 
46 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
Thus faith in God's providence does not eliminate the contingency that 
applies to particular events, and these contingencies are often incomprehen-
sible. But Christians believe that God, having become flesh, has the well-
being of each and every human being at heart, and that therefore God 
·guides' the contingencies to the best outcome, which means taking up the 
final end of each individual 'into God'. We have discussed the manner of 
the 'guidance', noting that it assumes principally a negative form, and we 
observe too that the 'best outcome' is not a historical utopia but a mystical 
assumption into God. History is governed by contingencies, but God, not 
fate, is the lord of history. Thus Christians find 'solace', whereas for Greeks 
there is no solace, simply a submission to what is. 
To conclude his discussion of the origins of Greece, Hegel turns to its 
political constitution. The Oriental world offers a brilliant display of despo-
tism; the constitution of the Roman world is that of aristocracy, and of the 
Germanic, monarchy. In Greece the constitution is democratic, which for 
Hegel means direct rule by the people (that is, the citizens among the 
people). Such rule presupposes the unity of subjective and objective will, 
which is possible only where infinite subjectivity or subjective freedom has 
not yet developed. Monarchy emerges when external order requires a 'focus' 
for the sake of stability and subjective freedom is recognized and honored; 
thus in Hegel's view monarchy is the highest form of governance. Under 
democracy, the will is still the objective will, the collective will of citizens, 
not that of individual subjects. 
Three conditions are required for the form that democracy takes in 
Greece. First, citizens make decisions based on their 'inner oracle'. They 
cast votes, and the majority decides. The greater the number of votes (and/or 
the closer the vote), the more the decision appears to be arbitrary, a matter of 
chance, and individual votes are devalued. Contingency appears on every 
side: one citizen stays away from the assembly for this or that reason while 
another speaks eloquently; issues are manipulated by interest groups; per-
haps only one insignificant vote decides the matter, and the decision is 
resented. The second condition is slavery: freedom holds good for the Greeks 
only because they are these particular citizens; it does not apply to human 
beings as such simply because they are human. Presumably what Hegel 
means is that not everyone can participate in a democracy, only Greeks 
who are adult male citizens. This points to the third condition, which is 
small size. A democratic state cannot spread out very far because it is the 
whole body that renders the decision. Thus the citizens must be present 
together and the various interests must be alive for them. Hegel does not 
consider here the possibility of a representative democracy and a balance of 
47 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
power among the legislature, the judiciary, and the executive; for him these 
conditions apply only in the modern world in the form of a constitutional 
monarchy (where the monarch is a figurehead but an important symbol of 
unity and national identity). Today constitutional monarchies are consid-
ered a form of democracy, along with republics, but both differ greatly from 
the Greek model. 
The Maturity of the Greek Spirit 
The second period involves contact with the antecedent world-historical 
people-in the case of the Greeks, with the Persians in the events involving 
what Herodotus called 'the War with the Medes'. Hegel notes that not all the 
Greeks participated in the Persian Wars. Even when the stakes were highest, 
'panicularity' maintained the upper hand over a common Hellenism. In fact, 
the Greeks were (partly) united only once, when Spana came to the aid of 
Athens at the Battle of Salamis in 480 Be. The next year the Persian army 
was defeated at Plataea, ending the very real threat of Greek destruction. 
These battles marked a major turning point: 'West and East stood so 
opposed here that the interests of world history lay in the balance.' Over 
against a mighty Oriental despotism, united under a single ruler. stood 'a few 
peoples of limited means but possessing free individuality'. 'Never in world 
history has the advantage and superiority of the noble power of spirituality 
over massed forces ..• been displayed so splendidly.' This was Greece's finest 
hour, and Herodotus gave it immortality by his words. 
As soon as the Greeks had repelled the external threat, the tension had to 
be turned inward. They turned to inner dissension and conflict in the form of 
the rivalry between Athens and Sparta. These city-states were opposites in 
every respect. Athens was a place of refuge for a diverse populace. Solon 
gave the Athenians a democratic constitution~ but with an aristocratic 
element. Slaves could be acquired by purchase, but no free Greek peoples 
were ever enslaved. The Athenians achieved an enviable refinement incus-
toms, beauty, talent, and discowse. The Spanans, by contrast, came into the 
Peloponnesus from Thessaly and made slaves, 'helots', of the native people. 
They lived in a continuous state of warfare and were constantly involved in 
military exercises. Sparta was an aristocracy or oligarchy run by wealthy 
overseers and military leaders. They forced an austere communal asceticism 
on their people and banned science and an. 
Hegel concludes this section by observing that, while we always feel 
oucse}ves drawn to Greece (especially Athenian Greere), our spirit canno£ 
find its highest satisfaction there. 'The objective absolute that is beautiful 
lacks a principal element, namely truth; and here right and ethical life still 
48 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
lack the sublime freedom that comes from the subjective unity of self-
consciousness.' Another principle is on the way, and it first appears as 
something 'revolutionary and demoralizing•. 
Decline and Fall 
The struggle between Athens and Sparta erupted into the Peloponnesian 
War, which dragged on for twenty~seven years (431-404 BC). Sparta ob-
tained financial support from the Persians and eventuaiJy defeated Athens 
and the other states, transforming democracies into oligarchies and aban· 
doning the Greek cities in Asia Minor. The Greek ideal had been fatally 
betrayed, and several centuries of decline ensued. 
It was precisely at this point that Greek philosophy attained its greatest 
achievement, threatening the religion of beauty and the order of the state by 
its critical thought and principle of subjectivity. Against the notion of the 
Sophists that hwnan beings as finite ends are the measure of all things, 
Socrates grasped being in-and-for-itself as the universal and thinking as the 
final end. Then the existence of the gods (though not the unitary divine itself) 
was questioned by Plato, who sought to ban not art but what art portrayed 
as the highest: thought of the absolute is required rather than merely sensible 
representation. The fate of Socrates, remarks Hegel, was the highest tragedy: 
for his pan he had the justi1ication of thought; but for their part the Athenian 
people were right in recognizing that the Athenian state would be weakened 
and destroyed by the principle that justification resides in one's own 
inwardness. 
In the state an irresolvable conflict arose between the principle of individ· 
uality (which had dar~ destructive aspects as weU as beneficia) ones) and 
that of rule by the people as a whole. The Greeks needed a foreign king to 
impose his will on them. That king was Philip of Macedon, and his son, 
Alexander. inherited his father's vast power and had a free hand to use it. 
This 'second youth of Greece' consolidated 
the inner impulse of Greek life, ... turning it against the motherland of Gr~. the 
East, the Orient .... In one respect, Alexander avenged the evil that had befaUen 
Greece at the hands of the Orient; in another respect, however, he repaid a thousand-
fold all the good that Greece had rea:ived from the Orient in the form of early 
cultural impulses •..• The great work of Alexander., his great and immortal deed. is 
that he made the Near East into a Greece. 
Historians say that., although there was nothing but bloodshed in 
Alexander's conquest, he was still great. However, remarks Hegel, 'One 
must be prepared for blood and strife when one turns to world history., for 
49 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTIOI'\ 
they are the means by which the world spirit drives itself forward; they come 
from the concept.' The means are undoubtedly tragic and self-destructive. 
but, as we have seen, they are used by the spirit to further its own ends. Part 
of Alexander's tragedy is that, while he established a Greek world empire, he 
couJd not establish a family dynasty. He was a military genius, an interpreter 
of history, and a man of great personal bravery. He died at the right time. 
when his work was finished, leaving behind a legacy that has endured to the 
present day. 
In the absence of Alexander, only an ugly, barren particularity remained, 
and the Greek states were tom asunder into rival factions. The biographical 
writings of Plutarch and Polybius tell us about the tragic individuals of thi~ 
last period: good persons could only despair or withdraw from public life. In 
these circumstances, 'a destiny appears that can only negate what has gone 
before; it is blind, harsh, and abstract. And the Roman Empire plays the role 
of this fate.' 
The Roman World 
The Roman Spirit 
With the Romans 'politics is destiny', which means for Hegel that indivi-
duals were not taken into account but were sacrificed; it means that the 
achievement of the Roman Empire was power for its own sake. Rome 
represented a prosaic, practical dominion without a spiritual dimension. 
'Rome broke the heart of the world, and only out of the world's heartfelt 
misery ... could free spirit develop and arise.· 
Rome expanded outward from a single hub (the reverse of the origins of 
Greece), embracing tribes of Latins, Sabines, and Etruscans. There was no 
family or patriarchal form at the outset but a robber band, a brotherhood of 
shepherds and bandits. Having no wives of their own, the Romans robbed 
neighboring people of their women. This genesis in 'abduction' is typical for 
the subsequent history of Rome. The Romans lacked the instinct ot natural 
ethical life, a lack that led to harsh familial conditions. Wives could either 
become legal possessions of their husbands or be acquired withour a mar-
riage ceremony by continued use or possession for a year. The husband wa~ 
the family despot, but he in turn was ruled over by the state. The grcarness of 
Rome depended on its sacrificing everything to the political bond. ro the 
state. By contrast with the immeasurable infinitude of the Orient and tht 
beautiful poetic individuality of the Greeks, the Romans simply held fast to 
so 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTIO.l\ 
finitude, to the prose of life, the ultimate abstraction. The development of 
formal law was an expression of the constricted, unsentimental understand-
ing of the Romans. It was their greatest achievement. Their art had a merely 
technical aspect, and religion was reduced to utility and finitude. In these 
respects, although Hegel does nor mention it here, the Roman Empire is very 
similar to our own age. 55 
'Religion' means 'to bind' (religio, from religare), and 'for the Romans 
there is in fact a "being bound", whereas for the Greeks religion is free 
fantasy, the freedom of beauty, and for the Christians it is the freedom of 
spirit'. The constraint of the Romans manifests itself in superstition. Their 
gods serve specific utilitarian purposes: everything, from political fortune 
and the minting of coins to baking and drainage, is governed by a god, and 
gods were imported to meet specific needs. The Romans gathered all these 
gods into the Pantheon and destroyed their divinity by reducing them to 
finite usages. They expressed no disinterested thankfulness toward, or exal-
tation and invocation of, what is higher. 
A similar, indeed gruesome utility manifested itself in their festivals and 
performances. These presented the Romans with the spectacle of murder-
of animals tearing human beings to pieces and of men and women slaying 
one another. To hold their interest, the Romans needed to see actual 
suffering and cruelty. These spectacles were an objectification of their own 
suffering, their veneration of finitude and death. 
The Periods of Roman History 
Here roo, as with the Greeks, three periods are found: the origins of Rome 
(the formation of Roman power), its reference to the East (the world-
dominion of Rome), and its relation to the principle that ensues (the down-
fall of Rome). In the second period, Christianity arrives on the scene as a 
religion that mediates between East and West, and Hegel devotes such 
attention to it as to warrant its being regarded as a separate topic. Part of 
the irony in his treatment is that Christianity subverts the Roman principle 
and requires another people, the Nordic, in which to mature. So the seeds oi 
destruction are sown at the height of Roman power, just as they are in 
Greece. 
55. Hegel makes this comparison in Lectures on the Philosoph)· of Rebgiun. ii1. 159--62. For 
a derailed dtscussion of Roman religion and festivals in the philosophy of rehgton lectures ot 
1821, see ii. 190-231. 
51 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
The Fonnarion of Roman Power 
Here we find no beautiful mythological antecedent, as in Greece, but simply 
a prosaic beginning. The early kings were driven out, and the transition to 
'republicanism' was in reality a transition to an oligarchic aristocracy that 
suppressed the plebeians. Aristocracy, says Hegel, represents the worst 
political condition, despite the desire for 'the best' to rule, because it simply 
offers an equilibrium between despotism and anarchy, and it produces only 
unhappiness and exigency. But it also produces a highly effective military 
strategy, based on the principles of abstract solidarity and obedience to the 
laws of the state. 
The World·Dominion of Rome 
With its increasing wealth and power, Rome enters into a second period, into 
a world theater that lies around the Romans like a panorama, the entire 
perimeter of the Mediterranean Sea. With its defeat of Carthage, Rome 
became mistress of the Mediterranean and aU the lands around it. Gradually 
it worked its way from this periphery more deeply into these lands until it 
became the mightiest empire the world had witnessed, stretching from 
Roman Britain to Asia Minor. Julius Caesar emerged as the consummate 
image of Roman purposiveness, a man who wished nothing other than to be 
the ruler, undeterred by ethical constraints. He suffered the fate of all such 
great individuals, having to trample underfoot what he lived for. After 
making inroads into Gaul and Gennania, he turned against the republic, 
cleansed Rome of base interests, and established the emperor as the one 
person whose will dominated all. Hegel describes this principle as that of 
'spirit's complete coming-out~f-itself, the utter, intentional, deliberate fini-
tude that is without constraint'". This principle reached its consummation in 
Caesar Augustus, and in opposition to him, to this 'profound breach' in 
spirit, there appeared its opposite, namely infinity-an infinity that did not 
negate finitude but encompassed it. 
The Arrival of Christianity 
With this concept of infinity, Christianity arrives on the scene. Hegel says 
that his purpose is not to describe what constitutes the true religion and the 
true infinite, but only its appearing, the necessity of its appearing at this time, 
when 'the time was fulfilled'; for history deals with the appearing of what is 
true .. not with truth itself. Despite this caveat, Hegel first launches into 
precisely a d.iscussion of the true idea, not just its appearing. 
52 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
The absolute idea is the universal that subsists in and for itself-not, 
however, as an empty essence but as internally concrete and deterrninare 
within itself. It posits itself as its own finite 'other' but then draws back into 
itself as infinite fullness; it does not lose itself in bringing itself forth as an 
other to itself. 'God is this infinite life of separating the other from itself and 
being present to itself in this separated element. This relationship is rhe 
speculative form.' This form constitutes the Christian doctrine of the Trinity, 
and it is present in the sentiment of love, which entails loving another for the 
sake of the other and finding oneself in this other. 
There are two ways to grasp this truth: the way of faith via representa-
tion, and the way of knowledge via reason. Between these two resides the 
understanding ( Verstand), which holds fast to the distinction between finite 
and infinite and does not know how to resolve it. 'Upon approaching truth, 
the understanding destroys what is true in it.' The truth of Christianity-the 
doctrine of the Trinity and of the divinity of Christ-does not appear simply 
at the beginning, in biblical statements literally construed, but through the 
living spirit of the community of fai~ speculatively interpreted. 
Our primacy task, however, is to describe the appearance of the idea~ the 
fact that the time had been fulfilled. When the categories of finite and infinite 
are separated, we find on the one side the absolute finitude of the Roman 
world, a harsh servitude, the principle of abstract personality, this one; we 
find it in the capricious form of the emperor, who is 'the god of the world'. 
The other category is infinite freedom, the principle of abstract universality, 
which appears philosophically in Stoicism and religiously in the 'immeasur· 
able expanse' of the East. This expanse, says Hegel, becomes supersensible 
only in the God of Israel, who is stripped of sensuality and is conceive<l 
as pure thought. Here, for the first time, in the jewish religion, rhe charac-
terization of God as 'the One' becomes a world-historical principle. These 
two, the infinite One and finite singularity or subjectivity, are the rwo 
categories of the self-consciousness of this age. •tn isolation they are one-
sided; ... in their truth they are posited as one. This Wtiting of East and West, 
and the assimilation of the two principles, rook place in the Roman world.' 
The Western longing for a deeper inwardness, a profound vastness, led it to 
the East where it found expression in diverse forms: Syrian mystery cults, 
Egyptian religion, Greek mythology, Neoplatonic philosophy. 
This is the world into which Christianity was born, on jewish soil~ under 
Roman domination. For Christianity, the infinite One, the God of Israel, 
comes into sensible presence as this one, jesus Christ. God reveals godself as 
a human being in human shape. In this way the longing of rhe world is 
fulfilled-its longing that the human being as finite should 'be elevated and 
53 

EDITORIAL INTROOUCTJON 
grasped as element of the divine essence', and that God should 'come forth 
from his abstract remoteness into appearance and into human intuition'· 
Faith is the intuition of the unity of God and humanity, the certainty that the 
divine spirit dwells within oneself~ that one is in mystical unity with the 
divine. It entails a liberation from the natural state. But the intuited unity 
must also be present in a natural mode, the mode of an immediate single 
being, a this one. The unity could appear only once~ in a single individual. 
'God is inherently only One, and God's appearing must therefore be desig-
nated utterly with the predicate of oneness and so it excludes all multiplic-
ity.' This appearing of God emerges within the Jewish religion, for this 
people prayed to God as 'the One', and it emerges under Roman domination 
as the antidote to the claim of Caesar to be 'the one •. Within judaism, God is 
not internally concrete, cannot take on the determinateness of finitude, and 
remains the God of just the jewish people.56 Within the Roman Empire, 
Christianity is able to break out of this constraint and to present itself as the 
true and universal religion. 'just as the divine idea has within itself this 
crossover to human being, the human being knows itself as infinity within 
itself.' Thus individuals attain an infinite inwardness, but only through the 
hard labor of breaking through the natural sphere, of taking up the cross, 
and of enduring the persecution of the state. 
The triwnph of Christianity has several consequences for life and the 
state. The first is that slavery is ruled out. Humans have infinite worth as 
human beings, and they are destined for freedom. Its external history to the 
contrary notWithstanding, when Christianity is truly practiced~ it can have 
no slavery; Christianity is the true humanity. The second consequence is that 
the forms of ethical life have changed. An authentic~ inner spiritual subjec-
tivity arises, which is no longer the beautiful ethical life of the Greeks, nor 
can it be d1e merely private interest and caprice of the Romans. The third 
consequence is the establislunent of two worlds: a supersensible spirimal 
world of subjective inwardness and a temporal world, a worldly existence 
that appears in one aspect as the churc~ and in the other aspect as the state. 
The final consequence concerns the political constirution that corre-
sponds to Christianity. For reasons already adduced, the true constitlllion 
cannot be Orientat despotism; nor can it be that of Greek democracy, in 
which subjective will is immediately identical with the will of the stare; nor 
56: Hegel remarks that the jtws attaint<~ a deeper speculative insight with the storv of dle 
c.rcano~ of human ~ings in the image of God aad their •fa))' into the knowledgr of good and 
evil. This story •s umque to Judaism. but it is touod only at the beginning and re-maios without 
Cot~Kquences elsewhere in the Hebrew Bible-
S4 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
can it be the son of servitude that exists under Roman aristocracy. In the true 
srate~ obedience to the secular order must be a matter of 'negotiation' with 
individual, subjective purposes. The state must be strong enough to accom· 
modate these private interests within it and to satisfy them. It must be 
rational in itself, and inherently just. Hegel believes, as we have seen, tbat 
these conditions appear most satisfactorily in rhe modern principle of mon· 
archy, of which he has an organic view, that is, a view in which legitimate 
competing interests of freedom combine into an organic totality. 'Each 
element is posited as an independent power and at the same rime as an 
organ of the whole organism.' 
The Downfall of Rome 
While Christianity came into being during the era of the Roman world, it 
required a different people to be the bearer of its principle, namely, the 'Nordic' 
people. The Romans were inextricably linked to their irrational, barren. and 
abstract principle of imperial dominion, and when they came into contact with a 
new world-historical people their end had arrived. 
Three characteristics mark their downfall. First, internal corruption de· 
stroyed the empire from within. Second, spirit withdrew into itself as some· 
thing higher: Stoicism on the one hand and Christianity on the other. Finally, 
the onrush of foreign peoples overwhelmed the empire in a flood that no 
dam could withstand. These were mass migrations of Nordic and Eastern 
barbarians. 'Since these ... barbarians were called "'Germanen". the world-
historical people is now the Germanic people'. 
The Germanic World 
Introduction 
In addressing the Germanic world, we face the subjective difficulty of being 
unable to approach more recem history as impartially as we can the distant 
past~ and the objective difficulty of having 'both the idea as such and the 
panicularity from which fulfillment of the absolute final end is ro emerge·· 
The latter difficulty arises because the subjectivity of will now predominates. 
along with the absolute idea as such; these two are essentially different, yer 
their unification is the ultimate goal of world history. 
57 The panicular will, 
57. Seen. 1, which also discusses Hegel's w;e of the term 'Germanic' and his principal source!' 
for tbis period. 
55 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
in pursuing its own ends, initially resists being driven toward an absolute 
final end; 'it affects the absolute itself by fighting against it'. The drive is at 
first obscure and unrecognized; 'hence we are often forced to judge what has_ 
happened in just the opposite way from how it appears to be in the history ot 
peoples'. The French say, 'In repulsing truth one embraces it', and this is 
what modem Europe has done by exhausting itself in bloody struggles. Its 
history shows 'that the idea in the mode of providence ruled-providence as 
a veiled inner power that achieves its end and prevails via the recalcitrant 
volition of the peoples-so that what it achieves and what the peoples desire 
are often at odds'. This is a principal instance of the negative rule of God in 
history. 
Individual European states form, struggling and fighting against each 
other, yet they are also being driven toward a general unity. When the latter 
has been accomplished, Europe turns outward-not backward to an earlier 
people or forward to a new people. This is because, 'with the Christian 
religion, the principle of the world is complete; the day of judgment has 
dawned for it' (see note 2). When it turns outward, Christianity encounters 
the world of Islam, which is for it an inessential moment (see note 3). 'The 
Christian world has circumnavigated the globe and dominates it'; any future 
essential revolutions will occur within it. 
Following this abstract summary of how Europe 'ends', Hegel returns to 
its beginning. The beginning occurred with mass migrations of Romance 
and Germanic peoples in the fourth and fifth centuries AD. The Germans 
were attracted by the cultural world they eventually vanquished, but for 
several centuries they lagged behind the Romance nations, which directly 
inherited Roman culture. Further east, Slavic nations existed, and from the 
south came later incursions of Hungarians, the Magyars. But these peoples, 
of Asian origin, have not yet entered into the realm of European history. 
The Periods of the History of the Germanic World 
Using the most sweeping generalizations, Hegel distinguishes three periods 
(early, medieval, and modern), which represent three types of unity (real, 
ideal, and universal), and which are compared with earlier periods of world 
history (Persian, Greek, and Roman 58). However, the Reformation does not 
fall easily into this classification, and in Hegel's actual treatment it belongs to 
a fourth period, which we have called 'The Transition to Modernity'. just as 
S8. Hae the Persian P~~ple ~presents authoritarian rule, the Greek principle an ideality of 
~pun., and the Roman pnnc1ple a quest for universal unity. 
56 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
Christianity subverted Roman hegemony but did not yet find its 'people', so 
the Reformation subverts the medieval synthesis but is not yet fully modern. 
The final period of the Germanic world is not that of 'decline and fall'. as 
with earlier empires, but that of 'modernity', which for Hegel seems to 
represent the consummation of world history-yet he broods over it. Tht> 
comparison with Rome is unsettling. 
The Preparation of the Early Middle Ages 
Covering the period from the fall of the Roman Empire (480) to the reign of 
Charlemagne ( 800-814 ), the early Middle Ages struggled with the tension 
between the independence of individuals and the need for social organiza-
tion. Germany always had free individuals, but they came together into 
assemblies and gathered around commanders-in-chief and kings. Their alle-
giance to the king was called 'fealty', which is a principle of the modern 
world: 'from one's innermost mind and heart to be in association with 
another subject'. The two elements were united in the formation of the 
state-the unification of fealty with the will of individuals. However, the 
unification occurred only gradually, and Germany in particular was initially 
splintered into numerous principalities in which private privilege and par-
ticularity of mind and passion triumphed. 
In contrast to this extreme of particularity in early Europe stood the other 
extreme, that of the pure thought of the One, which emerged in the Oriental 
world in the form of Islam in the seventh century (see note 14). Here all 
particularities become accidentaL Judaism and Christianity share with Islam 
its worship of the One, but in Islam this characteristic becomes fanatical 
because all differences and determinacies are abolished. Everything drops 
away: positive rights, property, possessions, particular purposes. 'That is 
why Islam devastates, converts, and conquers all.' At the same time. the 
ardor and beauty of love are nowhere expressed more fully; and-though 
Hegel does not take note of it-tolerance of other religions is an early feature 
of Muslim rule over subjugated peoples. Hegel does note that the 'natural 
father' of the Christian world is the West, but its 'more sublime and spiritual 
father' is the East. The East is the birthplace of freedom and universality, 
over against the Nordic reliance on individual subjectivity. Christiani~· 
could combine these elements, but Islam remained largely untouched b~· 
Western influence. It conquered all that it could: the Middle East, North 
Africa, Spain, and southern France. Only at Poitiers (or Tours, 732) were the 
Arabs halted by Charles Martel, grandfather of Charlemagne. Great cities 
appeared in Asia Minor, Egypt, and Spain; scholars and schools were 
57 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
established, which disseminated the sciences and the works of classical 
antiquity, together with free poetry and free fantasy. But this magnificent 
empire soon disappeared. Islam did not impinge again on the history of 
Europe until early modernity, with the invasion of the Ottoman Turks-a 
presence with which Hegel was familiar in the 1820s in the form of the 
Greek struggle for independence. 
The Middle Ages 
The Middle Ages continued from the early ninth century to the Reforma-
tion. 59 Charlemagne unified the Frankish Kingdom and was named Holy 
Roman Emperor in 800. Later the empire split up and fell apart, and the 
Germanic world reverted to private dependencies. Thus during the medieval 
period the 'real' authority and unity became 'ideal', or spiritual, through the 
triumph of the Catholic Church. Its first great accomplishment was to make 
the Christian religion into an object of scholarly study by bringing rational 
reflection to bear on it. The basic doctrines of the church had been estab-
lished by the early church fathers and the ecumenical councils. 'What there is 
now, in addition, is the elaboration of this subject ... by theologians of the 
West, who formulated it in thought; these theologians were essentially 
philosophers .... Every theology has to be philosophical; for purely histori-
cal treatment does not address the content as truth.' Theology brought 
dialectical thinking to bear upon faith and transformed it. The science of 
theology as cognition of the truth became the principal mode of scholarship, 
but other sciences also appeared, such as law and medicine. 
A second aspect, however, was that of feeling, 'the deepening of religion 
in the heans of individuals'. The church established convents and monastic 
orders. Even the •finn gnarled oaken hean' of the Germanic peoples was 
split in two by Christianity, pierced by the power of the ideal. •It is the 
incredible power that breaks the stubborn self-will of barbarism and wrests 
the strength of that nature to the ground.' The envisaging of the ideal took 
the fonn, finally, of transforming laws in accord with the church: murder 
became a crime and was no longer tolerated as a form of vengeance; laws 
governing marriage prevented the treatment of women as property to be 
bought or sold, and divorce was not allowed; but celibacy and the religious 
life attained a higher status. 
59. On the divisions of the medieval period and the transitional character of the Refonna-
oon, ~ 
n. 18. 
58 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
Hegel describes at some length the role of the church in medieval politics. 
Power struggles occurred between secular and ecclesiastical authorities, and 
different regions of Europe experienced different solutions. Especially in 
Germany a protracted struggle persisted between emperors and popes, a 
struggle that undermined the unity of Germany and led ultimately to the 
victory of the church. At the height of its power, the church asserted author-
ity over every aspect of life and scholarship. The real kingdom had been 
replaced by 'the dominion of this ideal kingdom'. 
The church seemed to possess everything, but one thing was lacking: 'the 
presence [of God] experienced by self-consciousness'. The early church coun-
~ils long ago established the objective, absolute content of Christianity. The 
content was not altered by scholastic philosophy, and 'philosophy in our own 
time too can only transpose the content into the form of the concept'. One 
aspect of this doctrine is that divinity is not a quantity of some kind but a 
relationship, the unity of the divine with the human, 'such that God appeared 
to humanity and is utterly present to humanity'. The divine nature has within 
itself the quality of the this. 'Christ has appeared, and this presence, this unity 
of the human and the divine, ... is what the world has ever been striving for.' 
But where is Christ today? The God-man Jesus Christ existed as a tempo-
ral being and thus as a past being. His spiritual presence cannot be that of a 
prolonged physical presence such as that of a string of Dalai Lamas. What is 
past exists no longer, but the this should still be present. The divine singular-
ity is no mere mode or accident of substance but is essential to the infinitude 
of God, and this singularity must be present. For medieval Catholicism, chis 
presence is found in the Mass or the Last Supper. The Mass happens not once 
but eternally, for it is the life, suffering, and death of God. The sacrifice of 
the Mass is an actual presence, not merely a historical remembrance or a 
psychological phenomenon. It takes place perpetually in the community of 
faith, which is itself the co-celebrant along with the priest. The problem with 
the Mass, however, is that Christ is represented as something external, as the 
host that is consecrated by the priest. Sensible presence as such is essential to 
the this. But when it becomes the host, the consecrated bread and wine that 
is supposed to be worshiped as God, then it can be repeated endlessly, and 
the need for such a physical presence multiplies exponentially. Miracles and 
relics extend the divine presence; single details of nature are converted into 
panicular manifestations of the divine. Christ is reproduced in countless 
churches, but Christ himself as the Son of God, remains utterly one. What 
the church demands is this u~terly one presence, on earth, here below. in his 
physical, if now long-decomposed, form. But access to the Holy Land and 
59 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
the tomb of Christ was blocked by inhdels, Muslims. The Crusades became 
necessary. 
The ineptitude of the Crusades (nine of them, between 1095 and 1291), 
together with the grandiosity of their mission, resulted in massive bloodshed 
and a failed objective; and the cross of Christ was converted into a 
sword. But when th.ey finally reached the tomb of Christ, the crusaders 
discovered the ultimate meaning of the sensible this: 'Why do you seek the 
living among the dead? He is not here but has risen.' Following upon Christ's 
sensible presence, th.e Holy Spirit comes upon the community, filling the 
hearts and minds of people, not their hands. The Crusades expelled the 
illusion of Christians about the meaning of the this; spiritual presence 
replaced sensible presence; and the interests of sensibility could now be 
directed to the world of nature. 
Hegel concludes his treatment of the Middle Ages by examining the tum 
to nature and to worldly affaiiS. Here be discusses the appearance of 
industry, crafts, and trade, and new inventions such as gunpowder and the 
printing press. The feudal system was broken by the rise of freedom in 
the cities. Social classes in Europe were political in nature and did not 
constitute natural distinctions, as in the Orient. Ordered states were found 
only in Europe, together with private rights and private property. A balance 
of power obtained between them, as well as among states. 
The Transition to Modernity 
Hegel briefly examines art and the corruption of the church before tutning to 
the Reformation. 60 Art inwardly transfigures the external this by spirimaliz-
ing, elevating, and breathing life into it, raising it to a figwative form that 
belongs to spirit. A piety that remains in a state of bondage, in a feeling of 
dull dependency, has no need of an and fails to recognize genuine works of 
art. 
As for the corruption of the church, we are speaking of a necessary, not a 
contingent, aspect. This corruption resides within the chwch, in the fact that 
it has not truly and wholly excluded the sensible element. It resides within 
its piety itself, in its superstitious veneration of sensible things as absolute. 
The church's bigbest virtue now assumes a negative fonn: retreat, renuncia-
tion, lifelessness. By contrast, in Hegel's view, the highest virtue is found in 
the realm of the living, in the family. The church is supposed to save souls 
from corruption, but it makes this salvation into a merely external means, 
60 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
namely, the indulgences. Indulgences were sold to support the construction 
of St Peter's, the most splendid church in Christendom. Hegel reminds us 
that the Athenians used funds from the Delian League to build the Parthe· 
non. 'just as this was the misfonune of Athens, so too this structure, St 
Peter's, which Michelangelo adorned with the image of the Last judgment, 
became the last judgment on this proudest and grandest structure of the 
church-a last judgment on the church itself in its corruption.' 
In describing the Reformation, Hegel reaches the narrative climax of the 
Weltgeschichte. 
In Germany there emerged a simple monk who was conscious that the this is to be 
found in the deepest recesses of the heart, in the absolute ideality of inwardness ..•. 
Luther's simple teaching is that consciousness of the this in the present is nothing 
sensible but something actual and spiritual; it is consciousness of an actual presence, 
not in the sensible realm but in faith and partaking. 
Faith here does not mean a belief in something that has already taken place 
or is in the past; rather it is subjective certainty about the eternal, about the 
truth that subsists in and for itself, and it is produced and given only by 
the Holy Spirit. The content of rhis faith is not its own subjectivity but the 
objective truth of the church: Christ, Spirit, the Trinity, the absolute being of 
God. In faith the absolute being becomes the being of subjective spirit, and 
subjective spirit becomes free in relating to it because it is thereby relating to 
its very being and truth. The ontological participation of faith in God, the 
communication of spirit with spirit, of finite spirit with infinite spirit, and 
vice versa, is the key insight for Luther and for Hegel. This is how Christian 
freedom is actualized-by participating in the true content and making this 
content its own. Faith and freedom are not merely forensic categories, as 
neo-Kantian interpreters of Luther have insisted. 
As proof that we have arrived at the narrative climax, read the foUowing 
words: 'This is the new and ultimate banner around which peoples gather, 
the Hag of freedom, of the true spirit .... The ages prior to our age have fa~ 
but one labor, have had but one task, and that has been to incorporate this 
principle into actuality, thereby achieving for this principle the fonn of 
freedom, of universality.' But, while the climax has been reached, the plot 
fully disclosed, history itself goes on and work remains to be done. Above 
all, the work of actualization remains: the reconciliation that has happened 
implicitly in religious faith must take on concrete existence in the institutions 
of modern life and it must be universalized so as to encompass the world. 
This is a tall o;der, and Hegel's relative optimism about its accomplishm:ent 
has become vastly more complicated in our own time. We say 'relaave• 
61 

EDITORIAl INTRODUCTION 
optimism, because Hegel's brief account of the history of modernity recog-
nizes deep ambiguities and difficulties. 
The History of Modernity 
The first development of modernity (see note 61) requires that the 'new 
church' (the Protestant church) should create a worldly existence for itself. 
This was not a simple task, for the 'old church' retained a considerable basis 
in power and did not surrender its hegemony easily. In fact what happened is 
that religious wars endured for many years, Germany was severely damaged, 
the Turks invaded Europe, and no true religious accommodation was ever 
achieved. In addition to the Catholic-Protestant (or Romance-Germanic) 
divide in Western Europe, there was a third large constellation, the 'Slavic 
nature', which persisted in its 'initial solidity' despite Russia's approach to 
the West. The Protestant church did achieve a legally secure existence, but 
Europe was far from unified, and deep divisions persisted throughout the 
rest of the world. 
The second development of modernity is that of the scientific investiga-
tion of nature, representing what Hegel calls 'the formal universality of 
thought'. True culture now essentially becomes that of science and is aligned 
with the state, not the church. The church does not assume the lead in 
advancing either freedom or the sciences. The sciences of the understanding, 
claiming to honor both humanity and God, were widely accepted as valid, 
although the Catholic Church did not concede that science honors God. The 
chwch is correct in the sense that the sciences could lead to materialism and 
atheism, for nature and its laws are now taken to be something ultimate and 
universal. One could indeed add that God created the world, but empirical 
science has no way of recognizing God. The understanding recognizes only 
itself in the universality of its laws. 
The third development of modernity is that the formal universality of 
thought turns to the practical, to actuality. The understanding with its laws 
turns itself as 'enlightenment' against the spiritually concrete, the religious 
sphere. Its principles, derived from nature, are logical consistency, identity, 
and coherence. It recognizes a natural sense of immortality, sympathy, and 
so on, but it is intrinsically antireligious. ·For the very principle of religion is 
that the natural is precisely what is negative and needs to be sublated ... · 
Religion is speculative ... and thus is inconsistent with the abstract consis-
~ency of the understanding.' Reason ( Vernunft) grasps distinctions within 
Itself as a unity, whereas the understanding ( Verstand) holds fast to an 
62 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
abstract identity that lacks distinctions. For it, 'the finite is not infinite', and 
that is that. 
When thought turns to the state, however, it has a more beneficial effect. 
It produces insight into the universal purposes of the state, which take 
precedence over privileges and private rights. Wars and revolutions are 
now fought on constitutional grounds, not religious ones. Such wars attempt 
to change governments through force from below, in the interest of freedom 
of the will and self-determination. 'Freedom of the will is freedom of the 
spirit in action', and it emerges directly from the principle of the Protestant 
church. 'The freedom of will that is in and for itself is the freedom of God 
within itself; it is the freedom of spirit, not of a particular spirit but of the 
universal spirit as such, in accord with its essential being. Revolutions, then, 
have proceeded from thought. This thought has had to do with actuality and 
has turned forcibly against the established order.' Such revolutions have 
already occurred in Protestant states, which now are at peace, but in 
Romance countries the revolutions have been strictly political and are not 
yet accompanied by a change in religion. Religion must change for there to 
be genuine political change. 
Conclusion 
This is where Hegel leaves the story-in a state of irresolution and inconclu-
siveness (forced upon him, perhaps, by his having run out of time). He offers 
only brief summary remarks about the whole of history being nothing other 
than the actualization of spirit. What is true in thought must also be present 
in actuality, and vice versa. 'Thus it is spirit that bears witness to spirit, and 
in this way it is present to itself and free. What is important to discern is that 
spirit can find freedom and satisfaction only in history and the present-and 
that what is happening and has happened does not just come from God but is 
God's work.' 
63 


MANUSCRIPTS OF THE 
INTRODUCTION 


INTRODUCTORY FRAGMENT, 1822, 1828 1 
121 
Gentlemen! 
The subject of these lectures is the philosophical history of the world. Ow 
concern is to work our way through universal world history as such. It is not: 
with general reflections abstracted from it and iUustrated by examples9 but 
rather with the content of world history irself. I have no textbook to we as a 
basis. However, at the end of my Grundlinien der Phirosophie des Rechts, 
§§ 341-60,2 I have already indicated the more precise conception of world 
history as well as the principles and periods into which our consideration of 
it is divided. (It will enable you to at least become acquainted with the 
abstract shape of the elements that we shall be discussing.) 
By way of an introduaion to our philosophical history of the world, I will 
begin by providing an indication, both general and specific, I of what 
122 
consrirutes a philosophkal history of the world. I will go over and describe 
other ways to expound and treat history by distinguisbing-[in] a survey 
that has nothing philosophical about it-three diffnent modes of writing 
history: 
o:. original history 
~- reflected3 history 
y. philosophical history 
(a) As to the first mode, the mention of a few names should give a mon 
specific picture of what I have in mind-e.g., Herodotus, Thucydides,• and 
other historians who have themselves witnessed, experienced, and lived 
through the events, deeds, and circumstances they describe, who have them-
selves participated in these events and their spirit, and who have compiled a 
report of these events and deeds. In this way they transposed things that 
merely happened and existed externally into the realm of mtellem.al repre-
sentation and elaborated them in its terms. First, [there was] something 
1. Next 1J0 the he4ding in the nr4rgin, amgJIIJiing the d4us the /ecblres bqdll in 1 B22 .md 
1828: 3Vl0 22 30110 28 
2. l-Iege~ Gnmdl;niell tkr Philosophie tks Redlts (Berlin, 1821). See E.lmretm of the l'IJilm-
opby of Right, eel. Allen W. Wood, tt H. 8. Nisbet (Cambridge, 1~11.172-BO. 
3. The manuscript ~ 
reads re/kctirte ('reftectrd') but at tbe beginning of the tR:I.UIIePl of 
the second mode, Tr!{leairewde (•rdlectin'l. 
4. Editions of Herodorus' The History and Tbucydides' 'lW P~ 
W.- ~ 
ill 
lkpl's library: Herodotus, Histot'imvm libri lX (Paris, 15~2), aud Libri ~ 
(~ 
15621; Tbuqdidrs, De bJio p~ 
lim Vlll (~ 
1594)-

123 
124 
125 
MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
existent-now something intellectual and representationaL That is how., for 
example, the poet elaborates the material that he has in his feeling, in his 
inner and I outer soul, into a sensible representation. Admittedly, thenar-
ratives and reports of others were also an ingredient for these historians, but 
they are merely the more scattered. less important, fortuitous, subjective, 
and transitory of their materials (just as the poet owes much to the shape of 
his language and the structured information he receives). Rut it is the 
historian who fashions a whole out of what in actuality has already passed 
away and is scattered about in subjective, fortuitous memory or indeed 
preserved [only] in fleeting memory, and sets it up in the temple of Mnemos· 
yne, thereby investing it with immortality. The historian transplants [the 
past}, gives it a more exalted and better soil than that transient soil in which 
it grew-transplants it into the realm of the departed and now eternal spirits, 
as the ancients described the Elysium in which their heroes do perpetually 
what in their lives they did only once. 
From such original history I exclude all legends, folksongs, traditions, and 
even poems; for such I legends and traditions are but obscure methods [of 
recording events], and therefore methods of peoples-or parts thereof-
whose consciousness is still obscure. I shall return later5 to the matter of 
the relationship of history to a people. 6 Peoples with an obscure conscious· 
ness, or the obscure history [of such peoples], is not our topic-at least not 
the topic of the philosophical universal history of the world~ whose end is to 
attain knowledge of the idea in history. [Its obiect is] the spirits of those 
peoples who have brought their principle to consciousness and who know 
what they are and what they do. 
Such original historians, then, shape the events, deeds, and situations that 
are contemporaneous to them into a work of representation for representa· 
tion. It follows from this: (aa) The content of such historical narratives 
cannot therefore be of great extent. Their essential material 'onsists in 
what is vital for humans in their own experience and current interests, 
what is present and alive in their environment. 1 
[These historians) describe events in which they have shared to a greater 
or lesser extent, or at least of which they have been contemporaries. [They 
describe] brief periods of time, individual configurations of persons and 
5. In th~ rrwrgin: To be ~d 
lab:r- historitl, res gesta- the objective history proper of a 
people begins for the lint time when they have a historical record (Historie]. lnJia ~till (bas] 
00~· (~itt) ~ cultural developmeot of 3.500 years, [it has] not yet arrived at a culture in 
wbicb a history IS possible. 
6. The ~elopmem of this idea is not found in the extant manuscript fragment. 

INTRODUCTORY FRAGMENT, 1822, 1828 
events. They work from intuitions drawn from their own experiences and 
lives, assembling individual and unreflected elements into a [composite] 
picture in order to give to posterity a representation as specific as that 
found in [their own] intuition or in the intuitive narrative they have before 
them [from someone else]. 
(fl/3) With such historians the development of the author and the develop-
ment of the events on which his work is based, or the spirit of the author and 
the general spirit of the actions he relates, are one aruJ the same. 
Thus initially the author brings no reflections to bear, for he is immersed 
in the spirit of the historical material (der Geist der Sache) and does not rise 
above it to reflect on it. This unity [of author and material] also means that-
in an age in which a greater differentiation between dasses occurs, and in 
which the culture and maxims of each individual are related to his class-the 
historian must belong to the class of statesmen, generals, etc., whose aims, 
intentions, and deeds are part of the same political world that he describes. 
When the spirit of the material is itself cultivated, it b«omes aware of itself. 
A major aspect of irs life and activity is its7 consciousness of its purposes and 
interests and of the principles that underlie them. 1 One aspect of its ac-
126 
tions8 is the way in which it explains9 itself to others., acts on their imagina-
tion, and manipulates their will. The author, then, does not explain and 
portray this consciousness in terms of his own reflections; rather he allows 
the persons and peoples themselves to express their aspirations and their 
knowledge of their aspirations. He does not put into their mouths alien 
words of his own devising; and even if he elaborates on what they said., the 
substance, culture, and consciousness of this elaboration are identical with 
the substance and consciousness of those whom he has speak in this fashion. 
Thus in Thucydides, for example, we read the speeches of Pericles, the most 
7. At this point tbe transition occurs from the first sheet of manuscript materials. now located 
in the Berlin Staatsbibliotbek Preu8ischer Kulturbesitt, w the second and third sheets, located in 
the Deutsches Literarurarchiv of the Schiller-Nationalrnwewn in Marbach. 7he smooth ttansi-
tion indicates that the sheets, though subsequently separated, originally fonned a single 
maouscript. 
8. In the margin (two /i'I'U!s lower): Words are actions-among human beings, very essetltiill 
and effective actiom. But words of a people, or between peoples, or to a people or sovereign, 
are, as actions, an essential ob;ect of history, especiaJly ancient history. Admittedly one bears of 
persons whose unerances have been taken amiss ofteo saying that what they ma.mU1ned or 
uttered was 'iust words'. If they are right in this judgment, that what they sa~ is jUSl words, then 
rhey must be pronounced innocent (unschuldig), for such words are notlnng other than idle 
chattc, which bas the sole advantage of being something harmless (~mSChuld,ges). 
_ 
9. In the margm (above the previous addition): n0e historian] bas no need ro c:xplam 
motives (and feelings) in his own oame or to bring them into his pmiculm conscJOIISPJI!5S, 
69 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
profoundly cultured, the truest and noblest of statesman, and of other 
orators, envoys of {various] peoples, etc. 10 In their speeches these men 
express the maxims of their people and of their own personality, the con-
127 
sc.:iousness of their political condition I and of their ethical and spiritual 
condition and nature, and the principles that underlie their purposes and 
rondua. The historian has left himself little or no room for [personal] 
reflections, and what he lets [his characters] express is not an alien con-
sciousness lent to them but their own culture and consciousness. 
Anyone who seeks to study substantial history, the spirit of nations, to 
live and have lived in and with it, must immerse himself in such {original] 
historians, must linger with them, and indeed it is impossible to linger too 
long with them. Through them the history of a people or a government 
comes to us fresh, alive, and at first hand. Anyone who does not desire to 
become a learned historian but rather to enjoy history can limit himself 
almost entirely to such authors alone. From them (we muse] distinguish [i.e. 
identify] the bibles of peoples; every people has a basic bible ( Grundbibel), a 
Homer. Such {authors] are, after all, not so common as frequently supposed. 
Such historians include Herodotus, the father or originator of history and 
moreover the greatest of historians, and Thucydides-[both are} to be 
admired for their naivete. Xenophon's Retreat of the Ten Thousand is an 
equally original book;11 Polybius;12 the Commentaries of Caesar13 are 
likewise masterpieces of simplicity by a mighty spirit. To have such histor-
ians, it is necessary not only that the culture of a people have attained to 
128 
a I high level, but also that it not he limited to the priesthood and scholars 
but rather be shared by leaders of the state and military. Naive chroniclers 
such as monks were certainly found in the Middle Ages, but they were not 
statesmen. To be sure, there were also learned bishops who stood at the 
center of commerce and the affairs of state, and were thus also statesmen, 
but in other respects [their) political consciousness was not developed. 
However, [such works) are characteristic not only of antiquity. In modern 
_ 10. On me speeches of Pericles see llulCydi<ks, The Peloponnes•an War 1. t4o--4; 2.13. 
h-46, 60-4 (0:. Srevm lattimore !Indianapolis, 1998) 67-71 81-l 91-7 103--6)· on thoS(' 
of~ · ludi 
the 
• 
' 
' 
' 
' 
rs, Inc 
n~ 
speech of the Corinthians, 1.120--4 (lattimore, pp. 57-91, or that of th~ 
Sparta~~ king Archidamos, 2.11 (lattimore, pp. 79-80). 
1 I. Hegt) was familiar with two edns. of XenQ))hon's works: Quae extant opero I Geneva. 
1581 I, and Anabasis ilelpzlg, 18111. 
~2._ Hegel owned two edns. of Poly hi us's Histari4rNmlilm qua£ superstmt (Frank fun. 1619; 
le1pzag. 18161. 
Li:; A~ius Caesar, Commen~riorwn BeUi Gallici Libri Vfll; Commemariorum Belli Civilis 
70 

INTRODUCTORY FRAGMENT. 1822. 1828 
times, all this has changed. Our culture immediately grasps and transforms 
all events into representational accounts. In modernity we have excellent 
accounts of military and othef events that are simple, ingenious, and specific. 
and that compare favorably with Caesar's commentaries; because of their 
weahh of content and specific declaration of means and conditions, they are 
even more informative. 
Works of this kind include numerous French memoirs. Many of them are 
cleverly written [accounts] of trivialities and anl!cdotes, ofren with a narrow 
content on narrow grounds. Others, however., are the product of an able 
ingenuity [set 1 on a larger and more interesting scale. The Memoires of 
Cardinal de Retz [ace] a masrerwork. 1'4 In Germany similar m4Sterpieces 
by persons who themselves participated in the events are race, although the 
Histoire demon temps by Frederick 1115 is a great and notable exception. It is 
[not) enough [for an author) to have been a contemporary of such events or 
even to have witnessed them at first hand and obtained reliable information 
about them. An author must be of the same class, circle, attitude, mentality, 
and culture as those whose actions he describes--[ the same rank] as those on 
whom I the authority of the sUite and the power of the government rests. 
129 
Only from an elevated position does one have a proper overview of the 
subject and see everything in its context-not when one looks up from 
below, peering through some limited moral lens or other bit of wisdom.In 
our time it is all the more necessary [to free ourselves) from the limited point 
of view of the classes that are more or less excluded from direct political 
activity and reflection-from the life of the state. They bask in mofal 
principles by which they are consoled and know themselves superior to the 
upper classes-in short, they do not stand within that sphere. 
16 
(~) The second mode of hismry may be called reflective history-a history 
whose portrayal goes beyond what is present simply to the author and that 
depicts not only what was present in time but is present in the life of spirit; it 
is concerned with the whole of the past. Thus many varieties of [this sort of 
historiography] are found-indeed, including everything {written) by those 
whom we customarily call historians. Here the most important thing is the 
way in which the historical material is worked up, for the worker comes to it 
14. See Memoires du Carditull de Retz, contenant ce qtU! s'est piUSe tk remarqwbie en 
Nance pendant des premreres annees du Regne fk Louis XIV. new edn., 3 vols.IAmsterdam. 
1719). It is uncertain which edn. was used by Hegel. 
15. ~e Hlstolre demon Temps lk Frederic ll, Roi tk Prusse. 2 vols. (Btrlin. 18261. 
16. In the margin: a Original [history I can encompass only a brief period of time- necessl~ 
of an overview of the whole -
a) a.a Compendium f3P Opposite - imitation of original [history) only an e:rternal expansion 
71 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
130 
with his own spirit, which is 1 different from the spirit of the cont~nt itself. 
Here everything depends on the maxims and representational principles ~hat 
the author apphes both to the content (to the purposes of _rhe a~t1ons 
and events themselves) and to the style of the historical narrative. Wtth us 
Germans the reflection-and the cleverness [with which it is practiced]-
differs considerably. Each historian has adopted his own style and method, 
however he is of a mind to do it. The English and French know in general 
how history must be written; they share the attitudes of a common culture, 
whereas with us each writer quibbles over his own distinctive view. Thus the 
English and the French have excellent historians; but with us, if we look at 
the critiques of historidns of the past ten or twenty years, we find that nearly 
every review begins with its own theory about how history should be 
written, a theory that the reviewer sets up against the theory of the historian. 
We are in the position of continually struggling to find out how history ought 
to be written. 
Various {modes of ret1ective history]: 
(aa) There is always a demand for surveys of the entire history of a people or 
cormtry, OT of the whole world in general; and to satisfy this demand history 
books must be written. These are necessarily compilations from accounts 
already prepared by original historians as such, and from other individual 
reports and accounts. [They are] not based on intuition and the language of 
intuition, or on first-hand observation. This first variety of reflective history 
131 
comes closest to the preceding kind when it has no further 1 purpose than to 
present the entire history of a country or people. The type of compilation 
depends on how exhaustive the history is intended to be. It often happens 
that such historians try to write so vividly that the reader has the impression 
of listening to contemporaries and eyewitnesses. But such anempts must 
always be more or less unsuccessful. The entire work should and indeed 
~ 
must be uniform in tone, for the author is a single individual with a specific 
, 
culture of his own; but the ages covered by such a history have very different 
cultures, as do the historians utilized by the author, and the author's spirit 
that speaks through them is different from the spirit of these ages. When the 
historian tries to depict the spirit of the ages, it is usually his own spirit that is 
heard. Thus Livy puts into the mouths of the old kings of Rome, the consuls 
and generals of ancient rimes, speeches that only an accomplished advocate 
lor hairsplitting orator) of Livy's own time could have delivered, and that 
contra~t glari~gly with authentic legends from antiquity (e.g., the fable of 
Menenaus Agrippa about the stomach and the intestines). He likewise gives 
us extremely thorough and cktailed descriptions of battles and other events 
132 
in such a tone and with such a specific grasp [of] 1 details that he appears to 
n 

INTRODUCTORY FRAGMENT, 1822, 1828 
have witnessed them himself, although these descriptions could not have 
derived from the ages in which they are set. Their features can be used ro 
describe the battles of any age; their specificity contrasts with the lack of 
coherence and the inconsistency that often prevail elsewhere in the main 
course of et•ents. 17 The difference between such a compiler and an original 
historian can best be seen by comparing Polybius with the way that Livy 
utilizes, selects from, and abridges his history for the periods covered by 
surviving portions of Polybius' work. 18 ]ohanru!s von Muller, 19 in an 
attempt to give a faithful portrayal of the times that he describes, has 
given his history a stilted, pompous, pedantic air. The old chronicle of 
Tschudi20 related the same events in a much more endearing, naive, and 
natural way than Muller's contrived. affected archaisms. 
This [is] an attempt to transpose us completely into tbe times [of the past, 
as something] quite vivid and alive-[ something] we [can achieve) no more 
than a writer. A writer is also [one of] us; {he] belongs to his [own] world-
he honors its needs and interests~ the things it esteems. For example, whatever 
[the age] we live in, we can [immerse ourselves) in the life of Greece, which is 
congenial to us in so many important respects; yet in the most irnponant 
matters we cannot sympathize with the Greeks [or share] their feelings. For 
instance, however much the city of Athens captures our interest, and however 
much we sympathize with its activities and customs--as a most worthy 
fatherland of a cultured people-we cannot share the feelings of {its citizens] 
when they prostrate themselves before Zeus, Minerva, etc., I [or when they] 
agonize over their sacrificial offerings until midday on the anniversazy of the 
Battle of Plataea.21 [Nor do we sympathize with] slavery-just as (we] cannot 
share the feelings of a dog, (even if) we have a dear impression of a panicular 
dog and can divine its mannerisms, attachments, and idiosyncrasies. 
17. On the fable of Menenius Agrippa, see litus Livius, Historiarum libri, ed. I. F. Gronovii 
(Lyons, 1645}, 1.114 (2.32.5-12); on Livy's depiction of battles, 1.274-7 (4.32--4). Stt LiV}·, 
The Ri$e of Rome, tr. T. J. Luce (New York and Oxford, 1998), 104, 251-4. 
18. Livy utilized Polybius' work. for the history of the eastern half of the Roman Empire. 
Polybius is discernible as the source for books 21, 26-8, and esp. 31-45 of the His~. 
See Heinrich Nissen, Kritische Unters#dnmgen Uber die Qwlkn der vierterr arrd !Unft.en 
Dekade des Livms (Berlin, 1863 ). 
19. Hegel is referring to Johannes von Muller's Die Gesch•chte tier Sch~scher~ 
Eidgenossenschaft, found in his Siimmtliche Werke, xix-xxv (Tubiogen, 1815-171. 
20. ~ 
Aegidius Tschudi, Chronicon Helveticwn, 2 vols. !Basel, 1734,17361. 
21. From a similar fonnulation in Hegel's l..echlre5 on the Histqryo{PhiJowphy, IB25~.ed. 
and tr. Robert F. Brown et al. (Oxford, 2006, 2009), ii. 146. It may bt sunnis.ed that tlu~ 
description relates to the efforts at obtainin~t a favorable oracle by Pausanias Ia~ by h1~ 
opponent Mardonius), as reponed by Herodorus in The Hish)ry 9.36--404 ltr. David Grem 
(Chicago, 1987), 629--40). 
73 
133 

MA.NUSCRlPTS OF THE lNTRODUCTlON 
But there are also other ways by which [historians! have tried to bring the 
historical (past) to us-if not by [eliciting] a sharing of feelings thcough the 
tone [of writing, at least by eliciting) vividness and lively feelings [by enter-
ing) wholly into the details of events, practices, modes of feeling, and specific 
presentation. 
Histories that endeavor to provide an overview of a lengthy period or the 
whole of world history must more or less dispense with individual portrayals 
of reality and (make do with] abstractions, epitomes, abbreviations. This 
(means] not only that many events and actions [must be] omitted but also 
that thought or understanding, the mightiest epitomizer, must intervene. For 
example, a battle was fought, a great victory was won, a city was besieged in 
vain, and so on. A battle, a great victOry, a siege--all these are general 
representations that condense a vast individual whole into a simple charac-
terization for representational thought. When we are told that at the begin-
ning of the Peloponnesian War Plataea was subjected to a lengthy siege by 
the Spanans .. and that after some of the inhabitants had fled the city was 
134 
taken and th.e remaining citizens were executed, this is a brief I swnmary-
not just shon in length hut a merely general representation distilled (redu-
cirt) by reflection-of what Thucydides describes with so much interest and 
in great detaiL22 [The same applies when we are told) that an Athenian 
expedition to Sicily came to an unfortunate end.23 Sut as we have said, such 
reflected representations are necessary aids for an overview, and an overview 
1s necessary too. 
However, it inevitably makes for a drier account: how can it interest us 
when Livy, after describing a hundred wars with the Volscians, repeats for 
the hundredth time such phrases as 'In this year war was successfully waged 
against the Volscians~ or the Fidenates.· etc.24 
Against this general way [of writing history, other historians endeavor] to 
collect all individual traits and to ponray them in an infinitely faithful and 
.U. The siege lasted for five }"ears at the beginning of lht Peloponnesian War· see Thucvdides., 
T~t~. 
Wa~ 2.71-~, 3.20-4,3.52--68 l~nunore, pp. 110-14, 139-41, 15~4) .. 
· 
~oo 
JS described by Thucydidcs m The Pelop011ne5io71 War 6.1-8.1 ll.attl· 
more, pp. 306-412). 
--~~4
•2
Accordingto Uvy~ war against the (Etruscan) fidmates flared up repeatedlv between 753 
....... 
(; IIC· the war ... ,., 
the " .. · 
h. 
· 
· 
~ 
. 
~n.<;t . 
. YOL<;Clan.\, "" •ch la..;ted more than two cenruries., hegan m .S .14 
Ex
iC. ~bvy,_HutonanDr~lar libri 1.20 ff. (1.14.1). 1.66 ff. (1.53.2) tLuce. pp. 19-20, 61-2). 
pregaoos SUJU 
to .. example giveo by H 
1 
f nd 
0 
24 J) 
1 145 (2 58 31 (" ··--
ege an: ou 
at 1.1 2 (2.23.1), 1.104 (2. 
. , 
• 
• 
• 
UA."C', PP. 93, 94--S, 132-3). 
74 

INTRODUCTORY FRAGMENT, 1822, 1&28 
lifelike manner (Ranke)Y [They give us) a motley assortment of details [that 
are} of little interest-actions of soldiers, private affairs-and that have no 
influence on political concerns. [fhese writers are] incapable of (envisaging] 
a whole, a general purpose. 
Such a way of writing history is lifeless-such forms and abstract repre-
sentations make the content dry. 
Making use of intuitional representation (Anschauung der VorstellungJ if 
not liveliness of feeling, [these writers] at least strive to reproduce past ages 
not by means of their own elaboration but by giving an accurate and faithful 
portrait of them. 
A series of features-as in one of Walter Scott's novels26-gleaned from 
here and there, painstakingly and laboriously assembled-such features are 
drawn from I historical writings, correspondence, and chronicles. Such a 
135 
procedure entangles us in numerous fortuitous details-historically authen-
tic, to be sure-however the main interest [is] in no way clarified by them but 
rather confused-and thus [it is) immaterial that such and such a soldier by 
the name of [so and so, did this and that]-the effect is the same. This [son of 
thing ought] to be left to Walter Scott's novels-this detailed portraiture 
with all the minutiae of the age-in which the deeds and fate of a single 
individual constitute a passing interest and all the particulars are much the 
same. However, in the portrayal of the great interests of the state, all these 
panicular details about individuals disappear. The featwes (that are 
included] should be characteristic of and significant far the spirit of an age. 
This should be accomplished in a higher and wonhier manner-[withl 
political deeds, actions, and customs, [which are] matters of universal 
interest, {depicted] in their specific character. 
15. This reference ro Leopold Ranke is found in the margin. It is not pan oi the tex:t that 
Hegel copied in 1828 from the earlier manuscript of his lectureS of 1822-3. Rather it be-longs to 
the subsequent expansion made in the winter of 1828-9. At this cime Hegel could have been 
fam.Iiar with three of Ranke's wocks: Geschichle der romani~ben und gernsanischen VOlker 
von 1494-1535, i !Berlin, 18241; Zur K11t1k neuerer Geschichtsschreiber: Eine Beylage Z1' 
Jesselbm romamschen und germanischen Geschichte (Leipzig and Berlin, 1824); Fiirsten wnd 
Vi:ilkeT von Sud-Europa irn 16. und 17. jahrhundert, i ~Hamburg, 1827). Thf Janer work and 
Ranke's Dte serbtst-he Revolution: Aus serbiSchm Papreren und Mittheilungen (Hamburg, 
1829) were in Hegel's libracy. 
. . 
26. It is not known wirh which. of Walter Scott's novels Hegel was familiar. A reference to 
Scan is not found in his lectures on aesrhecics (at least in the presendy available edns. I but in a 
later fragment on aesthetics. Hegel owned a German edn. of Scott's works, Ueber da5 Leben ,,.,J 
die Werke der bernhmten mglrschen Rmnan· Dichter, tc. Ludwig Rdlo;tah, 1 vols.. (Berhn, 11126). 
[n the Morgenblatt fur die gebil.ieten Stank he excerpted Scott•s views on the french Revolu-
uon with the remark, 'a shallow man' (BerlmerSchriften 181tl-183l, td- Johannes HoffmeiSter 
!Hamburg, 1~56), 697-8). 
75 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
27 (pfJ) The first variety of reflective history leads directly to the 
136 
second. 1 This is pragmatic history, or [it] remains nameless [because] It 
is the kind that historians in general serve up-a developed and purer 
lportrayal of) the past. [If we] do not have [individuals} and their lives-
such a totalitv-before us and have no living experience of them-(na.) but 
. 
' 
rather are dealing with a reflected world, i.e. a past-its spirit, its interests, 
its culture ... 
(Then we have} in general a rational (verstandige) history. (a.a) A totality 
of interests-such as the totality of a state, the epoch-making event of a war 
or even of an individual-is the object. 
(~fJ) Here roo the object is a present interest, but without it being the 
presence of tone. of feeling, of external vividness (Anschaulicbkeit) in cir-
cumstantial details and the fortunes of single individuals as such. The need 
for a present exists, [but} it [is) not [to be found] in history. Such presence [is 
created by] the insight of the understanding, the activity and effort of spirit. 
The external {aspect of events is) pale and grey. Their purpose and rational-
ity ( Verst4nd), the state and fatherland, their inner continuity, the universal 
aspect of their inner relationships, are what endure, (for these aspects are} as 
valid and present now as in the past and forever. The first step is a primitive, 
enveloped people, [not] as such, but insofar as it reaches the point of 
becoming a state. Subjection to a state, a rational whole in itself, is a 
137 
universa' end of reason. 1 Every state is an end for itself. lts external 
preservation, i.ts inner development and formation, follow a necessary pro· 
gression whereby rationality, justice, and the consolidation of freedom 
gradually emerge. [It is) a system of institutions - (ao.) as a system [it is} 
the consequence and (/3) the content of the same [rationality, justice, free· 
dom), the means by which true interests are brought to consciousness and 
struggle to obtain acruality. In every objective advance (there is] not merely 
an external consistency and necessary continuity but also a necessity in the-
thing [at work in history], in the concept (in der Sache- im Begriff). This [is I 
the true thing, [present] for example in the state (German, Roman), or in 
single great events [such as] the French Revolution, or in any great necessit)•. 
27. Tiis paragraph is u.,.itten in tbe margin adjaant to the p-resent paragraph: 
t,81 H~ograplry 10 gcoeral. Tbt wont kind of pngmatic lhistorian is one- who takes up) 
moral questions las) ao amateur psychologist. The motives of tbe subject \are) denved not from 
~ 
co~ but from panlOI\u inchoations aod passions, instead of regarding the thing itseli 
ltut histor.- LS a~11Jt) as. driv1ng and effecri~. (Such a historian is) likt:W1se a compiler, and. 
when he awakens lrom bis ~ary ramblings, events and individuals are occasionally felled with 
"' moral flank ~tt.u:k bv mrans of edifying Otrislian and other nflcttioos--{by} rossin!( in an 
edifying mlection. a bo£Utory proclamation or doctrine and the like!. 
76 

INTRODUCTORY FRAGMENT, 1822, 1828 
This [is] the object and aim of the historian as well as the aim of a people, of 
the age itself. Everything [isJ related to it. 
Such pragmatic reflections, although highly abstract, belong in fact very 
much to the present and should enliven the accounts of the past, bringing 
them to life today (French, German [writers are] more satisfying; [they tell 
us] how it was).28 
Whether such reflections are in fact interesting and enlivening depends on 
the author's own spirit. 29 
28. In the margin: Empires [of} great individuals - other individuals like Napoleon only 
momentary - in essentials, dependence -
29. The manuscript ends here and does not include a discussion of the remaining subty~ of 
reflective history (critical and specialized) or the rhird main form of historical writing, philo-
sophical history. 

138 
139 
INTRODUCTION, 1830--1
1 
Gentlemen! 
The subject of these lectures is the philosophy of world history. About 
what history or world history is, I need to say nothing; the general impres-
sion of it is sufficient and we can perhaps agree on it. But that we shall be 
considering a philosophy of world history, that we intend to treat history 
philosophically-this is what is striking about the title of these lectures and 
appears to require a discussion or, even more, a justification. 
However, tne philosophy of world history is nothing other than the 
contemplation of it by means of thinking. Thinking is something we can 
never cease, for humans are thinking beings, and in this respect they are 
distinguished from animals. [In] everything that is human-feeling, knowl-
edge and cognition, instincts and volition-insofar as it is human and not 
animal, thinking is involved. [Thinking] is involved in all historical studies. 
However, this 1 appeal to the panicipation of thinking in all human activ-
ities, including history, might appear to be unsatisfactory because it could be 
argued that thinking is subordinate to what exists, the given~ that it is based 
on and guided by it. Philosophy by contrast is assumed to have its own 
thoughts, produced by speculation from out of itself without reference to 
what is. With such thoughts it supposedly approaches history as a material 
to be treated; it does not leave it as it is but a"anges it in accord with thought 
and constructs a history a priori.2 History [so it is said] just has to grasp in 
unalloyed fashion what is., what has been-events and deeds. It gains in 
veracity rhe more strictly that it confines itself ro the given, and-since what 
is given is not so immediately evident and requires manifold investigations 
that are bound up with thinking~the more that its aim is to discover simply 
what happened. 
This aim appears to contradict the impulse of philosophy; and it is this 
contradiction, and the accusation that philosophy imports its thoughts into 
1. In the nwrgjn. designa~ing the date the lectures began, 8 Nov. 1830: 8/11 30. 
!. This criticism oi philosophy is directed by Hqel implicitly against jobann Gottlieb Fichte. 
~o lays out _such a program. In his Die Gnmdtifge des gegenwiinigtm Zeitalters (Berlin., 1806). 
nch~. describes d~ opposition between a priori and a posteriori history, arguing that 
~philosopher _works _io~pendendy of all exPc:rience in idenrifyillg the concept of an e}'O'h 
'In PI'- 4--61. W~th the mtrodumon of pa~ expenences and future expecution..., the work of the 
philosopher comes to ao end and that of the: observer of the world and humanity begins. The 
ptulosopher rontnbute-s to an a priori consuucrion of tbe general plan of the world and its major 
rpochs 1PP- 30~). 
78 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
history and treats history according to them, that I wish to discuss in the 
introduction. In other words, we must first obtain a general definition of 
the philosophy of world history, and then consider the immediate irnplica· 
tions that are connected with it. Then the relationship between thoughts 
and events will of its own accord be correctly posed. For this reason, and 
since in this introduction I do not wish to become too copious-for a wealth of 
material lies before us in world history-mere is no need for me to spend time 
refuting and correcting the endlessly many misguided misrepresentations and 
reflections that are ongoing or perperually reinvented about the perspectives, 
principles, and views I on the aims and interests of the treatment of history, 
1-40 
and especially on the relationship ofthe concept and of philosophy to historical 
matters.3 I can omit them entirely or just mention them in passing. 
A. THE GENERAL CONCEPT OF WORLD HISTOR¥'4 
5The first thing I wish to say about the provisional concept of the philosophy 
of world history is this. As I have already remarked, the main objection 
brought against philosophy is that it approaches history, and reflects on it, 
with thoughts or conceptions (Gedanken). However, the sole conception 
that it brings with it is the simple conception of reason6-the conception 
that reason governs the world, and that therefore world history is a rational 
process. From the point of view of history as such, this conviction and 
insight is a presupposition. Within philosophy itself this is no presupposi~ 
tion: by means of speculative cognition it is proved that reason-and we can 
adopt this expression for the moment without discussing more precisely irs 
connection and relationship to Gocf -is substance and infulite power. (lr isl 
3. ln the margin; The preface to every new history-and then again the introduction in tbe 
reviews oi such histories--[bringsj a new theory 
4. The section headings are editorial but reflect Hegel's own intended divisions. Nott Hegel's 
tUnher subdivisions of this section as indicated in rhe margins. 
5. In the margin: 
r a) General Concept 
Ill) DetennJOate 
ly) Mode of Development 
6. In the margin: (a) Reason 
-. The references to ·proor and 'God' might all attention to the lectures on the pr~fs o( the 
exi~tence of \rod, which Hegel wrore and tJelivered in the !\ummer semes1er of 1 H2 9, JUU over a 
ve.ar before he wrote this introduction. ~ 
two projectS share some common themes and 
concerns. The proof~ establish, among Ofher things, mat God is infinite substance, in6ni1e 
power, and infinite form (or subject). See Ledures on the Proofs of the Existenu of God. ed. 
79 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
itself the in~nite material of all natural and spiritual life and the infinite iorm 
that activates rhis its content. [It is] the substance whereby and wherein all 
actuality has its being and subsistence. [It is] infinite power, for reason is not 
141 
so impotent as to yield only an ideal 1 or a moral ought, and only outside 
the bounds of actuality, or who knows where-perhaps merely as something 
particular that exists in the heads of a few individuals. lit is] the infinite 
content, all essentiality and truth, itself constituting the material on which it 
operates by its own activity. Unlike finite action, it does not require the 
limiting factors of external materials or a given medium from which to 
derive its sustenance and the objects of its activity. It feeds upon itself, it is 
itself the material that it labors on. Just as it is itself its own presupposition, 
its own end, the absolute final end, so it is itself the activation and the 
bringing fonh, out of inwardness into appearance, into world history, not 
only of the natural universe but also of the spiritual realm. That only this 
idea is the true, the eternal, the almighty, that it reveals itself in the world, 
and that nothing is revealed in the world except it, its glory and honor--this 
is, as I have said, what is proved in philosophy, and so it may here be 
presupposed as demonstrated. 
8To those of you gentlemen who are not yet acquainted with philosophy, 
I could perhaps appeal that you approach these lectures on world history 
with a faith in reason, with a desire and thirst for knowledge of it. And we 
must surely assume that a desire for rational insight and knowledge, and not 
just a collection of information, is the subjective need !that drives] the study 
of the scientific disciplines. In fact, however, 1 do not have to adopt such a 
faith in advance. What I have said in a preliminary way and have still to 
say is not-and not just with reference to our science--to be regarded as a 
142 
presupposition I but instead as an overview of the whole as the result of 
' 
the inquiry that we have initiated-a result that is known rome because I am 
already familiar with the whole. What therefore remains to be seen, and will 
ma~e itself evident from the consideration of world history itself, is that a 
rat10nal process has been taking place in it, that world history is the rational 
and necessary course of world spirit. World spirit is spirit as such, the 
substance of history, the one spirit whose nature (is] one and the same and 
and t:· Pe1erC. Hodgs.oo. (Oxford, 20071. In the lectures on the philosophy of religion Hegel savs 
thar God IS es!il'Dll~ll }' rauonal, IS rationality that is alive and, as spirit, is in and for itself'. Set-
uctures em the Philo50phy of Religl<m, ed. and u. Perer C. Hodgson et al !Oxford 20071. 
1
• 139 tl824lectuns). alsoi. 170 (18271ecrures). For Hegel the proot of reas~n tand of God I is 
the task of philosoph)' as a whole, oor just of philosophy of relig~on. 
8. '" the margin: (til Faith, survey, rnult. 
80 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
that explicates its one nature in the existence of the world. This, as we have 
said, must be the result of history itself. 
History, however, must be taken as it is; we must proceed in a historical, 
empirical fashion. 9 For example, we must not allow ourselves to be misled 
by the professional historians; for at least among the German historians 
(even leading authorities who are experts in the so-called study of sources) 
there are those who do what they reproach the philosophers for doing, 
namely for introducing a priori fictions into history. Thus, to take one 
example, it is a widely accepted fiction that there was an original, primeval 
people, directly instructed by God, living in perfect insight and wisdom, and 
possessing a thorough knowledge of all natural laws and spiritual truth; 10 or 
else that it was from one or another priestly people---or, by a more specific 
assumption, from a Roman epic-that the Roman historians have produced 
their ancient history; 11 and so on. Let us leave such a priori inventions to the 
ingenious professional historians, who in Germany commonly make use of 
them. I 
12We can therefore declare as our first condition that we must apprehend 
the historical accurately. But general expressions such as 'accuracy' and 
'apprehension' contain an ambiguity. Even the ordinary, average historian, 
who believes and professes that his attitude is entirely receptive, that he 
devotes himself only to the given, is not passive in his thinking and intro-
duces his own categories as medium through which to view the available 
evidence. The truth does not lie on the superficial plane of the senses; in 
regard to everything that aims to be scientific, reason may not slumber and 
must employ meditative thinking (Nachdenken). Whoever looks at the 
world rationally sees it as rational too; the two exist in a reciprocal relation-
ship. But it is not our task to discuss here the differem modes of meditative 
thinking or the various perspectives for judging what is significant and 
insignificant in the immense amount of material that lies before us, and the 
most suitable categories to use in doing so. 
131 will mention only two points concerning the general conviction that 
reason has governed and continues to govern the world, and thus also world 
9. In the margin: (y) Historical procedure 
. 
. 
I 0. In Hegel's time, this notion of a primeval people was found mostly in the sphere ot romantiC 
mrrbology; Stt e.g. J GOrres, Mythengeschichte der asiatischen Well, 2 vols. (Heiddbrrg, 1810), 
i. 11. 
11. Hegel could be alluding here co the reference to a primeval people in Barthold Georg 
~iebuht, Romische Geschichu, 2 vols. (&rlin, 1811-12), i. 112 ff. 
12. In the margin: (.S) Appn:bend accurately 
13. In the m<lrgin: (£)Two Points- An.uagoril5 
81 
143 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
history; for they provide an occasion to examine more closely the main 
point, which constitutes the difficulty, and to indicate what we must discuss 
144 
more fully. I 
One is the historical point that the Greek Anaxagoras was the first to say 
that nous-understanding in general or reason-rules the world.14 This is 
not an intelligence in the sense of self-conscious reason, nor a spirit as such; 
the two must be clearly distinguished. The movement of the solar system 
foUows unalterable laws; these laws are its reason, but neither the sun nor 
the planets that revolve according to these laws are conscious of them. It 
is human beings who derive these laws from existence and know them. 
Perhaps the only thing striking to us about the conception that reason exists 
in nature, that nature is ruled by irrevocable laws, is that Anaxagoras 
initially restricted it to nature. We are accustomed to such conceptions and 
do not make much of them. I have mentioned this historical circumstance 
to point out that history teaches that conceptions of this sort that may 
appear trivial to us did not always exist in the world, that rather such 
conceptions are epoch-making in the history of the human spirit. Aristotle 
says of Anaxagoras, as the originator of this conception, that he appeared as 
a sober man among drunkards. 15 
This conception was taken over from Anaxagoras by Socrates, and-with 
the exception of Epicwus, who attributed everything to chance 16-it 
became the ruling principle above all in philosophy; we shall see in due 
course in what further religions and peoples [it came to prominence]. Plato 
makes Socrates [say] of this discovery (Phaedo, Stephanus edition, voL 1. 
145 
pp. 97-8)
17
: 'I was delighted with it and 1 hoped I had found a teacher who 
would exp,ain nature to me rationally, who would exhibit the particular 
purpose in particular things and the universal purpose in the whole-the 
good. the final purpose. I was not at all eager to relinquish this hope. But 
how very disappointed I was,' continues Socrates, 'when I turned full of 
anticipation to the writings of Anaxagoras himself. I discovered that he dealt 
14. Hegel ~s refem~ to Socrates' report in Plato, Ph.udo 97b-< (The Collected Dialugues u( 
P~, cd. Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns (Princnon, 1989), 791. 
b. See Arisrotle, Metap~ 985a 10-17 (The Basic Works of Aristotle, .-d. Richard 
McKeon (New York, 1941),696-71. 
16. l~ his .Uctxres 01'1 the History of Philosophy, ed. and tL Raben F. Brown eta/. (Oxford, 
2006), 
11
• 28~, Htgel dra~ upoo Cicero for his discussion of Epicurus' principle of chance. See 
~reus~•: Gcero, Ubri tres .k natura Deorum (Leipzig, 1818), 1.36 ff., 52.....o4 We natwra 
onmr 
c.ademic4. tr. H. Rackham,rev. edn., Loeb Classical library (Cambridge Mas> .. 
and London, 1951), 52-51. 
' 
17· What foUows is not a direct quotation but a summary of Phaedo 97b-98c (Hamilton and 
Cairos, pp. 740). See Lee~Mres on the History of Philosophy, ii. 10·4. 
82 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
only with external causes, such as air, aether, water, and the like, instead of 
reason.' We see that what Socrates found to be unsatisfactory in the principle 
of Anaxagoras is not the principle itself but his failure to apply it to concrete 
nature-the faa that natwe is not understood and conceived in tenns of this 
principle; that in general this principle remains abstract; more specifically 
that nature is not grasped as a development of this principle, as an organiza-
tion produced by reason as its cause. 
I wish from the outset to call attention to this distinction between whether 
a definition, principle. or truth is just held to abstractly, or is advanced to a 
rnore precise determination and concrete development. This distinction is 
decisive, and in addressing other issues we shall come back [to) this circum-
stance especially. 18 
Above all, however., I have referred to the first instance of the conception 
that reason rules the world and also discussed its inadequacy I because the 
146 
complete application of this conception has assumed another shape, 19 one 
we know full well as our own conviction-namely the form of tile religious 
truth that the world is not given over to chance and external, contingent 
causes, but is ruled by provUlence. I stated earlier0 that I did not wanr 
to presume on your faith in the indicated principle. I might, however, have 
appealed to faith in this religious form were it not that the distinctive 
character of the discipline of philosophy does not allow it to accept pre-
suppositions; or, to express the point in a different way, it is because the 
discipline with which we are engaged must first of all furnish the proof/' 
if not of the truth, then of the correctness of this principle. The truth that a 
providence, indeed divine providence, presides over the events of the world 
is consistent, then, with the indicated principle because divine providence is 
the wisdom that has the infinite power to actualize its purposes, that is. the 
absolute, rational. final purpose of the world. Reason is thinking that 
determines itself wholly freely: nous. 
22But there is a disparity, indeed a contradiction, between this faith and 
our principle precisely in the same way that there is between the principle of 
18. The referen<:e ro 'this circumstance' tdiesen Umstandl makes more senst in relation tc> 
material not introduce<! into the main text by the German editor in which Hegel indintes that 
the distinCtion will be encountered •at the end of our world hJstol)' in comprehending the most 
reant political condition (Zustand)'. These words are not cancelled although Hegel apparenrh-
imended to replace them with a passage from the margin that now comprises thi~ paragraph. 
19. In the margin: ({l Pro11iderr.u 
20. See above, p. 80. 
21. In the margm: that it JS so- displays the concretene~-
22. In the margin: (71) Transirion- Providential plan 
83 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
147 
Anaxagoras 1 and what Socrates makes of it. For that faith is likewise 
indeterminate; it is faith in providence in general and does not advance to 
the determinate; it lacks an application to the whole, to the extensive course 
of world eventsP The determinate aspect of providence, the specific acts 
that it performs, is called the providential plan (the plan's end and the means 
[for its) accomplishment). But this plan is said to be hidden from our eyes, 
indeed it is supposed to be presumptuous to want to know it. Jr was natural 
for Anaxagoras to not know how [his] understanding could manifest itself in 
actuality, for thinking and the consciousness of thought had not advanced 
funher with him and in Greece generally. He was not yet able to apply his 
general principle to concrete reality, to cognize the latter in terms of the 
fonner. It was Socrates who took a step toward [finding} a means of com-
bining the concrete and the universal, though, to be sure, he grasped it only 
in a one--sidedly subjective way. Thus he was not hostile to such an applica-
tion, although faith in providence is at least opposed to the application on a 
large scale; it is opposed to knowledge of the providential plan. To be sure, 
148 
it is allowed in particular cases, here and (there); 1 and pious souls discern 
in numerous individual occurrences, where others see only contingencies, 
not simply dispensations of God in general but rather God's providence--i.e· 
dle purposes that God pursues with such dispensations. But this usually 
happens only in individual instances. For example, when an individual in 
great difficulty and distress receives help unexpectedly, we must nO( hold it 
against him that he should at once look up to God in gratitude; however~ the 
purpose itself is [in t~is instance] of a limited kind; its content is merely the 
particular purpose of this individual. In world history, however, the indivi-
duals we are concerned with are peoples, totalities, states. We cannot, 
therefore, be content with this petty commerce, so to speak, on the part of 
faith in providence, nor indeed with a merely abstract and indeterminate 
faith that concedes the general notion that there is a providence ruling the 
world but that does not apply it to specific [events]. Rather, we must be 
serious about [our faith in providence}. Concrete events,. the ways of provi-
dence, are its means, its appearances in history; these lie open before us, and 
we have only to relate them to the general principle mentioned above. 
However, in mentioning knowledge of the divine providential plan in 
general, I call to mind an enduring question that in our time is of utmost 
imponance. This is the question as to whether it is possible to know God--or 
23. rrr_ tht! ""'"gin'. A~ply [to] hiswry - explain - human passions, snonger anny, talent, 
gen~us of a parricular •mli~dual- or that in a state none of these lhings happens contingently -
S<Halied natural taiJSe$- lilr.e Socrates. Abstract merely in remaining satisfied with the general -

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
rather, since it has ceased to be a question, [it is a matter of] the precept 
now become a foregone conclusion that it is impossible to know God, 
notwithstanding the teaching of Holy Scripture that our highest duty I is 
149 
not only to love God but also to know God.24 It belies what Scriptwe itself 
says, that the Spirit leads into truth, knows all things, and penetrates even into 
the depths of diviniry.25 I could have refrained from mentioning that our 
principle (that reason rules and has ruled the world) is expressed in the 
religious form that providence governs the world; in so doing I would have 
avoided the question about the possibility of the knowledge of God. But I did 
not wish to do so, panly in order to bring out some further implications of 
these matters, and partly also to allay any suspicion that philosophy shies 
away from or should shy away from mentioning religious truths, or that it 
circwnvents them because it does not, so to speak, have a good conscience 
about them. To the contrary, things have gone so far in recent times that, in 
opposition to certain kinds of theology, philosophy has to take on the content 
of religion. 
[I make] only these general remarks. In the Christian religion God has 
revealed godself; i.e. God has given it to humanity to know what God is, so 
that God is no longer something hidden and concealed. With the possibility 
of knowing God, the duty to do so is laid upon us. The development of the 
thinking spirit, which starts out from and is based on the revelation of 
the divine being ( Wesen), must eventually increase to the point that what 
initially was set before spirit in feeling and representational modes is also 
grasped by thought. The time must finally come when this rich production of 
creative reason-which is what world history is-will be comprehended. 
Whether I rhe time has come for this cognition wiJJ depend on whether the 
150 
final purpose of the world has ultimately entered into actuality in a universal 
and conscious manner. This [is] the understanding of ow time. Our cogni-
tion consists in gaining insight into the fact that what is purposed by eternal 
wisdom comes about not only in the reahn of natwe but also in the world 
of actual [human events) and deeds. In this respect our consideration [of 
history) is a theodicy, a justification of God, something Leibniz attempted 
metaphysically in still abstract and indeterminate categories.
26 It should 
enable us to comprehend all the evils ( Obe/) of the world, including mora) 
24. Emphasis on the knowledge of God 1s found especially in the Johannine writings; e.g. 
John 8: 32. The connection between knowledge and love is found in 1 Cor. 8: 3, 13: 12. 
15. Hegel here combines John 16: t3 and 1 Cor. 2: 10. 
. 
26. See Gotdried Wilhelm Leibniz, Tentomi111J TheodiC~WU, i tfrankiun, 1719); a11d Es.sar.s 
de Theodicee sur Ia bonti d£ Dieu, 14 uberti de J'homme et /'orig;- du mal (new edn., l vols., 
Amsterdam, 1734). 
85 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
evil (Bose); the thinking spirit is [thereby] reconciled with the negative; 
and it is in world history that the total mass of concrete evils is set before 
our eyes. 
Indeed, there is no arena in which such a reconciling knowledge is more 
urgently needed than in world history, and we shall accordingly take a 
moment [to consider it]. Such a reconciliation can be attained only through 
knowledge of the affirmative [element in history) in which the negative 
passes away into something that is subordinate and overcome. It is attained 
in pan through the awareness of what the final purpose of the world truly is~ 
and in pan through the awareness that this purpose is actualized in the 
world and rhat evil has not been able to maintain a position of equality 
alongside it. Reason, it has been said, rules the world; but 'reason' is just as 
indefinite a word as 'providence'. People speak continually of reason with-
out being able to define ir, to specify its content, or to supply a criterion by 
which we can judge whether something is rational or irrational. Reason 
grasped in its determinate form is the-thing-that-history-is-about (die Sache); 
151 
and the rest, if we confine ourselves to reason in general, is mere I words. 
With this declaration we make the transition to the second poim that (as 
indicated earlier) we wish to consider in this introduction. 
B. THE ACTUALIZATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORYT 
The definition of reason in itself-insofar as reason is considered in relation 
to the world-amounts to asking what the final end of the world is. To 
discuss the latter implies that it should be realized or actualized. Thus there 
are two points to consider: the content of the final end, its definition as such; 
and its actualization. 
We must first of all note that our object, world history, takes place in the 
realm of spirit. 'World' embraces both physical and psychical nature. Physi-
cal nature also plays a role in world history, and at the beginning we shall 
anend to the basic aspects of this natural influence. But spirit and the course 
of Its development is the substantial aspect !of world history}. Spirit (is] 
higher than nature. Here we need to consider nature not as a rarional system 
2-_, The manu~ripl_ g!V<'~ a~ a headmg "b.' This corresponds to the '(,6\ Determinate' an 
H~el s rnumerataon ol the mam poinlS of the introduction (above, n. 51. This S«tion consider~ 
the dttermmatr wn- lhar reason rul-
ld hi 
· 
b 
~a.. h 
· 
· 
· - · 
_ 
-
~~ wor 
story,l.e. t rou,... t e acruahz.auon of sptnt mats 
lreedom. 
86 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
in its own right, operating in its own distinct element, but only in relation to 
spirit. 
But spirit is found in its most concrete actuality in the theater in which we 
[are about to] consider it, that of world history. Despite this-or rather 
precisely so thar we may comprehend the general aspect of spirit from this 
mode of its concrete actuality-we must begin with some abstract defini-
tions of the nature of spirit. At the same time, these can be nothing more 
than mere assertions since this is neither the place nor the time for a 
speculative exposition of the idea of spirit. What is said needs I to be 
152 
made accessible to the level of education and outlook that can ordinarily 
be expected among the audience. What can be said in an introduction is, a~ 
already remarked,28 to be taken generally as historical, as a presupposition 
that finds its elaboration and proof elsewhere or that will at least obtain its 
confirmation at a later stage in the elaboration of the discipline. 
a. The General Definition of Spirit as Intrinsically Free29 
The first thing rhat we musr do is to provide an abstract definition of 
spirit.30 ••• In accord with this abstract definition, we can say that world 
history is the portrayal of the labor of spirit ro arrive at knowledge of what it 
is intrinsically. The Orientals do not know that spirit, or the human being as 
such, is intrinsically free; because they do not know tills, they are not 
themselves free. They only know that one [person) is free, but for this very 
reason such freedom is merelv arbitrariness, savagery, and dull-witted pas-
sion, or their mitigation and domestication. which itself is merely a natural 
happenstance or something capricious. This one is therefore a despot. nor a 
free human being. 
The consciousness of freedom first awoke among the Greeks, and accord-
ingly thev were free· but like the Romans, they knew only that some are 
. 
' 
' 
free, not the human being as such. Plato and Aristotle did not know the 
28. See abovt", pp. 80-l. 
29. The manuscript re.:Jds; (a\. In the margm; 
Ia) General definition 
(,8) Vi~ible mt'ans of fulfilling this definition 
(y) C.ompll'"trd reahry- state" 
30. The manuscript adds the words. 'With respea to this we say that·.···, and then lea \"1:\ 
threl'"-quarters uf a page blank. This appears to be a referena to an earher. no longer _extant 
manuscript, ust'"d by Hegel in the actual pr~ntation of the lectur~. The lectun rranswpuon~ 
contam material at this point that is not found in the IKtUre manuscnpt; Hegel dtscusses thr 
·d 
· · 
· · d 
· 
a.Jllto'wei<>h!' asdlt'subsunuahn 
t ea of freedom as the s.ubstanuahry of spmt, rawmg a par e 
"' 
of mattet 
87 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
latter. Thus not only did the Greeks have slaves, upon whom their life and 
rhe continued existence of their beautiful freedom depended; but also their 
freedom itself was on the one hand only a contingent, transient, incomplete 
flowering of limited scope, and on the other hand a harsh servitude 
153 
[imposed] on [some] human beings, on [their) humanity. I 
The Germanic nations were the first to come to the consciousness, through 
Christianity, that the human being as human is free, that the freedom of spirit 
constitutes humanity's truly inherent natwe. This consciousness first arose 
in religion, in the innermost region of spirit; but to incorporate this principle 
into secular existence was a further task whose solution and application 
wou.ld require a long and arduous labor on the pan of cultuJ'e. For example, 
slavery did not immediately [cease] with the adoption of the Christian reli-
gion; still less did freedom immediately come to prevail in political states, 
nor did governments and political instirutions become rationally organized 
and founded upon the principle of freedom. The appliUJtion of this principle 
to actua~ty, the penetration and transformation of worldJy conditions by the 
principle of freedom, is the long process that is history itself. 
I have already drawn attention to this distinction between the principle as 
such and its application, that is, its introduction into and its accomplishment 
in the actuality of spirit and life; and we shall return to it again shortly. It is 
one of the basic aspects of ow discipline, and we must keep it ever in mind. 
The distinction applies not only to the Christian principle of the self-con· 
sciousness of freedom, which I have mentioned here in a preliminary way, 
but also to the principle of freedom in general. World history is the progress 
of the consciousness of freedom31-a progress whose necessity we have to 
154 
recognize. I 
These general remarks on the different degrees of the knowledge of 
freedom-namely, that the Orientals only knew that one is free, that in the 
Greek and Roman world some are free, and that we by contrast know that 
all human beings are intrinsically free, that the human being as human is 
free-supply us with the divisions that we shall make in world history and by 
which we shall treat it. But these are only preliminary remarks made in 
passing; several other concepts must first be explained. 
. 31. In .the margin: Education of the human race to what? To freedom -humanitv educated to 
1t - aot directly. [It is a] result-
· 
[Ed.) Hegel •s alluding he~r to Gonhold Ephraim Lessing's Dre Erz.ieh~mg des Me11Schm· 
g~lechts (llerlin, 1780). It 1s notewonhy thar the typology of stages of the consdousnes.s of 
freedom IS already found in Hegel's 1820-1 kcrures on the history of philosophy. See uctur~ 
rm the fliStory of Philosoplry, t:d. and tr. Robert F. Brown et "'·(Oxford, 2009), i. 181, 195. 
88 

INTROOUCTION, 1830-1 
Spirit's consciousness of its freedom (and along with it for the first time 
the actuality of its freedom) has been declared to be the reason of spirit in irs 
determinacy. The latter is the destiny of the spiritual world, and (since the 
substantial, physical world is subordinated to the spiritual, or in the specu-
lative sense has no truth over against it) it is the final end of the world in 
general. But that this freedom, as accounted above, is itself still indetermi-
nate, that freedom is a term of unlimited ambiguity, that since freedom is the 
highest (concept] it is subject to no end of misunderstandings, confusions, 
and errors, including every possible aberration-all this has never been 
known and experienced so fully as in the present age; but we must be 
satisfied for the moment with this general definition. We have also taken 
note of the imponance of the immense difference berween the principle as it 
is intrinsically or in itself and what it is in actuality. At the same time it is 
precisely freedom within itself that contains the infinite necessity within 
itself to bring itself to consciousness and to actuality-for its very concept 
is to know itself. Freedom is itself the end or purpose of its own operation, 
the sole end of spirit. The immediate question I must be: What means does 
155 
it employ? This is the second point that we have to consider here. 
b. The Means of Spirit's Actualization: Passions, Interests, Ideals32 
The question about the means by which freedom brings forth a world for 
itself leads us to rhe phenomenon33 of history proper. Whereas freedom as 
such is primarily an internal concept, the means it employs is something 
external and phenomenal that confronts us directly in history. An initial 
inspection of history, however, indicates that the actions of human beings 
pnx:eed from their needs, passions, and interests, from the representations 
and purposes to which these give rise, and from their character and talents-
indeed in such a way that in this spectacle of activity these needs, passions, 
interests, etc., seem to be the sole driving force. Individuals do at rimes 
pursue more general purposes such as goodness, but in such a way that 
this goodness is itself limited in character, for example, a noble love of 
country, of a country that plays an insignificant role in rhe world and the 
general purposes of the world; or a love for one's family, one's friends, and 
one's moral rectitude in general-in a word, all virtues. We may well see the 
dictates of reason actualized in these subjects themselves and in the sphere of 
rheir efficacy; but these are only isolated individuals who make up but a 
32. The maTJuscript reads:(~· 
33. The maTtUSa-ipt adds: (ao.l 
89 

MANUSCRIPTS Of THE INTRODUCTION 
small minority of the vast human race over against all the other indivi-
156 
duals, 1 and the effective range of their virtues is correspondingly small. 
But in many cases passions, private interests, and the satisfaction of selfish 
impulses ace the most powerful force. What makes them powerful is that 
they do not heed any of the limitations that justice and morality seek to 
impose on l:hem; and the natural force of passion has a more immediate hold 
on human beings than the artificial and laboriously acquired discipline of 
order and moderation, of justice and morality. 
_ 
When we contemplate this spectacle of the passions and the consequences ot 
the violence and irrationality that are associated with them, and even more so 
with good intentions and wonhy aims; when we have before our eyes in history 
the evil, the wickedness, the destruction of the noblest constructs of peoples 
and states, the downfall of the most flourishing empires that the hwnan spirit 
bas produced; and when we [observe] with profound compassion the untold 
miseries of individual hwnan beings-we can only end with sorrow at the 
transience of everything. And since this downfall is not a work of nature merelY 
but of the will of human beings, we can aU the more end up with moral sorrow 
and with the good spirit (if such is in us) repulsed by such a spectacle. 
Without rhetorical exaggeration we need only compile an accurate 
account of the misfortunes that have been suffered by even the finest crea-
tions of peoples and states, and of private virtues or innocence, to raise up a 
157 
most frightful picture-a picture 1 by which our ieelings are intensified to 
the deepest and most helpless sorrow with no reconciling outcome to coun-
terbalance it. We can perhaps fortify ourselves against this sorrow or escape 
from it by the thought that this is how things have happened, that it is a 
matter of fate, that nothing about it can be changed. And then we react 
against the lassitude into which our sorrowful reflections are able to plunge 
liS and return to our {nonnal} outlook on life, to the aims and interests of the 
present, which are not a sonow over the past but return us to our own 
actuality, even to that selfish complacency that stands on the calmer shore 
and, from a st(:ure position, finds satisfaction in the distant scene of confu-
sion and wreckage. But even as we look upon history as this slaughterhouse 
in which the happiness of peoples, the wisdom of states, and the virtues of 
individuals are sacribce~ our thoughts are necessarily impelled to ask: to 
whom. lo what final purpose, have these monstrous sacrifices been made? 
~rom here the question customarily rums to those general considerations 
trom which we have begun our inquiry. From this beginning we identified 
those same events that offer this spectade for gloomy feelings and brooding 
reflection to be the field in which we wish to see only the means to what we 
have claimed to be the substantial destiny~ the absolute final end, or {what is 
90 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
the same thing) the true result of world history. We have from the very 
beginning rejected the way of reflection as a means of ascending from 
this picture of [historical] particularity to the universal. Besides, such senti-
mental reflection has no real interest in raising itself above these anitudes 
and feelings, or in fact solving the enigmas of providence to which such 1 
158 
considerations give rise. Rather it is; woefully content with the empty and 
fruitless sublimities of this negative result. We return, therefore, to the 
standpoint that we have taken, and the elements we shall adduce from it 
will furnish us with the essential indications for answering the questions that 
are raised by these pictures [from the past). 
J+rhe first thing to be noted is that what we have called the principle, the 
final end, the destiny, or the nature and concept of spirit in itself, is purely 
universal and abstract. A principle, fundamental rule, or law is something 
universal and inward, which as such 1s not completely actual, however true it 
may be in itself. Purposes, principles~ and the like are in our thoughts, only in 
our iMer intentions, or also in books, but not yet in actuality. In other 
words, what is only implicit is a possibility, a potency, but it has not yet 
come out from its inwardness into existence; [it is] one-sided ([like] philoso-
phy (itself]). A second moment is needed to arrive at its actuality, that of 
activation, of actualization, and the principle of that is the will, the activity 
of human beings in general in the world. It is only through this activity 
that the [original] concept, the implicit determinations, are realized and 
actualized. 
Laws and principles are not immediately alive, do not gain currency, by 
themselves;35 the activity that [puts] them into operation and determinate 
existence is that of human needs, drives, inclinations, and passions. The fact 
that I actualize something and 1 bring it into determinate existence must 
159 
involve me, I must be at hand, 36 I seek to be satisfied duo ugh its accom-
plishment-my own interest must be at stake. 'Interest' signifies 'being at 
hand'. 37 A purpose that I am actively to pursue must also in some way be my 
own purpose; I must simultaneously satisfy my purpose, even though the 
pwpose for which I am working has other aspects that have nothing to do 
with me. This is the infinite right of the subject, the second essential element 
34. In the margin; Connection of particularity with the universal, whereby the former 
becomes the means -
35. In the margin: my interest 
.16. Hegel plays on the connection herween Daseyn (here trandated 'detenninate existence', 
literally "being there') and dabey seyn ('being at hand'). 
37. Interest (Interesse) means literally 'being between' (inter-esse}, thus less literally 'being at 
hand' or 'being involved'. 
91 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
of freedom38-that the subject itself must be satisfied in [carrying out] an 
activity or task. And if persons are to be interested in something, they mu~t 
be able to be actively engaged in it; that is, they require an interest of thear 
own, they wish to identify themselves with it, and they find their own self-
esteem confirmed by it. But we must a void a misunderstanding here: peop~e 
find fault and justifiably say, in a misguided sense~ of an individual that he IS 
an interested party, that he seeks only his personal advantage--that is, seeks 
his personal advantage39 without regard to the general purpose on the 
occasion he seeks that advantage, even [acting] contrary to the purpose by 
curtailing, damaging, or sacrificing it. But whoever is active on behalf of a 
cause is not merely interested in general but is interested in it. Language 
accurately expresses this distinction. Nothing happens or is brought to 
completion unless the individuals who are active in it are satisfied
40 too-
they who are particular [individuals] and who have needs, drives, and 
interests that are specific, are their own,. although others have them too, 
160 
and that in their context-for example, my coat-are not I distinct from 
those of the others. Included among these [interests] are not only one's own 
needs and volitions but also one's own insights and convictions~ or at least 
one's own esrimation41 and opinion-asswning that the need for argument, 
understanding, reason is otherwise already awakened. When people are 
active on behalf of a cause, they expect that the cause will appeal to them 
as such, that they should enter into it on the basis of their own opinion and 
conviction regarding the goodness of the cause, its justice, usefulness, ad van-
tage for themselves, etc. lbis element in particular is important for our own 
time when people are much less inclined to accept something on the basis of 
trust and authority and wish rather to dedicate their share of activity to a 
cause on the basis of their own understanding and independent conviction 
and estimation. 
Thus we may say that in general nothing is accomplished without the 
interest of those whose activity is involved. And since interest can be 
described as passion (insofar as individuals wholly apply themselves to an 
object with every fiber of the will, to the exclusion of all other actual or 
• 
possible interests and aim~ and concentrate all their needs and resources on 
, 
this end), we may really say that nothing great has been accomplished in 
38. 11lc lint elrmmt could be the universal principle of freedom that is mentioned in tiK 
preceding paragnph; or it could br marlccd by the '(QQ.)' (above n. 331 that is not matched bv a 
·~IJI!t' later in tbe ~xt !Stt the ~of 
tbe second p3fagra~ betowl. 
. 
39. Ill 1M matg~n: says I he •sl mterested for his own sake- isolated, only bu cause 
40. lrr the """8'_Pr. sansfacoon of my spirit - mediatEd- stubbornly pursued 
• 1. '" the marpr; nowadays private inumots (are I COilDetted with ~nl intereStS 

INTRODUCTION • 1830-1 
the world without passion. Passion is the subjective, and in thls respect the 
formal, aspect of the energy of volition and activity, irrespective of it~ 
content or aim. just as with my own conviction, insight, and conscience 
the specific content of my conviction matters, so also does the specific aim of 
my passion-whether I one aim or another is of a truer narwe. But con-
161 
versely, if it is the truer nature, then it is inevitable that it should come into 
existence and be actual as that element of the subjective will that includes all 
such factors as needs, drives, passions, as well as one's own views, opinions, 
convictions. 
From this discussion of the second essential element of historical actuality 
of a pwpose as such, it is evident-if in what has been said we consider the 
state--that in this aspect a state will be well-constituted and internally 
powerful if the private interest of its citizens coincides with the general 
end of the state, each finding in the other its satisfaction and actualization. 
This is a most important proposition. But for the state to achieve this unity, 
numerous institutions must be established and appropriate mechanisms 
invented. This involves a lengthy struggle of the understanding to become 
aware of what is appropriate, as well as a struggle with particular interests 
and passions, which must be subjected to a protracted and difficult discipline 
before this unity is achieved. The point in time at which the state attains such 
a unity marks the period in its history when it flourishes, the period of its 
virtue, strength, and success. 
But world history does not begin with some sort of conscious purpose, as 
do the particular spheres of human beings. The simple human drive to a 
common life already has as irs consdous purpose the securing of life and 
property, and once such a common life has come into being these purposes 
are further defined, such as upholding the city of Athens or Rome; and with 
every new evil or exigency the problem becomes more specific still. World 
history begins with its general purpose--that the concept of spirit be satis-
fied-but only in itself, i.e. as nature.42 It is the inneE; or innermost uncon-
scious drive; 1 and, as has already been mentioned, the whole business of 
162 
world history is the labor to make this drive conscious. Thus what has been 
called the subjective side-needs, drives, passions, particular interests, opi-
nions, subjective impressions-is present on its own account in the shape of 
natural being or natural will. The vast number of volitions, interests, and 
activities constitutes the instruments and means by which the world spirit 
accomplishes its purpose-raising it to consciousness and making it actual. 
42. In the mmgin: Actuality 6rst [exists) only as oatutt 
93 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
This pwpose is simply to find itself, to come to itself, and to con_te~pla~e 
itself in its actuality. All these expressions of individual and pubhc hfe, 1n 
seeking and satisfying their own ends. are at the same time the means and 
instruments of a higher and wider pwpose, which they know nothing of b~t 
unconsciously carry out. It is this that can be open to question, and indeed It 
has been questioned and frequently denied-decried and disdained as a 
philosophical fantasy. 
. 
Sut I nave made this clear from the very beginning, and our presupposi-
tion or faith (which, however, can only be postulated as a result) makes no 
claim here beyond saying that reason rules the world and thus also has ruled 
and continues to rule world history. Everything else is subordinate to this 
universal substance in and for itself, and serves as a means tor it. In addition, 
however, reason is immanent in historical existence, bringing itself to com-
pletion in and through it. That the unification of the universal that subsists in 
and for itself with the singular or subjective is the sole truth, is speculative in 
narure~ and in this general form is treated by logic. But in the course of world 
history itself, seen as something still in progress, the subjective side or 
consciousness is [not) yet in a position to know what the pure and final 
163 
purpose I of history is, what the concept of spirit is. For the latter has not 
Yet become the content of its needs and interests; and although the subjective 
consciousness is still unaware of it, the universal is nonetheless present in its 
panicular purposes and completes itself through them. Since, as I have said, 
ilie speculative aspect of this connection belongs to logic, this is not the place 
for me to provide and develop its concept or, so to speak, make it conceiv-
able. But I can attempt to give a clearer impression of it by means of 
examples. 
The relationship [between the universal substance and subjective con-
sciousness) is such that the actions of hwnan beings in world history produce 
an effect altogether different from what they intend and achieve, from what 
they immediately know and desire. They accomplish their interests; but at 
the same time they bring about something additional that indeed is implicit 
in their actions but was not present in their consciousness and intention. By 
way of an analogy, let us think of a man who, out of revenge (perhaps 
justified in that he may have been harmed unjusdy), sets fire ro someone 
else's house. This at once means that a connection is established between the 
immediate deed and further circumstances~ albeit external circwnstances, 
which have nothing directly to do with the original deed. The deed as such is 
~rhaps the application of a small flame to a small portion of a beam, and 
turther consequences of the deed ensue on their own accord. The burning 
section of the beam is connected with other sections; these in turn are 
94 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
connected with the timberwork of the entire house, and the latter with other 
houses, leading to a widespread conflagration that destroys the property of 
many more persons than the one against whom the revenge was directed, 
and indeed costs the lives of many persons. This outcome was not part of the 
original deed or of the intention of the perpetrator. However~ the action has a 
further implication: the instigator only intended an act of revenge against an 
individual by destroying his property, although in addition it is a crime~ 
which carries its I punishment with it. The perpetrator may not have been 
164 
aware of, still less intended, this resuh, although it is the universal and 
substantial aspect of his deed in itself-that which is brought about by it. 
This example only establishes that something more can reside in an 
immediate action than was present in the intention and consciousness of 
the agent. The example has the additional feature that the substance of the 
action, and thus as a whole the action itself, turns against the one who 
performed it; it recoils upon him and destroys him. Insofar as the action is 
[treated as] a crime, it misfires and justice gets restored. But there is no need 
to stress this aspect of the example, as it applies only to a specific case; and 
besides I have said that I only wished to introduce an analogy. 
But I would like to mention another example, which will appear later in 
its proper place. As an actual historical instance it involves, in a characteris-
tic form that essentially concerns us, the unification of the universal and the 
panicular, of a determinacy necessary on its own account and a purpose that 
appears contingently. Caesar, in danger [of losing] the position to which he 
had ascended-a position in which he was not yet superior to the others who 
stood at the head of the state but was at least equal to them-opposed [his 
rivals] in the interest of preserving his own position, honor, and security. He 
was in danger of succumbing to those who were on the point of becoming his 
enemies, but who at the same time had the formal constitution of the state 
(and hence the authority of outward legality) on the side of their own 
personal ends. 1 But since their power gave them sovereignty over the 
165 
provinces of the Roman Empire~ his victory over them simultaneously 
enabled him to conquer the whole empire itself. Without changing the 
form oi the constitution, he thereby became the sole ruler of the stare .... 
3 
By carrying out his originally negative end, he gained the undivided sover-
eignty of Rome, which was at the same rime an intrinsically necessary 
determination in Roman and world history. Thus not just his personal 
43. Hegel is following here me interpretation that Caesar himself gJVe!i of his conflict with his 
opponents. See C. Julius Caesar, Commenumorvm Belli Cruilis, book 3 (The Civil War, tt. J. M. 
Caner (Oxford, 1997), 76-139). 
95 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
advantage was involved; rather his work was an impulse that accomp~ished 
the end for which his age was ready. Such are the great figures of history. 
Their own panicular ends contain the substantial end that is the will_o£ the 
world spirit. Their true power is this content, which is present m the 
universal, unconscious impulse of humanity. Human beings are inwardly 
driven by this impulse and are incapable of resisting the individual who has 
taken over the execution of such an end in [the pursuit of] his own interest. 
To the contrary, peoples gather about his banner; he reveals to them and 
carries out what is their own immanent drive. 
If we go on to examine the fate of these world-historical individuals, [we 
see that) they have had the good fortune to be executors of an end that 
marked a stage in the advance of the universal spirit. However, as subjects 
166 
who are also distinguished from their substance, they .... 
44 l 
But although we may accept that individual persons, their purposes and 
the satisfaction of their purposes, are sacrificed, that their entire happiness 
is given up to the realm of nanual forces and to the contingency of which 
it is a pan-that we view individuals in general under the category of 
means---{here still remains one aspect of individuals that we hesitate to 
view only in this light, even in the face of extremes, for it is something 
utterly not subordinate [as a means) but rather is in itself eternal and 
44. Hen a break occurs in the manuscript (between sheets 65b and 66a) where H~l 
presmted matmal orally in the lectuces that is not included in the manuscript. The loose 
sheet' Auch Schauspiele der uneodfu:hc Vawiklungen' ('also spectacles of endless complexities' l 
helps to fiU in the gap(sce bdow, pp. 127--8).lt is in this fragment that Hegel's famous reference 
to tbe ·cunniug of reasoo• (List der Vemunft) ottun, a reference incorporated into the oral 
lectures. Karl Hegel's transcription of the lectures o{ 1834}-1 contains the following passage 
IMS, pp. 19-20} at this point: 'In cxttmal history we have right before our eyes what is 
particular, namely, drives md needs. We see these panicular elements engaged in mutual 
desuuction, Ma.ded for ruin, [whereas] d~ idea is what is universal, and in the struggle it i!> 
free from assau1t and is unscatbed.lllis is what we may call the cumaing of reason, since reason 
av&ls itself of these instnunenrs and shines fonb untouched or, .-adtet, brings itself forth. 
Rational purpose (Vemun{t-Zweck) realius itself by meaJIS of the needs, passions, and rne 
like of human bangs; what is personal or private is quite insigJJificam over against what is 
univ~; individuals are sacrifiad and relinquished. World history represents itself as the 
conllia of mdiVlduals; in the realm of particularity things proceed Mturally, that is, force 
(Ge1(•~t) prevails. In animal nature the preservation of life is the purpo!>l', drive, and imtinct. 
and tt LS rhJs wa~·too in that natural domain to which belong the aims oi the passtons; these aims 
are engaged in conflict "A;tb one anotber; they are successful but in rum are just as likd,· 
destroved. R~aSQo alo~~t arries weight, pursues its own purpose within the tumult of the 
world. and hfts ttselt up.' S« the forthcoming voL it of this edn. Difierent versions of tlu~ 
passa~ are ioo~d in the _1840 Werke edn. !The Phrlosophy of History, tr. John Sibree (New 
York, 1956). L-3). and m the Lasson and Hoffmeister edn. luctur~s on tht Philosoph·y of 
World History: lntrodMdiVfl: Reason in History, tr. H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge, 1975}, 891. 
96 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
divine. This is morality, ethical life, religious piety. Something already 
mentioned about the activation of rational ends by individuals45 is rhat 
their subjective aspect-their interest as a whole and that of their needs and 
drives, their opinions and views (as only a formal aspect)-does, however, 
have an infinite right to be satisfied. When we speak of a means, we 
represent it principally as something that is only external to the end and 
plays no part in it. But in fact natural things generally, even the commonest 
inanimate things, when they are used as means, must already be of such a 
character as to be suitable to their end and have something about them that 
has affinity with it. And the relationship of human beings to rational ends is 
least of all that of a means in this wholly external sense. For in fulfilling 
rational ends, they not only simultaneously fulfill their own panicular 
ends (whose content is quite different from that [of the universal end]) 
but also participate in that rational end itself, and are thereby ends in 
themselves. [They are] ends in themselves not only in a formal sense, as 
are all living beings-see Kant46-whose individual lives are by their very 
nature already subordinate to human life and are rightly used as means; I 
167 
individual human beings are also ends in themselves by virtue of what their 
ends involve. And under this heading falls everything that we would exempt 
from the category of means, namely, morality, ethical life, religious piety. 
Human beings are ends in themselves only in virtue of the divine principle 
within them that we have referred to all along as reason and, insofar as it is 
inwardly active and self-determining, as freedom. And we assen (without 
being able to develop the point more fully here) that indeed religious piety, 
ethical life, etc., have their soil and source in this principle and therefore are 
intrinsically elevated above external necessity and contingency. (But it must 
not be forgotten that we are concerned with these factors only insofar as 
they exist within individuals, that is, insofar as they are left to individual 
freedom; in this regard, the responsibility for religious and ethical weakness, 
corruption, or loss falls upon individuals themselves.) 
This is the hallmark of the lofty and absolute vocation of human beings, 
that they know what good is and what evil is,47 and that volition itself is 
willing either good or evil-in short, that they are capable of responsibiliry 
w1th respect not only to evil but also to good; they are responsible not simply 
4.5. See above, pp. 91-3. 
46. Hegel is reiecring to Kant's distinction between orgaruud beinss as an_ end of oature and 
human beings as the tina I end ot nature. See Immanuel Kant, Critik der Urthnlsltraft ( Berlm and 
Libau, 1790), 383 (the beginning of§ 83); The Critiq~U of}udgement, tr.jarnes Creed Meredith 
tOxford, 19521, ii. 91. 
47. Hegel is aJILJding to Gen. 3: 5. 
97 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
for this or that or for everything that is around them and in them, but also 
for the good and evil that are inherent in their individual freedom. Only the 
animal is truly and totally innocent. But to prevent or remove all the mis-
understandings to which this daim usuaHy gives rise (when, for instance, the 
very ignorance of evil, which gets called 'innocence', is hereby debased and 
168 
devalued) would require an extensive discussion, I a discussion no less 
extensive than a complete treatise on freedom itself. 
48But when we consider the fate that overtakes vi"ue, ethical life, and 
religious piety in history, we must not fall into a litany of lamentations to the 
effect that the good and the pious often or indeed most of the time fare badly 
in the world, while the evil and the wicked prosper. Prosperity
4~ is com-
monly understood in many different ways, such as wealth, outward honor, 
and the like. But when we are discussing an end that subsists in and for itself~ 
the so-called prosperity or misfonune of panicular single individuals cannot 
and ought not to be regarded as an element of the rational world ordeL 
There is more justification for expecting of the world purpose that good, 
ethical, and just pwp<>ses should seek their fulfillment and guarantee under 
its auspices and in it than to expect that simply for the happiness and 
good fortune of individuals. What makes humans morally dissatisfied (and 
they may take a certain pride in this dissatisfaction) is that they find a 
discrepancy between the present and their conceptions, principles, and 
opinion concerning ends of a more universal content, what they consider 
to be right and good (nowadays ideals of political institutions in particular); 
they find a discrepancy between the present and their predilection for 
devising ideals on which to lavish enthusiasm. They contrast [present) 
existence with their view of how things rightly ought to be. In this case it 
is not particular interests and passions that demand satisfaction but reason. 
justice, and freedom; under this banner., sucb demands assen themselves and 
not only are readily dissatisfied with the condition and events of the world 
169 
but rebel against them. To I appreciate such feelings and views, we should 
have to undenake an investigation of the stated demands themselves, of very 
emphatically expressed judgments and views. In no other time than our own 
have such general propositions and conceptions been advanced with more 
forceful claims. Whereas history customarily seems co present j[selt as a 
48. In the marg;,.,: ll()t that btam· 
49. 'Prosperity' translate~ Hegel'~ Gr.t-gehen (literally, 'going well' J. used m conjunction with 
schkcht g~he and gut gehe in lhe preading sentence. In the next Sc.'Otence ·prosperity or 
llUsfo~une translates Gut- oder_ Schlechtgehen. The literal sense of ·going well' and ·going 
badly perhaps conveys the mearung more accurately in this context. 
98 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
conflict of passions, in the present age-although the passions are nor 
absent-it appears, on the one hand, primarily as a conflict of conceptions 
striving to justify themselves to one another, and on the other hand as a 
conflict of passions and subjective interests, but essentially under the banner 
of such higher justifications. These rights, demanded in the name of what we 
have described as the vocation of reason-as the absolute end and as self-
conscious freedom-are thereby legitimated as absolute ends just like reli-
gion, ethical life, and morality. 
We shall turn in a moment to the state, 5° to which all such demands are 
directed. But as for the curtailment, harm, and ruin of religious, ethical, and 
moral purposes and affairs in general, it must at least be said-although we 
offer a more precise judgment regarding this matter later51-thar such 
spiritual powers are absolutely justified; nevertheless, although their inward 
and universal aspect is infinite, their shapes, content, and development into 
actuality are more limited, thus meshing externally with the natural order 
and being subject to contingency. In this respect they also are transient. 
subject to curtailment and harm. Precisely as inwardly universal essences, 
religion and ethics have the feature, in conformity with their concept, of 
being truly present in the individual soul, even if this feature is not fullr 
cultivated there and not applied to 1 a network of relationships. The reli-
170 
gious piety and ethical life of a restricted sphere of life (e.g. that of a 
shepherd or a farmer), in their concentrated inwardness and their limitation 
to a few quite simple situations of life, have an infinite value-the same value 
as the religious piety and ethical life that accompany a high degree of 
knowledge and a life that is rich in the extent of its relations and actions. 
52 
Ths inner center, this simple region of the right of subjective freedom, the 
seat of volitio~ decision, and action, the abstract content of conscience, that in 
which the responsibility and value of individuals and their eternal judgment are 
contained-all of this remains untouched by the noisy clamor of world bistorr. 
untouched not only by external and temporal changes but also by the changes 
brought about by the absolute necessity of the concept of freedom i~lf. But in 
general the following may be established: that whatever in the world can justly 
claim nobility and splendor is subject to something even higher than itself. The 
right of the world spirit transcends all particular rights; it imparts itself ro them 
50. See below, pp. t00-7. The beginning of the section on the state has not been.prestrvt'd .. 
51. An exposition as indicated here of the opposition berweeo an absol~te JUsnficanon ot 
spiritual powers and their historical variability is nor to be found in the available wurces. In a 
somewhat altered perspective Hegel rerums to this !heme at PP· 118-19. 
52. In the margin: Ethical life in ir.s genuine shape- in the staU'-
99 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
but only conditionally, insofar as they indeed belong to its substance but at the 
same time are burdened by particularity. 
These remarks may suffice in respect to the means that the world spirit 
employs for the realization of its concept. In simple and abstract terms, the 
means it employs is the activity of subjects in which reason is present as their 
inherendy subsisting substantial essence; but this g.round is as yet indistinct 
and concealed from them. The matter becomes more complex and difficult, 
111 
however, when we consider individuals not merely as active I Ol' in renns of 
particular purposes limited to only this individual, but rather in terms of a mol'e 
concrete and detenninate content related to religion and ethical life; for this 
content partakes of reason and hence also of its absolute rights. Now the 
relationship of a mere means to an end disappears (from view}, and the major 
aspects that arise in regard to the absolute end of spirit have been briefly 
considered. 
c. The Material of Spirit's Actualization: the State53 
The third point concerns the end or purpose that is carried out by this means, that 
is, the shape it assumes in actuality. We have spoken of means, and with the 
carrying out of a subjective and finite end we also have the element of a material 
that is available or that must be procured in order that the end may be actualized. 
So the question becomes: What is the material in which the rational final end is 
carried out? (Tills is a] spiritual [end}. Here humanity [is}: (a) the subject of what 
112 
is substantial--its reason 1 and drive; (ji) means; (y) consciousness, a knowing 
and willing intelligence. [Its] specific end is a spiritual nature. 54• 55 ••• 
The living power of the state in individuals is what we have called ethical 
life. The state~ its laws and institutions, are theirs, are their right; so also are 
53. The ma'ID4Script reads: y 
54. Adihd at tbe md of the paragraph and in the mgrgm; Two aspecrs: (a) subsumtiol 
content; !~)subjective will-freedom [as) subjective freedom- will-1ht- true. Right, law, reason 
the subject matter. Universal will is ambiguous, oot dual- false limitation of the will. Will of the 
unit'~sal- ought to be the will of the individual, which [has) a universal end [as] its own end-
the~_ It is free (al.objectively - (p) subjectively - dependent on law 
)) .. At this pomt a break occurs in the manuscript, which jumps from sheet 69a to sheet 74a. 
In his lecture presentation, according to the transcriptions, Hegel discusses tne difference 
~ren and th~ umficarion of the subjective side of history, a!S the knowing and willing 
mdiYldual, an~ the objecnve, substantial ~ide, as the universal final end (see the oudine of this 
maun~l m ~· J4l. Here too be introduces the concept of the state, which is presupposed at the 
beginnmg ot sheet 74a. lbe next three paragraphs are fow.d on sheets 74a-b. In tbe lecrure; 
.:orrespooding to the beginning oi sheet 74b Hegel discusses the state as the acrualiz.atioo of the 
.:oncept of freedom and as the ground for the emergeoce of an, religion, and philosophy. He also 
addresses the system of needs, thl' concept of law as the univena.l the emergence oi the 
Vollugeist (the spirit of a people), and the relationship of &ecdom and 'oeussity. 
100 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
their external possessions in nature-the soil, mountains, air, and waters-
as their land, their native land. The history of this state, its deeds and the 
deeds of their forefathers, are theirs; it lives in their memory as having 
brought forth what now exists, what belongs to them. All this is their 
possession, just as they are possessed by it; for it constitutes their 5ubstance 
and being. Their way of thinking ( Vorstellung) is fulfilled within it, and their 
will is the willing of the laws of their native land. 56 This spiritual totality 
constitutes a single essential being, the spirit of a people. Athena [has] a 
double significance57: as spiritual, and with all its characteristics included in 
a simple essentiality, {this totality} must become fixed as a single power and 
being. Individuals belong to it; each individual is the son of his people and, 
insofar as his state is still developing, the son of his age. No one can remain 
behind his age or even less leap ahead of it. This spirirual being is his being, 
he is a representative of it; he arises out of it and exists within it. 
This spirit of a people is a determinate spirit, and, as has just been said, 
it is also determined by the stage of its historical development. Thus this 
spirit constitutes the foundation and content in the other fonns of its 
consciousness 1 that have been indicated. 58 This spirit is a single individu~ 
173 
ality. In religion it is represented, revered, and enjoyed in its essentiality as 
the essential being, the divinity (der Gott); in art it is portrayed in image and 
intuition; and in philosophy it is cognized and comprehended in thought. 
Because they have the same original substance, the shapes they assume, their 
content and object, exist in an inseparable unity with the spirit of the state. 
This particular form of the state can exist only with this religion, and 
likewise in this state only this philosophy and this art can be found. 
These remarks are especially important in light of the foolish efforts of our 
age to devise and implement political institutions independently of religion. 
The Catholic religion, although it shares the Christian religion in common 
with Protestantism, does not allow for that inner justice and ethicality of the 
state that resides in the inwardness of the Protestanr principle. It [is in fact] 
necessary that the political consrirution and government should be divorced 
from a religion that has the feature of not acknowledging the inherent and 
substantial existence of right and ethical life. But if the state's legal principles 
and institutions are divorced from inwardness, from rhe ultimate shrine of 
56. In the margm: If an Englishman is asked. . . 
. 
. . 
. 
57. The goddess represents both a people (rhe c•ry-srate ol Athens! and the Sp1m of th1s 
people. 
58. This allusion is to pariS of the manuscript that have been lost and that originally stood 
just before the beginning of the present paragraph. 
101 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTIOr-;; 
conscience-the silent sancruary where religion has i~ seat-they will not 
become actually central [to life) but will remain abstract and nonspecific.
5
"~ • • • 
The nature ofthe state has been described. 60 It will be recalled that in present· 
174 
day theories various misconceptions about it are prevalent I that are taken to 
be established truths and have become simply assumed. We will cite only a few 
of them here, especially those that are related to the aim of our [study of] history. 
The first error that we encounter is the direct opposite of our concept that 
the [political) state is the actualization of freedom. This is the view that 
human beings are free by nature, but that in society and the state, which they 
enter by necessity, this natural freedom must be restricted.61 That hurnam 
are free by nature is completely correct in the sense that they have freedom as 
their concept, but only in terms of their destination or vocation, that is, only 
implicitly; the 'nature' of an object just means its •c::oncept'. But this propo-
sition is also taken as Wtderstanding, and referring to, human beings in thetr 
merely natural and immediate existence. In this sense a state of nature is 
assumed in which humans are imagined to be in possession of their natural 
rights and have the unrestricted exercise and enjoyment of their freedom. 
This assumption can scarcely claim to be historical fact. If one did seriously 
wane to make such a claim, it would be difficuit to point to such a state of 
nature that exists in the present or that existed sometime in the past. One can 
cenainly point to states of savagery, but they are connected with raw pas-
sions and violent deeds; and, no matter how unrefined they are. they are 
connected with social institutions that supposedly limit freedom. This 
assumption is one of those nebulous pictures that theory produces, a repre· 
175 
sentation that flows I necessarily from it, and to which it then falsely 
ascribes an existence without any sort of historical justification. 
59. H~ a b~ak oa:urs where the manuscript revertS from sheet 7~b to 70a. 
60. This is a reference to pans of the manuscript that have ~n lost and that origtnall~ srood 
bnween shcru 69a and 74a and sheen 7 4b and 70a, in other words, just btfore the beginning of 
dUs paragraph. 
61. On tbr ~ne o! the state of nature as a state of freedom.. see 1"'Spec1aJiy Thomas Hob~ 
Eleme-rrtonmr flhilosophiae sedioalur4l: ~ewe !Amsterdam, 1696). Hoblxs gave the title liberlas 
to em. 1~, which tnat lhe State of nature. !)ee also jean-jacques Rousseau, Du Contrat Social 
IAmstmlarn, 1762\,book l,~p.c~ 1-2,6--8. Kant's idea that in a righthordered common life dlf' 
cxeraSII:oftrec' -u-
·1 ,. -._ .. L._ .L_ 
• 
1 
~ 15 naessan Y umu:u "Y ""'freedom of everyone is relevant here: lnunanue 
K~ Mt'~be Arr{angsgriinde der Recbtslehre (K6ni~berg, 17971 (Kant. GesarmneltR 
Sdmften.F,..... 
_ ed. Ruloyal Pnwian Academy of Scienas (Berlin, 1900 H.), vi.130 H.). Job .ann Gottbet> 
IUlte m pante ar emphasr:;>.o the idea. criticized by Hegel, that a neces.sarv limitation of freedom 
occur.. w soc.ery: Gnmdlage des Naturrechts nach Priru:ipie-n der W~aftsltbre LJma and 
l..t-tpz~g. 1796 ),~.the lntrodiiCbOII, pt. 21 Fichte, Ge5ammtausgabe der &rverisdum Akademre drr 
WissePucbaft-, di¥. 1 !S.t~~:tprt-Rad Canosun., 1966), iii. 319--221. 
. 
102 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
When we find a stare of nature in empirical existence, it does indeed conform 
to its concept. Freedom as the ideality of the immediate and natural does nor 
exist as something immediate and narural but must rather first be acquired and 
attained through the endless mediation of discipline acting upon knowledge 
and will. Thus the stare of nature is rather a state of injustice, of violence, of 
uncontrolled natural impulses, of inhwnan deeds and emotions. There is of 
course a restriction imposed by society and the state, but this is a restriction 
of these dull-witted emotions and raw impulses, and of preferences based on 
reflection too, as well as of the needs. choices, and fervor arising from cultural 
formation. These restrictions are part of the mediation by which the conscious-
ness and the will of freedom in irs true form, that is, its rational and conceptual 
form, are first engendered. Freedom in its concept is such that right and erh.ical 
life belong to it. The latter are, in and of themselves,lllliversal essences, objects, 
and aims that are discovered by the activity of thinking-a thinking that 
distinguishes itself from and develops over against the realm of sense-and 
that in turn must be given form by and incorporated into the initially sensuous 
wil~ indeed contrary to that will itself. To regard freedom in a purely formal 
and subjective sense, abstracted from its absolutely essential objects and aim;r,, 
is a perennial misunderstanding; for it means that the drives, desires, and 
passions that belong to particular individuals become part of the content of 
freedom, I [their} choices and preferences; and the restriction of any of these is 
t 76 
taken as a restriction of freedom. On the contrary, such a restriction is the 
absolute condition from which liberation proceeds, and society and the state 
instead provide the condition in whkh freedom is actualized. 
We must mention a second representation that generally inhibits the devel-
opment of right into a legal form. namely, patriarchy. This condition is re· 
garded as providing, either for the whole (of humanity] or at least for some of 
its individual branches, the circumstances in which juridical as well as ethical 
and emotional elements [of life] are satisfied; and onJy in conjunction with 
patriarchy is justice itself truly practiced in accord with its concept. The 
patriarchal condition is based on the family relationship, which is the earliesl 
torm of ethical life, while that [of] the state is the second, consciously developed 
form. The patriarchal relationship is a transitional form in which the family has 
already grown into a dan or people. and in which the bond has already ceased 
to be one simply of love and trust and has become an association of service. 
We must first indicate the ethical life of the family. The family is [regarded 
asj only a single person. The members of a family have either muruall~· 
surrendered their (independent] personhood (and hence their legal statu~ 
along with their particular interests and selfish inclinations), as is thr case 
with the parents, or else they have nor yet attained to it, as with the children. 
103 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
who initially are in the state of nature described above. Thus they live in a 
unity of feeling, in love, trust, and faith toward one another. In love an 
individual finds his own consciousness in the consciousness of the other and 
1-n 
is divested of himself; in this mutual divestment I each individual gains not 
only the other but also himself as he is at one with the other. The [family's] 
further interests [arising] from the needs and external concerns of life, as 
well as its internal structure in respect to raising children, constitute a 
common purpose. The spirit of the family-the Penates-is just as substan-
tial a being as the spirit of a people within the state; and ethical life consists 
in both cases in a [common] feeling, consciousness, and volition, not in 
individual personalities and interests. But in the family this unity is essen-
tially one of feeling and remains within a natural mode. The piety of the 
family is something to be most highly respected by the state, for by means of 
it, it has in its citizens individuals who already are intrinsically ethical (which 
as persons they are not}, and who bring to the state a genuine foundation in 
their feeling of being at one with a whole. 
But the expansion of the family into a patriarchal unit transcends the ties of 
blood relationship, which is the natural aspect of its foundation, and beyond 
which individuals must assume the status of [independent] personhood. 
To examine the patriarchal condition in its wider scope would lead 
especially to the consideration of the form of theocracy, for the head of the 
patriarchal dan is also its priest. When the family is not yet separated from 
society and the state, then religion too is not yet set apart from society, and 
religious piety itself has not yet become an inwardness o£ feeling.62 ••• 
d. The Constitution63 
The previously mentioned points have concerned abstract elements that are 
found in the concept of the state. But it is the constitution that carries out 
this concept and establishes the institutions that insure that whatever hap-
178 
pens within the state is appropriate to the concept.li-4 1 If the principle of the 
individual will is taken as the sole determinant of the freedom of the state, 
1>2. Here~ break occurs where the manuscript jumps ahead from meet 72a to 76a. At 
tbe c~hJSJon of his trea~t o~ the family and the state as the two main ethical powers, Hegel 
'accordmg to the traoscnpuons) Introduces the concept of right as the acruality of the universal 
Will_. then omer matters that lead finally tO tM Concept of the (:OOStitutiOO, With which sheet 7 6a 
begjos. From ~ 
76b on. there are oqJy limited points of agreemeot between the manuscript 
and the lecture transcriptions. 
63. The matrllSCripr re/MI.s: !8) 
b4. In the nl4r"gin: Supedluous [to say) that a Stale bas a constitution -self-evident - being 
without a CODSDrutioa is alsa cepre:smtcd as a constitutioo, like a sphere as a shape 
104 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
and if each individual ought to assent to everything that takes place by and 
for the state, then in the strict sense there is no constitution. Only two things 
would be needed: first, a central body without a will of its own, which would 
take note of what appeared to it to be the needs of the state and make its 
opinion known; then a mechanism for calling together the individuals. 
recording their votes, and performing the arithmetical operation of counting 
and comparing the number of votes in favor of various propositions, at 
which point the decision would already have been taken. 
The state itself is an abstraction, which itself has only a universal reality in its 
citizens; bur it is acrual, and its merely universal existence must become specific 
in the form of individual volition and activity. The need arises for some sort of 
government and political administration;65 there is a need (or sel~ring and 
singling out those to be heavily occupied with the affairs of state, to make 
decisions and determine how they are to be execute~ and ro instruct dte 
citizens who are to put them into practice. If, for example, in a democracy a 
people chooses (to go to] war, a general must still be put in command to 
conduct the war. The state as an abstraction comes to life and actuality in the 
first instance by means of the constitution; but as it does so a difference arises 
between ruler and ruled, between command and obedience. I Obedience, 
179 
however, seems to be incompatible with freedom; and command seems to do 
the very opposite of what is required by the foundation of the state, by the 
concept of freedom. If sometimes the distinction between command and 
obedience is necessary because the matter could not be otherwise-and this 
appears to be a necessity that is merely external to freedom, abstractly defined. 
and indeed in conflict with it-the arrangement at least must be such that the 
minimwn of obedience is required of citizens, and the minimum of arbitrari-
ness is allowed to those in command. The content of what it is necessary to 
command should be the main thing that is determined and decided by the 
people in accord with the will of many or of all individuals-although the stare 
as an actuality, as an individual unity, must have vigor and strength. 
The foremost feature is the distinction between ruler and ruled, and 
constitutions have rightly been classified on the whole as monarchy, aristoc-
racy, and democracy. It should be noted, however, (a} that in monarchy itself 
a distinction must be made between despotism and monarchy proper; and 
(/3) that in all classifications derived from the concept only the fundamental 
feature is emphasized. This does noc mean that this very shape, variety~ or 
kind is said to be exhausted in its concrete application, bur rather that it 
65. fn the m<Jrgin: People deceived, war waged, Goethe - HOIDtf 
105 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
admits of a number of particular modifications, not only in terms of general 
arrangements in themselves as such, but also of the sort that blend several of 
these essential arrangements, but which are accordingly amorphous, unsus-
tainable, and inconsistent configwations. This clash of features raises ~he 
question, therefore, as to which is the best constirution, that is, by whtch 
anangement, organization, or mechanism of political power the purpose 
180 
of I the state can be most securely attained. 
This purpose can certainly be understood in different ways, for example, 
as the peaceful enjoyment of civic life or as universal happiness. Such 
purposes have given rise to the so-called ideal of political regimes, especially 
the ideal of the education of princes (Fenelon), or of rulers generally, the 
aristocracy (Piato).66 Here the chief concern is with the character of those 
who govern the state, and no thought at all is given to the ideal form of the 
organic institutions of the state. The question about the best constitution is 
often treated as though not only is the theory about it a matter of subjective 
and free deliberation, but also the actual introduction of what is recognized 
as the best (or the better) constitution is a consequence of such a wholly 
theoretical decision-as though the type of constitution could be a matter of 
a wholly free and wide-ranging choice, not choice delimited by deliberation. 
It was in this thoroughly naive sense that the Persian nobility (but not the 
Persian people), having conspired to overthrow the pseudo-Smerdis and the 
Magi, after this successful undertaking and in light of the fact that no 
descendant of the Achaemenid dynasty67 was still alive, deliberated on 
which constitution should be introduced into Persia; and Herodotus reports 
on this deliberation in equally naive fashion. 68 
Nowadays the constitution of a land or people is not thought to be so much 
a matter of free choice. The fundamental but abstractly fonnulated definition 
of freedom bas led to the widespread theory that the republic is the only just 
and true constitution. Indeed, a number of men who have held high positions 
66 · ~ 
tbt oO\'d by Fr~is de Salignac, de Ia Mothe Fenelon, U;s avantures .de Telemaque, ~Is 
J'U~ I london, 17421, esp. 18. where Pallas Athena instructs Telemachus in the form of Mentor 
~is noa rccogpiztd. On Plato., see his reports to Diony5ius the Elder and Dionvs.ius the Younger on 
dJe ~ 
oi his tnvels to Sicily, L.ettn-s 7. esp. 327c-328a and 328&-c i Ha~ltoo and Cairns, p. 
1 'iT"!'· ~ his ~ 
on the Hislcry of P~Jik,sophy, ii 179--80, Hegel says of Plato's intention to 
realiu bis politial ideas~ Dionysius that the idea of •a young prince with a wist man 
suodiog bdliod or beside him, a philosopher wbo instructs :md iBipius him' is 'the basis for a 
b~m~ political ~t:s·. 
67 · We have COI"RCt~ Hegel'~ enoneou.~ reference to the Pishdadians (according m Per.;ian 
m~"thology, the moa anocnt royal lineage). 
~- Set Huodorus.. Tin History 3.61-83 (on tbt Acbaemenids. 3.65} (u. David Greoe 
t OUcago, 1987), 23&-SO). 
106 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
in a monarchical form of government, for example Lafayette. 69 have not 
contradicted such a view or have subscribed to it. But they have seen that such 
a constitution, even though it may be the best, in actuality cannot be intro-
duced everywhere. and that, because humans are what they are, one must 
make do with a lesser degree of freedom. As a consequence, under these I 
181 
circumstances and in Jight of the moral condition of the people, the monar-
chical constitution may be the most workable one. From this perspective the 
necessity of a specific constitution is made to depend on conditions that are 
merely external and contingent. A representation of this kind is based on how 
the reflective understanding (Verstandes-Reflexion) separates concept and 
reality because it holds only to an abstract and therefore untrue concept 
and does not grasp the idea, or, what amounts to the same thing in content 
if not in form, does not have a concrete intuition of a people and a state. It has 
already been remarked70 that the constitution of a people fonns one sub-
stance and one spirit with its religion, with its art and philosophy, or at least 
with the representations and conceptions of its culture generally-not to 
mention additional external factors such as its climate, its neighbors, and its 
position in the world at large. A state is an individual totality from which a 
particular aspect, even a highly important one such as a constitution, may not 
be abstracted and isolated, considered solely for itself on its own terms. Not 
only is the constitution inwardly connected with and dependent on the other 
spirirual powers, but also the specific fonn of the entire spiritual individuality 
[of a state] with all of its powers is merely one moment in the history oi the 
whole. The course [of world history as a whole] predetermines what gives to a 
constitution its highest sanction as well as its highest necessity. 
71 
• • • 
C. THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORYn 
a. The Principle of Development 
Historical change in the abstract sense has long been apprehended in a 
general way as involving a progression toward a better and more perfect 
69 
-
-
ws ao:ounts of the: situation in 
. Hegel ts probably drawmg here on contemporary ne 
. 
_ 
bad bcm 
France after the Revolution of July 1830 in which Lafayette. who 1D preY!OU~ years 
'
.be 
· 
· 
·m the sucas&on to tbe throne 
a I 
raJ deputy, led the national guard anew and m connecnon W1 
of Louis Philippe once again briefly gained great political influence. 
70. See above, p. 101. 
. 
· 
blank 
71. Here a final break occurs where more than two stu:ts ot ~ 
~=pr ~ 'b' ~ 
72. This heading is in the manuscript, but the subsection heading ~ . ona ~ 
BOa the 
bclow (n. 73) but not a corresponding 'a'). In this 6Pal secnon. begiiJD.l!lg at 
' 
107 

182 
183 
MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
condition. Changes in nature, no matter how I diverse they are, exhibit 
only an eternally recurring cycle. In nature there is nothing new under t~e 
sun, and in this respect the manifold play of its shapes carries on in wean-
some fashion. Something new emerges only through the changes that take 
place in the spiritual realm. Purely natural things have one and the ~a~e 
quality, an always stable character, into which all changes return and wath~n 
which they are subject to it. The phenomenon of the spiritual as it appears m 
humans shows an altogether different character-an actual capacity for 
change, indeed, as has been said, a change in the direction of completion, 
an impulse of perfeaibility. This principle, which makes change itself into a 
(basic] precept, has been grievously attacked by religions such as the Catho-
lic and also by states that claim it to be their true right to be static or at least 
stable. While mutability is generally acknowledged with regard to worldly 
things such as states, an exception is made in the case of religion. as the 
religion of truth. Moreover, it is possible to ascribe changes, revolutions, and 
the destruction of legitimate rights partly to contingencies and misfortunes 
but principally to the frivolity, corruption, and evil passions of human 
beings. Perfectibility is in fact something almost as indeterminate as change 
itself; it is without aim and end; that toward which it supposedly tends, the 
better and the perfect~ is completely unspecified. 
The principle of development has a further aspect: there is at irs basis an 
inner determination, an implicit presupposition, that it brings into exis-
tence. I This formal determination is an essential one: the spirit whose 
theater, property, and field of actualization is world history is not one tha.r 
drifts about in the extemal play of contingencies bur is rather a spirit that is 
in itself the absolutely determining [power]; its own distinctive determina-
tion stands firmly against contingencies, which it makes use of and governs 
(for its own purposes]. But natwal organisms are also capable of develop-
ment. Their existence is not simply an immediate one that can be altered 
only by external influences; rather it proceeds from its own inner 
manuscript differs ~ompletely from the lccrures. The t:ranscription of the latter by Karl Hegel 
pr~·~ a much briefer alremative ten, which must have been ba5ed on earlier materiaJs, one of 
which •s the fragment 'C. CA>IICSe lofWorld History)' (see the Loose Sheets below). The contents 
of the final sewoo ol the manuscript, especially Hegel's arrack on Friedrich Schlegel, the Abbe 
Lamnvl\al$, Baroo von Eckstein,. and the journal Le Carholique !set> below, nn. 77-9)-all 
represeotanves of French R t 
· 
Ji · 
· 
· 
. 
es oranon po tlC&-suggests a motive for planning a pubhcanon 
ba~ 
011 the_ lllalluscnpt, namely, to emer into the then-livelv debate over the positions taken b~· 
•he Re-storabon pam aod bv o·L 
11 
· 
: 
· 
d 
. . 
• .,, 
. 
UleTS as we , on 1ssues relatmg ro the philosophv of hJstor-,.· an 
the pnnc1ple of ~velopment. See Waltet jaeschke, 'Das Geschriebene und d~s Qsprochene: 
W.ll~elm ~~Karl_ Hege_l uber den Begriff der Philosophie der Weltgeschi~:hte', Hegei-Studien, 
44 ~Ham..,...l5' ~hx Memer Verlag, 2009), esp. 40--4. 
108 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
unchangeable principle, from a simple essence whose existence as a germ is 
at first likewise simple but then brings distinctions fonh from irself into 
determinate being. These distinctive features engage with other things and 
thereby undergo a process of change; bur this is a process rhar continuously 
reverts to its opposite and instead maintains the organic principle and irs 
configurations intact. Thus the organic individual produces itself; it makes 
itself into what it is in itself. Spirit too is simply what makes itself; it makes 
itself into what it is inherently. But the development of the organic individual 
is such that it produces itself in an immediate, unopposed, and unhindered 
fashion; nothing can intrude between the concept and its realization, 
between the implicitly detennined nature of the germ and the adequacy of 
its existence to its nature. 
With spirit, however, it is otherwise. The rcansition of its I determinate 
184 
nature into its actual existence is mediated by consciousness and will. The 
latter are at first immersed in their immediate natural life; their object and 
purpose are at first their natural determination as such. Because it is spirit 
that animates them, consciousness and will (consist) of infinite demands, 
strength, and wealth. So spirit in itself is opposed to itself; it has to overcome 
itself as the genuine and hostile hindrance to its purpose. Development, 
which as such is a peaceful procedure because in its expression it remains 
simultaneously equivalent to and within itself, is, within spirit, in a hard and 
ceaseless conflict with itself. Spirit wants to attain to its own concept, but it 
conceals itself from it and is proud and full of satisfaction in its alienation 
from itself. 
{Spiritual] development, therefore, is not just a harmless and conflict-free 
process of emergence, as in organic life, but rather a hard and obstinate labor 
directed to itself; moreover, it involves not merely the formal aspect of 
developing as such but rather the production of a purpose or end with a 
specific content. We have established from the beginning what this end is: it 
is spirit, and indeed spirit in accord with its essence, the concept of freedom. 
This is the fundamental object and thus also the driving principle of devel-
opment. Such an object is that from which development derives its meaning 
and significance; so for example in Roman hisrory Rome is the objeC[, which 
guides the consideration of events, while the events in tum proceed only 
from this object, deriving their meaning from their relationship to it and 
having their substance in it. 
In world history there have been several great periods of development 
rhat came to an end without any apparent continuation. As a consequence 
all the vast accomplishments of culture were destroyed, which unfortunately 
made it necessary to start over irom the beginning in order to regain-with 
109 

185 
186 
MANUSCRIPTS 0 F THE I NT R 0 D U C T I 0 N 
some help perhaps from salvaged fragments of past treasures and with a 
renewed and immeasurable expenditure of energy I and time, ot crimes and 
suffering--one of the domains of past culture that was mastered long ago. ~t 
the same time there have been enduring developments, fertile and expansave 
structures and systems of culture with their distinctive elements. The fonnal 
principle of development as such can neither assign superiority to one [form 
of culture] over another nor make intelligible the purpose behind the 
destruction of earlier periods of development. Rather it must regard such 
progressions, and in particular the retrogressions they include, as outwardly 
chance occurrences; and it can only evaluate the merits [of a culture] by 
employing indeterminate criteria that are relative and nor absolute ends, 
since the development is what finally matters. 
b. The Stages of Development73 
World history accordingly presents the stages of development of the princi-
ple whose content is the consciousness of freedom. This development has 
stages not only because it (occurs through) the mediation of spirit with itself 
rather than in spirit's immediacy, but also because it is inwardly differen· 
tiated into components or differences of spirit within itself. The more precise 
determination of these stages is in its general nature logical, but in its more 
concrete nature it is provided by the philosophy of spirit. The abstract form 
of the stages may be adduced here simply as follows. The first stage is that of 
immediacy, and, as already mentioned, in it spirit remains immersed in the 
natural state in which it exists in a condition of unfree singularity (one is 
free). In the second stage spirit emerges into the consciousness of its freedom, 
~ut this first breaking loose is incomplete and partial (some are free) because 
It originates from the immediacy I of the natural state, is related to it, and is 
still e.nc~bered with it as a moment. In the third stage spirit is elevated out 
of .this sttll partiC14lar freedom into freedom's pure universality (the human 
bemg as such is freeklevated into the self-consciousness and self-aware-
ness (Selbstge(Uhl) of the essence of spirituality. These stages are the funda-
mental principles of the universal process; but how more precisely within 
each of the stages a funher progression of shapes occurs and how the 
dialect. 
f 
· · 
be 
' 
d 
_ 
ac 0 transanon 
tween the stages comes about~ are matters reserve 
tor the ensuing discussion. 
Here w.e merely note that spirit begins from its infinite possibility, which 
however IS only a possibility. This possibility contains spirit's absolute 
73. The heading is editorial; the manuscript reads 'b'. 
110 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
substance as something implicit, as the purpose and goal that it attains only 
as a result-a result that is only then its actuality. Thus in existence rhe 
progression appears as one from incompleteness to completion, although the 
former is to be understood not merely in the abstraction of incompleteness 
but rather as something that contains within itself its opposite, the would-be 
completion, as a germ or drive; just as possibility, at least for a reflective way 
of chinking, indicates something that ought to be actual, and, more precisely, 
just as the Aristotelian dynamis is also potentia, energy and power. i 4 Thus 
incompleteness, which contains its own opposite within itself, is a conrra-
dicrion; it indeed exists but just as surely is sublated and resolved. It is the 
drive, the impulse of spiriwallife within itself to break through the bond, the 
rind of natural and sensuous life, of whatever is alien to it, and to come to the 
light of consciousness, that is, to itself. 
c. The Beginning of World History75 
In connection with the notion of a state of nature in which freedom and 
justice are, or were, supposedly present in perfect form, we have already 
remarked in general terms how the beginning of the history of spirit must be 
comprehended in terms of the concept. However, the historical existence of a 
state of nature was only an assumption made in the feeble light of hypothe-
sizing reflection. 1 A pretension of a quite different sort-that is, an assump-
187 
rion put forward on the basis not of thought but rather of a historical fact, 
and indeed one based on a higher attestation-is made by another notion 
that is prevalent today in cenain circles. It is that of an original paradisiacal 
human condition, a notion that earlier was elaborated by theologians in their 
own fashion (for example, that God conversed with Adam in Hebrew
76
), 
and that is taken up again but adapted to suit other requirements. The higher 
authority to which appeal is initially made is that of the biblical narrative. 
But this narrative presents the primitive condition only in its few well-known 
paramerers, in part, however, with various adaptations in regard to the 
"'"4. In hi~ Lectures on the History of Philosophy Iii. 235-7) Hl.'gel illustrales 1he concept of 
dynamis by referring especially to Aristode, Met.~physics l019a 32-1019b 15 (McKeon, 
pp. 765~). 
75. This heading is editorial. 
:-6. Hegel apparently is alluding here to the doctrine of the divine origin of language. Soft, 
among others, Johann Peter Siigmilch, Verswch eines Beu•eises, da/J die ersu Spracbe ihren 
IJ npnmg nicht von Mrnschrn. sondern allein vom &hop fer erhaltrn habe (Berlin, 1766 I. Hegd 
would ha~e heen familiar wnh this discussion. through Johann Gottfried Herder. Abh.JmiiWt~g 
uber den Ursprun.g der Sf"oche (Berlin, 1772) (Siimmtliche Werke, ed. Bernhard Suplu.n.. _v 
1 Berlin, 1891 ), I-155). Hegel could also have drawn upon Rabbinic and espeoall~ CabbabstJc 
spttulations about Adam's possession of complete knowledge and books wnnen m Hebnw. 
111 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODU CTlON 
hwnan being as such (taking it as universal human nature), or, insofar as 
Adam is taken as a single individual, as two in this one individual--or as only 
present and complete in a single human couple. The biblical account does 
not justify our imagining that a people and its historical condition actually 
existed in that primitive shape, still less that it had developed a pure knowl· 
edge of God and nature. Nature, so the fiction runs, 'originally lay open and 
transparent like a bright mirror of God's creation before the clear ~ye of 
humans' 77 and the divine truth was equally open to them. It is also htnted, 
althou~ in an indefinite and obscure fashion, that in this primitive condition 
188 
humanity was in possession of a specific 1 and already extensive knowledg_e 
of religious truths, which indeed were directly revealed by God.
78 All reh· 
gions had their historical origin in this condition, but at the same time they 
adulterated and concealed the original truth with products of error and 
depravity. In all of the erroneous mythologies, however, traces of that origin 
and of the first teachings of religious truth are present and discernible. Thus 
the study of the history of ancient peoples gains its essential interest from 
fol1owing it back to the point where such fragments of the original revealed 
knowledge can still be encountered in their greater purity.79 We owe vecy 
n. In tJu mmgin with an asterisk: Friedrich von Schlegel's Phi/QsophU der Geschichte, vol. 1, 
p.44. 
[Ed.] Sec Friedrich von Schlegel, Pbilosophie der Gescbichte (Vienna, 1829), i. 44-5 (Kn-
tisehe friedrit:b-Schlegei-AKSgahe (,. KFSA), ed. Ernst Behler (Munich, Paderbom, Vienna, 
ZUrich. 1!158 ff.). i.x.. 34-5). 
78. Rdereoas to an original revelation are found in passages preceding the above citation; 
see Schlegel, Pbilosophie der Gescbichu, i. 3!1-40 (KFSA ix. 31 ). See also Schlegel's Ueber du 
Spradle ICIId Weisheit der Illdier {Heidelberg, 1808), 197-200 (KFSA viii. 295-9). In his 
l.e.ctures 011 the History tJ( PbiJosopl7y, i. 1-41, Hegel refers to •the Fnnch and Schelling' for 
lbr idea of 3.11 original coodition o( perfect knowledge. On his acceptana of such. an original 
cooditioo, see friedrich ScbeUiog, Vorlesungen ilber die Methode tks ~ischen Studium.s 
("Thbingen. 1803), 16S-9 (Schelling, Siimmtliche Werke, ed. K. F. A. Schelling (Stuttgart and 
Aug:sburg, 11156-61 !, v. 287); and Ober d~ Gottheiten VOtJ Sdmotbraa (Stungart and iubi.ngen, 
1815), 30, 108-9 CSiimmlliche Werke, viii_ 362, 416-17). 
79. In the m4rgin with an asterisk: We have this interest to thank fat many valuable 
disc~veries in Orientalliteurwe, and for the renewed study of previously accumulated treasure~ 
relatmg to the circum.sta.oces, mythology, religion, and history of ancient Asia. The Cnholic 
governments in more Clllturally advanced countries h.a ve ceased to resist the demands of thought 
and the need to ally themselves with scholarship and philosophy. In an eloquent and impressive 
fashion the Abbe ~ennais has reckoned it among the criteria of true religion that it must be 
wru~oerwl. I.e .• catholtc, and tbe oldest; and the CongregatiOPJ in France has labored zealous!• 
aod di hgentl~ that such assertions should no longer be rt:garded as pulpit tirades and pwdama · 
uons ot aurhont)-·, as was frequently accepted in the past. The rl"ligion of the Buddha-a (-;od· 
man--whKh commands so widespread a following, has aruacted particular anention. The 
Htndu Tnmum and the Chinese abstractioo of the Trinity were (however] intrinsically clearer 
m content. The scholars Abei-Remusat and Saint-Mania have for !heir pan conducted the rnCJSt 
112 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
much that is valuable to the interest I [that has produced} this research, but 
189 
the larter directly belies itself because it sets out to prove by historical 
methods what it has presupposed to exist historically. Neither that 
(advanced] state of the knowledge of God, or of other scientific, for example, 
astronomical, information, such as astronomers themselves, including 
Bailly, ao have fancifully attributed to the Indians, nor the assumption that 
such a state prevailed at the begiMing of 1 worJd history or that the reli· 
190 
gions of the peoples were derived from it by tradition and subsequently 
developed by a process of degeneration and deterioration, as is claimed by 
the crudely conceived so-called system of emanation-none of these 
praiseworthy investigations into Chinese and tbence into Mongolian literature. and, when thry 
muld, into Tibetan literature. And Baron von Eckstein, in his own fashion (i.e. With the h.elp of 
super6cial no Lions and mannerisms borrowed from Gennan natural philosophy in the style of 
friedrich von Schlegel, which, although more ingenious than those of Schlegd, nevertheless 
made not the slightest impression in France) has promoted lh.is primitive Catholicism in his 
jownal Le CatholiqHe; in particular, he has gained the government's support for the scholarly 
projects of the Congregation, with the result that it has even commissioned expeditions to the 
Orient to discover at last still hidden treasures with the hope of obtaining further information 
regarding more profound doctrines and espe-cially on the greater antiquity and sources of 
Buddhism-thereby funhering the cause of Catholicism by this circuitous but for scholars 
mteresting detour. 
~Ed.] On the Abbe Lamennais, see among other writings his f.ssai sur l"indiffermce en motiere 
J.e religion, 4 voJs. !Pans, 1817-23), esp. iii, ch. 25; iv, ch. 29; and iv. 2-4,486-7. Hegel's referenu 
is to Ihe Congregation de Marie, which during the revolutionary and Napoleonic periods in 
France was suppressed, but which, following the restoratioD of the Bourbon monarchy, bcca.rne an 
ambitious political-theological organization to wh.ich a number of influential Resiorationisrs 
belonged. The remainder of the information in the footnote most likely derives from an article 
probably written by Baron d'Eckstein, 'De Ia migration des peoples, et des causes determiruntts 
de Cette migration', in the journal he published, Le Catholique (Paris, 1826-9), 8 (1827). 279-
450. Marked by the fusion of religious, political. and OrientaJ interests, Ecksrei.rJ was influenced 
not only by Schlegel's natural philosophy but more especially by the work of Joseph Gorres on the 
history ot mythology. His article refers to the research by Abei-Remusa.t and Saint-Martin 
mentioned by HegeL Tile latter is most likely Antoine Jean Saint·Manm, who in tk 1820s 
wrote several essays on Oriental history and lectured at tbe Academie fr~ise. Hegel discusses 
Buddhism, the Hindu Trimurti, and the Chinese signs for the Trinity in part 2 of the l..et:tum on 
the Phrlosophy of Religion, where among other SOutO$ he cites Jean Pierre Abel-~musar's 
.\1'bnoJres sur Ia vieet les opinions des Lao-Tseu (Paris, 1823); see ii. 558 n. 120. He was familiar 
with other works bv Abel-Remusat who was Professor of Sinology at the College de Franct. 
Hegel's remarks a~ut the need f~ funher research on the origins of Buddhism and abollt 
Eckstein and h. is contributions to Catholicism are supported by other articles in Le Catho/sqlle. 
80. See jean Sylvain Bailly, Histoire de l'astron<Jmie anci~, depuis son origine tusqu'a l't!t.a· 
btJssement de /'ecole d'Aiexandre (Paris, 2nd edn., 1781); this worl; abo existed m German u:. 12 
vols.. Leiplig, 17T7). However, it is nor certain th.at Hegel read &illy's ':ork.; i~ is more likely that ht 
was familia.r with the criticism of Bailly by Jean joseph Delambre, Htsto1u de /IZSII'On()mle anamne, 
2 vols. (Paris, 1817). See Lectr~res 011 the Hislory of Philosophy, i. 110-11 n. 15; and Lectuns llfl the 
PhJosophy of Religron, ii. 530, incl. nn. 42, 43. 
113 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
assumptions has any historical foundation, nor; when we co~t~ast th~ir 
origin (which is arbitrary and on1y derives from subjective opmton) WJth 
the concept [of history], can they ever hope to attain one. 
The only fitting and wonhy mode of philosophical reflection is to take 
up history at the point where rationality begins to appear in worldly exis-
tence-not where it is first merely an implicit possibility, but where a condi-
tion exists in which it steps forth in consciousness, volition, and deed. The 
existence of spirit or freedom in unorganic form-where there is no awareness 
of good and evil and thus of laws, whether it be an existence of savage or 
innocuous dullness, or, if you like, one of excellence-is not itself an object of 
history. The natural and at the same time religious form of ethical life is family 
piety. In such a society the ethical consists in the members behaving toward 
each other not as individuals or persons with free will; and for this reason the 
family in itself lies outside the development from which history first emerges. 
But if this spiritual unit steps beyond the sphere of feeling and natural love and 
attains a consciousness of personality, we have before us that obscure and arid 
midpoint in which neither nature nor spirit is open and transparent, and for 
191 
which nature and spirit 1 can become open and transparent only through 
a further labor and a protracted formation of the will that is becoming 
conscious of itself. Openness pertains solely to consciousness, and it is to 
consciousness alone that God and anything at all can reveal itself; in their uue 
and universal form, which exists in and for itself, they can reveal themselves 
only to a consciousness that has become capable of meditative thinking. 
Freedom amounts to knowing and willing such universal and substantial 
objects as law and right, and producing an actuality that corresponds to 
the.m--the state. 
Peoples may have had a long life without a state before they finally reach 
dteir destination [of becoming one), and they may even have developed 
considerably in certain directions. But, as already indicated, this prehistory 
lies outside our purpose, irrespective of whether an actual history followed it 
or whether the peoples in question never finally succeeded in forming 
themselves into states. A great historical discovery, like char of a new 
world, has been made twenty or more [years} ago in regard to the Sanskrit 
language~~ the connection of the European languages with it. Ir has given 
us a_ new IOSight into the historical links between the Germanic peoples in 
pamcular and those of India, an insight that carries as much certainty with it 
as can be achieved in such matters. 81 Even at the present rime, we know of 
81. HcgeldOfSaot meotioobe tha _....._ ... di 
Eur 
Ia 
. 
. 
re 
t. ... u::r uoe 
srovery o{ the relations !up among the Indo· 
opeao 
nguag~ fnedrich Schlegel was one of the first to clarify this relario11ship iunher. 
114 

INTRODUCTION. 1830-) 
tribes that scarcely form a society, much less a state, but that have long 
been known to exist; and with others, although it is primarily their advanced 
condition that interests us, their traditions extend back before the history 
of the founding of their state, and they underwent numerous changes prior 
to this epoch. In the above-mentioned connection between the languages 
of peoples so widely separated [in space] and so 1 very different in religion, 
192 
political system, ethics, and in all aspects of spiritual and even physical 
culture (differences not onlv todav bur also in ancient times that we know 
about}, we see as a result. the i;refutable fact that these nations spread 
outwards from Asia and developed in disparate ways from a primordial 
kinship; and this is not something established by the popular method ot 
a rationalizing combination of circumstances great and small-a method 
that has enriched history with so many fabrications given out as faces. 
and will continue to do so, since alternative combinations of the same 
circumstances as well as with others are possible. In themselves, how-
ever, all such evidently disparate events lie outside history: they have 
preceded it. 
In our language the word 'history' ( Geschichte) combines both objective 
and subjective aspects and signifies the historia rerum gestarnm as well as 
the res gestae themselves, the historical narrative (Geschichtserziihlung) as 
well as the events (Geschehene), deeds, and happenings themselves-as-
pects that in the strict sense are quite distinct. This conjunction of the rwo 
meanings should be recognized as of a higher order than that of external 
contingency: we must assume that historical narrative appears simulta· 
neously with the actual deeds and events of hlsrory, that they are ser in 
motion together from an inner common foundation. Family memorials and 
patriarchal I traditions are of interest within the family or tribe. Their 
193 
repetitiveness is no object worthy of memory, although distinct deeds or 
tums of fate may inspire Mnemosyne to retain those images, jusr as love 
and religious feeling impel the fanciful imagination to confer shape upon 
such initially shapeless urges. But it is the stare that first supplies a content 
that nor only lends itself to the prose of history but also helps to produce ir. 
Instead of the merely subjective dictates of the ruler, which may suffice for 
the needs of the moment, a community in the process of coalescing and 
raising itself up ro the position of a stare requires commandments and laws. 
Bur Hegel's designation of the time when this discovery was made, a gO<XI twen~- vears prior 10 
the lectures of 1830-1, corresponds precisely wtth the publication in 1808 oi Schlegel'5 Spr4cht> 
und Weisheit der Jndier. At 1he ve~- beginning of his essa ,. Schlegel thematizes this relationship: 
~ 
KFSA viii. 115. 
115 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
general and universally valid directives. It thereby creates a discourse ~of its 
own development), and an interest in intelligible, inwardly determmate, 
and-in their results--enduring deeds and events, ones on which Mnemos-
yne, for the benefit of the perennial aim that underlies the present configu-
ration and constitution of the state, is impelled to confer a lasting memory. 
All deeper feelings such as love, as well as religious intuition and its fonns, 
are wholly present and satisfying in themselves; but the external existence 
of the state, with its rational laws and customs, is an incomplete present, 
the understanding of which caHs for incorporating the awareness of its past 
[history]. 
Those periods-whether we estimate them in centuries or millennia-
that elapsed in the life of peoples before history came to be wrinen, and that 
may well have been filled with revolutions, migrations, and the most turbu-
lent changes, have no objective history because they have no subjective 
194 
history, no historical narratives. It is not that narratives of such periods I 
have simply perished by chance; on the contrary, the reason why we have no 
such narratives is that none such were possible. It is only within a state that is 
conscious of its laws that clearly defined actions can take place, accompa-
nied by that dear awareness of them that makes it possible and necessary to 
preserve them in this way. It is obvious to anyone who begins to be familiar 
with the treasures of Indian literatwe that this country, so rich in spiritual 
achievements of a truly profound quality, nevenheless has no history. In this 
respect, it at once stands out in stark contrast to China~ an empire that 
possesses a most remarkable and detailed historical narrative going back to 
me earliest times. India has not [only) ancient religious books and splendid 
works of poetry but also ancient books of law, 82 something already men-
tioned as a prerequisite for the formation of history, and yet it has no history. 
But in this country the original organization that created social distinctions 
immediately became set in stone as natural determinations (the castes), so 
that, although the laws concern the civil code of rights, they make these 
rights dependent on distinctions imposed by nature, and they specify, above 
all, the position (in terms of injustices more than of rights) of these classes 
toward one another, i.e. only of the higher vis-a-vis the lower. The ethical 
element is thereby excluded from the splendor of Indian life and its realms. 
Given this bondage to an order based firmly and pennanently on nature, 
~~- Hegel alludes ~re to the so-called Laws of M~~m~, to which ne refers 5L"Veral times and in 
dcu.ilm his philosophy of religion lectures. See In.stillltes ofHirrdu lAw; ()1', The Ordinanus of 
Z!~:~na., l794);andLea.tresonthePbilosopbyof Religion, ii.346, 589-91 incl. n. 217, 
116 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
all social relations involve a wild arbitrariness, ephemeral impulses, or 
rather frenzies, without any purposeful progress and development. Thus, 
no thoughtful memory, no object for Mnemosyne presents itself, and a deep 
but desolate fantasy drifts over a region that ought to have had a fixed 
purpose-a purpose rooted in actuality and in subjective yet substantial 
(i.e. implicitly rational) freedom I -and thereby ought to have rendered 
195 
itself capable of history. 
As such a precondition for history, what happened is that so rich and 
immeasurable a work as the growth of families into tribes and of tribes into 
peoples-which have then expanded because of this increase, resulting 
presumably in many complications, wars, revolutions, and dedine~nly 
transpired without giving rise to history; and what is more, that the concom-
itant expansion and development of the realm of speech itself remained 
mute, taking place inaudibly and furtively. The evidence from monuments 
is that the languages spoken by uncivilized peoples have attained a high 
degree of development, and that the understanding has cast itself meaning-
fully, expansively, and fully into this theoretical region. An extensive and 
consistent grammar is the work of thinking, and irs categories are apparent in 
it. Further evidence indicates that, with the progressive civilization of society 
and the state, this systematic completeness of the understanding gradually 
erodes, and language thereupon becomes poorer and less refined-a peculiar 
phenomenon in that a progression that is inwardly spiritual and that promotes 
and cultivates rationality allows intellectual elaboration and precision to fall 
into neglect, finds it to be confining, and dispenses with it. Language is the 
activity of the theoretical intelligence in the proper sense, for it is the outward 
expression of it. Apart from language, the activities of memory and fantasy 
are only just inner manifestations. But this whole theoretical activity, together 
with its further development and the more concrete process that accompanies 
it-the dissemination of peoples, their separation from one another, their 
interminglings and their migrations-remains buried in the obscurity of 
a voiceless past; these are not acts of a will becoming conscious of itself, 
of a freedom giving itself another sort of exteriority I and a proper actuality. 
196 
Since they do not partake of this true element, all such changes, regardless 
of the language developmenr they cultivate, have nor attained to history. 
The precocious development of language and the progress and diffusion of 
nations have first acquired their significance and interest for concrete reason 
partly as they bear upon states, and partly as they themselves begin to form 
a state. 
After these remarks that have concerned the form taken by the beginning 
of world history and the prehistory that lies outside it, we must now indicate 
117 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
more precise}y the manner of its course [of development)-but for the 
present only in its formal aspects; the further determination of its concrete 
content is the task of the division of topics. 
d. The Course of Development of World History83 
It [world history], as we have indicated earlier,~
4 presents the development 
of spirit's consciousness of its freedom and of the actualization produced by 
such consciousness. This development is of itself a sequence of stages-a 
series of successive determinations of freedom that proceed from the concept 
of the matter, which in this case is the nature of freedom as ir become~ 
conscious of itself. The logical and even more the dialectical nature of the 
concept as such, i.e. the fact that it determines itself, posits determinations 
within itself and then sublates them, thereby attaining an affirmative, richer. 
and more concrete determination-this necessi.ty, and the necessary series ot 
pure and abstract conceptual determinations, are made known in philoso-
phy. Here we need only indicate that each stage, since it is different from the 
others, has its own peculiar determinate principle. In history, such a princi-
ple constitutes the determinate characteristic of the spirit of a people. This 
principle concretely expresses every aspect of a people's consciousness and 
will, of its entire actuality; it is the common feature of its religion~ its 
197 
political institutions, its ethical life, 1 its system of justice, its customs, as 
well as of its science~ art, and technical skill, and the direction of its industry. 
These special characteristics are to be understood in terms of the general 
characteristic. the particular principle of a people, just as vice versa this 
general particularity can be found in the factual detail that history sets 
before us. The question as to whether a specific particularity in fact consti-
tutes the distinctive principle of a people is one that can only be approached 
empirically and demonstrated by historical means·. 
To accomplish this, a trained capacity for abstraction and a thorough 
familiarity with ideas are both necessary. One must, so to speak, be familiar 
a priori with the sphere to which the principles belong, jusf as Kepler-to 
name the greatest exponent of this mode of cognition-had to be acquainted 
a priori with ellipses, cubes, and squares and with the conception~ 
concerning their relations before he could discover his immortal laws from 
83. The manusc:npt -~atk 'b. Course o{ World History (Gang der Weltgeschi.cbte~-. I[ thm 
rt"peats the wordmo ol 1U ma·1or ~~; 
'C' 
1-. 
· 
· 
'b" 
"' 
..... -.uon 
~auvve, p. 107) and overlooks 1ts prevwus 
Iabove, P· 1 10). We have designated as a separate section 'c' the dis.cussion of the begimung ol 
world history 1 above, p. 111\. 
84. ~above, pp. 87-9, 
118 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-t 
the empirical data;85 and the laws consist of definitions drawn from the 
indicated sphere of representations. Anyone who approaches such data 
without a knowledge of these elementary general definitions, however long 
he may contemplate the heavens and the movements of the celestial bodief>. 
can no more understand these laws than he could hope to formulate them 
himself. This unfamiliarity with conceptions concerning the self-developing 
shape of freedom (sich entwickelnden Gestaltens der Freiheit) is partly 
responsible for the objections to a philosophical consideration of a science 
[history] that usually confines itself to empirical matters-objections to its 
so-called a priori character and its importation of ideas into the (historical] 
material. Such thought-determinations or categories rhen appear to be 
something alien, nor present in the object. To a subjectively cultivared 
mind that is unfamiliar with thoughts and unaccustomed to using them, I 
198 
the categories do indeed appear alien and do not reside in the representation 
and understanding that have such a limited a view of the object. It is this that 
has given rise to the saying that philosophy does not understand (nicht 
verstehe) such sciences. Philosophy must indeed admit that it does not 
have the kind of understanding (Verstand) that prevails in those sciences-
i.e. that it does not proceed according to the categories of such an understanding. 
but according to the categories of reason ( Vernun{t}--although it is acquainted 
with the understanding and with its value and position. In the procedure of 
scientific understanding, it is likewise the case that the essential must be sepa· 
rated from the so-called nonessential and dearly distinguished from it. But this 
is impossible unless we know what is essentia4 and when world history as a 
whole is to be considered, the essential, as we indicated earlier,86 is precisely 
the consciousness of freedom and the detenninate phases in its developmenL 
Orientation to these categories is orientation to the truly essentiaL 
Some of the instances oi the more direct kind of contradiction to the 
comprehension of a determinate object in its universal aspects can usually be 
traced to an inability to grasp and understand ideas. If. in natural histol1·· 
some monstrous and abnormal specimen or mongrel is cited as an instance 
against clearly defined species and classes, we can rightly reply with a saying 
that is often used in an imprecise sense, that the exception proves rhe rule. 
namely, that the rule includes the particular conditions under which it 
applies, or that deficiency and hybridism occur in deviations from the 
85. johannes Kepler's 6rsr and second laws on the fj>Yolution o~ rhe_ planetS are set fonh in ni~ 
Cotnml!ntJrus on the Motions of Mars (1609),and his third law m h1s Harmrmy of the Wor~ 
(1619!. 
86. See above, pp. 87-8. 
119 

199 
200 
MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
norm. Nature is not strong enough 1 to preserve its general classes and 
species from other elemental factors and agencies. But, [although) the con-
stitution (Organisation) of the human being, for ex:ample, is comprehended 
in its concrete configuration, and the brain, the heart, and the like are 
specified as essential ingredients of its organic life, it is possible to adduce 
some wretched monster or freak that possesses a human shape in general or 
in part, and that bas even been conceived in a human body, gestated there, 
been born from it, and drawn breath from it, but which lacks a brain or 
heart. If such a specimen is quoted as a counterexample to the defining 
properties of an actual human constitution, then all we are left with is the 
abstract word 'human being' and its supetfi(ial definition. from which the 
representation of a concrete and actual human being is of course quite 
different: the latter must have a brain in its head and a heart in its breast. 
A similar situation arises when it is rightly maintained that genius, talent, 
moral virtues, moral sentiments, and piety can be encountered in every 
region, under all constitutions, and in all political circwnstances; and there 
is no lack of examples to prove this assertion. But if this means thar the 
distinctions that arise out of the self-consciousness of freedom are unimpor-
tant or nonessential in relation to the above-mentioned qualities, then {with 
such a view) reflection remains tied to abstract categories and waives any 
claim to determinate content because they provide no principle for it. 
The cuJtivated standpoint that adopts such formal poinrs of view affords 
unlimited scope for ingenious questions, learned opinions, 1 striking compar-
isons, and seemingly profound reflections and declamations----ones that can 
become aU the more brilliant the more they resort to indefiniteness~ and can be 
ever more perpetually refwbished and modified the less they achieve great 
results in their efforts or arrive at anything solid and rational. In rhis sense, we 
might compare the familiar Indian epic poems,87 if you like, with those of 
Homer, and argue perhaps that, since the magnitude of fantasy is the rest of 
poetic genius, they are superior to the latter; in the same way, similarities 
between certain fanciful ttaits or attributes of the deities have led some to 
f~l_iusrified in identifying figures of Greek mythology with those of India.88 
Snrularly, the philosophy of China, insofar as it takes the One as its basis, 
has been equated with what later appeared as the Elearic philosophy or the 
87- Hegel was tamdta.r with the Ramayana and 1he Mahabharau, as i~ evident irom hls 
Le.ture5 on the Philo5ophy of Religion· see ii. 342 n 2~7 344 
282 593 
230 59"' incl. 
n. 144. 603. 
' 
· ' ' 
n. 
• 
n. 
• 
' 
88. This c~~rison is found frequently. See esp. Schlegel, Sf"' ache und Weisheit der lndier, 
163-41KfSAvnL 263); also Le Catboliqw 9: 5-19. See also Ll 
96 
,. 
IJIII: ow.,n •
. 
120 

INTRODUCTION, 18 30-1 
Spinozistic system;89 and since it also expresses itself in abstract nwnbers and 
lines, some have claimed to detect Pythagorean philosophy or even Christian 
dogma in it.90 Examples of bravery, indefatigable courage, qualities of magna-
nimity. self-denial and self-sacrifice, etc., which are encountered in the mosr 
savage and the most faint-hearted of nations, are deemed sufficient for the view 
that there is as much and even more ethical life and morality in such nations as 
in the most civilized Christian states, and so on. In this regard, some have seen 
fit to doubt whether hwnan beings have become better with the progress of 
hisrory and of culture in general, and whether their morality has increased-
the assumption being that morality depends on subjective intentions and 
opinions, on what the agent considers Jega.l or criminal, I good or evil, and 
201 
not on what is considered to be legal and good or criminal and evil in and for 
itself or in terms of a particular religion that is regarded as true.91 
Here we can spare ourselves from illumining the formalism and error of 
such attitudes, and from establishing the true principles of moraliry, or 
rather of ethical life, in opposition to false morality. For world history 
moves on a higher plane than that to which morality belongs: the proper 
sphere of the latter is that of private conviction, the conscience of indivi-
duals, and their own will and mode of action; these have their value, 
imputation,92 and reward or punishment on their own terms. Whatever is 
required and accomplished by the final end of spirit (an end that subsists in 
and for itself), and whatever providence does, transcends the duties, liability. 
and expectation that attach to individuality by virtue of its ethical life. Those 
who, on ethical grounds, and hence with a nobler intention, have resisted 
what the progress of the idea of the spirit necessitated, stand higher in moral 
worth than those whose crimes may in some higher order have been trans-
formed into means of putting the will of this order into effect. When the 
89. Hegel could be referring to a work by Gonlob Benjamin Jii.sche, Der Pantheisi7UIS MCh 
seinen verschiedenen Hauptformen, seinem Ursprung Ullli Fortgange, Sl!i'Mffl speculativtm smd 
praktischen Werth und Gehalt; see i {Berlin, 1816), 5. 
90. In his Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion Hegel refen in this conne<tioo to a work b' 
Abei·Ri:musat that he probably has in view here as welL See Jean Pierre Abei·R~musar. 
Memoires sur la vie et /es opinions des Lao-Tseu {Paris, 1823), 40-9. 
91. Hegel alludes here to a theme that through Rousseau's first discourse_ became m~h 
diS~:ussed in the late Enlighumment. Sre jean-Jacques Rousseau. D•~o:urs qut a ro:mporte le 
prix a l"Academie de Diion (Geneva, n.d.). Rut whether He~el read the first or the !>eeond 
discourse himself is uncerrain. 
92. The German reads Imputation. In rhe ne~ sentence the expression lmputations-Fahig-
keit occurs. which is best translated as 'liabilitv' Oitera!ly, 'capable of bemg charged o_r 
Imputed'); and the Janet is followed by the tenn Zumutung. meaning 'demand'. 'c:-xpea.ataoo · 
or 'imputation'. Imputation is the Latin equivalent of the C".ermanic Zumut:u"g, and It nugfn be 
translated here as 'expectation'. 
121 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
tables are turned in this way, however, both groups are subject to ruin, and 
this is thus merely a formal kind of justice that is upheld by the defenders of 
legaliustification-a justice already relinquished by the living spirit and by 
God. The deeds of the great human beings-who are the individuals of 
world history-thus appear justified not only in the significance of what 
they do unselfconsciously themselves, but also from the standpoint of the 
[larger} world. But from the latter standpoint, demands must not be placed 
202 
upon world-historical deeds and 1 their agents deriving from moral spheres 
that are not pertinent. The litany of private virtues--modesty, humility, love 
of humanity, generosity, etc.-must not be raised against them. World 
history might well disregard completely the sphere to which morality and 
the much discussed and misunderstood dichotomy between morality and 
politics belong, not merely by refraining from judgments-for the principles 
of world history and the necessary relationship of actions to these principles 
already constitute the judgment-but also by ignoring individuals altogether 
and leaving tbem unmentioned; for what it has to record are the deeds of the 
spirits of the peoples, and the individual configurations that these deeds have 
assumed on the soil of external actuality could well be left to ordinary 
historians. 
The same formalism as that found in morality makes use of the ill-defined 
aspects of genius, poetry, and even philosophy, and finds these in similar 
fashion in everything. These aspects are products of reflective thought; and 
culture consists of the ability to operate skillfully with such generalities, to 
get down to essential distinctions, to highlight them and give them labels, 
but without bringing out the true depth of their content. Culture is some-
thing fonnal in that its sole aim, irrespective of content, is to divide the latter 
mto its component parts and to comprehend these in thought-out definitions 
and configwations; it is not the free universality that would enable it to 
make itself the object of its own consciousness (which is something that 
belongs to culture as such). Such a consciousness of thought itself and of the 
fo~s of thought in isolation from any material, is philosophy, for whose 
eX!st~nce culture is admittedly a prerequisite; but the function of culture 
consiSts merely in clothing whatever content it has before it in the form of 
203 
universality, I so that the two are inseparably united within it-so insepar-
abl! tha.t it regards its content (which, through the analysis of one represen-
tanon uno a ~ultirude of representations, can be expanded to an 
Immeasurable nchness) as a purely empirical content in which thought 
plays no ~n. Rut it is just as much an act of thought, and indeed of the 
un~er.standing, to reduce to a simple representation (such as 'earth', 'human 
bemg etc. or 'Alexander' 'C 
') 
b. 
. . 
' 
' 
• 
aesar an o )ect that m Itself encompasses a 
122 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
rich and concrete content, and to designate it by a single word, as it is an act 
of thought to analyze it, to isolate [the qualities] contained in such a 
representation, and to bestow particular names on them. All this [has to be 
saidJ to avoid making ill-defined and empty pronouncements on culture. 
But to return co the view that originally occasioned these remarks, it is at 
least clear that, just as reflection produces the universal conceptions of 
genius, talent, art, science, etc., and equally general observations about 
them, fonnal culture at every stage of spiritual configuration not only can 
but also must make its appearance, grow, and blossom out to the full; for 
each such stage must develop itself into a [political} state and, from this basis 
of civilization, advance to reflective understanding and to forms of univer-
~aiity, both in laws and in all other things. Political life as such necessarily 
involves formal culture and hence also the establishment of the sciences and 
ot a fully developed poetry and art in generaL Moreover, what we call the 
fine arts, indeed in their technical aspects, require a civilized common life of 
human beings. Poetry, which has less need of external means and supports, 
and whose medium is the voice, the element produced immediately from 
spirit's existence, I emerges in all its boldness and with a highly developed 
204 
power of expression even in the circumstance where a people does not live 
under a shared legal system; for as already remarked,93 language by itseU 
attains to a high cultivation of the understanding outside the bounds of 
civilization. 
Philosophy, too, must make its appearance in political life. For that which 
confers culture upon a content is, as already mentioned, the form proper to 
thought itself; but philosophy is simp1y the consciousness of this form itself, 
the thinking of thinking, so that the distinctive material for its edifice is 
already prepared in the general culture. And in the developmenr of the state 
itself, periods must occur in which the spirit of nobler natures is driven to flee 
from the present into ideal regions to find in them the reconciliation with 
itself that it can no longer enjoy in an actuality that is internally divided; for 
rhe reflective understanding attacks all those sacred and profound elements 
that were naively introduced into the religion, laws, and customs of peoples, 
and debases and dilutes them into abstract and godless generalities. Thought 
is then impelled to become thinking reason, and to seek and accomplish in irs 
own element the undoing of the destruction that it brought upon itself. 
Thus, in all world-historical peoples, we do indeed encoumer poetry, fine 
an, science. and also philosophy. But these differ not only in their rone, sryle, 
93. See above, p. 117. 
123 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
and orientation as such, but even more in their import or substance; and this 
substance involves the most important difference of all, that of rationality. It 
is pointless for a presumptuous aesthetic criticism to insist that the subject 
matter, i.e. the substance of the content, should not determine our pleasure, 
and to argue that beauty of fonn as such, imaginative greatness, and the like. 
205 
are the aims of fine art 1 and what must be taken into consideration and 
appreciated by a liberal disposition and cultivated mind.~
4 If the substance 
irself is insignificant, or wild and fantastic or absurd, a healthy common 
sense cannot bring itself to set aside such features so as to derive enjoyment 
from such a work. For even if one ranks the Indian epic poems as highly as 
Homer's on account of numerous formal qualities---greatness of invention 
and imagination, vividness of imagery and sentiments, beauty of diction, 
etc.-they nevertheless remain utterly different in their content with its 
substantial element, and in the interest of reason, which simply concerns 
the consciousness of the concept of freedom and its expression in indivi-
duals. There is not only a classical form [of poetry) but also a classical 
content; moreover, form and content are so intimately connected in works 
of an that the form can only be classical insofar as the content is classical. If 
the content is fanciful, not internally self-limiting, then the form becomes 
wild, measureless, and formless, or awkward and trivial. The rational ele-
ment is what contains within itself both measure and goal. 
In the same way, it is possible to draw parallels between Chinese and 
Indian philosophy [on the one hand], and the Eleatic, Pythagorean, and 
Spinozistic philosophies, or even all of modern metaphysics [on the otherj, 
for all of them do indeed base themselves on the One or on unity, the wholly 
abstract universal. But such a comparison or indeed equivalence is highly 
superficial: it overlooks the one factor on which everything depends, the 
determinacy of the unity in question; and this involves an essential distinc-
tion, whether the unity is to be understood in an abstract or in a concrete 
sense~oncrete to the point of being unity in itself, which is spirit. Those 
w~o treat these as equivalent merely prove that they recognize only abstract 
umty; and although they pass judgment on philosophies, they are ignorant of 
what constitutes the interest of philosophy. 
Rut in all the diversity in the substantial content of a culture there are also 
206 
spheres that remain the same. This diversity concerns 1 thinking reason~ 
freedom. whose self-consciousness is this reason, has one and the same root 
. 
94
- Hegel is not rngaged here in general reflections on aesthetic criticism but rather.. as the 
lollowmg !>entences reveal, in a critique once again of the mmparison of lnd•an poem· with 
Homenc. See above, n. 88. 
· 
124 

INTRODUCTION, 1830-1 
as thinking. Since, in distinction from animals, human beings alone think. 
they alone possess freedom, and they possess it solely because they 
are thinking beings. Consciousness of freedom consists in rhe fact that the 
individual comprehends himself as a person, i.e. sees himself in his singular 
existence as inwardly universal, as capable of abstraction from and renunci-
ation of everything particula~ and therefore as inwardly infinite. A feature 
these substantial [cultural] differences have in common is spheres that 
accordingly lie outside this comprehension [of freedom]. 
Even morality, which is so closeJy connected with the consciousness of 
freedom. can be quite pure while still lacking any such consciousness; for ir 
may simply enunciate universal duties and rights as objective command-
ments, or even as commandments that remain purely negative. by formal!~· 
imposing a renunciation of the sensuous and of all sensuous motives. Since 
the Europeans have become acquainted with Chinese morality and with the 
writings of Confucius, it has received rhe highest praise and the mosr 
flattering acknowledgment of its merits from those who are familiar with 
Christian morality;95 in the same way, the sublimity is acknowledged with 
which the Indian religion and poetry (of at least the higher sort), and in 
particular the Indian philosophy, express and require the removal and 
sacrifice of sensuous things.96 Yet these two nations are lacking~indeed 
completely lacking-in the essential self-consciousness of the concept 
of freedom. The Chinese look on their moral rules as if they were laws of 
nature, positive external commandments, mandatory rights and duties, or 
rules of mutual courtesy. I Freedom, through which the substantial deter-
207 
minations of reason can alone be translated into ethical attitudes, is absent; 
morality is a political matter that is administered by governrnem officials 
and courts of law. Their works on the subject are not books of legal statutes 
but are addressed to the subjective will and disposition. Similar to the moral 
writings of the Stoics, they read like a series of precepts that are supposed to 
9 5. As a prominent example of this praise of Chinese morality, see Christian Wolff, Orat1o de 
Sinarum philmaphia practica (Frankfun am Main, 1726). 
~6. Here as elsewhere, Hegel hesitates to assign to the Indian religion and poetn" tht" 
pr!!dicau of 'sublimity' (Erhabenheit), whose proper place (or him is found in the reli~tion and 
poetry of IsraeL See the comrast in his Lectures on the Philosophy of Religio,., iJ. 136-7. as well 
as in his Aesthetics: Lectures on Fine Art, IL T. M. Knox (Oxford, 19751 •. 371-7. On the 
evaluarion of Indian poercy as 'sublime', see Herder's preface to a work he ediu·d. S.zkontala 
oder Der Ent5cheidende Ring: Eirr lndi5ches Sch.zu:;piel l'O" Ko~lidas !Frankiun am ~latn. 
1803), pp. xxx-xxxviii, esp. xxxi Uohann Gottiried Herdec. Sdmmllichl' Werke. xxi1· {Berlin. 
1886), 577). See also Schlegel, Sprache und Weishl'il, 213-tS (KFSA \·ii1. H 1-131, alrhvu~ 
Schlegel does not speak specifically of 'sublimi~·'. 
125 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
be necessary for the attainment of happiness, so that the free will that 
confronts them appean to decide to follow them or not. So we then have 
for the Chinese, as for the Stoic moralists, the image of an abstract sub;ect, 
the wise man., as the culmination of such doctrines. And in the Indian 
doctrine of the renunciation of sensuality,. desires, and earthly interests, 
affirmative ethical freedom is not the goal and end, but rather the annihila-
tion of consciousness, a spiritual and even physical stagnation. ~
7 
'J1. lt1 the ~~'to 
the trfd of the ~1: Love -
126 

LOOSE SHEETS 
ALSO SPECTACLES OF ENDLESS COMPLEXITIES 
also spectacles of endless complexities 
- misery, misfortune, evil - transitoriness, only sorrow -
displeaswe~ 
regret - looking away with dread 
fJ{j - • this appearance combines need and passion - means - realm of 
contingency 
providence, means - if the passions surrendered - badly ordered with the 
execution 
which connection between final end and means 
thus represent- insight (into] the universal- a) universal final end- not 
completed for itself 
~) through human beings - activity - abstract law -
need, passion, interest - as its subjective end - interest 
attaining, willing only its end 
~) virtue, morality 
a.) absolute right of world spirit 
/3) realm of contingency 
if we thus as means - spectacle of the world 
-absolute final end- morality, vinue- perish 
in particular spheres -
if its right-
co,flict, destruc:tion falls into these particu~~Jr (spheres] 
this activity in general the inner means for the end 
con;unction of an end with the activity in the interest of the subject -
so universal final end - reason with activity interest of human beings- but 
distinction of consciousness from it - and unconsciousness -
here inasmuch as we believe, reason rules the world - it in the deeds of 
human beings, although unconsciously- that through their actions some-
thing else is accomplished at the same rime - comes forth as they know and 
will immediately - still more is in it - they have their particular end, their 
interest 
different example in one [instance} - arson that kills - follows only 
iusti(ied revenge - good intention - - bur at the same time crime 
-misfortune of a city- human beings 
127 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
external nexus 
cunning of reason 
so we must envisage [it] for ourselves as such - the connection not made 
conaptually - the more particular end in it a universal determination 
but the singular, external - connected with the inner, universal - this the 
action- crime- the universal determination [of] character and punishment, 
unintentional or unselfconsciously righteous, vinuous - does not know that 
it virtuous- knows morally; this knowledge - removes at least half of 
210 
virtue- a closer 1 example from history- CaeSIW master over his [political] 
enemies, alongside whom he could no longer exist -but his personal enemies 
connection with the Senate-fights them in the process of making himself the 
sole ruler of Rome - but inwardly, inherently - not only makes himself 
secure but secures undivided sovereignty over Rome 
211 
great human beings in world history I 
212 
C. COURSE [OF WORLD HISTORY} 
a) development in general -spirit (humanity matures) 
must make itself into 
come to consciousness of what it is in itself 
to its concept -
labor of spirit in world history - perfectibility -development 
fl) world history portrays spirit's stages -easy, stages of this consciousness 
- rhe whole of world history employed to this end -to enjoy a specification -
familiar to us, the fact that the human being is free- already introduced -
every f~Jtcific stage- allotted to a specific nation- appears as a distinctive 
principle 
ua) in history likewise as natural determinacy -distinctiveness as national 
-(philosophy in thoughts) 
11) deep beautiful sensation 
~) uses of WOTid history - learn from experience 
Y) - examples- - Greeks, Romans, North Americans 
~fJ) world-historical people- the mightiest -that stands at the highest 
stage of each era - outer 
n-) this world-historical people in itself, course of development of the 
world I 
- only once - a great many peoples not world-historical - they stand in 
good stead only briefly, in a specific period 
128 

LOOSE SHEETS 
y) type of conneaion of peoples- series appears in the world -sous terre, 
mole - a.a) as a totality -
inner necessity, that existing 
so - geographicaJ allotment of the natural determinacy of peoples, a 
whole-
they have not formed this 
needless development within itself 
flfl) in history - only what static -
among the developed states, Chinese, Indian 
- principle of rest - unfreedom -
wuest of freedom - reflection is connecting with the other 
- the former static, only presupposes itself, not an other 
not turned outward 
beginning thereof 
Persians - against Greece -
revolutions, violence, 
intelligence, gradual improvement from within outward in the Prussian 
state, yet also 1806 and proceedings in France -
not utility - but enjoyment of reason 
form ot beginning and prehistorical excluded 
beginning with formation of states 
philosophical consideration alone worthy - in accord with taking up 
history where rationality begins to appear in worldly existence- I not 
213 
where it is still only a possibility in itself- the in-itself here to historical 
existence - what is rational in itself, to know this other philosophical 
sciences, 
unorganic, unconscious dullness or mastery 
(whether] it be wild or tame, mild-
a condition in which reason brings itself to existence -
the [reason] of freedom, i.e., of good and evil and therewith of law 
society-
natural - ethical - family piety 
history res gesta, historia - where with consciousness and deed 
history of stare, and only here for the fust time history even exists -
language is its highest theoretical existence - forerunner - before will 
forms to universality 
- self-conscious freedom to infinite content -
its existence presupposes (formed) society 
worth 
state 
129 

MANUSCRIPTS OF THE INTRODUCTION 
law, fRedom, even religion bas a universal object, thus law-
and freedom wants only such a universal object- condition 
will therefore the state 
opposition of the Indian and Chinese - the former no history, no forma· 
214 tion of the state- I 
prehistory lies outside our specification -
the highest deed of intellect (c>raward expression of it) 
amazing aspect of development - it is itself no 
more recent history as such 
indwelling the pure theoretical ground of peoples - who resorted to their 
understanding; 
Sf4te. intelligence worthy of Mnemosyne -
Homer calls upon it in his Iliad1 -
suppositions, infermces are no facta 
memories, thoughts in the peoples 
first genuine interest - also outer universality of recollection and 
preservation 
loud talk insidiously silent 
l. Hegel is apparmdy thiokios bere DOt so much of the Iliad u o( the fuSI ten vencs of tht 
Odyssey ltr. E. V. Rieu. mo. D. C. H. Rieu (London, 2003 ), 3 ). 
130 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 


INTRODUCTION: THE CONCEPT OF WORLD IDSTORY 
The subject of ow lecrures is universal world history. Out concern is with 
world histocy itself, not with reflections about it; it is with its origin and 
progression, not with how we might consider it as a set of examples. 
We want to give a preliminary representation of what the philosophical 
history of the world is, and for this purpose we shall explore the other 
customary ways of treating history. This survey is only a vecy brief one. 
The types of treatment are three in number: first, original history (the word 
'history' in Gennan contains the double meaning of res gestae and the 
narration of them 1 ); second, reflective history; and thir~ philosophict:ll 
history.2 
TilE 1YPES OF TREATMENT OF HISTORY 
Original History 
3 
Writers such as Herodotus and Thucydides belong to the first or original 
history. They merely wrote down the events that they experienced and 
described the deeds of which they were aware. These writers, therefore, 
belonged to the spirit of their age; they participated in it and described it. 
What they accomplished was to transpose what took place into the realm of 
intellectual I representation; in this way, what was at first something at 
4 
hand (ein Vorhandenes), something existent and transitory (ein SeienJes, 
VO'f"i4bergehendes), became something represented intellectually (geistig Vor--
gesteUten). The poet prepares his material for sensible more than for intel· 
lectual representation. With him the main work is his own; likewise with 
these historians. For such writers of original history, the reports of others 
that are available to them are an ingredient, but these ace subordinated, 
suppressed~ and dispersed; for the main work (the masterpiece) is the work 
of the historian himself. These historians bring this primary material, which 
was transitory and consisted of scattered memories, into a finn and enduring 
1. The German word for 'history', Geschichte, is related 10 the verb gescbehtm, 'to bappm' « 
'occur'. and thus refers to 'things that bappen' (res ~)t but it also, lik~ lbt &gijslt wonl. 
means 'story'. 
Z. For the 6tst two types rompare me manusaip .&agmem of 1122. 1828. 
133 

THE. LECTURE.S OF 1822-3 
representation; they link together what rushes past fleetingly and set it up in 
the temple of Mnemosyne so that it may be immortal.3 Legends and folk-
songs must be excluded from history, for they are but obscure means of 
establishing what has happened. They are the representations of peoples 
with an inherently dim awareness, and for that reason such peoples are 
excluded from world history. In world history we have principally to do 
with peoples who knew what they were and what they desired-people~ 
who were thoroughly cultivated. Poems do not belong here either because 
they lack historical truth; they do not have as their content determinate 
actuality. They are not the concern of a people that has arrived at a firm 
identity and a developed individuality. A people first belongs to history when 
it possesses a determinate consciousness, a personality. The history of a 
people properly begins with the formation of its consciousness. 
The original historians transplant the events that were contemporaneous 
to them from the soil of the past onto a better soil, that of a stable cepresen-
5 
ration, and such is the distinctive character of their work. I Such a history 
cannot be very extensive because its material consists of what the historian 
has to some extent participated in, experienced, or at any event been con-
temporaneous with. Such perceptions (Anschauungen) and features taken at 
face value (unre/lektierte Zuge) are what he portrays as posterity envisages 
them. ln such a history the cultural formation of the author and his spirit, as 
well as of the deeds that he narrates-( thus the formation) of his spirit and of 
the actions described by him-are one and the same. Therefore he does not 
have to reflect on them; he stands and lives in the material itself, doe!> not 
elevate himself above it. 
Here we shall indicate more precisely what also apphes to later ages. Only 
in ages when the cultural formation of a people is more advanced do great 
differences in culture as well as in political conditions appear, which arise 
from the differentiation of classes. The writer of the original history must 
therefore belong to the same class as the one that produced the events and 
the deeds he intends to recount. To be an original historian, he must be a 
general or statesman. Reflection is excluded because the author is identical 
3. Herodoius describes the purpose of his history with a poweriul metaphor: 'that 1ime rna' 
n~I draw the- color from what man has set mto being'. Herodotm, The Historv 1.1 ltr. David 
Grene ICh•cago. 1987). 331. For Hegel the 'original hsstorians' are those who have an onginal. 
1.e. ammc-d•att' and prereflecti,-e, relationship to the things that happened. transpostng fleeung 
e\·ents mto the endunng mode of representation IVorstellung). 
134 

INTRODUCTION 
with the material. If the spirit of the material itself involves a certain level of 
culture, then the historian must be cultured too. The author of an age with a 
certain culture must be aware of its fundamental principles, for he lives in an 
age that is self-aware. The spirit of his age is aware of itself and of the 
purposes of its actions, the evidence for its principles. Thus the historian 
must be aware of them. 
Another aspect to consider is that actions I also manifest themselves 
6 
as words (Reden) because they themselves operate on representation; such 
words are like actions and constitute an essential part of history. This 
includes above all the utterances (Reden) of individuals to peoples and vice 
versa. If they do not become living words, if they do not lead to deeds and are 
[not] likewise heeded, then they remain empty and inconsequential chatter. 
Thus the historian must incorporate such utterances; they contain reflections 
about the age and its purposes and provide information about its principles. 
sparing the historian any need for his own reflections. He lives in the 
reflections that are the reflections of the age. If he also has composed such 
speeches (Reden), they are still speeches of his age. Since he exists within the 
spirit of his activity and the culture of his age, what he expounds is the-
consciousness of the age. The historian thus presents the maxims of the age 
through the speeches [he composes). Such writers deserve to be studied. 
Thus in Thucydides we read speeches of Pericles and utterances of foreign 
peoples-speeches that contain the maxims of the basic principles of the 
peoples and their reflections about themselves. In these presentations rhe 
writer provides the reflection of the age itself, not his own reflection abour 
the material. These speeches roo are to be regarded as something completel~· 
original. If we want to become acquainted with the spirit of such peoples, to 
live among the peoples themselves, then we must spend time with these 
wmers, become familiar with them, and obtain a picture of the age at first 
hand. Whoever wants a quick dose of history can find that to be sufficient. 
[Original historical] writers are not as common as we would like to think. 
Herodotus, the founder of history, is one of them. We have mentioned 
Thucydidcs. Xenophon, who describes the retreat {of the ten thou§and]. 
and Caesar's Commentaries, belong here too.4 I But original historians of 
7 
this kind arc found in our own day as well, although ow modern culture 
also involves dealing with events by assimilating them representationally, 
apprehending them in commentaries, and transforming them inro stories 
( Geschichten). These too can have the character of originality. In particular. 
4. On Herodotus, Thucvdides, Xenophon, and Caesar, see the IntroductorY Fragment C 182!. 
1828), nn. 4, 10, 11, 13. 
135 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
the French have produced numerous memoirs, more so than hav~ ~t~er 
nations. The terrain on which such men labor contains many triv1ahues, 
intrigues, passions, petty interests. But exceptions are found here as well. 
There are always masters who labor on a larger field, for example, the clever 
work of Cardinal de Retz. 5 In Germany the works of men who live in the age 
[about which they write] are found but rarely, although the memoirs of 
Frederick ll6 are an exception. It is not enough to have been present at the 
events; rather one must have been positioned within the spirit of large 
political operations and world events. 
Reflective History 
The second type consists of the reflective historians; their ponrayals go 
beyond the [historian's own) present and are of several varieties. 
[1.) What one expects from them above all is a survey of the whole of a 
people or of world history. These are of necessity compilations of already 
existing historical writings and repons of others; the language is not that of 
observers or of eye-witnesses. Every world history is necessarily like this. 
The more specific type of compilation depends on its purpose. Livy belongs 
8 
here, also Johannes von Muller's Schweizer I Geschichte.7 If well done, 
they are meritorious and indispensable. It is very difficult to state a norm 
for this type of treatment. The historian tries to make it possible for readers 
to hear the voices of contemporaries to the events. But these attempts 
ordinarily fail more or less and come to grief because the whole should 
convey a single tone, whereas the spirit and culture of diverse times are not 
uniform; for one always remains a single individual 'mirroring the spirit of 
one's own time'. The spirit of the time in which the historian writes is 
different from the spirit of the rime that is to be described. Livy describes 
h.is battles in the minutest details that either were anachronistic or could 
nave occurred at any time. likewise, the speeches of the ancient Icings as he 
repons them could only have taken place in the age of Roman [law and] 
lawyers; they contrast greatly with the age in which they are supposed to 
have been given and are incompatible with itS lesser maturity. In some 
5. Jean Fra~ois Paul de Gondi, Cardinal of Retz, was Coadjutor of rhe Archbishop of Paris 
md a leader oi the Fronde. His three volumes of Memoires appeared in 1717. 
o. Frederick 11, the Great, Historre de rnon temps 1 1746); Memoires pOIIT servrr a l'histoire de 
LJ m.Jison de Brandebcntrg 11751 ). 
7. joha.JlMS voo MUller, Die GeS£hid7u der Schwerurischm Eidgenossensc.ha(l, 5 vols. 
(leipzig, 1786-18081. 
136 

INTRODUCTION 
periods the delivery of speeches is grand, in others it is quite deficient. The 
fable told by Menenius Agrippa is natural enough, 8 but other speeches are 
rather awkward. The difference between a compiler and an original histo-
rian can be most clearly seen by comparing Polybius and Livy. A similarlv 
unfortunate attempt to make it seem that one has lived in the age in which 
the events occurred is found in johannes von Muller's Schweizer Geschichte, 
which has a somewhat wooden and pedantic quality with its artificial and 
affected antiquity; it is not original as compared with the original historian 
Tschudi.9 A history that covers a long period of time and large epochs must 
by its very nature resort to abstractions and generalities: for example, a 
battle was lost or won, a city was besieged in vain, and so on. As a result, 
such a history becomes very dry and uniform, but this is in the nature of the 
case. I Reflective history by its very nature takes a large body of concrete 
9 
details and reduces them to abstract representations. 
[2.] A second type of reflective history is the so-called pragmatic histori-
ography. When we have to do with the past, and are concerned with a 
distant and reflected world, spirit finds irself in need of a present-a present 
that it produced by its own activity as compensation for its efforts; and this 
present is found in the understanding. The occurrences of history are diverse; 
but what is universal and inward, the relationship between events, the 
universal spirit of the circumstances, is something enduring and ageless, a 
perpetual presence that sublares the past and renders the events contempo-
rary. These pragmatic reflections are enlivening; they bring the distant past 
into the present. Whether they are enlivening and of interest depends on the 
author's particular spirit. General relationships and chains of circumstances 
become, to a greater or lesser degree, the objects of description; they become 
themselves the events; it is the universal that appears, no longer- the particu-
lar. If, to the contrary, we should want to make countless individual events 
the topic of these universal reflections, that would be tasteless, ineffective, 
and fruitless. But if general conditions are treated in such a way that the 
entire context of an event is comprehended, this is taken as evidence of the 
intellect of the author, of the mind of such a historian. 
Here we should mention in particular the moral reflections and instruc· 
tions that arise from history and 1 with which one often cloaks history. 
10 
Moral reflections are very often regarded as the essential purpose of the 
8. On the fable tOld bv Menenius Agrippa (consul in 503 BC) about tht Bdlv and the Ltm~. 
see livy, Historwrl4m Jibri, ed. l. F. Gronovii (Lyons, 1645), i. 114 (2..1.1..5-121: on lt~"~ 
description of battles, ~e i. 274-7 (4.32-4). 
9. Aegidius Tscbudi, Chroniam Helveticum, 2 vols. (Basel, 173~1. 
137 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
study of history. In brief, examples of the good elevate the heart or disposi-
tion of young people in particular and are often cited because they exemplify 
the good more concretely. Such examples are to be employed in moral 
instruction as concrete representations of universal moral principles. But 
the fate of peoples and the ovenh.row of states occur on a different plane 
than that of morality, a higher and broader one. The methods of moral 
instruction are very simple and of no use [on the broader plane of history]. 
The biblical history is sufficient for moral instruction, which has no need for 
so large a plane (as that of world history]. The reference here is to experi-
ence. Statesmen, sovereigns, and generals are referred to history; but in the 
complexities of world history and the affairs of the world it is often seen that 
simple moral laws are inadequate. History and experience teach that peoples 
generally have not learned from history. Each people lives in such particular 
circumstances that decisions must and are made with respect to them, and 
onJy a great figure (Charakter) knows how to find the right course in these 
circumstances. This [figure embodies] the character of the age, which is 
always unique. Peoples find themselves in such an individual circumstance 
that earlier conditions never wholly correspond to later ones because the 
11 
situations are so different. The moral law applies 1 to simple interests and 
private circumstances, and these I do not need to learn from history. In the 
case of moral laws, the core element in all such situations is exhaustively 
covered by such a law. Here I am instructed once and for all. 
Under the press of world event~ such simple principles do not hold good 
because the conditions are never the same and what is taken from memory 
cannot prevail against the vitality of the moment; memory has no power in 
the new situation of the present. History is formative, bur in a wholly 
different way. The fonnative power of history is something other than the 
reflections derived from it. Orators advocate study [of the past]; but calling 
upon the activity and deeds of the Romans or the Greeks with respect to 
modem political circumstances has always led to distortions. No case is 
entirely similar to another, and parity never applies in individual situations; 
as a result~ what is best in one case is not so in another. The circumstances 
and conditions of different peoples are never completely similar. The intent 
ot me Schweizer Geschichte of Johannes von Muller, for example, is a moral 
one; to this end he laid out a whole collection of reflections, and conse-
quently his work is boring. His conceptions are supc=rficial; he collects a mass 
ot propositions that are then distributed at random throughout the narrative 
a.s he sees fit. Such reflections may indeed show that the author is well-
meaning, but they also reveal the superficiality of his thoughts. Reflections 
must therefore be 
interesting and even concrete; only thorough 
138 

INTRODUCTION 
'ontemplation of events can make reflections interesting. The meaning of the 
idea as it interprets itself constitutes the true interest. This is the case with 
Montesquieu, 10 who is at once thorough and profound. However, everyone 
thinks himself smart enough I to be able to make such reflections, and thus 
12 
a superlluity of such reflective histories arises. We thus turn back to the 
simple proposition of merely narrating what happens with precision and 
truth. Precisely crafted descriptions and narratives of this kind are of great 
merit: but for the most part they merely provide material for others. We 
Germans are satisfied with that and want to live in the past. The French by 
contrast generate descriptions themselves and seek to treat them with in-
genuity; as a consequence they are to a lesser extent thorough historians. 
They always see the past in terms of the present. 
[3.J A third type of reflective history, which has been developed especially 
in our age, is critical. Critical history is not so much history itself but rather 
a history of the narratives of history and an evaluation of them. Niebuhr's 
R&mische Geschichte11 is written in that way; he treats the narratives in light 
of the actual circumstances and draws conclusions from them. The aspect of 
the present that is foWld here consists in the acumen of the author, who dcaws 
conclusions regarding the credibility of reports in renns of all the circum-
stances. The French have accomplished much that is basic and beneficial in 
this regard. With us the so--called higher criticism has taken possession of 
history and has sought to supplant the more circumspect historiography; 
having abandoned the soil of history, it has made room for the most arbitrary 
representations, 1 digressions, fantasies, and combinations. Attempts are 
13 
made to bring these most arbitrary elements into history. Til.is too is a way 
of bringing the present into the past. The present that is advanced in this way 
rests on subjective fancies that are all the more striking the less they have 
any basis. 
[4.] FinaJiy rhere is a history that annoWlces itself as something that is 
partly abstractive; it is indeed abstractive, but at the same rime it forms a 
transition to philosophical world history. This rype is a special history within 
a universal outlook: it is extracted from the whole matrix of Wliversality, 
(:UIIed from the wealth of a people's life. But it also involves a particular 
aspect. Owing to today's culture, it has gained regard and prominence. Our 
cultured representation, as it frames a picture of a people~ brings more 
aspects to bear than does the history of anc:ient peoples. Such individual 
10. Charles de Secondat, Baron de Ia Brede et de Montesqu.ieu, De /'esprit sks loiS, 2 vols. 
(Geneva, 1748). 
11. Barthold Georg Niebulu; RCimische Gescbichte, 3 vols. (Berlin, 1811-32). 
139 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
aspects include, for example, the histories of art, science, government, law. 
property, and navigation. Every particular topic can be given prominence in 
this way. In our rime the histories of law and government are especially 
14 
favored and emphasized. Both make sense only in connection with the I 
state as a whole and with historv as a whole. When these histories are 
fundamental and interesting, and. do not merely labor away at external 
material, as Hugo's Romische Rechtsgeschichte12 does, they are admirabl~: 
A richer content is found in Eichhorn's Geschichte des deutschen Rechts. ~ 
Such general aspects and branches [of culture] can and will also be made the 
subjects of particular histories, and they are related to the entire history of a 
people. In the treatment it is a question of whether the whole internal nexus 
i~ exhibited or is merely sought or touched upon in its external circum· 
stances. The Iauer, unfortunately, is more frequently the case, and as a result 
the aspects appear on)y as wholly contingent details of peoples. 
Philosophical World History 
Philosophical world history is closely related to the previous type of history. 
Its point of view is not a particular universal, nor is it one of many general 
viewpoints that is singled out abstractly at the neglect of the others; rather 
it is a concrete universal, the spiritual principle of peoples and the history 
of this principle. This universal is not restricted to a contingent appearance 
in such a way that the fates, passions, and energy of peoples would be the 
primary occasions that reveal the universal. Rather this universal is the guiding 
soul of events; it is Mercury, 14 the guide of individual souls, of actions and of 
events. The idea is the guide of peoples and of the world; it is spirit that guides 
15 
the world, and its guidance is what we wish to learn about. I 
Philosophical world history shares with reflective history the fact that it 
has a universal as its subject, but this is no abstract universal; rather it is 
what is infinitely concrete and utterly present. For spirit is eternally present 
to itself; the spiritual principle is one and the same, always active and 
vigorous, whether as it was or will be, and for it there is no past. Thus the 
[concrete I universal is the subject of world history and this universal needs to 
be funher defined. 
12. Gusu \' Hugo. L.ehrbu,;h cines cwilistischen CursU5, iii. Die Geschichtt! des Romi.sches 
Ru:hts. 4th rdn. I Berlin, 18101. 
U. ~,arl Fri~rich Eichhorn, Deutsche Staats- und Rec:htsgescbichte, 4 pam (Gomngen. 
1808--->L 
14. In Roman rrliftion Jl.1ercury is the messenger of the gods, tiM- one who communicate~ 
hetwet:"n )I.OOS and mona Is and guide<. human commerce. a role similar to that of the Greek g:od 
Hermes, who is named by Homrr the guide of souls in The Odyssey (cf. 24.1-151-
140 

INTRODUCTION 
At the outset we have to consider two modes in regard to the concept of 
world history. f'irst, the spiritual principle is in rhe first place the totality of 
all particular perspectives. But this is nor to be understood narrowh· 
because, secondly, the principles themselves, the spirits of peoples, ar~ 
themselves the totaliry of the one world spirit. They complete themselves 
in it and stand in a necessary succession of stages. They are the offshoots of 
spirit (Sprossen des Geistes), and in them spirit completes itself to totality 
within itself. 
All aspects and viewpoints that are salient in the history of a people are 
closely interrelated. It is a trite statement that the condition of the sciences, 
arts, legal relationships~ system of government, and religion of a people is 
bound up most closely with its grand fortunes and its relationships with its 
neighbors in war and peace. This truth has often been stated. Such state· 
ments are both accurate and profound, but they fail to develop and clarify 
the uniry, the soul involved; they do not identify the one thing necessarJ, 
which is to determine how everything is interrelated. What is normally 
omitted is a ponrayal of [the interrelationship of] the pans, a description 
of the soul. 1 Too frequently this specification is lacking. Such reflective 
16 
expressions are often ventured-filling pages and entire books-but they 
remain superficial and never address the substance. 
In general such reflections are correct; but the correctness of propositions 
that everything is interconnected must be specified more precisely. For 
individual facts often appear to contradict them. There are peoples such as 
the Chinese and the Indians who have achieved a high level of artistry. The 
Chinese, for example, were quite advanced in mechanics and invented 
gunpowder, but did not know how to use it. With the Indians poetry 
blossomed gloriously, but in the art of statecraft, freedom, and law they 
lagged far behind. To offer the superficial judgment that all elements of their 
culture should be equivalent simply demonstrates how much such a propo-
sition represents a misunderstanding. The interrelation of cultural aspects is 
not to be understood to mean that each aspect must be developed to the 
same degree. 
Each aspect relates to the others, and the various aspects of culture 
comprise the spirit of a people, which ties all connections together, unifying 
all aspects. This spirit is something concrete; we have to become acquainted 
with it, and we can only recognize this connection to the extent that we 
know it. For a spiritual principle can be grasped only spiritually. onl~­
rhrough thought, and we are the ones who 1 grasp thought. But this spir~t 
17 
itself is driven to grasp its thoughts, which for it have to do with its. selt· 
production: it will think itself, and in doing so is alive and efficac10us. 
141 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Thinking is the profoundest aspect of spirit and its highest activity is ~0 
comprehend itself. Its purpose is to think itself, to engend~r itsel.f for Its 
thoughts. While it is operating, however, it is aware only ot the a~ms of a 
determina(e actuality and nothing of itself, [not] what it is in itself; tt knows 
only the aims of finitude and nothing of itself. Its object is not i~s. o~n 
interiority but a detenninate actualiry. Thus the highest goal of spmt, ItS 
truth, is to know itself, to bring to fruition the thought of itself: this it shall 
do and has done. 
This achievement, however, is its demise and marks the emergence of a 
different stage, a different spirit, a different epoch of world history; the~ ~ 
different world-historical people comes to the fore. The individual sptnt 
completes itself, the thought of itself, as it makes the transition to the 
principle of a different people; this is how higher principles come about, 
taking the place of the principles of peoples as the world advances toward its 
consummation. The task of world history is to show the matrix in which this 
comes about. 
Philosophical world history is a world history that has universal concepts 
about history that extend across the whole; it is not reflections about 
individual situations and circumstances or individual aspects. 
The 6.rst general concept that tenders itself is the abstract category of 
18 
change or alteration--the supplanting of individuals, 1 peoples, and states 
that arise, linger for a while, attracting our interest, gaining, losing, or 
sharing it with others, and then vartish. 
This aspect, viewed negatively, can arouse profound sadness that is 
evoked particularly when observing the ruins of ancient splendor, of past 
grandeur; everything seems to pass away, nothing endures. Every traveler 
bas experienced this melancholy. This is no( melancholy tha( attends the 
demise of individual, personal aims, nor grief at the tomb of renowned 
persons, but rather the general sadness of a spectator over the decline and 
destruction of peoples, of a cultured past. Each new stage is built on the ruins 
of the past. 
A feature closely linked to this category is the other side of the coin. 
namely that alteration and decline at the same time entail the creation tJnd 
emergenu of new life-new life arises out of death. This is the radical idea oi 
Oriental metaphysics, perhaps its greatest conception. It is found in the 
notion of the transmigration of souls; more striking is the image of the 
phoenix, which builds its own funeral pyre but arises anew from the ashes, 
handsomely rejuvena(eo and glorious. This image relates, however, only [0 
natural life and is purely Oriental; it applies only to the natural body, not to 
rhe spirit, which indeed passes over into a new sphere but does not rise out of 
142 

INTRODUCTION 
its ashes in the same shape. The Western conception is that the spirit comes 
fonh not merely rejuvenated but rather elevated and transfigured. Indeed, 
spirit acts in opposition to itself 1 and consumes the fonns of its configura-
19 
tion, its structure; its previous structure becomes its material-the material 
that by its labor it elevates to a new and higher shape. The alterations 
undergone do not merely return it to the same shape but rather reconstitute., 
pucify, and elaborate it-a process whereby, through the completion of its 
task, it creates new tasks and multiplies the material for its labor. 15 Thus in 
history we see spirit indulging itself, enjoying itself, and satisfying itself in 
innumerable directions. But its labor has only one outcome-to increase irs 
tasks anew and conswne them anew. Each of its creations confronts it anew 
as material that it must rework; its labor is thus merely that of preparing 
heightened enjoyments. 16 The unmitigated conception of simple change 
becomes that of spirit, which is disseminating its energies in all directions. 
We learn the extent of its energies from the multiplicity of its forms and 
productions. In this longing for activity, it is only engaged with itself. It is, to 
be sure, entangled with the outer and inner conditions of nature; these do not 
merely stand in the way as resistance and hindrance, but also can occasion a 
total miscarriage of its efforts. It attempts to overcome these conditions, 
although it often succumbs to them and must do so. Then, however, in its 
vocation as a spiritual being and in its efficacy, it founders and presents the 
spectacle of itself as spiritual activity that seeks not deeds ( Werke) but living 
activity. For its aim is not deeds but its own activity. I 
.20 
Thus under this category [of change) we see in history the most diverse 
human activities, events, fortunes; we see ourselves in all this. Human doing 
and suffering everywhere attract our interest as our own experience. Some-
times phenomena appear that shine with beauty and freedom; sometimes 
energy, even depraved energy, creates dominion and power; sometimes 
summoning all one's strength produces only tiny results; and sometimes an 
insignificant event has the most enormous consequences. Thus we see saris· 
tYing activities and unsatisfying ones. Great efforts often produce small 
results and vice versa. The most variegated needs pass before our eyes; one 
human interest supplants another. But it is always human interests that move 
us, human interests above all. 
15. This sc:ntence contains a play on the words Arbeit (work, labor), Ver<ITIH11Nng (m:onstJ· 
tutinn. reworking), and Ausarheitung {elahoration, outworking). 
. 
_ 
16. The noun GenuP (here used in the plural, Geniisse) is related to the verb geme~ {gsnj 
10 
a preceding sentence), meaning in the most literal sense to enjoy and partake of food and dnnk, 
thus to 'consume' but also to 'commune'. 
143 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
As appealing as these observations are in themselves, their most immedi-
ate consequence is that we grow weary from sifting through this press of 
details and arrive at the question: What is the purpose of all these singular 
events~ which interest us all? There is more to them than their particular 
aims. This enormous cost must be for some ultimate purpose. Is that bevond 
imagining? We are faced with the question as to whether the din and noisy 
surface appearances [of history] do not conceal an inner, silent, secret 
working that gathers up the energy of all phenomena and benefits there-
from-something [for the sake of which] all this is happening. This is the 
21 
third category, that of reason, I the conception of a final end within itself. 
The question concerns an inwardness determinate in and for itself, the one 
(das Eines) whose eternal labor it is to impel and bring itself to the knowl-
edge, application, and enjoyment of itself. It is a truth that such a final end is 
what governs and alone consummates itself in the events that occur to 
peoples, and that therefore there is reason in world history. lbis affirmative 
answer to the question is presupposed here; the proof of its truth can be 
found in the treatment of world history itself because history is the image 
and deed of reason. But philosophical world history is more an exposition 
than a demonstration of this proposition. The actual proof resides in the 
cognition of reason itself; the proof consists in what is cognized, reason 
itself, which is the stuff of all spiritual life. In world history reason simply 
proves itself. World history itself is but one mode of appearance of this one 
reason, one of the particular shapes in which reason discloses itself. 
From our standpoint, we must proceed on the basis of the principle of 
finding nothing but a likeness of the one archetype-a likeness that presents 
itself in a particular element. The material, the element, for this likeness are 
the peoples [of world history] with their struggles and labors. In order to 
recognize reason in history or to know history rationally, we must swely 
bring reason along with us; for the way in which we look upon history and 
the world is how it in tum looks to us. In modem times, when knowledge of 
the world and experience of the truth are very difficult to come by, people 
22 
desire to gain conceptions by pointing to history. 1 History has been 
expected to yield all manner of information about the nature of spirit, 
right, etc. But history is empty; nothing is to be learned from it if we do 
not bring reason and spirit with us. In particular, the shallowness of general 
abstractions must be resisted in order that reason itself may indeed be 
brought to bear in the task. Reason accomplishes much in combating these 
abstractions, bur one must know befo.-ehand what counts as rationaL With-
out this knowledge we would not find reason [in history). If and when reason 
gives us the final result, we will know that we have already entered senility. 
144 

INTRODUCTION 
The distinctive quality of old age is that it lives only in the memory of what 
has been, the past, not in the present; this is a sign of our senility. 
If we do not bring with us the conception of reason, then we must at least 
bring that of faith-the faith that there is an actual causality in history, and 
that intelligence and spirit are not given over to chance. At this point spirit 
steps forth into the light of the self-knowing idea-higher therefore than in 
na rure, in which the idea is also present. It is often enough conceded that the 
spiritual world is not abandoned by God, that a divine will and final purpose 
rule in history. God governs the world. As soon as we come to more specific 
matters, however, we refrain from inquiring about the providential plan. 
What then is the plan of providence in world history? Can this plan be 
comprehended? Has the time arrived to examine it? 
The more proximate question regarding the providential plan is answered 
with a confession of humility: God's providence, like God's nature, is said to 
be inscrutable and inexhaustible. To this humility we must oppose what the 
Christian religion is about: 1 this religion revealed to humanity God's 
23 
nature and essence; before that, God was the unknown. The previously 
concealed God has become manifest. Thus as Christians we know what 
God is; God is no longer an unknown. To regard God to be just as unknown 
after God's revelation is an affront to this religion. In doing so we acknowl-
edge that we do not have Christian religion; for that religion lays upon us the 
one obligation that we should know God. 17 It has vouchsafed this benefit to 
humanity. So the Christian religion demands the humility of being lifted up 
not of one's own merit but through the spirit of God, through cognition and 
knowledge of that spirit. God does not desire narrow-minded hearts and 
empty heads but rather children who are rich in the knowledge of God and 
put their merit in it alone. Thus Christians are initiated into the mysteries of 
God. Because the essential being of God is revealed through the Christian 
religion, the key to world history is also given to us: world history is the 
unfolding of God's nature in one particular element. As a particular element, 
it is something specific; and the only knowledge that we have is of a specific 
providence, i.e. of its plan; otherwise, there is no knowledge. One can stick 
quite naively with the general idea that divine providence rules the world; or 
one can hold to this assertion self-consciously. And this general I proposi· 
24 
tion can, on account of its generality, also have a particular, negative conno-
tation: that the absolute divine being is kept at a distance and conveyed to 
the far side ( ;enseits) of human things and knowledge. If this is done. we keep 
17. ~I is a.lluding to Paul's speech ar the Anopagus in which be makes mown the 
unknown God (Acts 17; 22--8). 
145 

THE LECTURES OF 1822~3 
ourselves free of that other side, indulge in our favorite representations, and 
distance owselves from rhe requirements of truth and rationality. Every 
representation of God in this sense is merely empty talk. If God is placed 
on the far side of ow consciousness, we are freed from knowing God, from 
troubling ourselves about God's nature, and from finding reason in world 
history. Then hypotheses are allowed free play, and blissful vanity has 
complete freedom. Humility knows well what it gains by its renunciation. 
Thus our task is to consider world history and inquire about its final aim. 
This final end is what God has willed for the world. To this end everything 
is sacrificed on the altar of the: world; this end is what is operative and 
enlivening. What we know about it is that it is what is most perfect, and God 
wills the most perfect; what God wills can only be God godself and what is 
like lUlto God, God's will. God's will is not distinguished from God, and 
philosophically we call it the idea. Here we must abstract from the religious 
25 
expression and grasp the concepts in the form of thought. I 
THE IDEA OF HUMAN FREEDOM 
The Fabric of World History18 
We can thus conclude that we must consider the idea in the element of 
hwnan spirit, or more precisely, the idea of human freedom. The true has 
diverse elements. The first and purest form distinctive to it through which 
the idea reveals itself is pure thought itself, and thus the idea is considered in 
terms of logic. Another fonn is the one in which the idea immerses itself, that 
of physical nature. Finally, the third fonn is that of spirit in general. Among 
the forms of spirit, however, we shall emphasize one in particular, namel}-, 
the element of hwnan freedom and human will-the element i.n which the 
idea utters and e::xremalizes itself in such a way that human will ultimately 
becomes the abstract basis of freedom, and the entire ethical existence of a 
people becomes its product. This is its more proximate soil; but we must 
consider not only the ethical world abstractly but also how the idea begets 
itself in rime. Freedom is simply the way in which the idea brings itself forth. 
becoming what it is for the first time in accord with its concept. This bringing 
forth is displayed in a series of ethical shapes whose sequence constitutes the 
course of history. 
18. Tbt subheadings iD this and subsequent sections are provided by the Eng.lish editon. 
146 

INTRODUCTION 
Thus we have here the idea as the totaliry of ethical freedom. Two elements 
are salient: first. the idea itself as abstract; and second, the human passions. 
The two together form the weft and the warp in the fabric that I world 
26 
history spreads before us.19 The idea is the substantial powet, but considered 
for itself it is only the universal. The passions of humanity are the ann by 
which it actualizes itself. These are the extremes; the midpoint at whkh these 
elements are bound together, by which they are reconciled, and in which rhey 
have their living unification, is ethical freedom. Further discussion will specify 
this more precisely. 
Concerning the idea-the soul as guiding power-its moments or ele· 
rnents must be clarified. The idea has major elements. Here we must not 
speak in wholly abstract terms; rather we grasp the idea in the concrete 
shape of spirit, not as the logical [idea). In this regard we shall speak of the 
nature of spirit in a formal way and then proceed to the applications. 
The Concept of Spirit 
Spirit as such is thinking-the sort of thinking that is, thinking that it is and 
how it is. It is knowing as such, is consciousness. Knowing is the conscious· 
ness of a rational object.20 I have consciousness insofar as I am self-con-
sciousness; that is, I know something over against me, something outside me, 
only insofar as in it I know myself, and I define the other as what makes 
possible my knowing my own determination in it; hence, I am not just one 
thing or another but am that of which I know. In other words, I know that 
that which I am is also object for me. Knowing myself is inseparable from 
knowing an object. Neither ex:ists without the other, although the first aspect 
(self·knowing) often appears to be predominant. 
19. Here tbe translation follows the reading of Griesheim !den Einscblag und dU KetUl 
rather than that of Hotho {die 1\ette und den Einschl4g), which is favored by the German edn. 
Griesheirn is more likely correct. The term translated as 'weft\ Einschl4g. mea.ru lirerall~· a 
'driving' or 'striking', and is related to Schlag, 'puiS!"' or 'sttoke'. This is an image that Hegel 
associates with the divine idea which drives back and forth across the 'warp' or 'chain' ( K.etu• 
of human passions, weaving 'the fabric of hiStory, which gradually assumn the panem oi 
'ethical freedom' (5ittiiche freiheit). E\·idence that the divine idea is associated with the Scbl4g 
is found in other lectures. For example, Hegel says (with reference to the State) th.at_'tht divilk". 
has broken through ( emgeschlagen) into the sphere of actuality' (Le~es on the Philosop#rr ol 
Religiu,.,, ed. and tr. Peter C. Hodgson et al., 3 vols. (Oxford. .2007). m. 342 n. 250); and that dtc: 
idea constitutes a \:ounterstroke' (Gegenscblag) that reverses tbe transition from finire to. 
infinite into a rransirion from infinite ro finite (Lectures on the Proofs of tb' Existence 0 -
1 
God, ed. and tr. Peter C. Hodgson (Oxford, 2007), 1651. 
. 
, 
20. Gegensumd, ll(lnnally translated 'object', means Iitrrally "what~-over-agamsa · 
147 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Initially we know ourselves as feeling; we find ourselves constituted this 
v 
way or that. Objectivity is not yet involved here, I only indeterminacy. The 
progression is to determine myself and cleave myself so that something is 
placed over against me as object. I strive, then, to separate this detenninacy 
from myself and make it into an object; in this way my feeling becomes an 
external and an internal world. 
If we speak of feeling in this way, detenninacy in genetal is accepted. But a 
distinctive mode of determinacy sets in, namely, that I feel myself to be 
lacking something and deficient, that I find a contradiction within myself 
that threatens to destroy my self-unicy. In this way determinacy first exists, 
but at the same time it is a distinctive mode of determinacy: I feel myself to 
be lacking something. However, I am; I hold fast to this. I know that I am, 
and I counter the deficiency, the lack, with it; in this way I cancel the 
deficiency and preserve myself. So I have, and am, a drive. Everything living 
has drives. Insofar as my drives are concerned, the significance of objects is 
that they are the means of reconstituting my unity and thus of my satisfac-
tion. (This [reconstitution and satisfaction] can be either theoretical or 
practical.} In these intuitions and drives we at first exist directly in external 
and natwal things; we are ourselves external. The intuitions are singular and 
sensible as is the drive, regardless of content; this is what human beings have 
in common with animals. In this condition they are not yet thinking beings, 
do not yet properly exist as self~onsciousness, as consciousness; for there is 
no self-consciousness in the drive. 
What robs human beings of this immediacy is that they have themselves 
as their own objects; they know of and about themselves and are inwardly 
28 
present to themselves; this is the being of thinking. 1 This distinguishes 
them from animals. Thinking is knowledge of the universal. Human beings 
think. only insofar as they are inwardly present to themselves. As something 
wholly simple and inward, I am something wholly universal; and only 
because I posit the content in this simplicity does it itself become simplified, 
i.e. ideal.21 The unending drive of thinking is to transpose what is real into 
ourselves as something that is universal and ideal. What human beings are 
as real they must be as ideal. Because human beings know the real as the 
•deal and know themsdves as ideal, they cease being merely natural; they 
21. Hegel uses the adjective ideell to designate something empirically reaJ {ree/1) that has, by 
the power of thought, been tt"amposed into or given the quality of ideality (lde.afitijt), which is 
tbe "trut_b' _of the finite. The ideal is simple undivided, onefold (em(4ch), inward, and universal. 
Hegel d1snnguishes between idedl and ideell, real and reel~ formal and formeU, etc. The former 
~-~ve 
~speculative n:ference, the latter an empirical reference. It is impossible to bring out 
this distinction 10 translabOO and it does DOt sean to be of importance in the preseot context. 
148 

INTRODUCTION 
cease living in their immediate intuitions, in their drives and satisfactions, 
and in their productions. Because they know this inwardly, they restrain 
their drives; they interpose representation, thought, the ideal~ between the 
urgency of the drive and its satisfaction, and they separate their representa-
tions from the execution of the representations. With animals this is not the 
case because for animals there is a constant connection between drive and 
satisfaction, a conne,tion that can be interrupted only outwardly, by pain 
and fear, not inwardly. The animal does not interrupt this connection by 
itself; it does not oppose an outer to an inner. The animal does not cleave 
itself, but human beings do; they think, they restrain the drive. Because they 
can either restrain their drives or give them a free hand, it becomes a 
question of purposes, of orienting themselves with reference to something 
universal. They entertain objectives that they consider prior to the execu-
tion; and which one of their many options they should choose depends on 
these objectives. 
The specific objective can be something wholly Wliversal if one posits 
what is wholly universal as one's purpose. The moot boundless I universal 
29 
is boundless freedom. Human beings can posit this freedom as their aim or 
purpose. They know what is, what determines them: it is knowledge of 
themselves and of their will. This constitutes humans as volitional beings, 
and herein resides their autonomy. Animals lack will, cannot restrain their 
drives, because they do not have their representations in the form of ideality, 
actuality. Recollection22 is the source of human beings• freedom and univer-
sality, of their determination in accord with purposes (which can be the most 
universal or singular); as a result, their immediacy and naruralness are 
broken. It is this inwardness that makes human beings autonomous. They 
are not autonomous because of being the source of their own animation; 
animals too as living beings have the source of their animation within 
themselves, but they are aroused to it only by their inner drives. With 
animals the arousal begins from within and presupposes an immanent 
execution; what is exterior does not stimulate them if the stimulus does 
not already reside within. Animals do not entertain something that does not 
well up from within them; what determines them, they have within. Nothing 
can come between drives and their execution, their satisfaction. However, 
what constitutes the abstract weilspring of human nature as such is thinking, 
the being of hwnans as spirit, as I; this constitutes the principle by which 
22. Erinnerung, translated 'recollection' or 'mtrnory', bas the root seme of 'inwardizing', an 
emphasis that is picked up in the next sentence with the tenn Innerlichkeil ('inwardncss'l. 
149 

THE LECTURES OF 1822--' 
spirit is spmt. This is the determinate quality that concerns us more 
30 
closely. I 
We tum now to the concrete aspects [of the concept of spiritl. The 
principal thing we have determined is that the human being as spirit is nor 
an immediate being but essentially a being that returns into itself. This 
movement of mediation is thus the essential element of spiritual nature~ in 
this way human beings become independent and free. Their activity is a 
going out beyond immediacy, a negation of immediacy, and a rerum into 
themselves. Thus spirit is only what it makes of itself by its activiry. When 
we speak of a return, we ordinarily picture a depanure from a place and a 
return to the prior location. We must reject this representation because for it 
the subject is what is first, whereas it is the second aspect, the return into 
itself, that for the first time constitutes the subject, the actual. the true; in 
other words, spirit exists only as its result, not as what is merely initial and 
immediate. This is the guiding principle for the whole of world history. 
The image of the seed helps to illustrate this principle. The seed is the 
beginning of the plant, but at the same time it is the result of all the activi~· 
and life of the plant. The plant devdops in order to produce the seed. The 
seed is essentially the result; but the fragility of natural life accounts for the 
fact that the individual seed as beginning of an individual plant is distinct 
from the seed resulting from it, and yet a seed is both of these. For the seed is 
in one respect the result of one plant and in another respect the beginning of 
another plant. These two aspects of the seed are distinct-in the torm of the 
seed. a simple kernel, and in the growth of the plant. But the unity is alway!> 
implicitly maintained because the whole plant is already there in the indi· 
vidual seed. 
The same is true in sentient and human life, and in the life of peoples as 
31 
well. The life of a people brings a I fruit to a ripened state. Its acti"i~· 
consists of carrying out its principle and being satisfied that it has produced 
its principle. The fruit that a people as a spiritual whole brings forth and 
displays, but that also develops a natural life, does not rerum into the shoot 
of which it is an offspring. It never gets to be enjoyed {by the people that 
produced it} but rather becomes for them a bitter potion. The people and its 
activity is this endless craving for the fruit, but a taste of this potion poisons 
the people's existence, destroying them; and the fruit again becomes seed-
seed and principle of another people, which it vitalizes and brings tO 
maturity. 
~\nother and more proximate example of the fact that spirit is only resulr 
is tound within every individual. Human beings initially and immediately 
150 

INTRODUCTIO:t-; 
are only the potentiality of being rational and free; they have this potentiality 
only as a vocation, an imperative. By means of discipline, education, and 
culture they become for the first time what they ought to be, rational beings. 
Humans have only the potential of being human when they are born. 
Animals arc born nearly complete; their growth is basically a strengthening, 
and in instinct they have straight away everything they need. We must nor 
regard it as a special benefit of nature for animals that their formation i!. 
soon complete, for the strengthening is only a matter of degree. Because 
humans are spiritual beings, they must acquire everything for themselves. 
must make themselves into what they ought to be and what otherwise would 
remain a mere potentiality; they must cast off the natural. Thus spirit i~ 
humanity's own achievement. 
The most sublime example of this is the nature of God. It cannot. 
however, be called an 'example'; rather it is the universal, rhr true itseli, 
whereof everything else is but an example. In our religion God is spirit; God 
is revealed as spirit, and this is the distinctive quality of the Christian 
religion. To be sure, the most ancient religions I also called God vovs; bur 
this is to be understood as a mere name that did not explicate the nature of 
spirit. In the jewish religion spirit is not yet comprehended and explicated, 
but only represented .in a general way. In the Christian religion God is first 
spoken of as 'Father': the power, the abstract Wliversal, which is still veiled. 
In the second place, God, as object, is what cleaves or ruptures itself, posits 
an other to itself. This second element is called the 'Son'. It is defined in such 
a way, however, that in this other to godself God is just as immediately God's 
own self, envisioning and knowing godself only in the other; and this 
self-possessing, self-knowing. unity-possessing, being·presenr-ro-self-in· 
the-other:, is the 'Spirit'. This means that the whole is the Spirit; neither the 
one nor the other alone is the Spirit. And God is defined as spirit; God is for 
the first time the true, the complete. Expressed in the form of feeling or 
sensibility, God is eternal love, the Son, knowing god self in the other, having 
the other as its own. This characteristic is, in the form of thoughr. constitu-
tive of spirit. This Trinity makes the Christian religion to be the revealed and 
only true religion. This is its superiority in virtue of which it stands above the 
other religions and by which it is distinguished from all the other rei igions. 
If the Christian religion lacked the Trinity. it could be that thought would 
find more (truth] in other religions. The Trinity is the speculative element in 
Christianity-the element wherein philosophy finds and recognizes rhe ide:a 
of reason in the Chrisrian religion as well. 
. 
. . 
We proceed now to the concrete implications of the concept ot sp1nt. 
implications that are of interest for our subject. I 
151 
32 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
The Beginning of History 
The first of these implications concerns the beginning of history and how it is 
customary to portray it as a natural state, a state of innocence. In accord 
with ow concept of spirit, the first, immediate, natural state of spirit is a 
state of bondage, of sensuous desire, in which spirit as such is not actual. It is 
customary to make of such a state an empty ideal, which misunderstands 
the word 'nature' since by 'nature' one often means the concept or the 
essence of a thing. In this sense 'natural state' means the natural right of 
freedom that human beings ought to have in accord with their concept, the 
freedom that belongs to hwnan beings in accord with the concept of spirit. 
But when we see what humanity is by natwe, we can only say with Spinoza, 
exeundum est e statu naturae ['it (humanity) has depaned from the narural 
state'J.23 That state lacks freedom and is one of sensuousness. To confuse the 
natural condition of spirit with that state is a mistake. Spirit should not 
remain in this natural state because it is one of sensuous willing and desire. 
It belongs to the concept of spirit to be by sublating the form of its sensuous 
existence and in this way positing itself as free. 
Earlier it was often customary to start history with traditions about a 
primitive state of the human race, with the narration of a natural state of 
the human spirit. The Mosaic tradition is pertinent here, although it has 
34 
no place of its own at the beginning, since it is from a time I when it 
had a historical existence, i.e. an existence in the being of a people. We 
do not begin with it, but instead refer to it in the era when the promise it 
contains is ful61Jed; then for the first time it takes on a historical 
existence. Prior to that it was lifeless and had not been taken up into 
the culture of peoples. 
In modem times the representation of a primitive condition has been 
underscored and verified with presumptive historical dates. The existence 
of a primeval people has been asserted, an archetypal people that possessed 
everything in science, art, and religion and has handed down all our extant 
knowledge in these fields. Schelling strikingly tried to validate this view. also 
23. Bmedictus de Spiooza, Trac~ Tbeologico-Politicus (Arnstrrdam, 1670), ch. 16. This 
does DOt appear to be a direct quoouioo. In the manuscript of 1830-1, Hegel explains that there 
are two ~of 
tbe exp~oo 'natural state' (Nt~tunustand): what burnan beings are in 
~ord _wnh tbe.tr CODUpl o~ intrinsic nature, and wbat they are in a prehistoncal, natural, and 
uruncdtate CXIstence. Ooly lD tbt first sense is it correa to say that human beings are free by 
oa~~· The attempt by Hobbes., RouS&eau, and Others to idea.lae tbe prehistorical state and 
cooJuse the two meanj~ is false. See above, p. 102, incl. u. 61. 
152 

INTRODUCTION 
Friedrich Schlegel (Sprache und Weisheit der Inder). 24 The hypothesis of 
such a primordial people is said to explain the high culture of the prehistori-
cal world. They are said to have been another human race that preceded the 
peoples known in history. Such a people is said to have left behind cultural 
traces in antiquity and to have been immortalized in the ancienr legends, 
depicted as gods. Disfigured vestiges of this high culture corresponding to 
the legends of ancient peoples are [said to be] found. The condition of the 
earliest peoples in recorded history would then represent a retrogression and 
decline from that of the high culture of the primordial people. This is a 
representation that has been favored m modem times with the expectation 
that philosophy I must construe such a people a priori and that historical 
35 
evidence of them must exist. The conception here is simply that human 
beings have not risen into consciousness and reason from instinct, from 
the stupor of animals, that humanity as such could not have begun in animal 
stupor. 
What is human could not have developed from animal stupor, but it could 
well have developed from human stupor. If we begin with a natural state, 
what we find is an animal-like hwnanity, not an animal nature~ not animal 
stupor. Animal-like humanity is something wholly different from animal 
nature. Spirit does not develop out of the animal, does not begin from the 
animal; rather it begins from spirit, but from a spirit that at first is only 
implicit, is a natural and not an animal spirit-a spirit on which the charac-
ter of the human is imprinted. Thus a child has the possibility of becoming 
rational, which is something wholly different and much higher than dx 
developed animal. An animal does not have the possibility of becoming 
conscious of itself. We cannot ascribe rationality to a child, but the first 
cry of the child is already different from that of an animal; from the outset it 
has the human stamp. Something human is already present in the simple 
movements of the child. 
By confining representation exclusively to that initial~ primeval condi-
tion-namely, that humanity has dwelt in the pure consciousness of God and 
of the divine natwe, standing directly at the center of all things (something 
we attain only with difficulty). standing at the midpoint of all science and 
art, so that all things lay open to humanity as an intelligence dtat can 
penetrate the depths of God and nature-then the implication of this repre-
sentation 1 is that one is ignorant of and no longer understands whar 
36 
14. Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph ScheUing, Vorlesungen liber die Methode des~ 
Studiums 11803), lecture 8 (On Uni1Jl'1'Sity Stwiies, tt E. S. Morg.ao (Adieus, Ohio. 19661. 82~ 
91 ); Friedrich von Schlegd, Uber die Sprach ..tJ Weishftt Jer lttdW (Heidel bets, 111081, d. 62 
153 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
thinking is, what the nature of spirit is. One could not know that spirit is this 
infinite movement, this ;vi pyEul, EVTEAi xna. Spirit is energy and does not 
remain in a state of immediacy; it is the movement and activity that proceeds 
from an initial state to another state, working through and overcoming the 
latter, discovering itself in this labor; and only by returning to the first state 
does it become actual spirit. It is only through this labor that spirit prepares 
for itself the universal, brings forrh its concept as its object, brings it before 
itself. This production, however, comes last, not first. If we claim that the 
spiritual aspects of ancient peoples-their customs, laws, institutions, reli-
gions, symbols-are productions and expressions of speculative ideas, this is 
correct; they are actual productions of spirit, but only in an instinctive way. 
However, the inner working of the idea is something quite different, as is the 
tact that this idea has recognized itself and grasped itself in the form of the 
idea. That inner working can only be comprehended through knowledge of 
rhe idea. The idea in the form of the idea is not something prior from which 
customs, religion, arts proceed; rather it is only the final labor of spirit. The 
known, speculative idea cannot have been anterior; rather it is the fruit of 
the highest and most abstract exertion of spirit. 
In addition, when an appeal is made on the basis of historical data, they 
37 
generally melt away, finally disappearing completely. I A Frenchman, 
Bailly. with a quite superficial knowledge of astronomy, sought to demon-
strate the wisdom of the lndians.25 In more recent times, when scholars were 
no longer satisfied with this and investigated the level of knowledge of the 
Indians, Lamben found for example that the Indians certainly possessed 
broad knowledge of astronomy . .!.6 He found that the modern Brahmans, 
who mindlessly and mechanically make use of forms the inspiration behind 
which is long forgotten, have preserved the traditional methods and no 
longer know the inspiration behind the ancient calculation of the eclipses 
of the moon and sun; hence the present-day Brahmans have surely declined, 
and the methods they use, while demonstrating great knowledge, are not as 
superior as people once believed. Other sons of historical data are equally 
unsatisfactory. 
~5. JeanSyh·ain Baill}·, Twte de l'~tronomie indien~ et oriental (Paris., 17S7l; 1:/lstoire d£ 
I'.JStronomre ancien~ (Paris, 1775). Bailly did not mere!~ speak in a po~itive way about thr 
astrononncal knowledge of the Indians; he also remarked on its defects. See the German tr. of 
the latter work, Gl'schrc:hte der Stemktmde des Altertums bis auf die Errichtung der Schule zu 
·Hn.mdrrt'n il.t'ipzig, 1777}, r. 122-.~. 
2.&. Hegel's reierence i~ uncertain. Possiblv 'lamben' 1s a mistake for., or a misheanng of, 
'Delambre': J. J. Delambre, Histoire de f'astror~omie ancimne, 2 vols. (l'ans, 1817). S« 
Lectures on the History of Philosophy, i (Oxford, 2009), 111 n. 15. 
154 

INTRODUCTION 
The Progress of History 
The second implication is the progress27 of world history, which can only be 
derived from the concept of spirit. 
The first thing to note is that history as the development of spirit occurs in 
time, which is appropriate to the concept of spirit. We shall treat only briefly 
the broader speculative discussion. 
The cultural formation28 of spirit occurs in time. Spirit has a history 
because of what it is, because it exists only through its labor, through the 
elaboration of its immediate form, thereby raising itself to a consciousness of 
itself and thus to a higher standpoint. The quality of the negative is intrinsic 
to time. For us it is something positive, an event or happening. But what 
characterizes time is that the opposite can also happen-the relationship of 
what has being to its nonbeing; and this relationship I is time insofar as we 
38 
do not merely think the relationship but also actually inruit it. The abstract 
intuition of being and nonbeing is time.19 Time is the wholly abstract realm 
of the sensible. Duration is the sameness of determinate being, where the 
nonbeing of this being does not intrude. But cultural formation, because it is 
the development of spirit and also contains its self-negation, occurs in time. 
Here we enter into a consideration of change or alteration ( Veriinderung), 
how it occurs in nature, and the alteration of spirit. A comparison of the 
alteration of spirit and of nature shows that the singular is subject to change. 
In physical nature everything is transitory, and the same is true of the 
singular in spirit. In nature, however, in this persistent change, classes and 
species (Gattungen) endure. So rhe planets move from place to place but the 
orbit persists; and it is the same with animal species. Alteration here is 
.:ydical, constant repetition of the same. Nothing new is produced by all 
the changes in nature; this is why nature is tedious. Everything happens in 
cycles, and individual things change only in keeping with their cycles. Inter· 
actions of the individual cycles present no obstacle to the persistence of these 
27. Hegel ~peaks of ·progress' or 'adYance' (fortgang) in rhe !iense not on I~· of "imprO\·ement' 
but also ol"progres.~ion' or 'process'. 
28. Btldung is a term used by Hegel in a variery of interrelated senses. II is rranslaud as 
·iormarion', ·.,ullure', ·~ultural forntarion', 'education', 'cultivation', del)(nding on context. 
:!9. This definition of rime is drawn from the Encyclopedia of the PhifosophiCJJI Soences. 
~ 258; cf. §§ 2$7-9. See Hegel's Philosophy of Nature, u. A. V. :O..iiller !Oxford, 19701, 34; ct. 
H-40, also ] 5-16.ln 'natural' rime, the present is the passmg over oi being into nonl>eing I the 
nnr·yet of the futureJ, and the iuture i!' the pas.~ing over of nonheing into hf-ing. The pa•~ ;, thr 
sediment, so to speak, deposited by rhis reciprocal passage, and as such it is the uruty ol hcmg 
and nonbeing, the 'truth' of finite time. In 'spiritual' time, howe~·er, the present 1s the cotn-
hen:nce of the modes of time; and for absolute spirit this presence is eternity. 
155 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
cycles. It is otherwise, however, with the shape of spirit in history. Here 
change affects not merely the superficial aspect but enters into the concept 
itself; it is a concrete alteration. The concept of a shape in history itself is 
enhanced and corrected. In nature the species makes no progress. But in 
spirit rhe change presses to a new stage (Stufe), and every change is progress; 
39 
yet all the individual 1 offshoots continue to exist. In nature every series 
allows its shapes to stand alongside each other. The species form a ladder of 
levels (Stufen), 30 ranging from the rudimentary, from light, from the 
abstract, to the highest pinnacle of life, the hwnan being. Each successive 
level presupposes the others, resulting as a new and higher principle from the 
sublation, reworking, and destruction of the previous level. But in nature 
this process falls apart; the connective matrix is only interior and not 
apparent; the transition appears only to the thinking spirit, which compre-
hends it. Nature itself does not know itself; its concept does not enter as such 
into phenomenal form; nature does not comprehend itself, and consequently 
the negative aspect of its configurations is not apparent for it. 
In that regard, the sphere of spirit differs from the mode of nature because 
the ladder of stages that spirit climbs and the labor needed to grasp its 
concept make it clear that the concept drives itself forward through the 
sublation and reworking of the previous, lower stage, which, once trans-
formed by time, falls into the past. This previous stage has ceased to exist. 
The existence of a new shape that is the transfiguration of the lower, 
previous principle demonstrates that the series of spiritual shapes comes 
about in rime. 
It should be noted that the peoples as spiritual configurations are in one 
respect creatures of nature and thus comport themselves in accord with 
40 
narure; therefore their diverse shapes 1 stand alongside each other indiffer-
ently in space, perennially portraying the independence of the stage [they 
represent]. If we consider today the shapes as they exist concurrently, we see 
three major configurations in the ancient world: The first is the principle of 
rhe Far East (Mongolian, Chinese, Indian), and it is also the first in world 
history. The second shape is filled out by the Islamic world, which embodies 
the principle of absolute antithesis; present in it is the principle of abstract 
spirit, the simple eternal God, but over against that spirit stands the 
JO. Hegel, in accord widt the science of his time, understood nature to bt> a hierarchy o( 
lnttrdtpendent. coe xisnng levels., not an evolutionary process with higher stages coming later 10 
ti~. Spirit~ however. preciselY evolves through a series oi temporal stages. Thus when Stu(~ 
reters to spmt, we tram;late as 'stage'; when it refers to nature. the more appropriate tenn •~ 
'level'. Natun: is spatial, spirit is temporal (though subject to the spatial, geographical effects oi 
nature, as Hegel makes abundantly clear). 
156 

INTRODUCTION 
unbridled free will of individuality. The third shape comprises the Christian 
world of Western Europe, the greatest accomplishment of which is spirit's 
knowledge of its own depths. Thus the shapes that we see in world hisrory as 
a succession in time we also see standing perennially alongside each other in 
space. It is essential ro note, and indeed we must convince ourselves of it, 
that these shapes subsist alongside each other and have their own conceptual 
necessity. For the sole intent of philosophical history is to eliminate consid-
eration of anything contingent and to know everything as engendered by 
the concept. Chance is external necessity, which indeed comes from causes, 
but from causes that themselves are onJy enernal conditions. One accus-
tomed to regarding everything as contingent can find the philosophical wa:v 
of considering the concept at first astonishing, and, from slipshod habits 
of representation, assume that such a view is itself contingent, a mere 
fancy. I But such a person has not yet arrived at engaging in philosophical 
41 
reflections, much less being able to critique them. Whoever does not value 
thought alone as the true and the highest is in no position to judge the 
philosophical way [of thinking]. 
Because we have said that the great principles also exist perennially along-
side each other. one might imagine this to mean that we should find all the 
shapes that have gone past in time existing alongside each other in the present. 
Thus we could expect that a Greek people with its beautiful paganism, its 
pleaswes, etc., still exists today; likewise, that a Roman people should still 
exist today. However, these peoples, these configurations, have passetl; simi-
larly, in the case of every particular people there are configucations that 
have passed. The ancient Germanic tribes have for example disappeared. 
Why these shapes and their principles have become part of the past and no 
longer exist physically can only be discussed in terms of the special nature of 
[historical] configurations. Our discussion of this matter would lack specific-
ity if we did not consider the particular shapes themselves, and this can be 
done only in [our treatment of] world history itself. It follows that only dte 
most universal elements and configurations can subsist perennially alongside 
each other, and that they necessarily disappear if they are in turbulent anima-
tion. This was the first consequence of the nature of spirit. 
The second point concerns the specific mode of progress of the spirit of a 
people ( Volksgeist) and of the transition Wtdergone by such a spirit. First 
there I is the wholly general and sensible activity of change~ or time as 
42 
such. Concrete negativity and movement constitute spiritual acrivity as such, 
and we shall want to consider these more closely in their mode and form as 
they relate to the progression of the spirit of a people within itself, and its 
transition [to another stage]. If we say initially that a people progresses, 
157 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
making an advance, and, overstepping itself, declines, then the most proxi-
mate categories that strike us are those of cultural formation in general: thus 
31 
fi 
. 
development, refinement, over-refinement, and decline. 
Over-re nement IS 
the result or source of a people's destruction. 
Cultural formation or cultivation in a general sense concerns the formal 
aspect and does not yet specify anything in regard to content. What consti-
tutes cultivation is in general the formal aspect of the universal. Cultivated 
human beings are the ones who know how to place the stamp of universality 
on everything that they do, say, and think; they surrender their particularity 
and act in accord with universal principles. Cultivation is thus the activity of 
the universal, the fonn of thinking. Cultivation informs thinking, the uni-
versal, everything. Regarded more closely, we find that thinking, formal 
universality, is able to restrain what is particular. Thus humans act not 
merely in accord with their inclinations, desires, and particularities; rather 
they restrain themselves, rein themselves in, thereby allowing the object per 
43 
se more freedom; they conduct themselves more theoretically, I respecting 
the right and freedom of the object. Connected with this is an individualized 
treatment of the aspects of the object, a closer consideration of the concrete 
situation at hand, an analysis of circwnstances, and a pinpointing of the 
aspects of the object. This individualization is directly what gives these 
aspects the form of the universal because they are abstracted and considered 
each for itself. Thus cultivated persons approach the objects and pay atten-
tion to their various aspects; the latter are available to them. Cultivated 
reflection has given these objects the fonn of the universal, takes them as 
particularized on their own account. With this approach cultivated persons 
can grant individual circumsmnces their rightful place, while uncultivated 
persons in a well·meaning way seize upon some prominent feature but 
thereby do injustice to a host of others. Because cultivated persons take 
into account and register the various aspects, they can act more concretely; 
moreover, this is essentially due to the fact that cultivated persons can act in 
accord with universal aims and perspectives. This is the nature of cultural 
formation in general. It has this one simple quality: that aims and reflections 
bear the imprim of the universal's character. 
The development and activity of spirit must, however, be grasped more 
44 
concretely; the movement produced by cultural formation must I be 
gcasped more specifically in irs moments. As the deed and concept of spirit, 
we have indicated that it [spirit] makes itself to be what it is implicirly in its 
31. The German reads: Brldsmg iiherhaupt, also Entwicldu,g, Bddamg, Uberbildung, 
Verhildung. 
158 

INTRODUCTION 
real possibility; thus we have first the real possibility, and second the actual 
existence of this merely possible being-in-self. The positing of the determi-
nate qualities that it has in itself constitutes the universality of spirit. This 
can be translated into a subjective meaning as well: we call what spirit is in 
itself 'ability', 'capacity'; and when these are posited, brought forth into 
existence, we call them 'attributes', 'aptitudes', etc. What is posited and 
brought forth in the form of attributes is itself received only in subjective 
form; but in history we have what is brought forth by spirit in the form of 
act, object, work. In the latter form spirit wants to have itself as explicit act 
ITat vor sich), to have consciousness of itself; and thus it must stand over 
against itself as act. 
As to the relationship between attribute and act, a distinction is often made 
between what the human being is inwardly, one's attributes, and what one's 
actions are. In history, however. this distinction comes to nothing because 
human beings are their actions; they are themselves rhe resulr of their actions. 
We assume that intentions can be admirable even if actions amount co nothing; 
we think that the inner is something other than the deed. With individuals, to 
be sure, it is possible that they dissemble and appear to be something other 
than what they are; but this is something quite partial, temporary, and limited, 
and on the whole it cannot succeed. The truth is that the outward does not 
differ from what is inward, and it is misleading to draw this distinction; a series 
of deeds is not to be distinguished from what is inward. History is what is 
revelatory; therefore it is especially in history that all the specious reasoning 
about momentous divisions [of inner and outer] I amounts to nothing. 
45 
History's method is to consider the actions of indi\'iduals and peoples; actions 
ponray what rhe peoples are. Aaions are the aim or purpose. 
The aim of spirit is to produce itself, make itself to be an object; in this way 
it has itself as an existent being; in this way it knows itself, and its being is to 
know itself. It is an actual spirit only insofar as it has brought its being-in~self 
before itself as object, work, deed. Thus the spirit of a people is a detenninate 
spirit, and its action is to make itself into an extant world, one in space and 
time. Everything is the work of a people; its religion, laws, language, customs, 
an, accomplishments, actions, relations to other peoples-all these are its 
deeds, and each people is only this work. Each people has this consciousness. 
All Englishmen will say that they are the ones who ruJe the East Indies and the 
oceans; and so forth. A people adduces irs institutions and deeds, for dtese are 
its being, these constitute the substantiality and self-esteem of a ~pie, e~en 
though single individuals may have no share in them. This work lS what ltves 
on; and individuals appropriate the work, that is, accommodate themselves to 
it [and know} that their individual aspects reside in this whole. They find that 
159 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
the work is there before them as a ready-made world that they must become 
pan of. 
Spirit is therefore this bringing forth, knowing that ir is this work and 
deed. When we consider the period in which this production occurs, we see 
in this period a people living for the sake of its work; and from this 
standpoint a people is to be regarded as ethical and virtuous because ir 
brings fonh and enacts its inner principle, the inner will of its spirit. This 
is the period in which its purpose is brought into concrete existence; here the 
46 
sundering of the 1 individual from the whole has not yet taken place; this 
happens only later, in the period of reflection. When a people has objectified 
itself in its work, it has arrived at its satisfaction. Spirit is no longer some-
thing subjective and merely interior that does not have a correlative exis-
tence. This deficiency of merely being-in-self~ the split between the in-itself 
and actuality, is suspended; and thereby a people has accomplished irself and 
is satisfied; it has erected what it itself is as a wor~ as its world. This is the 
first moment that comprises the activity of spirit. 
The second moment, associated with the firs~ is that spirit, when it has 
achieved itself and has what it wants, no longer needs its activity. The 
substantial soul is no longer active; now it is only oriented to individual 
aspects, having lost the highest interest of life, which is found only with the 
antithesis [between goal and attainment]. I have an interest in something 
only insofar as it is still concealed from me or insofar as it is my purpose but 
is not yet fulfilled. Hence, its deeper interest disappears when a people has 
achieved itself and makes a transition from adulthood to old age, to the 
enjoyment of what it has achieved. Such a people lives in the spirit of what it 
has become, in the spirit of what h sought and has been able to attain. It has 
perhaps surrendered several aspects of its purpose or been satisfied within a 
narrow compass. It now lives within its habitual routine, which is what leads 
to natura) death. (But because it is universal~ a type (Gattung), something 
different comes on the scene, a different determination.) For habit is no 
longer alive; it is where purposes are no longer at work because they have 
47 
been achieved. A necessity or need did arise, but it is no longer felt 
because I ir was satisfied by some arrangement or other. Although they 
once had a sound basis, such earlier arrangements are now of little interest 
and are discontinued as unnecessary; a present without need ensue!i. 
However, such an undemanding perpetuation of habit leads to natural 
death. Natura) death can show itseH as political nullity: a people continues 
to vegetate, only the particular needs and interests of individuals predomi· 
nate, and there is no longer the spirit of a people with lively interests. If true 
and universal interests are to arise, the spirit of a people must aspire to 
160 

INTRODUCTION 
something new. But from where is this to come if the principle is already 
produced? The new can only entail a surpassing of that people's principle, 
a striving for something universal in such a way that this principle will 
determine itself further. This is possible; for spirit does not simply die a 
natural death; the spirit of a people is not a natural, singular, immediate 
indi'lidual but rather essentially a universal life and spirituality. And thus 
what appears as a natural death also appears as a self-mortification, not 
merely as the abstract negative of simple cessation; ra thee this negative other 
will come to light in the universality of the spirit of the people itself. 
The spirit of a people exists as a type ( Gattung), as universal on its own 
account, and therein resides the possibility that the universal c:an appear 
within this people as what is posited over against it. Thus the spirit of a 
people allows its negative to make an appearance. Peoples can drag on in a 
vegetative life and be spiritually dead in such a way that the negative that is 
within them 1 does not come to light as division and conflict. We have seen 
48 
this in modernity with old imperial cities that have outwardly declined but 
inwardly remain without a due of how that happened to them. This brings 
us to the third point, which is that spirit as spirit prepares its own downfall, 
which is however the coming forth of a new life. 
It is not merely the habitual routine of spirit's life that constitutes its 
transition; rather, the spirit of a people as spirit must get to the point of 
knowing itself and thinking what it is. The spirit of a people is knowing, and 
this activity of thought in relation to the reality of such a spirit is such that 
the latter knows its work to be objective and universal, no longer merely 
subjective. This is the other principal determination rhar stands in juxtapo-
sition to a natural death. In this regard we wish to return to the point that 
spirit produces its being-in-self as work, makes itself into an ethical, political 
organization. This is something external, a system of articulations. Such a 
work is something objective, and for this reason it has universality as its 
determination and foundation. As the work of the spirit of a people, it is nor 
something particular but something inherently universal. Only as enduring 
and permanent is it a work. 
When a people is driven to actions by mere desires, such deeds pass by 
without any trace, or the traces are not positive but rather destructive. 
Enthusiasms, impulses, and occurrences of this sort are not ·works'. The 
same thing is the case in the ancient myths. In the beginning Chronos ruled 
in an age of innocence when ethical relationships did not yet exist. This 
Chronos, or time, had his own works or achievements that he begot and 
that were only ephemeral, and he in turn devowed them. Jupiter, the political 
god who created an ethical and conscious work-he from whose head I 
49 
161 

THE LECTURES OF 181.2-3 
Minerva sprang, he who was father of Apollo and the Muses-was the first to 
vanquish time because he produced an enduring work, the stare. So work has 
the quality of universality and objectivity. Universality has the nature of 
subsistence. Thus a work must have objectivity and universality. 
The second point is that the formation of a people is necessarily accom-
panied by the fact that it knows its universal aspect as ethical. Objectivity is 
found in the work only to the extent that it is known. The people must be 
cognizant of the universal upon which its ethical! i fe rests and that allows the 
particular to disappear. The people must therefore possess a conception of ib 
life and circumstances; it must be cognizant of its laws as acknowledged 
universalities; it must know its religion and not merely possess a cultus but 
advance to the doctrines of religion. Spirit seeks to know this; thus it seeks to 
know its universality, and only by means of this knowing does it make itself 
one with the aspect of its objectivity that constitutes what is universal. A'f. 
what is umversal it seeks to relate itself to its own universal elements. Its 
objectivity is at the same time a world of singularities; by relating itself only 
to these singularities, it exists in faith, in sensible behavior. in external 
perception, etc. But it ought to be a thinking being, the unity of its highest 
and innermost being with its existent being; and this unity can obtain onl~· 
when it knows the universal aspect of its work and its world. This is its 
highest satisfaction because thinking is what is innermost for it. Thinking 
involves a need and necessity that we shall have to consider further. At this 
point spirit knows the universality of its principles and its actual world: it 
so 
knows what it essentially is. It is now conscious 1 of its essential being. This 
work, this world of thinking, i.s initially, in terms of form, distinct from its 
actuality; so there is both a real and an ideal ethical life. and the individuals 
who know about the work of the people are different from those who live in 
only an immediate way within it. So at this standpoint we see the sciences 
flourish, as they necessarilv must. 
If we want to know what the Greeks were, we find out about Greek life in 
Sophocles, Aristophanes, Aristotle, Plato, "lbucvdides, etc.: in them spirir 
came to know itself through thought. 
. 
This satisfaction is indeed the highest, but in one respect it is ideall'is-a-
vis the real. Thus we see a people find satisfaction in the representation oi 
and talk about the sort of vinue rhat stands over against or in place of actual 
virtue. Spirit has produced this, and it knows to bring reflection to bear on 
the unreflected. Here resides in part the awareness of the limitations ot such 
dett"rminacy. Reasoning prompts self-consciousness to renounce duties and 
laws thar otherwise it would immediately fulfill. Now it is the general 
tendency to require grounding, to require that an acknowledged [practice] 
162 

INTRODUCTION 
be connected firmly to some wholly universal principle. If such grounds, i.e. 
something wholly universal~ are not discovered as the basis, the representa-
tion of virtue becomes precarious- Then dury as such becomes somethin~ 
that is not valid absolutely I bur only insofar as the grounds of its validity 
51 
are known. Connected with this is the separation of individuals from each 
other and from the whole; for consciousness is subjectivity, and it has the 
need to isolate itself, to grasp itself as a particular subjectivity in the form of 
a this. This subjective inwardness, grasping itself in the form of singularity, is 
what produces vanity, self-seeking, etc.-qualities that are contrary to faith. 
to immediacy. Thus self-interests and passions are unleashed as destructive 
qualities, and the destruction of a people runs rampant. This is not natural 
death but the death of an ethical life, a death that appears in ethical life as the 
tearing apan of the members. Thus it came to pass that after Zeus put a stop 
to the devourings of Chronos and established something inherently perma· 
nenr, Chronos himself and the whole race of his offspring were in any event 
swallowed up themselves, in fact by that very principle of thinking that 
requires insight based on reasons. 
Time is the negative portrayed in a sensible way; thought, by contrast, is 
the innermost negativity in which all determinacy is dissolved and objective. 
existent being is superseded. Thought is the universal, the unlimited, and it 
puts an end to all limitation. If indeed what is objective does not appear as 
limited, it still appears as a given and thus as something that can set no limits 
to thought. Political states are the sort of objects that limit thought because 
thought can overcome them. To the thinking subject states appear to be a 
limitation. This is the path on which the spirit of a people, out of its depths. 
prepares its downfall. 1 
52 
This dissolution of the ethical world by thought is at the same rime, 
however, necessarily the emergence of a new principle with new determinate 
qualities_ Pur briefly, thought is the dissolvent of the previously healthy 
shapes because its activity is that of the universal. In this dissolurion brought 
a hour by the universal, however, the previous principle is in fact maintained. 
bur only in such a way that its determinate mode or actual being is de-
srroyed. Here this is to be taken as axiomatic. On the one hand, rherefore. 
because spirit is the comprehension of the universal, the singular become!> 
something precarious and foundering; but on the other hand the universal 
essential being is maintained-not only maintained but elevated into the 
form of universality; irs universality is rendered prominent. The p~ecedmg 
principle is thus transfigured into this universality. Bur rhe mode_ot umver-
saliry now existing is also to be regarded as something different trom what 
preceded it, tor universality then was more in the mode of inwardness and 
163 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
· had outward existence only as concealed within an endless number of 
various existing relationships. 
The labor involved in processing this externality by thought means for us 
simply that what beforehand was singularity and merely subsisted in con-
crete singularity is now transposed into the form of universality, which 
however has a different determinate quality in preference to the others; for 
it is a further determination and thus appears as something different, some-
thing new. And spirit, which thus now inwardly has further comprehension 
of its essential being,. appears as something more and different, and it now 
has different and broader interests and purposes. This transformation has, 
indeed intrinsically, arisen from a uansfonnation o{ fonn., but this new form 
53 
then adds to the principle other I and further determinations. which also 
become determinations of content. In order to bring this into greater repre-
sentational clarity, we can recall well-known phenomena. So., for example, 
those who are cultivated among a people have quite different expectations 
than those who are uncultivated and who share in the same religion and 
ethicality, whose substantial circumstances are entirely the same. Cultural 
formation at first changes nothing about the situation itself but appears only 
to be a formal matter. The cultivated and the uncultivated Christian have the 
same content but nonetheless wholly different needs. The person of luxury 
eats and drinks and has a dwelling place just like the simple person. The 
same is true regarding matters of property. On the whole, the serf also has 
property, but it can be bound up with encumbrances, which confer another 
sort of property right involving a joint proprietor. In thinking about prop-
erty, we state forthwith that it is something unencumbered (ein Freies), that 
there can be but one master of it; thus thought posits the definition of 
property as something freely held (freies). The content is the same; but 
thought emphasizes the universal., and &om the latter emerge a separate 
higher principle and a different need and interest. 
Thus the characteristic of the transition or the changing of a people is that 
what is present to hand and immediate is subjected to thought and thereby 
elevated to universality; for the particular must be purified of its particularity 
and transfigured into essentiality. Only this relationship [to thought] makes 
for a further determination. Therefore., to the extent that we have seen a spirit 
striving to be with itself and to grasp and comprehend its actuality in thinking 
54 
fashion, I the principle has to that extent bem expanded and further deter-
mined To grasp this, we must know what thought is, namely that it is what is 
true and essential, what is universal. But spirit consists in grasping the universal; 
thus the universal is found in philosophy. This is the speculative significance of 
the universal, and spirit is what has this speculative significance lxcause the 
164 

INTRODUCTION 
defining categories as known by philosophy are explicit to it. Merely reflective 
thinking has general representations too, but only as abstract and distinguished 
from actual being. Thus we can give a general representation of peoples and 
their masters, etc., but this is merely subjective and just facilitates our repre-
sentational activity. Universality~asped as it truly is-is the substance, the 
essentiality, that which genuinely has being. 
If, for example, being a citizen of Athens includes being a citizen in a 
universal way, such that this person counts for something just as he now 
truly is, then this universal aspect simply means that the citizen is a human 
being; and, in face of this universality, the panicularity of simply being a 
citizen of Athens or having some other features, melts away. Particularity of 
this son melts under the light of thought, as snow melts under the sun. 
When, in a people, thought comprehends universality, that people can no 
longer remain what it was but rather must attain new and higher determi-
nate qualities. Thus, for example, if particularity is sublated by thought in a 
people such as the Athenians, and if thought deveJops in such a way that the 
particular principle of this people is no longer essential, then this people can 
no longer endure; another principle has emerged. H higher qualities accom-
pany such a principle, then the substantial foundation of the spirit of a 
people has changed. What was once its purpose now has different character· 
istics. A new work is at hand, one that must be accomplished. I 
55 
Incidentally, it must be remarked that in world history, insofar as a 
principle of the spirit of a people has become a higher principle, this spirit 
is now existing in the fonn of a different people; and that world history has 
made a transition from the people that previously was prominent to another 
people. For a people cannot traverse several such principles and several 
stages; it cannot be epoch -making twice in world history, even though it 
bas stages in its development. 
These stages a.re, howeve~ merely fonns of the development of irs derermi-
nate principle. If the latter changes, then a different people atrives at the 
higher principle. This is the reason why, in the history of spirit, the principles 
exist as the spirits of peoples but at the same time are also natural existenceS; 
here we find ourselves nor on the soil of pure thought but rather on that of 
existences. The stage at which spirit has arrived exists as a narural determi-
nacy, the natural principle of a people, or rather as a nation; for 'nation• is 
what a people is in natural form. In history spirit appears as displayed in 
various sorts of natural shapes in space and time. Thus when a detenninate 
principle takes on further determinate qualities, the new appears in the spirit 
of a people as the negation of what previously existed, as religions, cusroms. 
etc., therefore as the destruction of what previously existed; it appears as tbe 
165 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-J 
negation of its determinacy, as the destruction of what that people was in 
tenns of its original determinacy. The higher stage in its positive existence is 
still a natural stage that thus appears as a new people. These are, then, the more 
precise moments in the process of change; herein reside the moments of the 
56 
concept in their necessity. These moments are the moving soul of pr~ess. I 
The End of History 
Further reflection about the respects in which the spirit of a people dies a 
natural death but also is altered by thought presents a succession of stages that 
appears to be nothing other than a progression into infinity, a perfectibility 
that proceeds in infinitum without ever attaining its goal. The additional 
statement that the higher principle consists in the fact that what preceded it 
can only be grasped in universal terms makes this universal itself only some-
thing determinate once again. Just as in nature there is a progression in the 
series of living forms such that the higher level is a universal life bur at the 
same time appears as something determinate, so also must the universal in 
history asswne a determinate shape and portray itself in a determinate way; 
for we are standing on the soil of existent beings, of natural shapes. In any 
event, history has to do with actuality. Rut it appears to be a matter of only 
indeterminate progress if no determinate shape can secure itself against 
thought, against the concept, if it cannot withstand thought. Were there to 
be something that the concept cannot digest, cannot resolve, cannot idealize, 
then this thing would stand opposed to the concept, estranged from it; and this 
would be the greatest rupture, the supreme unhappiness. Thus the concept 
resolves everything, and it does so continually. Had something been able to 
hold out against thought, that would only be thought itself. since it would 
itself be the object such that it grasps its own self; for it is simply what is itself 
unlimited. In that event it would have returned into itself, and the tribunal of 
history (das Gericht der Geschichtel would be over and done with; for 
judgment is passed only on what does not accord with the concept. 32 In this 
return of thought into itseU, eternal peace would be established. 
Here is the place to discuss the final end of the world. If onlv new 
principles constantly emerged, world history would have no purpose l~ading 
31. In a well-Lnown passage in Elemmts of the Philosophy o{ Right, ed. AJien ~'.Wood. tr. 
H. B. NJsbet {Cambridge. 1991), §340 \p. 371 ). H~el reiersto world histonas world ,udgmeOI 
I die Wdtgeschichte •st da.s Welrgericht). Judgment i~ accomplished, not O\: retribution. but In 
the anairunenr of the uni,•ersal prmciple of history, the concept of freedom.· Heg~l return~ to the 
theme of the dawning of the day of judgment in the Germanic World (see n. 21. 
166 

INTRODUCTION 
to a goal; no end would ever be in sight. However, religion and reason 
recognize as of interest only I what is genuinely true, subsisting in and 
57 
for itself, only what has no limitation and is nor merely transient. This brings 
us to the content of the absolute purpose that spirit sets fonh by means of 
world history and that is therefore the work of world history. This too, like 
the first two stages. must proceed from the concept of spirit. We have thus 
far indicated the mode of the beginning [of historyj, then secondly the 
moments of its progress. The latter must have a goal, a final end, and it is 
this final end that we now consider. It resides in the already-indicated 
concept of spirit. If we speak of it briefly, however, it remains abstract: if 
we speak of it as it is for the concept, we would be roo expansive, and this is 
not appropriate here. Thus we can give here only a general representation; 
history itself provides the details. 
One often hears that the final end of the world is the good. But this is 
indeterminate, and precisely the final end posits something determinate. We 
call to mind the statements of religion about this matrer, and we must do so; 
for we must not proceed in philosophy by failing to take into account 
religious and other venerable intuitions because, out of timidity, we ventured 
no comparisons. We find the religious final end expressed as follows: that 
human beings should attain eternal peace, that they should be sanctified. 
This is, in one respect, the proper religious aim as it concerns the individual. 
The subject as such has an infinite interest in this religious arrangement. 
However, the presupposed content of the final end, so conceived, is that in 
which individuals will find their eternal goal, that in which souls find their 
salvation. One might have the impression that the eternal goal has nothing 
to do with us here, 1 where we act in the world, because it is a future~ 
58 
otherworldly end, something 'over there'. But then this world, what is this-
worldly, is still the place of preparation and attainment. and so this world 
must furnish the basic orientation for all works. Yet the final end as thus 
expressed by religion refers only to the individual, subjective side; an~ if the 
interest of the individual is thus expressed as the final end, then the obJect, or 
the content of salvation, would fall under the heading of means. Sur this is 
cenainlv not the case. What constitutes the way to the goal is no mere mean!'. 
but dir~cdy the absolute thing-that-history-is-about itself, the absolute his-
tory33 in which individuals are only single moments. 
· 
· 
1 
~ -ch 
/b t die tJbsoiuJ~ Gesc:hichiL' 
33. Hotho reads (as translatedl: zug/erch dte abso ute .JU e se 
5 • 
. 
be 
ptd 
Griesheim n-ads: es muP durchaus als das Absolute selb5t ge{a/11 werden ('It must 
gras 
altogether as the absolute itselrl. 
167 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
If we leave aside the merely subjective form, the substantial content that it 
presupposes may be grasped more precisely. Just as is the case with the 
purpose of natural existence, the purpose of spiritual activity is the glorifi-
cation and honor of God. Here the matter is comprehended in religious 
terms. This is in fact the worthy aim of spirit and history. It is implicit in 
what we said before, and we wane to think about it with more precision. We 
found spirit to be what produces itself, makes itself into and grasps itself as 
object. Only then is it result, as what is brought fonh and self-produced. To 
grasp itself means simply to grasp itself in thinking fashion. It does not mean 
merely to have information about arbitrary, optional, and transient matters; 
rather it essentially means to grasp the true being, the absolute itself. Spirit's 
absolute is the absolute of everything, the divine being. Spirit's purpose, its 
absolute drive, is thus to gain a consciousness of this being such that it is 
known as the one and only actual and true being through which everything 
59 
happens and I proceeds-to know that everything must be arranged, and is 
actually arranged, in accord with it, and therefore that it is the power that 
guided and guides the course of world history, the power that rules and has 
ruled it. The recognition of this in these deeds and works is whar religion 
rightly expresses by giving God the honor and glory, or by glorifying and 
exalting the truth. 34 This exaltation of the truth is to be understood as the 
absolute final end, and this truth is the sole power that brings fonh and 
completes this exaltation. The individual spirit has its glory in glorifying 
God. This is not its particular honor; rather its honor comes from knowing 
that its self-feeling is the substantial consciousness of God, that its action is 
to the honor and glory of God, of the absolute. In this knowledge the 
individual spirit has attained its truth and freedom; here it has to do with 
the pwe concept, with the absolute; here it is at home not with another but 
with itself, with its essence, not with something contingent but rather in 
absolute freedom. This, accordingly. would be the final end of world history. 
In this idea the antithesis that is found in the constricted spirit falls away, for 
that spirit is aware of its essence only within a limitation and overcomes the 
latter by means of thought. Here, therefore, the destruction wrought by 
thought is no longer something alien to it, since nothing other stands over 
against it [the free spirit} than thought. Here too natural death is no longer at 
hand, and the eternal circuit is completed. These are the major elements of 
the idea. 
34. The cerms here are Ehre ('bonor', 'glory'l and VnherTiicbNng ('gloriJicatioo', 
·exaltation'). 
168 

INTRODUCTION 
Human Passions and the Divine Idea 
We come now to the other aspect, the passions and their relationship to the 
divine idea. These consrirute the element of singularity, of parriculariry, of 
the activity whereby particular purposes are actualized. lr is in and through 
the passions that rhe rule, the power, and the dominion of the idea are to be 
recognized. 
These passions include all special purposes and interests. The form of the 
purpose is not essential. 'Passion' is the most passive of terms/5 but not 
completely so. When something is accomplished, we think of it as a purpose~ 
as something set forth or presented (Vorgestelltes). Indeed passion always 
seeks something set before ir; I but what it does is determined within itself 
60 
and by itself. It is the unity of the determination of the will with what the 
subject is as such. Passion is the determination of the whole human being; 
thus it is what separates and distinguishes one human being from another; it 
is that whereby the individual is this person and not someone else. Every 
human being is a specific, particular person; only so is a human being acrual, 
for a mere abstraction of humanity has no truth. A purpose is not something 
selected but is precisely what emerges from the determinacy of the passion. 
Thus •passion' means here the determinacy of the hwnan being. •character' 
is already too broad a term because it encompasses all particularities and 
denotes the whole complexion [of the person]. We are not concerned with 
the merely impotent interiority that lacks the strength to realize itself, nor 
with merely putative purposes by which weak characters bear around the 
bush. In history we do not have to do with individuals who have cenain 
intentions but then act like mice or gnats; rather we have before us the 
colorful din of passions. 
If we compare the colorful drives of passion with the silent and simple life 
of the idea, which has within itself, and carries out, the absolute final end, 
then the next question concerns the nature of their connection. The idea of 
world history necessarily sets forth this connection and contains the uniry 
of the two; it makes this unity utterly fundamental. This conneaion is not 
something to be taken simply on faith; actions are not to be the mere 
material or external means by which the idea realizes itself. I For indivi-
61 
duals are knowing and willing beings and make no claim to carry out solely 
the designs of a pretty magic (was ein schoner Zauber wi/1). They have the 
justifiable expectation not to have to serve as mere means. Nor can we say 
35. The German term Leidenschaft is related 10 tbe verb I~, '10 suff~t. beac. ~ndure. 
undergo'. Similarly, the English word 'passion' derives from the Latin pas.sw, suffeong · 
169 

THE LECTURES OF 18 22-3 
that the connection is something incomprehensible; rather our task is to 
comprehend it since we are engaged in a philosophical history of the world. 
Nevertheless we cannot enter into the full extent of this discussion but only 
indicate the path on which a response to the question is to be found. Still it 
can be noted that the connection of these elements employs the well-known 
form of the unification of freedom and necessity. It is customary in reflective 
representation to speak about free will, 36 the particular will of freedom, and 
to place over against it what has being in and for itself, the rational, as 
something proper to itself and as iron necessity. In fact, rhe relationship of 
spirit to what has being in and for itself, as a relationship to what is its own, 
is only one of freedom. Freedom in the proper sense is the rational. Free will, 
the particularity of interests, is only a mixture of freedom and necessity, and 
it belongs only to the presumptive or phenomenal freedom that stands under 
the influence of narural determinations. 
The connection between the particularities of human beings and what 
has being in and for itself has two aspects: first, it is found intrinsically in 
the concept, it is the idea itself; second, the question concerns what the 
connection is in explicit terms, in its mode of drawing-out (Erziehung), in 
its workings. 
First, we take note of the idea itself, of how we give an account of it. 1be 
62 
idea has within itself the attribute of subjectivity, of 1 self-knowing; it 
contains within itself the attribute of activity. For it is what posits itself as 
over against itself and makes this ideal object its own. This idea is the eternal 
life of God within itself, before, as it were, the creation of the world; it is the 
logical nexus. It is represented initially as inward and universal, and it still 
lacks the form of being in the form of exterioriry, of immediate singularity. 
Thus this idea has within itself the moment of determination, but it does not 
yet have the mode of reality, of direct emergence. 
The second aspect is that this idea must go forth into antithesis-which is 
initially, in terms of fonn, found only within itself, as something ideal-in 
order to give this antithesis its due; that is, to posit the distinctions on their 
own account and with the appearance of independence vis-a-vis each other. 
This is the first point, and the more precise specification is that the universal 
is rhus found as one side, while the other side, that of immediacy, determines 
itself as fonnal being-for-self, as formal freedom, as abstract unity of self-
consciousness, as infinite reflection within itself, as infinite negativity. Abso-
lute negativity applies only to spirit. The I, which places itself over against all 
36. Willkiir for Hegel nfer.; to a will that is free in a private oc arbitrary way; it is not nue 
freedom. 
170 

INTRODUCTION 
fullness as an atom [i.e. a self-contained particle), is the most extreme 
contrast to that fullness. The entire fullness of the idea is opposed to this 
abstract negativity. God, the world, or whatever form the concrete may 
have, is posited as something 'over there', as an object; but the I is rhus 
defined by the fact that this other is for it. The knowing side, absolutely 
unyielding (absoiut Sprode), is so situated that for it there is also the other. 
These are the initial specifications. Further conceptualization arrives, for 
instance, at what is called the emergence of the world of finite and free 
spirits. I What can be noticed as first is that this arom, which is at the 
63 
same time multiplicity, is the finite as such. This atom is for itself only as 
exclusive of the other because it negates the orher and therefore is limited 
by the other; it has rhe other as a negative, a limitation of itself, and thus is 
itself finitude. 
It is to be noted, thirdly, that this finitude, this extremity of freedom 
that is for itself, must (because it is formal knowing within itself) be 
considered in relation to the honor and glory of God as the absolute 
idea, and that the latter is to be recognized. In recognition reside God's 
honor and glory. This aspect of finitude is thus the ground on which the 
spiritual element of knowing rests, knowing as knowing. If is thus the 
aspect of determinate existence for the absolute, the aspect with only 
formal reality. These are the principal moments in terms of which the 
connection is to be found. 
Inasmuch as we now make the transition to more concrete shapes, we 
said that there is an other for the finite I. The other is present for the I as the 
divine, and thus religion is present; but also in the shape of the other there is 
the world as such, as the universal sphere of finitude. Its own finitude exists 
for this formal self-knowing. It grasps itself in this aspect of itself as finite, 
and so it has as such the standpoint of finite being, of finite will, of free will, 
of finite knowing, of finite ends; this is its phenomenal standpoint. In one 
aspect this self-knowing wills itself as sue~ and it also wills itself in every-
thing; its subjectivity is to be found in all objectivity; this is its self-certainry. 
Inasmuch as this subjectivity is thought of as pure and wholly without 
content, it constitutes the drive of knowing, it is the reason rhat seeks ro 
know itself in everything. Thus the pious individual I wants to be saved, to 
64 
be blessed. Certainty of it is therefore a moral truth and resides here in puce 
subjectivity. But this being-for-self must have gone through a sequence in 
order to be purified. It does not want itself back as knowing; rather ir fir~t 
seeks itself as finite in accord with its immediacy, in irs particularity; and rhas 
is the sphere of appearance. It seeks itself in accord with the ~pec~cation of 
its finitude and particularity in that an other stands over agamst at. 
171 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
This is the point at which the passions occur, the point where individuals 
place their certainty in their particularity and seek to actualize it. lf we 
consider this point, namely that individuals seek the existence of their 
finitude, we see that they have doubled themselves: they are finite and they 
actualize this finitude. If they have achieved this harmony by reconciling 
themselves in this way, they are called 'happy'; for those who find harmony 
with themselves and enjoy themselves in their existence are called 'happy'. 
This is where happiness has its home. Happiness might also be considered a 
factor in history. In this regard it can be remarked that world history is not a 
soil of happiness; in history the periods of happiness are blank pages~ for the 
object of history is, at the least, change. In world history satisfaction cannot 
really be called happiness because it is a question of the satisfaction of 
universal purposes that transcend the sphere in which ordinary and panicu-
lar inclinations can be satisfied. The object of world history is those purposes 
that have meaning in world history, purposes that are carried out with 
energy, by an abstract willing that is often directed against the happiness 
65 
of I individuals themselves and of other individuals. World-historical in-
dividuals have not sought happiness, yet they have found satisfaction. 
If we go further, the next characteristic is that of formal activity, the 
principle of being-for-self, of formal unity. The moment of abstract activity 
is to be regarded as the guiding aspect, the medius terminus; it is positioned 
as the middle term of a syllogism. Everything rational is a syllogism. If the 
activity is regarded as the middle term, then on one side is the abstract idea, 
which is found in the well of thought. On the other side is externality, matte~ 
to which belong the particularities, the independent atoms. What is itself 
atomistic, however., exists as the activity of this middle term, which actua-
lizes the inwardness of the idea, translates it from interioriry to the external-
ity of existence, and singularizes universality in immediate existence. 
Inwardness for its own sake would be something inert or lifeless, an abstract 
essentiality; through activity it loses this aspect and becomes something 
existent. Empty objectivity, this external material, is itself only emptiness if 
the activity is not elevated to universality, to the manifestation of the 
essential being that it is in and for itself. The singular self--consciousness 
elevates the empty objectivity to a thinking of the universal, a willing and 
knowing of the ethical; it renders the particular will commensurate with the 
universal will as it is in and for itself. 
The connection concerned first of all the diremption of the idea. The 
singularity, the atom, which thinks itself, is also for another, and the other 
is for it. Thus the activity is to be grasped as infinite restlessness within 
itself, and it stands at the peak. But there is also the direct obligation to fit 
17Z 

INTRODUCTION 
everything in the material realm into the universal and to draw everything 
out of rhe universal; in this way the absolute will is known and accom-
plished. This infinite I drive of unity, restoration, rupture 37 is as such the 
66 
second aspect of the diremption of the idea. Thus it is the restoration, the 
universalization of the singular. If we understand the singular as singular 
self-consciousness, then this process is the raising up of the singular to 
universal ethical principles, and in precisely this way the ethical realm 
comes into force. 
The more pertinent question concerns the form or character that the 
universal takes on when brought into appearance, to existence; for it is 
activity that actualizes the universal. This is the viewpoint of separation, 
of differentiation, of finitude in general. The agents who are acting from this 
viewpoint seek for themselves actual and finite things, higher purposes; they 
seek the enjoyment of their particularity. The ocher aspect is that at the same 
time a universality of purposes appears in these particular purposes, and we 
call these universals good, right, duty, etc. If the universal is not apparent in 
the particular purposes, chen we are dealing with the stance of abstract free 
will, of brutality, which desires only the satisfaction of its self-seeking. But 
this latter viewpoim lies behind us. 
This universal, as seen from the viewpoint of finitude, is the panicular 
good as such, present in ethical form. It is a production of the universal, 
which is already the ethical. This can be called the sustenance of the ethical; 
it is no lifeless duration but essentially a bringing fonh. What is brought 
fonh is in the first instance ethical custom, valid right, not merely good in an 
abstract sense but the determinacy of the good, not just anything as good. It 
is a duty to defend one's native land, be it Rome or Sparta-a duty, not an 
option. The ethical is thus essentially something determinate. This operative 
ethicality I comprises individual duties, the rules of conduct for the ethical 
fi1 
activity of individuals in general, which all individuals should weave into 
their activity. These are the well-known duties and laws that each individual 
acknowledges, the objective aspect of one's status and country. There is 
nothing problematic about them; weak-willed persons are the ones who 
think they call for extensive discussion. The feature of the universal as 
ethical practice is that the sustenance of the ethical sphere comes about by 
all persons having to produce this ethical life by their own activity. Over 
against this universality of ethical custom there is a second universal that 
comes into prominence and expresses itself in the great figures of hisrory; 
37. Thus Gnesheim; Hotho reads: 'Tbe drive of restoration. of rupture to uni~··. 
173 

THE LECTURES OF 18 22-3 
and herein lies the point of conflict that makes it difficult to conduct oneself 
in accord with the ethical realm. Within an ethical community of being such 
a conflict cannot occw. For the latter is a necessary world of ethical life, and 
the universality of the ethical is not damaged by the ability of individuals to 
may from it. Singular things can indeed happen; but such singular things as 
depravity and deceit are suppressed. Still, the [other} universal that menaces 
mis (ethical] universal is of a different sort; it has already been noted where 
that universal comes from. 
We remarked earlier in reference to the progress of the idea that an ethical 
whole is at the same time limited and as such has a higher universal above it. 
Inasmuch as the laner comes to prominence, a doubling or inner fragmenta-
tion occurs; the universal remains what it was but the higher power within 
it rises to prominence and intrudes upon it. This constitutes the transition 
from one spiritual shape to another higher shape; the preceding universal 
is sublated as a particular by means of thinking it. Thought renders the 
68 
particular universal by means of thinking. I 
A universality that is higher than the preceding universal, higher than 
what is now specified in contrast to it as particular, can be referred to as 
the next type. It was already inwardly present in the preceding universal but 
had not yet come into currency, so that its actual existence was precarious 
and inwardly broken. It is precisely the great historical figures, the world~ 
historical individuals, who grasp such a universal and tum it to their pw-
poses. They can be called heroes, those who produce something universal-a 
universal that they create out of themselves by knowing. willing, and 
accomplishing it, a universal that is recognized to be a universal. They are 
praised for having accomplished a universal that previously was only 
implicit, a universal that was not invented by them but rather was eternally 
present and, as posited by them, also as such is honored along with them. 
These historical individuals grasp such a universal; they create it out of a 
source whose content was not yet at hand in a known, determinate exis-
tence, and thus they seem to create it out of themselves. out of their inward-
ness. Thus they bring about, as accomplished deeds, new conditions of the 
world that appear initially to be simply their own goals and specific charac~ 
ter, their productions., their passion. It is their rrGOo~; and they will it as 
something universal Everything is gathered under the banner of such heroes 
because it is they who articulate what that era involves. We can say that by 
dint of the passions of the world-historical persons, the universal that 
appears here in the form of passion is the absolure. 
69 
At this point we should indicate that, while such moments are higher, I 
they are themselves only one moment in the universal idea. This concept is 
174 

INTRODUCTION 
peculiar to philosophy. World-historical individuals should have this con-
cept. Accordingly, they know the universal and seek it; they have to do with 
this universal. Its hour has come; it is the truth of the age, and on this 
account they are world-historical persons; it is what is inwardly already 
prepared. Thus they have the absolute right on their side; they know how to 
carry it out. Spirit validates itself in this shape, and these persons are 
conduits of it. We remark in this regard that the world-historical persons 
are the most perspicacious about their age. They have the best understanding 
of what needs to be done; they desire and do what is correct and right, 
although what they do appears to be their own concem, their own passion, 
their own free will because others do not yet know it. They must heed it 
because they feel it, because it is already inwardly their own and now comes 
into existence for the first time. But, as we have said, it appears as the passion 
of the world-historical figures. 
Their words and actions express what is timely, what is true and neces-
sary. They have power in the world solely because they seek what is right, 
although initially this right is simply their own representation. They have 
the correct view of what is right. Thus julius Caesar had the correct view of 
what Rome was; he knew that the Republic was only a shell (a shadow of 
its former self), that the rightful laws of dignitas and auctoritas had been 
suppressed, that (and this was the main thing) they no longer were to be 
granted to the people, for instead it was proper that he make the panicular 
will subject to himself. This was a correct representation of the rime, and 
thus Caesar could be its culmination. Lucan says: Cato favored the van-
quished cause; the gods, however, the victorious cause.38 What is right I 
70 
is the characteristic that promotes the idea in and for itself. This appears as 
the passion of those individuals who above all satisfy their own concept 
in their passion. What the great persons do is to act in order to satisfy 
themselves, not others. Were they to satisfy the others, they would have 
much to do, for the others do not know what is timely or what they 
themselves want. Hence the great individuals know what the rimes call 
for; they seek it and find their satisfaction only in doing so. They are so 
consrituted that in their quest they satisfy their own concept, and this 
appears as their passion. For this reason the peoples gather around them,. 
38. Marcus Annaeus Lucan. Bellum civik 1.128. The Larin text reads: viarix CIIJCS4 deis 
placuit S€d victa C..atoni ('the victorious cau~ wa.~ plea.~ngto rhe gods, hut the vanqui!lbrd cau.~ 
ro Cato'l. Cato the Younger (95--46 BC) sought to preserve the Roman Republic and lhus 
supported Pompey in opposition ro Caesar. The BeUum civile is an epic poem about the war 
between Julius Caesar and Pompey the Great. 
175 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
and those who resist them and remain true to the old are defeated. People 
are powerless to resist these individuals. 
lbis is the true connection between passion and the idea. The necessicyr of 
the idea is ethical only through the passion of historical human beings and is 
connected with it. Thus the purpose of the idea and the content of the 
passion are one and the same. Passion is the absolute unity of character 
and the universal. Passion appears, as it were, as something animal-like in 
the great individuals; for their being as spirit and their being as something 
natural are utterly one and the same, and this unity constitutes their 
strength. Because they are driven unresistingly to do what they do, they 
are satisfied. In this way they satisfy their passion. They have not been 
happy; for [their work] has perhaps become bitter to them, or at the moment 
they achieved their goal they have died or were murdered or exiled. They 
sacrificed their personality; their entire life was a sacrifice. And that they 
71 
were not happy is a consolation for those who need such a consolation. I 
Such great ones attract hangers-on, and enviers of them point to the fact that 
they were immoral and find this situation tolerable only if it is evident that 
such persons were not happy. However, free inquiry knows what has truly 
come about by means of them; it acknowledges rhe greatness and is glad that 
it exists and has existed. The psychological mode of inquiry commonly 
comes into play here; it disparages the passion of such great persons and 
tries to demonstrate that they were immoral. Thus Alexander is judged to 
have had a thirst for conquest and to have not done what is good for its own 
sake. Alexander's thirst for conquest was supposedly something subjective 
and for that reason not something good. But such modes of inquiry do not 
concern us. 
Thus the two aspects that we have considered in their connection are, on 
the one side, the ide~ and, on the other side., passion or the subjective will 
insofar as it is what activates the idea and is the sustaining principle of the 
existing ethical whole. Thus the subjective will has not only produced the 
aspect of particularity or mere change; it also sustains what is substantial, 
for changes presuppose something in which all changes come about. What is 
postulated is the absolute unity of the idea with the subjective will that 
actualizes it. These changes are posited by the subjective will. The unifica-
tion of the idea (that is, of the will in its representation) and the subjective 
will is what is substantial, rational, the ethical whole. The latter, insofar as it 
is defined in terms of will, is the idea as volitional and thus the state as such, 
72 
the idea I as human freedom. This is the topic of world history, and the 
stare as such is the more narrowly defined topic of world history as a whole. 
176 

INTRODUCTION 
THE NATURE OF THE STATE 
The State and the Actualization of Freedom 
Ethical life constitutes the midpoint in which freedom objectifies itself, 
maintains itself, and lives in enjoyment of itself. This ethical whole is the 
unity of the two extremes [the idea of freedom and human passions]. The 
state is the midpoint of these two aspects, which also come to the fore in it. 
Thus it is the midpoint of other concrete aspects: an, law, customs, the 
conveniences of life. When we have defined this middle more precisely as 
the unity of universal and subjective will, we will as a consequence be in a 
position to say something more specifically about ow subject and about the 
connection of the state with religion, art, and science. Before we can go into 
history proper, it is important to know what is involved of necessiry in the 
state, what the state is, and likewise how art, religion, and science are related 
to the state. 
Thus the first topic to consider is the nature of the state. The nature of the 
state is developed more specifically and exactly in the philosophy of right. 39 
The interest of philosophy is precisely to comprehend the concept [of the 
state}, in contrast to the approach more recently in vogue, the belief that one 
has an immediate knowledge of its nature. Here we must for the most part 
presuppose this cognition and only summarize the results. 
Concerning the nature of the state, it should be represented as follows: 
that in it freedom becomes objective to itself, that in it freedom is realized in 
a positive [i.e. historical] fashion-in contrast to the representation that the 
state is a collection of human beings in which the f freedom of all is limited, 
73 
and that therefore the state is the negation of freedom in such a way that for 
individuals only a small area remains free, one in which they might express 
their freedom. However, the state is freedom in its objectivity; and the 
constrained space within which people have, as a rule, known freedom is 
only arbitrary choice or free will ( Willkur), thus the opposite of freedom. 
Therefore the way in which philosophy comprehends the state is that the 
39. See Elements of the Ph&sophy of Right (1821), §§ 257-340 (Wood and Nisbet: edn., 
pp. 275-371). Perhaps Htgel intends to refe-r here only fO the introductory sections(§§ 257-B) 
(pp. 275-Bl ), where the nature of the state is dc6oed as ethical idr:a and objective freedom, sinct 
the topic of this first subsection is the nature of the state as the actualization of frrecbnl. 
followed by subsections in wh.ich t1uec aspects of its nature art addressed (i15 coostitutioa, its 
relation to the spiritual world, and its relation to the physical world). In a broader 5alSC, 
however. the whole discussion of the state in the Philosophy of R.;gbt tteats the nalliR ol the 
nate. and the s.ame is true of these lectures. The heading 'The Naaue of the Stare' is found iD the 
Getman edo., while the subsectioo headings are supplied by the £oglisb edirors. 
177 

THE l E C T U R E S 0 F 1 8 22- .l 
state is the actualization of freedom. This is its principal definition. 
Connected with this is the fact that human beings occupy a rational stand-
point only in the state. Aristode indeed says: 'Apart from the stare the human 
being is an animal or a god.' 40 We remarked earlier41 that the being ot 
individuals, as well as law, art, and the sciences, are the accomplishments 
of the peoples. Individuals are offspring, representatives, of their age and 
people. What one truly is, is one's people as existing in the form of a state. 
Only this deserves to be called one's being. For better or for worse, one is a 
representative of one's age. Earlier we called this being the objective work oi 
a people, and this constitutes the objectivity of each individual. Individuals 
are only this objective work; anything else is only their formal activitr. The 
goal of all education is that the individual should not remain something 
subjective but rather become objective. 
Individuals can, to be sure, regard the state as a means for the satisfaction 
of their own ends. This view is, how eve~ simply a one-sided error on the pan 
of individuals; for the state is the end or purpose, and individuals have 
meaning only to the extent that they enact within themselves the subsranti· 
ality of the people. The true will wills the people's objective essence (die 
Sache), and this is what is substantial. The true artist strives to portray the 
74 
object or situation (die Sache) as 1 it is for itself, and in doing so his own 
subjectivity must disappear. Likewise, individuals must make their people's 
objective essence actual within themselves, and thus their subjective will and 
what is universal in and for itself are united also in the subject. Individuals 
owe everything that they are to the state; only in the state do they have their 
essential being. The state is the ethical whole; it is not an abstraction that 
stands over against the individual. Only the criminal stands over against the 
state as an antagonist; but he too remains in the state and has rights in it. The 
individual lives only in the whole. 
The interest of reason is that the state, this ethical whole, should exist. 
and that the singular will should be united with this absolute. The legitirna~· 
of the heroes who founded stares is in terms of this absolute interest. The 
foundation of states is the supreme justification. The state does not ex:isr 
for the sake of its citizens; rather it is the end in and for itself, nor a means 
for individuals, who are elements of it. It is not the case that individuals are 
the end and the state the means. The relationship of end and means is not 
40. Aristotle. Politics l. 1253a CThe Basic Works of Aristotle. ed. Richard McKeon CNew 
York, 1941 }. 1129-301. ·Man is by nature a political animal. And he who bv nalUreand not ~ 
mrre accident i~ without a state, is either a bad man or above humanin·. · . 
41. ~above, p. 159. 
· 
178 

INTRODUCTION 
appropriate; for the stare is not an abstraction that stands over against the 
citizens; rather they are the essential element, the consciousness of the whole 
itself. In an organism everything is end and means simultaneously; in it no 
member is an end and none is a means. Thus the state is the idea as it is 
present on earth. 
Regarded more closely, the relationship of the state can appear as a famil}· 
relationship, a patriarchal relationship. In any event, such conditions are 
found in the world; states also arise in parr out of the association of families. 
Such a relationship constitutes the transition from the family to the state . 
.Bur the state can also be shaped in a nonparriarchal form. The specific 
quality of the state will be clearer when we compare it with the family. 
The family is likewise an ethical whole, but in it love as such is the modality 
by which spirit and unity are present. Each family member is aware of being 
a member of the whole through I love. The labor and goals of each are not 
75 
independent, for their own sake, but rather exist for the family as a whole, 
and this whole takes precedence over one's own particularity. So here too 
there is ethical life, actually existing spirit, the spirit of the penates.42 But the 
spirit of states is different from these penates. 
The state is [a willed and known) unity: it is spirit not in the form of love 
or sentiment but rather in the form of willing and knowing the universal. 
Members of the state confront universality as a force of nature because, for 
the individual, customs and habits exist as the immediate mode of the ethical 
and in an immediate way. But in addition laws belong to a state, which 
means that custom does not exist merely in immediate form; rather the 
universal is known also in the form of universality. lr is these laws that are 
the universal in the form of knowing~ they are what elevate the state to a 
spiritually existing community, whereas in the family sentiment is the domi-
nant force. In the state individuals obey the laws and know that in this 
obedience they have their freedom, their objectivity; for the laws are the 
rational. Thus in the laws individuals are related to their own being, their 
own will. This is, accordingly, a known and willed unity. Thus the indepen-
dence of individuals is found in the state; for they are knowing individuals, 
and knowing constitutes the being-for-self of individuals, i.e. it posits their 
'I' vis-a-vis the universal. Here, therefore, personal identiry (Personlichkeit) 
enters into play. This personal identity is not found in the family; instead 
only a natural drive binds the members together, a drive heightened to 
spirituality and thus ethicality. Only in the state do individuals know the 
42. The lares and penates were household gods of the ancieot Romans. 
179 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
78 
universal and are 1 reflected into themselves, have independence. The 
universal, the laws, sand over against individuals in the state, are posited 
over against them. Individuals are set apart from these laws; as singular they 
are over against the universal. The independence of individuals constitutes 
the division in the state, the antithesis; this antithesis is the element of 
rationality, constituting the state as a concrete whole. 
Thus what appears in the state is the element of knowing and thinking. 
Connected with this is the fact that precisely all religion, art, science~ and 
therefore culture as such, can emerge only in a state. For they all have 
thinking as their principle. Absolute being is represented in religion. In the 
state the absolute is still limited [and takes the form of a I specific folk spirit-
so the Athenians had Pallas Athena, and they worshiped their folk spirit as a 
divinity. Absolute knowing, however, is something distinct from this exter-
nality. An likewise porttays the substantial. Thus all these aspects have as 
their object the thinking and knowing of the universal, and the latter is able 
to become actuaJ for the first time in the state. 
The more precise correlation is as follows: in every state, indeed in every 
relationship of master and servant, it is already the case that the subjective 
wiD obeys an other. Even in rudimentary states the subjection of one will to 
another occurs. The subjection of the will means !hat the particular will does 
not count. This does not me~ however,. that the individual has no will; 
[rather, it means that] fancies and desire do not count. Thus what takes place 
is a worlcing oneself free from the particular will and natural desires. It 
involves the habit of directing oneself to an other. The habit of acting in 
accord with the universal wiD~ of knowing a universal and affirming its 
purpose, is what counts in the state. Thus the state is the knowledge of the 
n 
universal I that comes about in this external way (and in history we stand 
on the soil of externality). In such a rudimentary condition there is already a 
renunciation of the particular will. There is at least a suppression here of the 
particular will such that it retreats into itself. This retreat into self, this 
inward being-with-self, presupposes that a power is brought to bear upon 
che merely sensuous, natural will. And it is onJy when this happens that art, 
science, and religion can form. But we should not suppose that they can 
appear in insular fashio~ or, speaking generally, simply in isolation. All 
great human beings have indeed shaped themselves in solimde, but only 
inasmuch as they rework:ed for themselves what the state had already 
created. Such fonnative activity presupposes the state and society. In the 
fonner instance [i.e. in solitude], the universal is pressed back into oneself., as 
inwardness; in the othe.r,. the univecsa.J must be there (da sein). The universal 
as an existing being (ein Seiendes) must be posited within me as the inwardly 
180 

INTRODUCTION 
universal. The universal must be posited as a universal that is an existing 
being, not as something that is merely intended, represented, or inward. The 
universal, what has being (da seiend ist), is present in the state. To it 
corresponds the inwardness that surmises that what ought to be for it is a 
being that is there (Dasein), and that its task is to make this being its own. 
Here inwardness is simultaneously actuality. Actuality is an external mani-
fold that is embraced within universality. This existent universal must be 
comprehended, and it can only be comprehended insofar as it is; and it is 
only in the state. Thus religion, art, and science can only be present in the 
state. These are the abstract aspects of what is involved. 
The Constitution of the State43 
Having examined the nature of the state, we sriJl face the question as to the 
essential character of its constitution. 44 What is to be rqarded as an 
advance, and what is not? I 
78 
The main point about the essential character of the constitution of the 
state in its myriad aspects is that the best and most complete state is the one 
in which the greatest degree of freedom prevails; for the state is the actua· 
lization of freedom. But thus far not much has been said, and it is a matter of 
determining wherein rational freedom is found. The question follows as to 
what constitutes the reality of freedom. 
The first proposal is the representation of freedom as subjective will, as 
free will ( Willkur); people think of freedom in the stare as free will, as the 
subjective will of the individual; and they think that this subjective wiD plays 
a pan in the most important affairs of state. What is called the subjective will 
is regarded as ultimately the decisive factor. But we have already set aside 
this principle of free will with the remark that the nature of the srate is 
precisely the unity of subjective and universal will such that the singular has 
raised itself to universality. 45 The subjective will is elevated so that it re-
nounces its particularity. In this way the notion rhat the free will of the 
individual should be the principle is already set aside. 
43. This subsection is the first of three in whiclt Hegel explores aspects ol tbt- oatwe of the 
state as the aaualizatiOP of freedom: its ronstitution; its relationship to tbr spiritual ~ld 
(religion. an, science, and culture); and its relationship ro the physical world (~phy). See 
below, o. 47. 
44. 'The German term is StaaJsver(asSUJJg. Verf!JSS*"' means •COQStinnioo' io me seme of tbt 
principles by wbich a system of goverruneot is organized. Hegd is DOt refcniDg priocipally to a 
written comtitution. i.e. to a document. 
45. See above. pp. 170, 177-8. 
181 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
When we have the state and its well-being in mind, we often represent it 
[as having two aspects]: one is the government, as the concentrated individ-
uality of the state, the activity of the universal; the other is, in contrast to 
this, the people as many individual subjective wills. Then we set forth the 
proposal that the best political organization of the state would be one in 
which both sides are posited and secured: the government in its universal 
operation, and the people in their subjective will. Both sides must then be 
limited. If we have this very common representation (and it appears often in 
79 
history), t but now ask what the concept of the state is, precisely this 
opposition between the government (i.e. the universal, the self-acting of 
the universal will) and the subjective will is suspended in the concept and 
disappears. There is something malignant in the opposition between the 
people and the government. As long as this opposition endures, there is 
not yet in fact a state, and what is at stake is the very existence of the 
state. The idea of the state is the unity of the universal and particular wills, 
and the opposition that we have been dealing with is an abstract one. In the 
state this opposition must have disappeared. The rational concept of the 
state has already left such an abstract opposition behind; those who speak of 
this opposition as a necessity and still assen it know nothing at all of the 
nature of the state and have not yet recognized the concept of the state. The 
state has as ii:S very foundation the unity of these aspects. lhis unity is its 
being as such, its substance; but in this regard it is not yet an inwardly 
developed substance. 
In this regard it is not yet rational. As a living entity, the state is to be 
thought of essentially as something developed, as an organic system consist-
ing in spheres or particular universalities that are independent on their own 
account, but only in such a way that their independent operation produces 
this whole, that is, sublates their independence. In the organism it is abso-
lutely no longer a question of the opposition between universal and singular. 
For example, in regard to an animal it is not a question of its animal nature 
in general and of its particular animal components. Rather, the unity of the 
universal and particular already resides in the animal nature, where the 
Wliversal quality of life is present in each component; when extracted from 
so 
the living thing, the component becomes something unorganic. 1 If the 
wtity is destroyed. m organism no longer exists. So too the state is to be 
grasped as this totality; and what is distinctive about a constitution is the 
form of this totality. 
The first form is the one in which this totality is still enveloped and the 
spheres [comprising the state] have not yet arrived at their independent 
subsistence, their autonomy. The second form is the one in which the spheres 
182 

INTRODUCTION 
become free, and along with them individuals become free too. The first 
form is compulsory unity; the second is a loose unity of liberated spheres in 
which the unity is a secondary factor (eine neue). Finally, the third form is 
the one in which the spheres, subsisting independently, find their efficacy 
only in the production of the universal. 
Reminding ourselves of concrete representations, we see that all stares, 
all realms, pass through these forms, and the whole of world history can 
be divided according to these forms. First we see in each state a type of 
patriarchal kingdom-patriarchal or militant-and here the unity is still 
inherently compulsory. Then singularity, particularity, come into promi· 
nence, and thus aristocracy or democracy arises, depending on whether 
particular spheres or individuals rule. In democracy an accidental aristoc· 
racy crystallizes, based on talent or some other contingency. This makes a 
transition to a second kind of kingship, a monarchy, which is finally the 
ultimate and true form of the state. World history has passed through this 
condition. Thus in Germany there have always been kings, who first ruled 
patriarchally. The later [Holy Roman] empire is to be seen as the demise of 
kingships; individual parts of it-Holland and others-even totally 
seceded. I So it was only an empty formuJa and not yet the second kind 
81 
of kingship. 
On the whole the same progression occurs in world history. In world 
history we find first the Oriental empires in which universality appears in a 
massive, undivided, and substantial unity. The Greek and Roman empires, at 
the point of their highest flourishing, i.e. the development of their world-
historical significance, split into aristocracy and democracy. The modem 
European or Germanic world portrays, by contrast, the (second] monarchi· 
cal constitution,46 where the particular spheres become free without endan-
gering the whole, where instead the very activity of the particular produces 
the whole. And this is the presentation of the idea, which grants freedom to 
its different elements, brings them into prominence, and takes them back 
into its unity. 
Nothing can be learned from history about the constitution of the state 
because the state is rationality in the world, concretely existing rationality. 
For this reason the various constirutions succeed one another in the differ-
entiation of their principles, and always in such a way that the earlier 
46. The "second monarchy', as Hegel makes clear in The PhilosopbyofRigbt (§§ 275-31,), is 
a constitutional monarchy in which the sovereign bas limittd althoogb i.mponaDI powers VIS-:a: 
vi$ tht executive brancll, the representative assembly, and the couns. On the ttm1 "Germanic 
and its equatioa with 'European', see below, n.. 79. 
183 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
principles are sublated by the later ones. The rationality of the state is this 
principle of inward unity that stands over against those [previously men-
tioned] abstract aspects. It is a wholly different matter in the sciences. In the 
sciences, once something has been brought forth it holds good for all times; 
the earlier principles are the absolute foundation of the later ones. It is a 
different matter with the constitution. In the case of the constitution of the 
stare, the later principles are not yet present in the earlier ones. For that 
reason we can learn nothing from ancient history; in ancient history there 
were distinctive principles that ultimately were inherently static. The princi-
82 
pie of the rational I state is precisely that such principles are not ultimate 
but, on the whole, perish. Moral principles can, to be sure, be extracted from 
history for the constitution, but not for the concept of freedom, which is 
what matters for the true constitution of the state. What matters in the state 
is the rationality of freedom, namely, that the whole is like a Gothic building, 
free-standing and having for its foundation and material the uniry of singu-
larity and universality. Its truth is that the singular exists only to bring forth 
the whole. It is here too that the concept of the true constitution of the state 
is found, which the ancient states knew not but the modern Christian world 
first discovered. 
The State and Religion, Art, Science, and Culture 
The second aspect
47 to be included here concerns the connection of the 
spheres of religion, art, and science with the state. The state is the idea in 
the element of worldliness, of human freedom. The state is the whole of 
spiritual and actual actuality. This concrete whole has particular forms in 
which it is and must be comprehended. These forms constitute, then, the 
particular content. There are three types of forms. In the first, the content is 
the universal in and for itself, the infinite; this is the conrem of religion, art, 
and [philosophical] science. The second is a finite conrent as it relates to 
needs. The third is the natural aspect of the state, climate, land, etc. These 
three aspects are thus forms of the state, and systems of cxterioriry with 
respect to it. The first is the state in its being-in-and-for-self, the second thC' 
4 7. _See above, n. 43. The second aspect, according to the present paragraph, divides into 
three lorms, of which the first two concern the state's relations to the spiritual and cultural 
world, in both infinitt' and tinite aspects, and the third its relations to rhe natural o£ physical 
world. These £elations are 'exterior' as compared to the Interior relatiom oi the constitution. 
Thus the discussion oi the state's natural relations !i.e. geography) forms a thtrd element in tu•o 
mads, an outer and an inner. Our subsection headings trace the outer triad (constitution, 
spiritual,ulrural relations, natural relations). The inner triad (infinite spirituality, finite spiritu· 
ality, narure) comprises the two pans of this subsection plus the next subsection. 
184 

INTRODUCTION 
state's exteriority for itself, the third the whole immediate determinacy of 
nature. These three aspects form a rich chapter. 
[L Religion, Art, Science.) Only the first aspect can be discussed here 
more fully. The content of the state that subsists in and for itself is the spirit 
of the people itself; comprehended in and for itself, we have the state in this 
form. The actual state is animated by this spirit. In the determinate existence 
that occupies this spirit, singularities certainly enter into play; for in the 
actual state determinate interests are at stake. As thinking beings, however, 
humans I must know the universal, the essential being; they muse represent 
83 
this being to themselves. But they must not merely know it; in doing so they 
must also know themselves. The singular consciousness must therefore have 
knowledge of both the being-in-and-for-itself of spirit and its unity with the 
individual. 
The center poinr of this knowledge, the actual spirit of this consciousness, 
is religion as such. Art and science can be viewed as forms and aspects of 
religion. Art shares a content with religion, but the element of art is sensible 
intuition. Art renders religion sensible and objective to representation. Sci-
ence also has the same content-the science that is simply science, science 
Ka'Ti{ox~v, namely philosophy. Philosophy treats the same object, but in the 
form of thought. The finite sciences do not have an absolute content, and 
rhus they are found in the second form [as the relationship to the finite). 
The substance of the state comes to consciousness in religion, as it did in 
Athens. So the penates were portrayed as the spirit of the family. Therefore 
religion is the first topic that we have to consider. We can adduce only the 
chief elements that are involved in religion, those that can be demonstrated 
by philosophy alone. The essential characteristics of religion~ the idea of 
religion, must be presupposed on the basis of the philosophy of religion.
48 
We begin with the assumption that the nature of the state is the life of 
ethical activity that unifies within itself the will of the universal and the 
subjective will. This is the essence of the state. Now, when we grasp the will 
as the foundation 1 of the state and take up this characterization on its own 
84 
account, it receives a further specification. The principle of will is being-for-
self. Will is activity and has its antithesis in the external world as such; to this 
extent ir is limited, its principle is finite, and so it is thwarted. The human 
being is infinite in cognizing, limited in willing. This is rhe direct opposite of 
the talk about the human being as unlimited in willing and limited in 
4 8. The drscussion 0 { 'The Com:ept of Religion' in the lectures of 1821 I deliVered a little over 
a year pr.or to the present lectures) is what is presupposed here; see Lectures arz the Phr/o$(}pb, 
of Religion, i. 185-256. 
185 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
thinking. 49 Intelligence alone liberates the will from its limitation, and rhe 
thinking free will is what is universal. The will as essentially in and for itself 
must now be thought of as liberated from its antithesis to an outer world. It 
is to be thought of as altogether universal in this aspect roo. Indeed cun-
ning50 always finds means for the attainment of its ends; but the will as 
universal is determined in and for itself by the antithesis, is in itself power; 
and essential being is to be thought of as universal power. 
This power can then be thought of as the lord of nature and the spiritual 
world. The word 'lord' expresses the power in the form of subjectivity; but 
this subject, 'lord', is itself only something fonnal; for an other stands over 
against the lord: the lord is active vis-a-vis an other. But the lord as spirirual 
power is lord not only over an other, but also over itself; it is retlected into 
itself. Thus this power must be thought of as the being that is at rest within 
itself, not as the universal negativity vis-a-vis the other. Power is not the sole 
aspect of the universal. This reflection into self is simple relation to self and is 
thus a subsisting being (ein Seiendes), individuality, subjectivity. Reflection 
imo self is for the first time personality. Thus reflected into itself, power is 
actuality, and indeed immediate actuality. The immediate actuality of chis 
85 
reflection in its spiritualized I shape is, however, knowing (Wissen), and 
more precisely the knowing one (das Wissende). This is self-<onsciousness, 
human individuality. The universal spirit is essentially present as human 
consciousness. The human being is knowing's being~there (Dasein) and 
being-for-self (Fursichsein). Thus we have a universal spirit as self-knowing 
and inwardly reflecting-as which it posits itself as subject, as immediate, as 
subsisting being. The subsisting spirit is human consciousness. 
These elements are to be apprehended within the divine idea in such a 
way that it is the uniry of the universal and the subsisting spirit. Abstracrly, 
this means nothing other than that spirit must be apprehended as the unity of 
finitude and infinitude; when the two are separated, the understanding's 
version of infinity prevails. In another fonn this is the mystery that the 
Christian religion has disclosed and revealed, namely, that God is the unity 
ot human and divine nature. This is the genuine idea of what religion is 
about. The cultus is also pan of religion, and the culrus is nothing other than 
the singular consciousness securing this unity of itself with the divine. The 
unity, therefore, of the divine and the human i.s the genuine idea of religion. 
49. Hege-l alludes ro Kant'scrinques of theoretical and practical reason: theorencal rea.~n i~ 
limited; practical reason, on the basis of its postulates., 1s unlimited. 
50. A reference to the ·cunningot reason' {List der Vermmft) is found in the lectures oi 1830-
1 ~see abm·e, p. 96, n. 44, and vol. ii of this edn.) in a context that differs from the pr~t one. 
186 

INTRODUCTION 
The understanding ( Verstand), as it is found in moderrtity, has made the 
divine idea into an abstraction, into a being that is beyond the human; it has 
made it into an impregnable battlement, looming starkly, against which 
hwnan beings run headlong when they approach it. Reason ( Vernunft) has 
a form that differs completely from the abstraction of the understanding. 
Since we regard this unity to be already posited as rational, it shows itself 
directly I when it is a matter of considering religion. The object of religion 
is the truth itself, the unity of the subjective and objective. 
In general, rwo types ot religion occur. The first is a religion of separation 
in which God stands on one side as an abstract being outside us, thus a 
religion not positing the singularity of consciousness, with the result that 
what it perhaps calls •spirit', its so-called 'spirit', is but an empty name. This 
has been the religion of Judaism, and it is still that of Islam; and so also it is 
the religion of the present-day understanding, which in this respect has gone 
over to a Turkish mode of representation. j 1 This is the religion of separation, 
which can have in tum a diversity of forms since a universal in the fonn of 
natural being can be represented in a natural, elementary way as air, fire, etc. 
But it can also be represented as a universal being in the form ot thought, as 
it is in judaism, etc. (When we represent the universal as narure, that is 
pantheism, but nothing exists in this pantheism. God disappears as the 
subject because nothing is distinguished any longer. Human beings do not 
recognize themselves positively in such a universal but instead relate to it 
negatively.) 
The other type of religion is the unity of infinite and finite, the unity of 
God and the world. This religion again has several fonns. For example, the 
incarnations of the Hindus belong to it, likewise Greek art, which portrays 
the divine in human shape. This type is found more purely in the Christian 
religion, where the unity of divine and human nature appears in Christ, and 
which allows God to appear in his Son, and so brings human beings to a 
consciousness of rhe unity. This anthropomorphic nature is not, howeve~ 
portrayed in an unworthy fashion but rather in such a way that it leads to the 
51. This depiction of judaism is similar to chat found in 1M 1821 philosoph)' ot reli_g~oo 
lectures. However, by the 1824 lectures and thereafter Hegel's pomayal undergoes a transmon 
to a more favorable interpretation, which emphasizes not only the sublimiry but _aJw the 
goodness, wisdom and subjectivity of the God of Israel. AJso in the 182_1 and 1824 ph•losoph~-
f I. -
' 
· 
· 
·1 
1 thatlound here. At !he s.ame 
0 re •g~on lectures, Hegel briefly refers to Islam m a way stm.J ar 0 
. 
. 
. 
_ 
. 
· 
h 
· 
- · 
f rh Muslim mv~ncJalal-ai-Dm Rum1. 
hme e expresse~ appreciation lor the umtary VISion ° 
e 
-
· 
-
8 .. -
See Le 
l . . 
.. 100 13+-41 152-60 261 423->4, 72 ; Ill. 
ctures on the Phtlosophy of Re tgf011, u. 
• 
' 
'. 
nd' . -L- ..1..;1 
L • 
· 
· · 
f 
· ' · 
too 
JD UK" r- osopu\' 
142-4. The typology 'religion of separauon', 'relag10n o un•rr • 15 PDl 
· 
of religion. 
187 
86 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
true idea of God. The true idea of God entails that God is not a beyond, over 
and against which stands consciousness. With religion, therefore, it is a 
87 
matter of these forms. I 
The existence of art is directly connected with religion. The understand· 
ing can have no art, or at best it can have an art of sublimity, where figure 
(Gestalt) is so distorted and disconnected that subjectivity seems to disap-
pear, inasmuch as figure becomes boundless. But an is essentially an an of 
beauty or fine art (schont Kunst) and had to have occurred among the 
Greeks. 52 It is to be represented as the sensible intuition of the divine, and 
the form of subjectivity belongs to it. Therefore the Christian religion too 
has art because the divine has appeared in it too and does not remain 
something above and beyond-because the divine is not the abstraction of 
the understanding. 
Whether philosophy can occur among a people is also a function of 
religion. Thus only among the Greeks and Christians could there have 
been genuinely concrete philosophy. The Orientals have philosophy too, 
but an abstract one, not a unity of the finite and the infinite. These are the 
main factors of religion. 
There is a necessary connection of religion with the principle of the state; 
for religion sets forth the principle of the state in its truth, in unconditioned 
universality, but in such a way that in it actual spirit has divested itself of 
external contingencies. Conscious freedom can only exist where individual· 
ity is known as positive in relation to the divine, i.e. where subjectivity is 
envisaged as present in the divine being. Thus conscious freedom is found 
among the Greeks, and, in more developed fonn~ in the Christian world 
because it is there that the characteristic of subjectivity comes to be known 
88 
as a divine characteristic. I 
In this respect it has been rightly said that the state rests on religion. The 
principle of the state must be an absolute justification; finite interests are 
relative matters. The absolute justification of the universal principle is that it 
is known as an element of, a determination of, the divine nature itself. The 
principle of the state, the universal, what it requires, is known as absolute, 
i.e. as a d.etennination of the divine nature itself. This is more precisely what 
it means to say that the state rests on religion. We have often heard this said 
in modem times, but we must not suppose it to mean that the existing state 
needs religion, and that religion is not pr-esent there and must therefore first 
51. The cootrast hen: follows that between me religion of sublimity (Jewish religion) and the 
religion of beauty (Grttk religioa). See Leawes on the Philosophy of Religion, ii. 152-39. 
188 

INTRODUCTION 
be imported into the state in bowls and buckets. Human beings are formed 
only into what exists, and nor into what does not. 
Thus we musr not believe thar the state existed beforehand and had to 
inuoduce religion into it; rather the state derives from religion itself. Only a 
state that is determinate has derived from a religion that is determinate; such 
a state has derived only from the Christian religion, Catholic or Protestant. 
Thus the state always derives from religion; the principle of the state, the 
consciousness of the sacred, is found in religion. 
[2. Finite Aspects of Culture.) Still to be considered is the fact that, vis-a-
vis its ideal aspect, the state has the aspect of outer appearance and life, of 
external material in general. Thus the content here is the particular as such. 
the finite, but the universal shines through this particular content. However, 
this particularity is so manifold and rich that we cannot go into it here. These 
are the elements that are involved in it. 53 1 
The first material of this sort is what is reckoned among the customs and 
practices of peoples. Here above all belongs natural ethical life or the family 
relationship; its characterization is very important. Both [customs and pcac· 
rices] are detennined by the nature of the state. The first aspect here is 
marriage, the question as to its type, whether it is polygamy or is monogamy, 
the marriage of one man and one woman. The modem world can have only 
the latter (thus also not polyandry), for the modem state is where each side 
receives its full right. Marriage, in accord with its conce~ now receives its 
full right as the relationship of one man and one woman. A second aspect is 
the relationship of children to parents. Likewise, in the third place, family 
property is important. Definitions of the law of inheritance are connected 
with the principle of the state, depending on whether persons are slaves or 
free property holders. A further relationship is the behavior of individuals 
toward each othe~ even to the point of what shows itself as courtesy or 
civility. Other customs include those involved in the necessary epochs of an 
individual's life, for example, birth, marriage, death. Such practices express 
the conceptions that a people has about these matters. They show the 
specific sort of representation that a people has of spirit. Such conceptions 
present themselves in practices that are symbolic, whether incidentally or 
expressly so. Incidental features often play a large role in practices. Thus the 
meaning is not to be sought in all their individual components. So these are 
53. Hegel briefly summarizes some of the matters addressed in de1ail io Th~ PbiJoscpbo, of 
Right prior to the treatment of the state (law, property, family, (;ivil society, etc.). 1besE our_ fionr 
aspects of human culture as distinct from the relationships to the infinia: repre5dlted by nl~g~on. 
art, and pbilosopb.ial scieDCe. 
189 
89 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
aspects that are connected with the universal dimension of the state-to 
90 
which courtesy 1 and conduct also penain, as, for example, the manner in 
which Europeans and Asians behave toward the authorities. Asians, for 
example, prostrate themselves before their rulers, while Europeans merely 
greet them. So such differences are characteristic too, though only a few are 
purely incidental. 
The second point that comes under consideration regarding the aspect of 
appearance is the practical conduct of human beings in relation to nature-
therefore, cultuce54-and how they act with respect to means for the satis-
faction of their needs. Here luxuries come into the picture, also the weapons 
that human beings use against animals and each other. Weapons are in any 
case an important element. According to ancient Asian legends, the discov-
ery of iron seems to be such an element; the impact of the discovery is still 
felt today. The invention of gunpowder is to be regarded as nothing more 
than accidental, but it could have been invented and used only at precisely 
this time and in this culture. Equally imponant elements are writing, print-
ing, etc. Such elements comprise influential stages. A great many of these 
things are free-standing, such as luxuries that could appear in any age and 
under any condition. Others, however, are bound to a specific standpoint. 
The third important point concerns the rights or basic principles in regard 
to finite needs: private rights as distinct from statutory law. This requires in 
part personal freedom, the exclusion of slavery, and in addition property 
(namely, freely-held property). Full personal freedom, full free property. can 
emerge only in states with a specific principle. 
Finally, the founh matter concerns the science of the finite: rights, &ee-
91 
dom, relations to finite objects. 1 Knowledge of the finite forms the content 
of the sciences that are not philosophy: mathematics, natural history., phys-
ics. These, too, require a certain cuJtural standpoint, also a theoretical 
interest, and can emerge only after the period in which sensuous drives 
prevaiL If individuals are inwardly free, have attained inner freedom for 
themselves, then objects are also allowed to be free and are engaged no 
longer simply in tenns of desire but rather theoretically. The freedom of 
individuals belongs to the fact that they are curious. The ancient world could 
not yet be acquainted with the objects of nature, or examine the finite obiects 
of nature, or have an interest in nature and its laws in the way thal we have 
had. The ancient and the modem worlds are distinguished here too. It 
54. The term used here is KMltur. not Bildlmg. The Latin cubwra derives from colere, to •till• • 
'cultivate•. 'tum (soil)'. Thus tbe Latin as distioct from the German tnm expnsscs an original 
relationship ro nature. 
190 

INTRODUCTION 
belongs to a higher and more concrete security, a greater energy of spirit, to 
take the objects of the life-nexus and occupy oneself with their superfluous 
and limited features. That spirit arrives at this abstraction involves a higher 
intensity on its part. These, then, are the aspects that have a connection with 
the universal shapes of spirit. 
The State and Geography 
The third aspect55 ro be discussed concerns the connection of the state with 
its external natural setting. World history, we have said, is a series of 
spiritual shapes that lead to the actualization of the principles of spirit and 
that end in such a way that spirit grasps itself. A necessary principle is 
allotted to each world-historical people. These principles have a necessary 
succession in rime, and likewise a concrete spatial specificity, a geographical 
position. So we speak here about geography in world history. 
The fust thing to note in this regard is that climate is a wholly abstract and 
general element in relation to the shape taken by spirit. History indeed lives 
on the soil I of the natural; but this is only one aspect, and the higher aspect 
92 
is that of spirit. Therefore nature is an element of lesser influence; the natural 
aspect, climate, does not account foe the individual. Thus iris tedious to hear 
about the mild Ionian sky and its influence on Homer; for the sky is still 
mild, and the Turks have no Homer. 
The second thing to be noted is that neither the frigid nor the tropical 
zones create world-historical peoples, foe these extremes constitute such a 
55- See above, n. 4 7. 1bt German editors ohhis cdn. point out that geography bas a systematic 
position in Hegel's cona:ption of the state, a fact that is obscured by the earlier edns. Eduard Gans 
and KMI Hegel placed the discussion of geography between the introduction and tbe divisiou ol 
topics. while Georg Latiou and johannes Hoffmeister moved it to an appendix. See Vorksamgen 
Mber die Pbilosophie JeT Weltgeschichte, p. viii. As a concise coofumation of the p~e of 
geograpby in world history, see Hegel's remark below (p. 198) that 'world history is spirit in the 
element ot worldliness; thus we must also recognize the natural and tbe corporeal in it. The 
natural and the spiritual fonn one shape, and this is bistory: It is not surprising that tUgei's 
perspective on world geography and world history is Euroceotri'" His sources f&X Ab-U and the 
r\mericas were principally travel and missionary repons by Europeans, which gave a very 
prejudiced and limited piaure. What is surprising, considering his Eurocmuic perspeuive, is 
the large amount of attmtion devoted to the Orienral world in these loctun:s (in 1822-3, nearly 
half the work following tbe introduction). Tbe sowces for Asian bistory. art., religioo., and 
philosophy were much more adequate than those for Africa and America, and J-kr:rl began to 
absorb this growing literature in the early 1820s- His only explicitly OJc:Dtiooed ~ 
~or 
geography is !i.e work of Carl Riner (see o. 62 below). He must also have been fanuliar- with 
the writing" of the naturaJi.~t and explorer Alexander von Humholdt (whor;e brother Wilhelm wa~ 
one of the founders of the University of Jkrlin). Through the couaibutioos of Humbolda aod 
Ritu:.r:, geography bc:ame ooe of the more advanced of the nanual scieDces iD the early l9tb UDL 
Hegel"s view of geography and nature is Oipnic but pre-evolutimaJY. 
191 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
powerful natural force that human beings there are unable to move abour 
freely or acquire adequate means by which to pursue higher spiritual inter· 
ests. The peoples who belong to such extremes persist in a state of torpor. 
They are under the thumb of nature and cannot separate themselves from it. 
The natural force is so great that the spiritual aspect remains in identity with 
it and thus cannot position itself over against the natural; this separation and 
self-composure are inherently the first condition of a higher spiritual devel-
opment. Other peoples who are less bound to natural forces and who art 
favored by nature are more open to spirit; but they have not yet raised 
themselves to spiritual activity and are not yet free enough from nature to 
advance beyond feeding themselves from the crumbs of the master, to 
advance further than other tribes, by gaining the impulse to attain a higher 
existence. 
On the whole it must be noted in the third place that the temperate zone, 
93 
and indeed the northern temperate zone, forms the stage I of the world 
theater. In the north the earth is continental in scope, with a wide breast, 
while in the south the shapes taper into points, so that here there are quite 
distinctive human beings and animals, and in the south animals and plants 
generally predominate. These are also elements of necessity. Here too the 
general conceptual distinction holds good and is conspicuous. Land divi-
sions parallel the division into several classes of animals. 
A founh and necessary division is that into the new world and the old 
world; we do not make the division, but the world itself does it. 
The new world is new not only relatively [in regard to its relationship to 
the old world]; it is [also} new in regard to its physical and spiritual proper· 
ties. Without speaking disparagingly of the new world, its geological age is 
not our concern, it being of comparable origin with the so-called creation, 
although islands of the South Seas such as New Holland 56 are evidently of 
recent formation. Nothing can and should be said about whether America 
had been in contact with Europe. 57 Nor does it matter that Mexico and Peru 
did indeed have significant civilizations, since they were of a feebler stock 
and are long gone. 
56. Hegel is referring to Au~tralia. The Dutch named this island-continent 'New HoUand' in 
1644, and the name was not officially changed until1824 although the Enpish sraned senle-
ments m 1788. Hegel's brief descnption of 'New Holland' below (seen. 64) 6ts th~ east coast of 
Australia. Th~ tenn 'South Seas' was the name given bv earlv exploren to the Pacific Ocean. 
Thus Australia and the Paci6c islands arc: pan of what Hegel describes as the ·new world'. 
57. Is this is a reference w Viking expeditions (if Hegel kntw about rhem) 311dlor Spanish and 
Ponuguese colonies prior to thr English and French settlements? 
192 

INTRODUCTION 
The new world has shown itself to be much feebler than the old world ' 
and it lacks rwo resources, iron and horses. America is a new, feeble, 
powerless world. Lions, tigers, and crocodiles are feebler there than in 
Africa, 58 and the same is true of human beings. The original inhabitants of 
the West lndies have died out. I Some of the tribes of North America have 
94 
disappeared and some have retreated and generally declined, so that we see 
that the latter lack the strength to join the North Americans in the Free States 
(die Freistaaten). The same is more or less the case with Mexico and South 
America. Those who assert themselves there and sense the need for indepen-
dence are Creoles, just like those in the Free States. When we read the 
description of the time before Europeans arrived, it is easy to understand 
why the Creoles are the dominant people involved. The Brazilians are of a 
wholly feeble nature and narrow spirit. In the East Indies the English utilize a 
policy to prevent growth of a Creole population, that is, a people of Euro-
pean ancestry who are indigenous to Asia. There Englishmen are not al-
lowed to pursue any occupation they like, or become indigenous themselves. 
Also a child born of an Englishman and a native cannot hold any official post 
and is relegated to lower status, just like the child of a native. 
America can have the aspect of a new land, a land of the future. Napoleon 
is supposed to have said that the old world wearied him. Emigrants to 
America have on the one hand an advantage in that they bring with them 
the whole treasure of European culture and self-awareness without the 
burdens that the European states impose on individuals, without re-encoun-
tering the hardships they have left behind, such as the lack of free land, the 
division and surplus of labor, or indeed being without any livelihood at all. 
None of this is characteristic of America. The new Free Stares of North 
America are often cited as an example that even a large state can exist as 
free, i.e. as a republic. But in general there is nothing less apt than the 
comparison of states 1 with one another in regard to specific conditions. 
95 
As an example that free states can exist, we can even point to Hamburg and 
Switzerland, but the inappropriateness of comparing them with large states 
is directly evident. In any event Nonh America is a still-forming state, a state 
in the making, which does not yet have need of a monarchy because it has 
not yet developed to this point. It is a federation of states. Such states are the 
worst when it comes to foreign relations. Only its peculiar location has saved 
the federation from total destruction. If large states were closer ro it, its 
58. The only 'lions' in the new world are mountain lions; the jaguar is the closes~ approxi· 
marion to a 'tiger'· and the 'crocodiles' are principally aUigators. lhesc are smaller anunals than 
their African co~terpans, so perhaps rhis is what H~l means when be calls them 'feebler'. 
193 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
precarious situation would essentially come to light. This was indeed evident 
from the last war with England. 59 The federated states could not conquer 
Canada, and the English even occupied Washington. The militias did not 
arrive, or they fled; and such tension existed between the southern and the 
northern states that, had the war continued Ionge.; a complete division of the 
state would have resulted. 
In general, the [Nonh American) state is only in a process of becoming. 
The coasts facilitate transit trade between China and Europe. As for the rest, 
wave upon wave of people migrate from the coastal regions to the hinter-
lands of the Mississippi River valley where rhey farm; when pressed [by 
more migrants), this self-sufficient class clears new land. But when all the 
land has been occupied so that there are internal social pressures and the 
96 
need for trade arises, I the state must necessarily develop to the point of 
having to maintain a different system of government. The beginnings there 
are Ewopean in nature. So this country is presently a country of becoming, 
of the future, and thus it does not concern us further. 
We return now to the old world, for it is the one that concerns us in more 
detail, and we shall examine its condition more closely. This world is divided 
into three continents ( Weltteile); antiquity was already aware of that natural 
feature. These differences ace necessary because they correspond to the 
concept of thought. These three continents stand in an essential relationship 
and constitute a rational totality. 
They are so situated in relation to one another that communication 
between them is easy. The Mediterranean Sea sunders the old world, but 
in such a way as to facilitate communication. An aspect of the beneficence of 
water is that it makes communication possible.60 It is a French point of view 
that rivers and water are natural boundaries because they are what most 
bind together. The stretches of land along both banks of a river are necessar· 
ily united, and they connect inhabitants more readilv than would otherwise 
be the case. The sea accomplishes the same thin~. Britain and Brittany 
belonged together; likewise Norway with Denmark, but not with Sweden. 
However, Livonia, Estonia, 61 and Finland have belonged to Sweden. Thus 
5-J. The War of 1812. 
60. ~ 
lived in an age in which transportation by water {rivers, seas, oaarul was still 
easier than by land; thus he paid special attention ro the role oi water in human lusfo~·. 
61. Livonia is a former Baltic State, comprising present Latvia and pans of Estonia. founded 
in the 13th cent., contested over by Poland, Sweden, and Russia. The German t~xt then read~ 
Abtland. which must be an errooeous transcription of Est/aM (Estonia I. Estonia too has been 
controlled. by several natiom, including Sweden. The lectures 0 ( 183Q--l at this point have 
Chwrrd ICourland), a fumer duchy and part of presmt~y Latvia. 
194 

INTRODUCTION 
the foremost aspect of the sea is that it binds together. One of the distinctive 
features of the Mediterranean Sea is its many gulfs; therefore it is not an 
ocean that offers an empty and endless journey into the unknown, to which 
human beings can only relate in negative fashion. One of the great differ-
ences between peoples is whether they go to sea or I avoid it. The Mediter-
97 
ranean Sea of itself invites and calls upon human beings to take to the sea 
because on the whole it presents such a friendly face to them. 
Thus the three continents are situated advantageously for their connec-
tion with one another. As to their geographical properties, the following is to 
be brieRy remarked. Our task is facilitated by Ritter's fine book, 62 which has 
thoroughly examined the physical properties of these continents. There are 
three main features. 63 
The first element is the highlan~ where there is a massive formation, a 
land that rises high above the sea and is encompassed by a girdle of moun-
tains. The second is that there are breaks or gaps in rhis great mass. Without 
them, these areas are not well-suited to human needs. Thus the second 
element is the precipitous flow of rivers down from these mountains, and 
what matters is whether this is close to the sea or not, whether they encoun-
ter only a narrow coastal strip or some impediment that causes an extensive 
delta to form. In (South] America in western Chile and Peru there are narrow 
coastlines and no culture. On the other side, in Brazil enormous rivers 
discharge~ such as the Amazon, [or in Argentina] the Rio de Ia Plata, rivers 
fed by the mountains. New Holland64 is an immature land, having in the 
east a narrow strip of coast. and, beyond the blue mountains, rivers, which 
however flow out into marshes and so have no banks. The rivers of the 
highland are the second feature, and, if their plunge to the sea is impeded, 
they have a longer course and flow in valleys. The third feature is a more or 
less absence of highland. where there are only mountain ranges that can 
indeed have flat areas but only a few, and from which only small streams 
flow; here meadows form and valleys are found, and the alternation between 
mountain and valley constitutes the main feature. I 
98 
62. Carl Ritter. Die Erdkunde im Verha/tms zur Natur und zur Geschichte des M~cben, 
fXkr mlgemeine, vergleichorde Geographie, als sicbere Grundlage des Studi#ms rmd VPJlerril;bt.< 
irz physikali5Chen und histarischen Wissenschaftm, 2 vols. (Berlin, 1817-181. Ritu:r ( 1779-18591. 
a founder of modern human grography, was profi!SSOr of geography at tht University of Berlin 
StaJ'ling in 1820. 
63. As the following paragraph shows. these features apply to the new world as wcU a~ 
the old. 
64. See above, n. 56. 
195 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
The three continents are distinguished in accord with these three aspects. 
In Africa proper the highland is the main feature; in Asia the fertile, abun-
dant plains and alluvial valleys; in Europe mountain ranges are found, 
alternating with valleys, hills, and plains, with no single element predomi-
nating. The character of spirit differs in the three continents in similar 
fashion. In Africa proper it is the sensuous nature at which hwnan develop-
ment is arrested: sensuous enjoyment, great muscular suength to sustain 
labor, childlike good nature, but also wueflective and unfeeling ferocity. 
Asia by conuast is the land of spiritual antithesis, which arrives at an ethical 
life hut sticks with a natwal, substantial ethical life, whereas the other aspect 
of the spiritual antithesis remains individual self-seeking, infinity of desire, 
and boundless extension of freedom, wholly abstract freedom. Ewope is the 
descenr out of abstract freedom into self, out of this boundless freedom into 
the particular; it is the deepening of spirit within itself, its diversification, 
and the elevation of the particular into the universal. 
Ow closer task is briefly to examine the continents in succession. In 
physical tenns ea4;h continent divides in turn into three parts physically-a 
division that more or less can stand, although the distinct parts are mutually 
related in such a way that their relations reveal the distincmess of forms and 
thereby become the bases for drawing new distinctions. 
[ 1.} We can consider Africa as comprising the following three parts; these 
differ such that distinctions in spiritual character remain bound to this 
99 
physical characterization. The I three parts comprise Africa as it is in itself 
(an sich). A more precise characterization of the division is that the parts 
exist fundamentally on their own account, and only then in relation to 
the others. We have to disregard what they are on their own account 
(das FUr-Sich). 
The first part of Africa is therefore Africa proper, which we can leave 
aside since its points of contact {with history) are minimal. It is bounded 
essentiaUy as follows: in the west, by the Gulf of Guinea; in the east, also not 
by a straight line but by the Gulf of Arabia; in the nonh, by the south side of 
the Niger River. This land is fashioned in accord with our first characteristic. 
It is a highland whose mountains fonn a narrow band around the interior. 
Within this band is a belt of rich vegetation but pernicious humidity (giftige 
Ausdunstrmg). Adjacent to it are the mountains of the highland. The plateau 
proper is round with a narrow strip of level coastland. In between lies a 
~ampy area whose annosphere is almost always pernicious. To the north is 
principally the Sahara Desert. The Europeans have established settlements 
and colonies on the other three sides, which touch the sea~ but they have not 
yet penetrated into the highland, where riches are to be found in the most 
196 

INTRODUCTION 
inaccessible conditions. The Negroes display great strength of body and a 
highly sensual nature along with affability but also a shocking and incon-
ceivable ferocity. 
These peoples have never emerged out of themselves, nor have they 
gained a foothold in history. In the sixteenth century, to be swe, I wholly 
100 
Wlknown peoples irrupted from the interior; but these hordes were merely 
destructive and of no cultural significance. These bands displayed the most 
frightful savagery and barbarism. But encounters with them in peaceful 
circumstances found them to be as affable as any others. This Africa remains 
in its placid, unmotivated, self-enclosed sensuality and bas not yet entered 
into history; ilS only further connection with history is that in darker days its 
inhabitants have been enslaved. 
As to the general condition of slavery, it is said that slavery ought not to 
exist, that it is intrinsically unjust in terms of its very concept. But this 
'ought• expresses a subjective wish; it is not a historical 'ought', for what 
ought to be exists, and what exists ought to be. What this deficient 'ought' 
regarding slavery lacks is substantial ethicality, the rationality of a political 
state in which it can have reality. There is no slavery in the state that is 
rational; slavery is found onJy where spirit has not yet attained this point, thus 
only where the true idea in some aspects is still just an •ought'.65 Slavery, 
therefore, is necessary at those stages where the state has not yet arrived ar 
rationality. It is an element in the transition to a higher stage. 
The second part of Africa is nonh of the Niger River and the Sahara 
Desen-this dry, burning sea that more completely separates than does the 
sea itself. This part runs from the Atlas Mountains in the west along the 
Mediterranean coast to the Nile. Here thece are mountain ranges and 
isolated deserts, but in pan it contains the most fruitful and many-hued 
stretch of land, including, for example, Morocco and I fez. This part as a 
101 
whole forms a coastal region and has only a subsidiary role in world history; 
it is not independent on its own account and does not stand on its own two 
feet. Spain is said to belong to Africa. But it is just as correct to say that this 
pan of Africa belongs to Europe. The third part of Africa is Egypt, a part in 
its own right and one interesting in tenns of world history. Egypt is a river 
basin; it has the river to thank for its existence, and it is isolated in the west 
and south. The three different pans as such are distinctive in Africa, which is 
the first, immediate continent. Egypt adjoins Asia. 
65. We follow here the reading of Griesheim rather than of HOI:bo, which i~ preftrnd by ~ 
German edn. The Hotbo version reads: ' ... thus the true idea still bas aspecl5 ID terms of which 
it merely oughr ro be'. 
197 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
[2.] The second land is Asia, the world of dawning (Aufgang). 66 Thus far 
we have viewed natural conditions as having a more negative and constrict-
ing impact on world history. In Asia they become positive, rhus the great 
intuition of nature, which must become the natural foundation for our 
intuition, as it is for history. World history is spirit in the element of 
worldliness; thus we must also recognize the natural and the corporeal in 
it. The natural and the spiritual form one shape, and this is history. Asia 
constitutes the dawning [of world history). Every country is east for another. 
Asia, however, is the continent that is the East as such, while Europe is partly 
the center and partly the endpoint of world history. In Asia the light of self-
consciousness dawns as the state. Here we have first to consider physical 
locales, which, in the way that they appear immediately. do not constitute 
historical distinctions; rather Asia is the land of antithesis. Here distinctions 
must be posited concretely as the relation of antitheses. The first differences 
102 
here are abstract but not isolated as in Africa. I Only in their concrete 
differences do the relationships play a part in history. 
Here in Asia the relations of the distinctions are necessary ones. To begin 
with, the entire northern slope must be regarded separately from the ranges 
of the Altai [Mountains] of Siberia. The apparent advantages gained from 
rivers emptying into the sea are offset by the climate~ and thus rhis area 
holds no interest for world history. The remainder is divided into three 
topographies. 
The first. as in Africa, is a massive highland, encircled by an enormous 
girth of mountains, the Himalaya Mountains, the highest in the world. 
These have the highest peaks. But this highland does not remain enclosed 
within itself like the one in Africa; rather it is intersected and stands in 
reciprocal relation with the second topography. This terrain comprises the 
river basins, which lie outside the highland and are different from those in 
Europe. There are no valleys but enormous alluvial valley plains (Talebenenl 
and river basins. The rivers, which rise in the highlands and flow through 
these valleys, are the connecting arteries between the two locales. but the,· 
only connect after cutting through the mountains. Within the mountains rhe 
rivers are wild; but there are rapids that interrupt the flow within the 
mountains and into the valleys. Rapidly flowing waters such as waterfall~ 
hamper interchange. The Zaire [River] is like this too in Africa, where the 
flow surges through mountains and is interrupted by waterfalls. Mountains 
66. The reference. oi course. is to the dawning or rising of the sun in the east; Ar.(gang also 
mt"ans ·east' or 'Orient'. Hegel has in mind the dawning ol world history. which ts the nsi~ oi 
spirit into self-conscious~. 
198 

INTRODUCTIO~ 
as such generally form watersheds, as it were free-standing areas. But rivers 
cut through such mountain ranges. Thus it is I not strictly correct to call 
103 
mountain ranges watersheds. The rivers are the sources of feniliry. The 
fertility in these valley plains is wholly different from that in the mountain-
ous country. In the lower parts of these valleys the fenility comes from 
sediment, etc. The vast plains are especially characteristic of Asia and 
Egypt. To be sure, we note them also in Europe, but they are only a minor 
element, like the lowlands of the Vistula and those in Lombardy. In Asia 
these plains are the focal point of the culture. The first of these river basins is 
China with the Huang Ho [Huang He] and the Yangtze [Chang Jiang), the 
Yellow River and the Blue River. These rivers are cut off from the southern 
section by a mountain chain. The Ganges and the Indus fonn the second 
valley. The Indus however lacks a characteristic valley; its upper part runs 
through mountains and is fertile, while in its lowlands it flows through sandy 
plains. The third valley or basin is that of the Tigris and the Euphrates and 
also encompasses grazing land. The fourth basin is formed by the Caspian 
Sea, along with the rivers that flow into it: in the east the Oxus, also the 
Jaxartes, now the Syr-Darya {which flows into the Aral Sea but formerly also 
into the Caspian Sea); and further west the Cyrus and the Araxes.67 To the 
west too there are flat valleys, but less important ones; noteworthy are those 
formed by the present-day Araxes. 
Thus the chief antithetical elements in Asia are highlands and enormous 
wide plains. These two topographies are necessary: they are a source and 
ground for wholly antithetical human dispositions, antithetical human 
activity. In this respect the distinctive feature is the essential interaction 
between them, the mountain dwellers with their inner restlessne5s, the valley 
dwellers with their rootedness; and they are not isolated as in Egypt. What is 
characteristic is precisely the connection between these wholly antithetical 
dispositions. 1 
104 
The third topography of Asia, running along the coasts, is of a mixed 
character. 68 Hert- we encounter Arabia, and the coastal regions of Syria and 
Asia Minor. 
These are the three principal terrains of Asia. These differences are not to 
be taken abstractly; for they are reciprocally related and concretely grounded. 
67. Hegel refers to the rivers by their ancient names. The OlCUS is_the Amu-Darya ~wllich. :e 
the Syr-Darva, flows into the Aral ~a, not the Caspian), the Cyrus IS the Kura lOt: .Kurl. _and .... e 
•-
-
· 
. 
f th 
-L-
border of Iran., flow~ onlo uoe 
nraxes IS the Aras. The Aras. wh1ch forms pan o 
e nonn,;rn 
-
Kura. which empties into the Casptan Sea south of Baku. 
p 
. 
Gulf and 
68. That is, the coasts of the Mediterranean, the Black Sea, thl' Red Sea, the ecsWI 
• 
the Arabian Sea. 
199 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Here two elements are to be distinguished: the one is the rootedness of hwnan 
beings in the plains~ the other is the wandering of the inhabitants of the 
highlands. These are the predominant differences. 
The first terrain involves the principle of the river plains. Here the 
predominant factor is the peaceful formation of substantial ethical life, 
which indeed contains within itself the awakening of spirit but has not yet 
arrived at inner antithesis; [it is] a patriarchal kingship. These are the regions 
principally of the Far East7 to which the western mountainous country is also 
adjoined, but in such a way that the principle of the plains continues to be 
dominant with the highlanders. The inhabitants can be called Mongols. The 
Far East belongs to them. China, although subjugated by Manchu-Mongols, 
remains what it was; the Kalmucks and other tribes are found here. The 
Indians too are pan of the whole area. 
The second part is the Middle East, where mountain peoples predomi-
nate~ and which also comprises the Arabs. It is, as it were, a highland of 
plains: it has the character of the highland, but in plains. This is the sphere of 
antithesis, and here the antithesis has arrived at its greatest freedom in the 
form of light and darkness, Orientalism, splendor-where the abstraction of 
pure spiritual intuition, of this One, Islam as such, breaks down (hinfiillt).69 
105 
Foremost here is Persia. I 
There is nothing [notable] about the third part, which is the Near East, 
consisting of multiple coastal areas, the side of Asia where it is related to other 
regions. This section is connected with the Mediterranean Sea. It includes the 
Syrian coast: Palestine, judea, Tyee and Sidon. Colchis, 70 through which the 
Phasis flows, this Ionian colony, and the plains of the Don and the Volga up to 
the Ural River-these are regions that are oriented toward Europe. 
[3.] In regard to Europe, we can be brief. Here a massive highland is not a 
factor, although one is found in Spain. The main features, however, are 
mountain ranges that surround deep valleys, and the diverse landscape of 
hills, streams, plains, and valleys, etc. The mountains are quite different 
from those in the highland countries. In Asia we saw the antithesis between 
the highland and the vast plains, but in Europe there is no overriding 
principle; rather everything is individualized: just as Spain, oriented to 
Africa, is home to a highland, so Russia with its {rivers] is to valley plains. 
69. Hegel seems to ~ suggestmg that on the soil of Persia the abstract monotheism of Islam 
takes on a dualistic character, similar to that oi Zoroastrianism. In the case of Islam it is not light 
versus darkness but lhe absolute opposition between the one God and enrything in rhe created 
world. 
70. An ancient country (and fonner Greek colony) south of the Caucasus Mountains, on the 
Black Sea, in present·day Georgia. The River Phasis is now calkd the Rioni. 
200 

INTRODUCTION 
In Europe we have to distinguish between two aspects: first, its turning 
outward toward other areas, toward the Mediterranean Sea; second. Europe 
on its own account. The first part is south of the Alps. As the Alps cut Italy 
off from France, Helvetia, 71 and Germany, so also the mountains south of 
the Danube, continuing further east from rhe Alps, separate the Haemus72 
from Greece. The other part, the northerly slope of these mountain chains, 
constitutes the whole of Europe proper. 1 Here eastern and western Europe 
106 
are to be distinguished: the western part includes Germany, France, and 
England cum ann£xis;73 the eastern and northeastern part includes Russia, 
Poland, Hungary, etc., where the dominant element is the connection with 
Asia. The heart of Europe is the western part, which was opened up above all 
by Julius Caesar, who broke through the Alps, occupied Britannia and 
Germania, and linked this new world with the old. This was truly a manly 
deed as compared with the youthful exploit of Alexandet; who opened up 
the Orient. The ideal of elevating the Orient to Greek life was merely a 
dream, and as a dream it was not realized. The midpoint of the ancient world 
is the Mediterranean Sea. 74 Around it lie jerusalem and the chief area of the 
Ishmaelites, Mecca;75 likewise Delphi, the navel of the earth/6 Rome, and 
finally Alexandria. which is of great value and has more significance than 
Constantinople because it was the link between Asia and Europe. It is the 
spiritual point of union between east and west. This sea is very influential 
(charakteristisch); if the center of the ancient world were not a sea. world 
history would be powerless; for as a sea this center gives life to and connects 
everything, and without it there could be no world history. just as Rome and 
Athens could not exist without a forum and without roads, so also the 
ancient world would be nothing without the sea. 
We have thus designated the tripartite geographical division of world 
history, from east to west, from southeast to northwest, from rising to 
setting. World history has arisen (aufgegangen) in the southeast, and it has 
subsided (niedergegangen) into itself to the northwest. Spirit is such as to 
create itself out of itself, as its own world. 
71. The Larin name of Swiu.erland. 
72. An ancient term lor the Balkans. 
73. i.e. including Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. 
. 
74. Here as elsewhere in these Iecrures Hegel uses the tenn Mittelliindisdre Meer, 'Midland 
Sea', rather rhan rhe more customary Mittelmeer, thus giving a literal Gt:rman rendering o( the 
latin Meditenw1eu.s. 
7 5. Ishmael was the craditional progenitor of Arab people~. 
. 
76. According ro ancient Greek tradition. Delphi, seat of the famous oracle and mcettnf: 
place of the league of Greek city-stateS, was at the very center of the uruvene, hence liS navel. 
201 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-J 
This geographical ground must not be taken to be an external occasion 
for history; rather it has a specific property, is of a distinct type, to which the 
character of the peoples who emerge from it corresponds. Since they emerge 
from such a ground, the peoples have specific characteristics that are 
107 
connected with their environments. Peoples have a spiritual locus, I but 
the determinacy of their principle corresponds to the natural aspect of the 
soil on which this principle appears. 
The connection of nature with the character of human beings appears 
initially to contradict the freedom of the human will because humans should 
have raised themselves above natural determinacy. We call the laner the 
sensible; and we could indeed represent the situation to be such that thinking 
takes place on its own account, that human beings have the truth within 
themselves and do not attain it from nature but rather from themselves. We 
must not think of the spiritual determinacy of peoples as dependent on the 
natural determinacy of the soil fon which they live] in such a way that we 
think of spirit as an abstraction that then acquires its content from nature. 
Rather the connection is as follows: the peoples in history are particulat; 
determinate spirits; and we ought to know from the nature of spirit that 
particularity does not obscwe the universal, that rather the universal 
must particularize itself in order to become true. Because peoples are spirits 
of a particular type, their determinacy on the one hand is a spiritual deter-
minacy, which then on the other hand corresponds to a natural determinacy; 
and the relationship is reciprocal. Spirit is in itself this determinacy, and 
what is simply in itself exists only in a natural way and thus has a natu.-al 
aspect; for the particular too must exist, and it has this existence in its 
natural aspect. The child as mere in itself, as possibility, as inwardness, is a 
mere natural being at first, a natural human being with unrealized 
108 
capacities. I 
We shall only briefly enumerate the major forms of connection berween 
natural features and spiritual beings. 
[l.J In regard to the vaJley plains., we note that they serve as fertile ground 
for the transition to agriculture. Agriculture involves a mental aspect, an 
understanding of provision for future needs. Agriculture must be oriented to 
the seasons. It is not a one-time, immediate satisfaction of needs; instead 
satisfaction adopts the general mode of provision. In addition, it establishes 
a si£uation involving tools and storage, which means being limited to one 
specific place. Determination of private property and ownership rights is 
based on the fact that this ground is a cultivated, external reality. The natural 
singularity, the family, is more or less disrupted by this exceptional 
202 

INTRODUCTION 
autonomy of the individual. Then something universal enrers more inro play, 
a condition that calls for something universal beyond this exceptional singu-
larity, one that protects it for the first time; in rhis way there emerges the 
possibiliry of a ruler and, essentially, of laws. What comes on the scene is 
the necessity of a self and later of spirit. In such natural conditions [i.e. the 
vaJley plains] lies the counterpan to outward striving {i.e. nomadism], 
namely, limitation or confinement to a restricted locale, one maintained 
within a general framework [of law]. 
[2.1 The second topography, the highlands, involves plains without rivers 
and soil of lesser qualiry; or there are streams with no tributaries, some 
of which disappear by drying up in certain seasons. Here I there is only 
109 
continual wandering in a constant circuit-a nomadism that simply remains 
formal, repetitious, and restricted in scope but is only de facto so and does 
not predude leaving this region, because this life involves no agriculture or 
private property, but only nature's bounty that can be discovered elsewhere. 
There is always the possibility of moving on. The soil is not cultivated, and 
one can exploit it everywhere. Thus an impulse both external and internal 
can drive such peoples forth. They do not have a characteristically unruly 
spirit; they are even of a peaceable nature. In individual cases such nomad-
ism can result in pillage. Some peoples of this sort are driven to pillage, 
but only in the lower plateaus because these border on peaceful lands. 
The highlands are bounded by lofty mountains where a robust and wild 
people dwell; but the tribes further down abut on peaceful inhabitants, who 
come into conflict with them. Thus these nomads are hostile to other groups 
and so are typically at war with outsiders, resulting in splinter groups and 
isolation, whicb leads to an antisocial personality and an unruly, fruidess 
autonomy, despite the abstract freedom that remains to them. 
[3.] The third environment is that of the mountains. Here there are no 
nomads, bur rather a pastoral life. The diversity of the soil even pennits 
agriculture, hunting, etc. The climate is I changeable, winter and summer, 
110 
as is all else. There are dangers here, so warrior strength and coucage are 
called for. The whole of life, however, is circumscribed by its locality. By 
becoming so narrow in scope, this life for that reason simply mens into an 
enclosed community and remains so. When the locale becomes too confin-
ing, such a mountain people calls upon a leader, not an army like the valley 
peoples; and the mountain people descend upon these fertile valleys. Tbeir 
exodus is not abstract, not a matter of restlessness, but is determinate, the 
price of choosing a more comfortable life. In Asia conflicts acising from 
nature are based on these characteristics and persist within this kind of 
opposition. 
203 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
[4.] [n Europe no single type of typography stands out; here, rather, one 
form of nature is offset by the others. The land here is such as to bring with it 
freedom from the forces of nature; here, therefore, universal humanity can 
emerge. Human beings can live in all (climatic) zones, but some zones exert a 
natural force over them, which, as compared with their general character, 
seems to be a force within them. Thus European people are indeed by nature 
freer beings because here no particular envirorunent is predominant. In 
111 
Europe the essential contrast is only between inland and coastland. I 
[5.) For Asia the sea has no significance. On the contrary, the Asian 
peoples have shut themselves off from the sea. China proper has no naviga· 
tion. Only those provinces that are cut off by mountains from the great river 
basin have a minor degree of navigation. In India, religion positively prohi-
bits going out to sea. The Egyptians, too, at the time of their greatest 
flourishing, had no navigation on the sea, although river navigation was 
very lively. Thus seafaring is excluded from the Asian principle, while in 
Europe it plays a large role. 
[6.) In Europe the relationship to the sea is precisely what is important. 
This distinction still holds good. States whose territories do not include the 
mouths of rivers are essentially different from those that possess them. 
Holland, for example, is different from Germany, Venice from Lombardy; 
and thus the sections of rivers that flow into the sea are inhabited by different 
peoples than are the inland rivers. A European state can be great only in 
connection with the sea. The sea, to be sure, separates lands but connectS 
peoples. Seafaring-going forth on the sea-is the entirely distinctive feature 
lacking in Asian life. 
This is the going forth of life beyond itself. Subjects have particular purposes 
that we call needs. Labor for the satisfaction of needs has the byproduct that 
individuals immerse themselves in this limited area, this sphere of acquisition. 
Human beings also benefit from the connecting aspect of the sea. Nevertheless, 
112 
the instnunent77 of satisfaction has here the reverse effect: property and I life 
are put in danger, and thus the instrument immediately contains its opposite. 
Thus, this trade or occupation, this involvement with [the sea], becomes 
something courageous and noble. From it arises a peculiar awareness of indi-
vidual independence, of greater freedom vis-a-vis the constraint of the occupa-
tion. Courage is part of the very aim of seafaring; here courage is essentially 
bound up with the understanding, with the greatest cunning. For the sea is this 
great expanse dtat seems innocent. But precisely the weakness of this elemenr, 
n. The term here is Mittel; later Hegel uses Ins~nt~, and the reference is to the ship-
204 

INTRODUCTION 
its compliant and permeable nature, is a danger to which human beings oppose 
their instrument-the instrument by which they direct to their own purposes 
the powerful effect of the sea and the sea breezes, and rake their wodd with 
them. The ship, this swan, so easy in its movement, is an instrument that 
pays tribute to the audacity of the understanding. This audacity of the under-
standing is what is missing from the splendid edifice of Asian ethical life. 
Although seafaring is an occupation roo, it is liberating to individuals, gives 
freedom to their lives. So the principle of the freedom of individual persons has 
become [foundational) to the European life of the state. 
These are the basic differences in physical features and the coiUlections of 
self-conscious life to them. We must, however; stop with the general charac· 
teristics, for the soil of nature is ar the same time that of contingency. Only in 
its general characteristics is this soil a determining factor, one corresponding 
to the principle of spirit. But the connection may often be tracked in specific 
ways. The character of Greek life comes forth from the soil-a coastline that 
produces individual isolation. Thus the land of Greece is a reflection of the 
splintering within Greek 1 life. Also, the Roman Empire could not have been 
113 
established in the middle of the continent; Roman world dominion could 
rather exist only on the sea, and indeed on the Mediterranean Sea, the center 
of the ancient world. These are simply the overall features of the connections, 
but ones with which we must be acquainted, just as we must know about their 
major place in history. 
The preceding discussion has now brought us closer to the principles 
that Wlderlie world history. We want to proceed to these principles of world 
history themselves. At this srage, therefore, the big picture lies before us. 
THE DIVISION OF WORLD HISTORY 
In regard to the division-and we have already remarked that it is the idea 
itself that drives itself that the idea creates and comprehends itself in its own 
ways-what we mus; proceed from is the state as such, the universaJ spiri· 
tuallife in which individuals have before themselves their will, their pwpose, 
their being, while at the same time they mainrain themselves a_s ~anicular 
through it, are active on behalf of it, and give themselves value 10 Jt. 
. 
The question principally concerns the fonn of the state: whether p~asel}· 
this ethical life (sittliche Leben) for the sake of the universal ~d 15 on)~­
custorn (Sitte) as an unreflective habit (reflexionslose Gewohnbett); whether 
custom is the authority for individuals, constituting the unity tba~ dec~r­
mines individuals· whether acrual life is one of custom, be it present m fa~th 
' 
205 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
and trust, or in habit. Within this immediate unity exists the other principle, 
the reflective power (Reflexion) of personality, rhe principle of subjectivity 
subsisting for itself. Abstractly considered, the latter is in general the infinite 
form, the activity of self-distinguishing and of the distinctions and develop~ 
114 
ment of I unity. Substance remains at the basis. Subjectivity, the form, 
merely develops the unity of substance in its distinctions. 
Conceptually speaking, where we have to begin is the state that is still 
internally oppositionless, where subjectivity is not yet for itself and the 
subject has not yet come into its own. Thus the first stare is the more 
immediate fonn of ethical life, the infancy (Kindesalter) of history, the 
ethical life devoid of law that does not advance to the singularization of 
subjectivity. The childhood (Kindheit) of history splits into two aspects 
because the antithesis (between state and subjectivity] is still there, it cannot 
be absent. To the extent that the antithesis has not yet developed in this 
shape, it falls outside of it and plays out on its own. 
The first aspect is the state. We have to regard it as based on family 
relationships-an organization based on paternal oversight and main raining 
the whole by punishment, admonition, discipline. This is a prosaic realm, a 
realm of permanence, an unhistorical history; it lacks this antithesis, the 
ideality, within itself, and such a condition does not change internally but 
only from without. True change, however, lies only within, and only when 
this condition changes does something external make inroads into it. The 
shape of such a state is found in the Far East and is essentially that of the 
Chinese Empire. The spatial dimension is of no consequence here. 
But, secondly~ the objectivity of the state exists also in rhe fonn of time~ in 
such a way that the state does not inwardly change and is only in conflict 
t 15 
outwardly; states that rest on the same unchanging principle I are essen-
tially occupied with themselves and so are in continuous decline. The new 
state that appears in place of the one that collapsed also sinks into decline, 
into the same downfall. No true advance occurs in this restless alteration, 
which ever remains one and the same. This ongoing unrest is an unhistorical 
history. 
This second shape. that of restless alteration that produces nothing, the 
shape of time, occurs in the Middle East. just as we call the first shape 
the infancy, we can name the second one the boyhood (Knabenalter) of 
the world in which the states are at constant odds with one another. But 
inasmuch as the state is outwardly directed, a premonition of the individual 
principle appears. Conflict and struggle cause a self-concentration (Sichzu-
S<Jmmenfassen) into individuality, an internal self-comprehension (lnsich(as-
sm ). But this premonition first appears as powerless individuals, as a 
206 

INTRODUCTION 
universal, unconscious principle, as something natural, as light, which, 
however, is not yer the light of the self-knowing personal soul. The latter 
grows into the age of youth ()unglingsalter); here the realm of Greece comes 
to prominence. 
Realm and state are distinct here~ for at the beginning the essence of 
Greece was not a state; rather a multitude of states is its characteristic 
feature. This is the realm of beautiful freedom. The prim:iple of this shape 
is that of naive, natural ethical unity, but ethical unity as individual person-
ality. The single person feels himself to be free as an individual uniry with 
universal substance. Thus it is the realm of beauty, the most cheerful and 
most graceful realm, bur also rhe utterly ephemeral one, the quickly wilting 
bloom, the inwardly most restless shape since it itself must overtUrn its 
solidity through reflection. For beauty unites the opposed principles, and 
the principle of individual 1 freedom is precisely the opposite of natwal 
ethical life. Thus constant unrest is found here. The reflective power (Reflex· 
ion) of personality can be sustained in unity with immediate ethical life for 
only a moment; reflection tears it apart. Here substance is present only as 
beautiful individuality. The reflective power of personality, through the 
power that subjectivity exercises vis-a-vis naive universality, must elevate 
immediacy to thought, to universality. 
The Greeks intuited their unity, the Romans reflected it. 
So we step into the Roman world, into the adulthood (Mannesalter) of 
demanding labor-a labor that hearkens to duty, serves a universal purpose, 
a state, in universal principles, the laws, and that is operative neither in the 
free will ( Willkiir) of the master nor in its own beautiful free will. Here is the 
sacrifice of individuality to universality, a universality in which the indiv1d-
ual is submerged. Individuals attain their purpose only in the universal. 
Such an empire seems to be eternal, especially when it is joined with the 
labor of the subjective principle of satisfaction in its uuth-wben it has 
become subjectivity reconciled with substance, i.e. with religion, or the Holy 
Roman Empire. Bur we saw the latter perish two decades ago. 
78 As abstract 
universality it is the labor of the Roman world to incorporate individual 
peoples and to subjugate them in its abstract universality. 
The transition to the next principle is to be seen as the internal struggle 
of abstract universality against the principle of particular subjectivity. I 
The struggle must end with rhe victory of subjective singufariry because 
abstract universality as legality (Gesetzmii{iigkeit) does not assume inwardly 
7"'8. A reference to the cenunciation of lhe imperial title by Francis II. the iaSl of the Habs· 
burgs, in 1806. 
207 
116 
117 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
individualized form and has to have a purely arbitrary, subjective singularity 
as its impetus. As abstract, this legality must therefore perish in complete 
subjectivity. The subject, the principle of infinite form, has not yet substan-
tialized itself and must therefore appear as arbitrary dominion. That is how. 
in this realm, the suspension of the antithesis, its worldly reconciliation, 
takes place. But in the meantime spiritual reconciliation is also produced: 
individual personality is transfigured into self-subsistent universality, into 
self-subsistent universal subjectivity, into the divine personality. The latter 
appears, then, in the world. Were it not to appear in the world, it would not 
be the self-subsistent universal, for such a universal includes subsisting 
actuality. From here on, a spiritual realm stands over against the worldly 
one. The realm of self-knowing subjectivity~ of subjectivity knowing its 
essence, is the principle of actual spirit. 
At this point the fourth realm is attained~ which we can compare with old 
age (Greisenalter).ln a natural state this is language at its prime; in spirit it is 
the full maturity of spirit. Old age in a natural sense has left behind the stage 
of development; but spirit is a11 infinite power to maintain within itself the 
moments of earlier development and thus to know i£Self in its totality. This 
founh realm is the Germanic because the Germanic peoples 7' stand at the 
pinnacle of this change. This realm begins with a reconciliation that is 
completed only implicitly; because this reconciliation is just starting, at 
118 
first the most enormous antithesis is exhibited, which then I appears as a 
wrongful condition and an antithesis to be sublated; it emerges therefore 
precisely in the supreme conflict [of the spiritual] with the worldly. 
The principle of this realm is free spirit subsisting for itself. The principle 
of the spirit that is for itself is freedom in its distinctive quality. On the 
one hand, it is subjectivity-wherein one's own mind or heart (Gemilt), 
the subject~ ought at the same time to be present in what it recognizes. On 
the other hand, it is not a matter of validating simply anything; rather, whar 
79. Hegel uses the terms gem~~Misch and G~nen to designate the European peopl~ 
whose cdutic and Jiosuistic bericage is Germanic. The Germanic peoples comprised one of the 
great ethnic complexes spreading over mucb of ancient Euro~- Germanic is one of the language 
families of Indo-European. but in German the terms indtJgemaaniscb and itldoeuropmsch are 
used synonymously. To distinguish geTm411isch and Gennanen from deutsch and Deutscher~ 
{'German'), we translate these tenn.s as ·Germanic' and 'Germanic pe<>ples'. In the ensuing 
discussion of the Germanic World, the tenn 'Germanic' really becomtS synonymous with 
'European' because in Hegel's view the Germanic principlr has pervaded EurOpt' lset also 
above, n. 46). The principle ultimately has nothing to do witb ethnicity or language but with 
the reconciliation o( worldliness and spirituality, substantiality and subjectiv•ty. state and 
freedom, actu.ali~· and rationality, etc. The process of reco~Kiliation is de5eribed in high!~· 
condensed and abstract terms in dx- following paragraphs. 
208 

INTRODUCTION 
ought to be validated is mind or heart in accord with its essential being and 
in its truth. Christ reveals this truth of spirit to us in his religion. His own 
truth, which is that of mind and heart~ is the placing of onesdf in unity with 
this objectivity (of truth]. Mind and hean are valid only when the true lives 
within them and takes its immediacy from them. This is the principle of this 
realm. Here is reconciliation, the reconciliation completed in and for itself. 
Spirit has found itself. 
But because this reconciliation is at first implicit, and because of its 
immediacy, this stage begins with the antithesis of the principle in itself; it 
begins with the spiritual principle to which the worldly realm is simulta-
neously opposed. This worldly realm, however, is not the preceding realm; 
rather it is a Christian realm, which as worldly recognizes the truth, and 
therefore as worldly desires to be commensurate with the truth. On the other 
side the spiritual principle wills to know itself as realized in the world. 
Inasmuch as the two sides emerge as distinct, the worldly realm has not 
yet cast off subjectivity, nor on the other side has it yet recognized the 
spiritual. For the two sides are at the beginning and are not yet done with 
immediacy: I spirit must first have worked off its subjectivity, and worldli-
119 
ness must first have rid itself of its own internal conflict. 
Seca use this process is not yet completed, spirit and world still confront 
each other. Thus the advance is not a peaceful, resistance-free development; 
rather it involves an enormous conflict of the two sides. Spirit does not 
advance placidly to its actualization; rather spirit strives to produce itself 
in its actuality. But the advance consists in both sides struggling to rid 
themselves of their one-sidedness, this untrue form. Thus it is an empty 
worldliness that strives to be commenswate with spirit; but it is not yet 
commensurate and ultimately is crushed by tbe spiritual power. Therefore it 
must perish. At the outset the power of worldliness in its vast shape cannot 
yet be at one with spirit. On the other side, the spiritual realm is immersed in 
external worldliness, is merely clerical and ecclesiastical (geistlich), appears 
in immediate worldliness. Just as the worldly power is outwardly sup-
pressed, so the spiritual power is inwardly corrupting, losing its inner 
significance. This corruption of the two sides causes the standpoint of 
barbarism to vanish-the barbarism where worldliness is immediately jusr 
the spirit of this immediate worldliness. The disappearance of barbarism 
results from the corruption of the two sides; and at this standpoint spirit, 
reflected within itself, finds the higher form of the reconciliation worthy of it. 
This fonn is rationality or thought. 
The spirirual principle cannot remain in its subjective immediacy; rather. 
insofar as it has attained its objective fonn, the universal shape of thought, it 
209 
~ 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
can truly encompass external actualicy; and the latter, as having become 
120 
thought, I can come to be the genuine aim of cbe idea of spirit. in this way, 
the aim of the spiritual is able to be realized in the worldly realm. Then the 
thought of the spiritual exists in the form of thought, which brings about the 
fundamental reconciliation. The depth of thought alone can be its principle. 
This depth of thought will thus appear to have come fonh on the side of 
worldliness. Subjectivity as such has its place here. The side of [thought's} 
appearance is the subjectivity of the singular as such. On this side knowledge 
as such breaks forth in this subjectivity, and its appearance takes place in 
existence. So thinking assumes this form in appearance, and the principle of 
higher reconciliation, th.e reconciliation of church and state, is found here. 
The antithesis is overcome in and for itself because spirituality and freedom 
have, and find, their concept and their rationality in worldliness. 
These are the principal moments. The process of overcoming this antith-
esis constitutes the interest in history. The point at which the reconciliation 
that subsists in itself assumes its being-for-self is found, then, in knowing and 
thought; here actuality is transformed and reconstructed. Because this 
[point) is found for the existence of reconciliation, the conditions and 
abstract elements of this reconciliation are there. 
These are, therefore, the moments to be considered. The first was the 
substantial immediacy of ethical life; the second the antithesis of subjectivity 
and abstract universality; the third the unity of the subjective with 
121 
universality. I 
210 

11ffi COURSE OF WORLD lflSTORY 
The Oriental World 
So we begin with the East. The dawn of spirit is in the East, in the [place of 
the sun's) rising. Spirit, however, is but its setting.1 So we begin with the 
Asian principle. The valley plains are the terrain of life here, not the 
mountain ranges and ravines. There may well be historical records of a 
prior existence of tribes on the mountain slopes leading to rhe plains; but 
ethical existence just is historical existence, and we are only interested in 
an ethical people. Such a people is first found on the valley plains and 
alluvial plains. 
We go first to the Chinese river valleys, and from there to India, to the rwo 
rivers, the Ganges and the Indus; in this connection we mention the Tibetans 
and the Mongols. The third topic is Middle Eastern life in the river valley e>f 
the Tigris and the Euphrates, where the valley comes into ce>nHict with the 
mountains; on the other side lies the easterly alluvial plain along the Caspian 
Sea, running up against the mountain ranges. This sets the limits of the 
Oriental world. 
CHINA 
The Historical Records of China 
What is first, then, is the Oriental world in the Far East, namely, the history 
of China, of the Indians, Tibetans, and Mongolians. Accordingly, our point 
1. The imagery in these first two sentences is of sunrise IAMfgang, which can also refer to 
rhe place, for Europeans, from which the sun appears to rise, namely, dK East or lhf 
Orient), and sunset, which involves a 'going down' (Niedergang, which can also mean 
'downfall' or 'decay'). For tht third sentence Griesheim reads: 'Spirit, however, is rhi~ 
going-ilown within itself' (or: 'descent into ir:self', in sich rsiednzugeben}. Th Hotho vers1oo 
of the third sentence, as given in our texr. with ibr !feminine) having 'dawn' as its onl~· 
possible antecedem, suggests that spirit comes on the sane only at the condQSI.oo of thir; 
'dawning', namely, upon the 'downfall' of tlw East ('after' it, or 'rep~~ it): What fo~ow.. 
here in the discussion of China ancl in the ensuing aa:ouots of odxr avilllAtumS too, IS. as 
we PQinted out in the Introd~ion, not so much a hisrory in the sense ol a chronological 
acl:Ount, as it is a cultural and political pomayal of these 'worlds'. oi_ what is disti~Vt" 
about each of these civilizations ancl wby Hegel thinks they consotme a meaningful 
succession in the emergence and development of spiri1. Excepr for tht main divisioos. t:ht 
settion headings are provickd by the Englis:h editors. 
211 

THE LECTURES OF 1822~3 
of departure will be China.2 China is this wondrously unique empire that 
122 
astonished Europeans, and has continued to do so, I ever since it became 
known. Self-contained, it reached this level of culture quite apart from 
foreign ties; its ties with other peoples are only recent, and they are of no 
1. This is an appropriate place for a few remarks about the section on China in the framework 
of this edn. In providing the editorial notes it is especially important to be dear as to which 
sources Hegel can have used and, in particular. which ones he certainty utilixed, rather than 
retrospectively correcting erroneous judgments. The edn. of Hegel's first lectures on the philos· 
ophy of world history makes it possible as well to cast a specific light on Hegel's fundamental 
engagement with Otina. To give the reader a sound orientation ro these lectures, the following 
indicates the essential sources. 
Two works are of overriding importance. The first is the Mbnoires concemllnt I'Histoire, les 
Scimces ... des Cbmois, by the missionaries of Peking, in 16 vols. (Paris, 1776-91 and 1814). 
The second is De Ia Chine; ou Description generale de cet Empire, by Abbe Crosier, 3rd edn., 
revised and expanded, 7 vols. (Paris, 1818~20). This 3rd edn. ol Crosier has until now been 
wholly neglected by resean:hers, although it can be shown from several passages that it must be 
viewed as Hegel's second principal source. 
In addition, Hegel ceruinly also utilized the Histoire ginbale de Ia Chine, by Jostph de 
~billa, in 13 vols. !Paris, 1777-85), aJthough it cannot be given the same significance as the 
previously mentioned sources. The 1st edn. of Crosier's De Ia Chine is vol. xiii of de Mailla's 
work, and so Hegel was familiar with it too; a German tL of it in 2 vols. was published in 1789 
!Frankfun and Leipzig). Hegel did not use the 2nd edn., 2 vols. (Paris, 1787). These facts are 
evident from a letter of Hegel to Duboc, in Briefe von l4nd an Hegel, ed. Johannes Hoffmeister 
(Hamburg, 1953), ii. 367. 
With the aid of the aforementioned works the basic framework of Hegel's account of Chma 
can be re(;onstructed. Whether or not other possible sources are actually significant for him is 
open 10 question. Hegel obviously relied more on the more recent works than he did on the 
numerous travelers' accounts and missionary repons of the 17th and 18th cents. The Allgemeine 
Hi5torie ... oder Samm/~nag aller Rei5ebeschreibungen, 21 vols. (Leipzig, 1 7 48-7 4), had already 
made the extant literature available, foremost the cepons of Trigaltius, Samedo, Martinius. 
Magellan, IUu, and ~)(hers; its vol. vi (Leipzig, 1750) concems China, and begins with the 
information that iu compilers followed the lead of du Halde in judging which works are m05t 
reliable; it includes the previously unpublished repons of many missionaries: Verbiest, Couplet, 
Fontenay, Bouvet, Gerbillon. Noel, le Comte, Visdelou, Regis, Premare, Dmuocolles, Hervieu, 
Contacin, Parrenin, Mailla, Gaubil, et al. jean Baptiste du Halde is the author of Descriptiorl 
geographique, hi5torique, cbroMiogique, politique. et physique de I' empire de Ia Chine et de Ia 
Tartarie Chinoise ... , 4 vols. (Paris, 1735}. The work of du Halde and the Allgemeine Historie 
can be taken as a point of departure, as representing the status of China ;tudies at the middle of 
tht 17th cent.; Hegtl only occasionally draws upon the two of them to fill out his presentatioJl. 
The Mimoires and the Hisroire giru!rak provided a new foundation for Europeans' iniorma· 
lion about China. 1be concurrence of Grosier's 3rd edn. with the Memoires supports the view 
that Grosier presems a summation of all p.-evious work on the topic. In contrast, the earlier 
1mponam volume by Athanasius Kircher (for which,~ the Bibliography on Hegel's Sources I, 
as well as the works on China by Leibniz, WoUf, Voltaire, Herder, and others, scarce!~· 
influenced Hegel's presentation, although he: may have been familiar widt thc:m. Tht s.unt 
must be said about various handbooks and presentations of Chinese history and religion. 
AJso, Hegel did not utilize the comprehensive anthology of Chinese law, the Ta Tsing l...erl 
Lee, by George T. Staunton (london. 1810). Staunton's accounts of his own diplomatic 
212 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
significance for this empire. It is the only empire in the world that has lasted 
from the most ancient rimes up to today. We have already remarked upon its 
truly vast expanse. Today the population of the Chinese empire as such is, 
according to the average estimate, some 200 million souls; the lowest 
estimate is 150 million, the highest 300 million. Every few years there is a 
census based on very precise tax rolls. So the data are correct. The Tatars of 
China are excluded from these counts, as are the many surrounding princes 
ruling their own lands under China's direct control. This enormous popula-
tion of China proper stands under a government that is well-regulated to the 
highest degree, that is most just, most benevolent, most wise. Laws are 
elaborated, and agriculture, commerce, industry and S<:iences flourish. 
There are cities with more than a million inhabitants.3 
What is even more astonishing is that this people has a continuous, well-
ordered, and quite well-attested history from irs earliest times onward, 
journeys (as Lord Macanney). and those of Amhent, in 2 vols. (London, 1797), and Pierre 
Sonnerat's 2 vols. of more recent travelers' accounts (Ziirich. 1783), are less important for Hegel 
than sometimes previously supposed. However, Hegel did occasionally draw upon Die Erd-
kunde, by Carl Ritter, 2 vols. (Berlin. 1817-18) and made use of rhe reprinted literarure, as well 
as Johannes von Muller. 'Versuch uber die Zeitrechnung der Vorwelt', in his Siimtliche Werke 
tTubingen. 18101, viii. 195-230. But these writings, and possibly others too, an: not important 
ior the overall concept of Hegel's lectures; he just rums to them to augment his treatment of 
mdividual problems. 
Another issue is the extent to which Hegel made use of Chinese texts in translation. His 
mformation about the Shu·iing, the Yi-jing, and translations of Confucius (Kongzi) and Lao-au 
il..aozi), must not be based on his own reading of them- We can take up this issue in connection 
with individuaJ passages, where we will also indicate difficulties with numerical dau and 
various express1ons, some of which are unfonunarely not resolvable. There is also the role of 
newspa~r5 (more imponant when we come to India than it is here), specifically the suspicion 
that Hegel occasionally drew upon newspapers (for instance, when he discusses reviews oi 
Marshman's book, n. 94 below). Not much light can be shed on this, given the problem of 
locating the peninmt newspapers and particular anides. In any case such a quest would yield 
no essentiaHy new information about Hegel's major sources. The notes refer not only to Hegel's 
most likely sources but also to their literary parallels, namely, other possible sources which the 
reader who is so inclined may wish to examine for himself or herself. 
The English tr. adds (and then uses) pinyin romanization for Chinese names and tenru. 
3. Hegel draws upon Grosier, De Ia ClJine, for these numbers- Citations in th~ notes are 
!rom the German tr_ of 1789, i. J 13-40. There it is stated that, according toP. Amiot, China has 
200 million inhabitants (p. 313). He obtaine-d this number in the following way. A 1743 roll of 
taxable persons tmals 28,524,488. Each is thought on average to have five dependeots. So, five 
times the roll total equals 142,622,440 people. Father Ami01 says it would not be wro~ to 
double this number, so as to include other populations nOt on the tax rolls. Peking (Bei(mg) 
alone is said to have two million people (p. 327). Other census tables lpp. HJ--<10) givedtrtota.l 
population of China in 1761 as 198,214,553. 0. Memoire5, ii. 374-5 and iv. 127; Rittn, D~e 
Erdkunde (i. 664), has different 6gures. 
213 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
covering at least 5,000 years4 with the greatest exactitude and certainty; it is 
not like Greek and Roman history but instead is more fully attested. 
No other land in the world has such a continuous, authenticated ancient 
history. 5 This empire ever remained autonomous, ever remained what it 
was. At times it was conquered-in the thirteenth century by Genghis 
Khan, and later, after the time of the Thirty Years War, by the Manchu-
123 
Tatars-but it was not changed by these conquests. 6 I In all these circum-
stances it aJways retained its character, for it remained wholly an autono-
mous empire. And so it is an empire untouched by history (ungeschicbtlich ), 
for internally it developed undisturbed; it was not destroyed from without. 
No alien principle carne to displace the ancient one. To that extent it has no 
history. So, in speaking about the most ancient history of this empire, we are 
not speaking of something past but instead of the shape that it has today. 
(The same is the case in India.) The principle of this empire, which has not 
departed from its concept, was set forth in universal terms; the amazing 
thing is that this principle is simply the natural concept of a state, the 
elaboration of which has not altered this first, immature principle. And yet 
we find here culture at its height."" 
So we cannot speak here of a proper history as such. We intend to 
consider briefly not only the res gestae (deeds} but also the narratio rerum 
gestarum [narrative of the deeds]. 
4. The Histoire generale (i, p. xxiv) and Voltaire, Essai (p. 82), both say 'more than 4,000'; on 
Voltaire, see the Bibliography. Griesheim has 'four thousand'. just below in our text Hegel puts 
lhe beginnin~ at 2400 BC, which makes the sources cited in this note closer to the resulting total 
of 4,200 or more years prior to Hegel's own day. Yet a bit further on Hegel repeats the number 
5,000. 
5. This assessment is taken from Grosier's introduction to the Hist01re general£. 
i, pp. xxi-xxii. 
~- Genghis Khan and llis Mongol army entered ClUna in 12 t 1 and devastated it methodically. 
conquering Peking (Beijing) in 1215; see the extensive account in the Histoire ginerale, ix. 
41-129. The Manchus, who conquered China in 1644, are a Mongol people from Manchuria 
who are related to the Tuogus people of nonh-eastem Siberia, nm to the Tatars (or TanarsJ. a 
Turkic people o{ Central Asia. None of these peoples are ethnic Chinese. The Manchu~ 
established the Cb"ing (Qing) dynasty (1644-1912), which replaad the Ming dvnasry 
( 1368-1644 ). setting their capital at Mukden (Shenyang) in Manchwia. Despirr being foreign-
ers, the Manchus assimilated to the dominant Chinese rulture. Perhaps Hegel's term Marrschu-
TarttJrtn could be taken as referring more broadly to these two large assimilated populatiom 
thar were not ethnic Chimse. 1be Thirty Years War in Europe, mentiooed in connection with 
the Manchu conquest. ended in 1648. 
7. See the discussion of change (Veranderung) above, pp. 155-6. There Hegel states that with 
a change in spirit (as contrasted with change in nature), the conapt embodied by a historical 
shape 'is enhanced and corrected', through progress to a new stage. He holds that no sucb 
change takes place in the case of China. 
214 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
[This empire] dares back to 2,400 years before the birth of Christ. 
According to conventional chronology, this is the era in which Noah and 
the flood are placed. After this time historical figures emerge, for prior to ir is 
the age of myth. Contrary to the conventional opinion that places the flood 
at this time, johannes von Muller, in agreement with several recent or earlier 
historians, puts the date at 3,473 years before Christ (and others pick a 
different number} based on Old Testament statements and the Josephus 
translation of the Septuagint into Greek; this is in his [Mtillec's] 6rst book 
as well as in part eight of his Werke. 8 This nypothesis dates the flood one 
thousand years before Abraham, while others I put it three hundred years 
124 
earlier than him. The discrepancy is owing to the fact that according ro one 
account only three hundred years passed between Abraham and Noah, 
whereas according to another, a thousand years are said to separate these 
two eras. A notable factor in favor of the latter hypothesis is that, given how 
the world looks in Abraham's day, it is improbable that only three hundred 
years should have passed since the flood. It would obviously be impossible 
for the world to have been so developed three hundred years aftec such a 
deluge.9 
The Shu-Jing 
Now we come more specifically to the Chinese themselves; we intend to go 
over briefly a few points about their 5,000-year history and then to look at 
the character of this form [of civilization] itself. In addition to its original 
historians, each people has original books that contain its myths. the ancient 
elements of its intuition set down in a sensory mode, which explicate the 
existing circumstances. Homer is such a book for the Greeks, as the Bible is 
for us. The Chinese named such books ]ing. The first is called Yi·iing, 
another is Shu-jing. The latter is a basic source (Grundbuch) of original 
8. Hotho gives the n11mber as 3,173. By Hegel's time MullEt's writinp;s had appeared in 
various edns. and trs. Possibly by his 'first book' Hegel means the critical rdn. by 1-bverkamr 
(Amsterdam, 1726). This work, Versuch uber die Zeltrechnrmg der Vonvelt. as repr. in the 
Siimtliche Werke, Achtn Teil: Kleine historische Schri{ten, ed. Johann Geo!J Miilln- (Tubingen. 
1810), 195-230. The Septuagint is a tr. of the Hebrew scriptLUeS into Grttk, rnade io the Jrd 
and 2nd cents. Be by Jewish scholan in Egypt. F1avius Josephus (AD 37/38-<.100), author o{ 
The Antiquit~ of the jews and not himself one oi the Septuagint translators, rnade usc of the 
Old Testament historical books in their Septuagint version. 
9. Muller does not provide the numbers Hegel mentions. He says (p. 210) that 1.232 year.. 
passed betw~n the tlood and the birth of Abraham. For support he cites Josephus. Clement ot 
Alexandria. and others. On p. 201 Muller wrius; 'How could he ]Moses. tradlnonal author oi 
Genesis] think that, three hundred years after such an upheaval as the great flood ~ver aU known 
lands of the earth, the world would be as he portrays it in tbe rime of Abraham? 
215 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
contemplation for the Chinese. We must become familiar with such original 
sources if we would be infonned about the types of representation employed 
by the ancients. 10 The Shu-iing has been translated into French, 11 as we are 
indebted to missionaries, in particular French missionaries, for all these 
reports concerning China. Formerly the priests did this in a lifeless manner. 12 
But since the eighteenth century very scholarly men have taken up the task of 
learning about China, those who knew the spoken and written language and 
are at the same time leaders of the European calendar deputation there. 13 For 
two hundred years the highest tribunal at the coun consisted of Christians. 
Up until the end of the previous century these clerics made translations, and 
subsequently Chinese converts were sent to Europe to complete their studies 
125 
here, with the result that we are I on the whole familiar with China. 14 Thus 
our information about China is not unreliable, for we have a basic acquain-
tance with its literature and its life as a whole, as well as with its history. 
As for the specifics of the Shu·;ing, it commences, according to the repon 
of Kang-mu [Gangmu] (the most famous of the Chinese historians), with 
Yao of the Xia dynasty, 2,35 6 years before the barth of Christ. 15 Yao was the 
10. This information may come from the account of P. de Premare, 'Le Chou-king Discoun 
Preliminaire', repr. io the Memoires, viii. 193. 
ll. Hegel is likely speaking of the tr. by Antoine Gaubi!, publ. by De Guignes as u Chou-
king tParis, 1 nO)_ There was no new edn. before 1822. There was me earlier Latin version by 
Gaubil (Peking, 1755), and clu Halde is said to have brought back a few eXU!rpts from the book 
nwle by the jesuit Premare (Ailgmume Historie, vi. 3241; but we cannot identify Hegel's source 
at !his point with certainty. See also o. 26 below. 
12_ Here Hegel expresses a widely held view. See Pierre Sonnerat, Reise 'fll2ch Ostmdien .m4 
China, 2 vols. (Ziiricb., 1783), ii. 3-4; also, Allgemeine Histone, vi. 349. 
13. Oo the calendar deputation, see o. 98 below_ 
14. These remarks concern the origins of the Memoires. Two young Chinese had studied in 
France, and were sent back to China with various inquiries for the missionaries resident there. 
This initiated a correspondence giving rise to the materials for the Memoires. See vol. i of the 
Mimoires, as well as W. T. Kxug. Allgememes HandwOrteTbuch der philosophisc:hen Wis-
senscha{len, 2nd edn. (Leipzig, 1833), iii. 758. We can take thest nmarks as an indication of 
the great prominence Hegel attributes to the Mimooes. 
15. Hegel's figun of 2,356 years dive£ges from all of his available sources. Crosier. De Ia 
Chine, iv. 35 has 2,357; see Histoire gbzirale, i, p. Iii; Memoires, ii. 181, vi. 311, xiii. 262,xvi. 
12. There are of course problems with exact dating. The Memoires states thar the time of Yao 
cannot be determined precisely (xiv. 183). Revealing are statements in the Shu-jing edn. of 
Gaubil that Ssu-ma Ch'ien (Sima Qian), the father of Chinese historiography, could n(l{ date 
Yao's time precisely, but calculated that he ruled about 2000 ac in our calendar; but that others 
placed Yao variously in 2303,2300, 2200, and 2132 BC (pp.ltXXiv, xxxvil; see also pp. xxvi ff. lr 
also says Gangmu put Yao's rule within the period 2357-2256, whereas Tsou-chou (Zouzhou) 
!Wlys 2205-2105 (pp. 5 ff.). So Hegel's divergent dating is understandable. However,. the Xia 
dyna.sry actually began with Yii (seen. 31 below), not Yao. This sentence of our text, untypi-
o:ally, has the pinyin 'Xia' rather than the oldef 'Hsia". Perhaps 'Kang-mu's report:' n:fers here to 
the translation of the 'Toog-Kieo-Kaug-Mou' in the Histoire ginbilk. 
216 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
first of that dynasty. The Shu-jing begins with him. Moreover, it musr be 
noted that later Chinese history has still other credible annals. In earliest 
times the rulers already had at their right hand a historian who recorded the 
ruler's deeds, and at the left hand one who recorded the ruler's words, for 
early on the custom was to have two kinds of historians at the court. In later 
rimes the number of historians was increased to four. These annals were 
preserved in locked chests. The custody of history as such is an affair of the 
state in China, in that the rulers are not obliged to compile their own 
biographies, and several historians from each of the two branches work 
together.16 The historians are not set any limits in their narrative. 
With regard to the Shu-jing and ancient history in the Hsin [ Qin] dynasty. 
it is notable that in a time of disorder the imperial history fell into disarray 
and was not continued with precision. The main factor is that a ruler of the 
fourth dynasty (Qin], one Shi Huangti [Shi Huangdi), some two hundred 
years before Christ, had all the historical writings burned. 17 The Sbu-;ing 
had in fact been edited by Confucius [Kongzi] in 551 Be. It too was burned, 
but it was reconstructed in fragments from the oral version of an aged 
mandarin. There are also extant traditions. The Shu·;ing I of Kongzi is 
126 
said to consist of one hWldred chapters, although only fifty-nine chapters 
have come down to us. 18 The Chinese also have from earlier times narratives 
of the beginnings of the empire, partly from traditions, partly from fragmen-
tary materials. On the whole these narratives resemble the way in wltich 
people in recent times have given psychological accounts of the history of 
hwnankind. 1 ~ Those [modem) narratives begin with a crude human condi~ 
tion in which people live in the forests like animals, without shelter, and they 
are set a pan from the animals only in virtue of ha vmg a soul, which is a verse 
to such crudity. One of their leaders taught them to construCt shelters out of 
16. For this picture of court historians and their roles, !1ft Histoire gbli:rdle, i, PP. xii aod 
xxxil, as well as the preface to vol. iii, and Allgemeine Historie, vi 317-18. 
17. The burning of historical writings (including the Shu-ii,g) under Sbi Huaogdi is gepa:all~· 
dated in 213 BC. See: Mimoires, xvi. 64; Grosier, De Ia Chine, iv. 346; Histoire gmittah, i. P· 
viii; Gaubil, Le Ch0t1-kir~g, 356-7; Allgemeirte Historie, vi. 323. 
18. Kongzi is generally said to be me editor (in 482 BC), although his birth is~ 
in 551 BC. 
(See Grosier, vii. 410 and 432; Memoires, iii. 43and xii. 379; Gaubil, Lt ~·kmg, 256.) Thr 
sage Fou-cheng (fouz:heng) is said ro h.ave dictated the ancient teJ{t c.176 BC. /See: Gaubil, P.P-
356 If.; Histoire generale, i, pp. viii ff.; Grosier, iv. 344-S.) Hegel's number of ~9 chapers_IS 
i.nexplK:a.ble, for all the sources have 58 as the number transmitted (Gaubil. P· cxhv; GrOSJe1". 1'·· 
344; Mbnoires, i. 440 and viii. 193; Hi5toire generate, i, pp. ix and xivl. Perhaps, then. Hegel 
did not utilize the French edn., or perhaps the discrepancv is just a slip. 
. 
19. This is perhaps a reference w Philosophisme MuJmaSS~D~gen iibn dU ~u;hte tier 
MeJ~SChheit, by Isaak Iselin (ZUrich., 17641. See Ernst xhulin, Die weltpscbidltfidle Erf4SSWIF 
du Orimls bei Hegel und [{Jmke (GOtt:ingen, 1958). 
217 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
tree branches, and to make fire, cook meat, observe the seasons, and the like, 
and later to build "Hoangti' [Huangdi], or houses, out of tree trunks. So this 
history commences like [that of] almost all ancient nations. 20 Renowned 
among those sovereigns in particular is Fo-hi or Fu-hi [Fuxi], who made his 
o;election as leader conditional on their making him lord and emperor. He 
took on counselors, then instituted ministers, priests, and the like, estab-
lished customs, and so fonh. 21 He is to be distinguished from that Fo, a 
Ji vine figure, whom people in eastern India call Buddha. 22 The invention of 
the Gua, certain arrangements of lines, is ascribed to Fuxi. In fact he saw a 
dragon climbing out of a stream with a tablet that had these lines on it.H 
They consist of simple arrangements of lines. Fuxi found eight Gua. The first 
was three straight lines, -, the second a straight line and a broken line 
127 
beneath it, I =,and so forth. This is the wisdom of the ancient Chinese. 
This table is the foundation of the Yi-iing, consisting of nothing but medita-
tion on these lines. Kongzi constructed the Yi-;ing from them. These hnes are 
utilized with a substructure of thoughts, such that by means of them one 
thinks universal, abstract characteristics. Thus the straight line~ -, is the 
simple material from which all things are constituted. The broken line, --, 
is the distinction of this simplicity. Light, fire, and the like they thought of in 
different arrangements among these lines. Thus abstract characteristics 
underlay these figures as symbols. So the Yi-iing is the speculative philoso-
phy of the Chinese.24 
.!0. In this account Hegel follows the content and stqut"nce of the exr~nsi~e discussion in me 
Hisroire gbrbale, i. 1-4 and 21. His other soun:es (Memoires, iii. 11, vii. 109, xvi. 9; Le Chou-
JcJng, pp. cxxx ff.l for the most pan differ from it. The Histoire generak (i, p. lCXXi) speaks of 
these narratives of beginnings as 'ridiculous fictions'. an assessment with which Hegel concurS. 
21. The sourceforthese statements about him must be Histoire generale, i. 5-lO, where he is 
called 'founder ohh~ monarchy' (i, pp. vii and .xiv ). See also Memoi1es, iii. 8-9 and xiii. 215-17; 
Grosier, iv. 343; Allgmte11U Historie, vi. 322 . 
.22. Ritter. on the contrary, advances the view that this ·Fo-hi' and fo the Buddha are the same 
heathen deity 1E1dlumde, i. 694). Seen. 121 below . 
. n The Lectures on the History of Philosophy (Oxford, 2006, 20091, i. 108, deso:ribe this 
.:vent as the discovery o( a turtle with the panems of lines etched into in carapace. 
24. The Memotre.s furnish this accoum o( Fuxi and rm dragon from the river 1 xiii. 216; also 
ii. 20). It is evidently based on a widespread tale (see Allgemeine Historie, vi. 323), one that 
Hegel reteUs tersely. Kongzi is said to have produced a commentacv on tht Gua, and it is bound 
together >A.ith two more ancient commentaries to make up the y;.;;."rg (see: Grosier, iv. 343--4 and 
v1i. 446; Mimoires, xvi. 77). Tbe Memoires refers to a Latin tr. of the Yi-iing by French JesuitS 
I xvi. ll 1 ), hut no such edn. can he found. Hegel could have drawn his infonnatiop ahout it fr-om 
secondary literature mentioned m n. l above; or be could have utilized Gaubil's Le Chou·king, 
which indudes a discussion of the Yi-jing by Oaude Visdelou lpp. 399-436}. The brevity of 
Hegel's account, however, counts against his use of the lanet 
218 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD; CHINA 
The Shu-;ing has the form of single fragments, portrayals of singular ele-
ments, poetic romances, without any historical sequence, lacking connections, 
and so it is not a proper book of history. 25 The content consists, for instance, of 
a command of this or that ruler to someone by which he makes that person a 
minister, or instruction given to a servant, or else it is teaching of a priest 
imparted to his disci pie, to a younger prince, or the appointing of a general 
rogether with the orders issued to him, or else it involves reports, especially 
retlections on military events. The historical dimension plays only an incidental 
part, one fleshed out from other traditional elements. So this book has a quite 
different aspect than do those of other peoples, which recount the deeds of their 
heroes. Here the content is principally speeches and exhortations of princes and 
ministers, ones for the purpose 1 of securing the successful performance 
128 
!Gluck) of subordinates. So in this case too the moral aspecr is the main 
element. One of the most ancient princes is Yao, who in the first chapter is 
reponed to have asked: 'To whom shaU I assign the task of protecting the land 
from t1ooding?' The minister proposed someone, but the prince rejected him 
and said: 'You are mistaken, for this man presents himself modestly, remark-
ably so, bur he is filled with pride!'26 A ruler ordered a mandarin to observe the 
five duties, that of father and child, of prince and subordinate, of children to 
elders. and so fonh.27 The Shu~;ing is compiled in such a fashion. 
The Main Elements in Chinese History 
We can only make general remarks about the historical element in the 
narrower sense. This ancient history has its grounding, indeed in its essential 
part, in Shansi (Shanxi) province on the upper Hoangho [Huang He) River, 
which flows first to the north-east and then to the east. All the earliest 
!5. This assessment echoes the view of Grosier, iv. 346--7. 
26. This passage is puzzling and needs an explanation. It appe~s that Hegel bas coojo~ed 
two separale elements in Gaubil's u Chou-king (pp. 8-9): the quesnou about a person qualified 
to combat flooding, combined with the reply of a noble to Yao's question about soz:neont 
qualified to be his successor. The issue is less about details than it is about the poruayal 10 this 
· 
· 
· ·1 
So Hegel could have 
teJCt. The Histoire genirak presents the conversatton m a Stm• ar way. 
draWn upon either one. Hegel's word choice more resembles Gaubil's., his sequence_ more the 
Histosre. More likely he utilized a third source, not yet identified. In any even~ this 7 
nukes it doubtful that Hegel utilized Gaubil's 1770 edn. (see also n. 11 abo~e). ll1•s oo~wo . f 
that Mailla, author of the Histoire, died in 1748, and so this work was ~tten ong: 
-~ 
115 
publication by Crosier (i p. xxvii). Evidently there are several commentanes ~ lhe Slnt-!•nt· as 
I 
· 
· 
' 
v 
d flocxls Mailla. mennons a passage m 
we I as Chmese orig~nal sources, that repon on .ao an 
. · , 
Premiel'l' ~· 
Mong-Lc;e (Mongzi) (Histnire, i, p. cvi); see 'lettres du P. de Ma.alla aM. Frerct, 
u, pp. lxxv--cxxxi). 
. 
. 
. 
8. th05C of fadw!r and cbild, of 
27. The Mhnoires mennon the followmg five dunes (v. 2 ). 
nd {&iendshi 
Prince and subject, oi husband and wife, of child and his brothers. a 
0 
P· 
219 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
traditions pertain to this sector of China. Dominion extended at first east-
ward to the ocean, and then nearly to Canton [Guangdong] province. This 
locale is one point. A second point to note is that later the Yangtse [Chang 
Jiang] River constituted the boundary for centuries. This river produces 
significant flooding and marshland, and the principal city of Nanking [Nan-
jing] is located on it. Only later did northern princes establish themselves 
beyond this river. The south was said to have been populated last of all.28 
Inasmuch as what is called Chinese history in the ancient period refers more 
to the western region, it is difficult to discern whether what is meant is the 
whole empire or just this one specific sector. Very likely the empire was made 
up of many separate kingdoms, which waged war with one another. Several 
dynasties sprang from such empires since, upon their demise, fathers passed 
the crown on to their sons or to important persons. 29 Only later was the 
empire unified into its present shape under one emperor., and yet during 
129 
several I centuries individual princes regained their freedom. 30 
Only the main elements in Chinese history can be of interest. Chinese 
history involves few external relationships, and accordingly these relation-
ships offer little in the way of anything universal. An ancient traditional 
history constirutes the beginning. What is factually historical (das Histor-
ische) commences with Yu in 2201, with the Xia dynasty. 31 From the Tschou 
[Zhon] dynasty in the twelfth century onward the history becomes clearer, 
more definite; this is in the fourth part of the Shu-;ing and has a more 
determinate character. 32 It is striking that it begins with Yu, and its 
28. ElementS of Hegel's account of the spread of the empire can be found in the Histowe 
genertJie, i. t, aod in Riner, Erdktnuk, i. 520,655. 
29. See below, n. 36. 
30. Ritter (Erdkurrde, i. 656) says tbe union into one dominion occurred in 213 BC, aod onl~· 
afterward were the plains soudt of the: Chang Jiang River populated. 
31. In plaQ' of this smtmce, Griesheim reads: 'In the seventh book of the Shu-;i"f (it says 
that] Yao lived 2,205 (yeanJ after Kangu and 2,256 years before the birth of Christ ... ' Hotho, 
likeGriesheim, has 'Yao' instead of 'Yu', which is indeed a mishearing or a written enor, Ol:" else 
a murup of names. The intent is 'Yu' ("Yii' in German), oot Yao. The Hi.stoire gmerale says that 
Yu asccDded the throne in 2205 lie aod so fouoded the Xia dynasty (i. 119-23 and 250). 1lte 
problem with tbt dating r~ on the fact that there ue other. rather different, attesred annals 
that may have influeocd Hegel, possibly indirectly. For instance, August Ludwig von Schlozer. 
m ht_s Weltgeschichte rtach ibren H~U~pttheilen im Au.szug und ZUStJmmenhange (2nd edn.; 
Gorungen, 1791-1801), follows me annals of Sematsjen (Sima Qian?) in dating the begmnJDg 
of Chinese history to 2207 BC (p. 225 f. 
. 32. The Histoite ginirale dares the beginning of the Zboo dynasty at 1122 Be and describes 
tts domm10n very fully (i. 261-ii. 362). The founb pan of Le Chou·king has the heading 
'Tchec;~u-Chou' and gives che year 1122 BC. In agreement with Hegel's "more determinate 
character' is the faa that it involves the largest division of this text (pp. 144-318 in Gaubil":. 
edn.). 
220 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
development coincides with what can be viewed as the historical beginnings 
of other empires: Egypt (2207), Assyria (2221), India (2204), all begin at 
approximately this time, according to solar and lunar calendars (Linlen). 33 
Already in the time of Yao34 a major issue is the government's struggle 
with the rivers and marshlands. This struggle is one of the largest and most 
important tasks of the empire even today, as it is in Egypt with the Nile. The 
physical life of the Chinese is conditioned by agriculture and in particular by 
the cultivation of rice. Dikes hold the rivers in check. Maintenance of the 
dikes is therefore the greatest task; a breach has the most significant conse-
quence, since millions lose their lives and famine is the lot of rhe survivors. 
Peninent here too are the canals, which are given the greatest attention. 
From earliest times onward the canals have been laid out and maintained 
with the greatest care. The main one is the imperial canal, which links 
Beijing to Guangdong, by linking the Huang He and Chang Jiang rivers. 
A third feature of the canal system I is that the royal capital was often 
130 
relocated to facilitate the nansport of provisions. That required canals. 
Wherever the emperor sec up his residence, thousands gathered there. The 
imperial capitals were principally in the north, along the upper Huang He; 
only later was Beijing the capital. The Asiatics [i.e. foreign invaders] brought 
about the relocation of the capital city. It is typical of conquering Asiatic 
peoples that new dynasties also founded new cities, 35 remaining together at 
one central point, and establishing themselves as new foreigners on their 
own in order not to dwell among the rest as foreigners, with the result thar 
the natives must come to their masters. The founding of such cities by 
foreign conquerors thus appears to be necessary. So today Cairo is the fourth 
capital city of Egypt. The same thing took place in Babylon. For the Chinese 
the relocation of the capital city was more the prince's decision. An addi-
tional major factor in a new dynasty necessitating a new residence was also 
that the ancestors must be gjven a place of honor in the palace, with its halls 
consecrated to them. Relocation of the residences was also connected with 
the layout of the canals. 
The Chinese were also occupied with wars and conflicts. In part these 
expanded the Chinese state beyond its original extent. The annexed regions 
had their own princes, who were cominually at war. Another cause of the 
33. Muller, in his uitredmung (p. 209), expresses a comparable view, puttillg the commoo 
date at 2200 BC. 
34. Here 'Yao' (not 'Yu') is correct. Seen. 31 justabove. Also see Mimoir£"S, xii. 7, about thr 
Rood during Yao's reign. 
35. Ritter ( Erdkunde, i. 662) mentions the relocation of the capi~l upon a_change of dyna~y. 
as well as the Olnal system (i. 644 ff.), and in particular the impmal cana.l (1. 655 ff.). 
221 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
wars was weakness at the center, because the governors acted independently 
of it. A third cause of war was the instability of the political succession, 
which became more secure only in more recent times. In earlier times the 
131 
emperors were able to select the worthiest ones as their successors.36 I So 
then what indeed happened was that the emperor often was induced by the 
second wife to disinherit the children of the first wife. A further cause [of 
war] was insurrection, instigated by the oppression of the governors or 
mandarins. Yet another was warfare with foreign lands~ with Mongols and 
Tatars. China was conquered by descendants of Genghis Khan, thus twice by 
Mongols and Tatars, but was not long under their dominion. This dynasty 
lasted for eighty-one years, 37 after which a Chinese person seized power 
once again. A naval battle was decisive in bringing about the regime change 
whereby the Chinese empire carne under its [i.e. the Mongol dynasry•s] 
control. The emperor cast rumself into the sea. 38 The canal extending 300 
leagues was created under this dynasty. 39 The wall of some 3,000 kilometers 
in length was built to keep out the Tatars;40 it sufficed in some instances but 
did not fulfill its proper purpose, for it could not protect against the incur-
sions and conquests of the Manchu-Tatars, and in 1644 China came under 
Manchu-Tatar rule, under prince Chun-chi [Shunzhi].41 Previously theTa-
tars were under Chinese rule; oppression caused them to rebel. They 
36_ The AUgemeine Histone states (vi. 415) that early emperors chose the cleverest of !heir 
sons as their SIIC(:essors, or even those of their subjects who were deemed most worthy. 
37. Hegel's nwnber here is problematic. The Histoin gblin~le, which he certainly used. puts 
the Mongol period &om Kublai Khan in 1279 to the Mlng dynasty in 1368, thus at eigbry·oint 
years lix. 401-x. 1), which agrees exactly with more recent authorities. 
38. Ritter states (ErdJamik. i. 657) that the cowardly southern Chinese reaeated befou 
Kublai Khan to their tleet of 800 vessels, were cut off from their anchorage, and 100,000 of 
them drowned, blanketing the sea with their corpses. See Histoirr gmbak, ix. 398-9. 
39. Hegel's vague remark heft. which seems to say the canal was constructed under the 
M.oogols, caD coofuse the reader. The Histoire gmerak says (ix. 450) that in 1292 it was tbe 
vesti~ of an aocientcanal. According to Ritter (Erdkunde. i. 666) the Manchus said it was built 
m the 13th cmt., but the Chi~ say the Mongols merely restored it. Ritter gives its length as 
600 English miles (i. 66S). T'hc Gennan Meik is an obsolete expression for a league, a variable 
distance that caD range &om 2..4 to 4.6 miles. 
40. The German reads '600 StuPIJen', wbiclt we render as ·J.OOO kilometers'. According to 
Wahrig. Gr~s DeutKbts Wiirterbt.ch, 'Snmde' (a duration of one bour) is an obsolete 
exp~ion for a distance of 4--5 ltm (presumably the distance that could be traveled io one 
hour). The waU was not extended during the Mongol period, but rather under the M.ing dyoasty. 
Vol. x of the Hi$toire gmbak as entirely an account of this dynasty. Set also n. 68 below. 
41. The date of 1644 for the regime clwtge. frOIJI Hotho, is generally acceptecl today. 
Griesheim's date of 1649 is possibly based on the account in the Histon-e gentrllk (X. 257 ff.), 
which bas the Ming dynasty persistiog until 1649. while acknowledging M.ancllu dominance 
prior to that year. It coouneoces the Manchu dynasty with Shunzhi. 
222 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
installed their own prince. An insurgent in China called for their assistance. 
They came, defeated the Chinese, and took over the throne. The nature of 
the empire was such that Manchus took over the government but did not 
change it. On the contrary, a series of the most excellent emperors ascended 
the throne. The series of these Manchu emperors was the best~ and gave new 
life to the whole. 
In the wake of Manchu rule the whole Tatar region became subject to 
China, so that China's bowtdaries reached to the Caspian Sea, also to Nepal, 
Bhutan, Tibet, and Bengal, where China today borders on the English 
colonies (Staaten), to the mountain slopes that extend, as plains of the 
Oxus [Amu Darya] River, to the [Aral) Sea. On its other side the empire 
runs up to Siberia, to I the Kalmucks of the Volga. The Russians had 
132 
pushed as far [east) as the Amur River, but had been supplanted by the 
Chinese in 1770. This is the extent of the Chinese empire. 
A major part of the history is the personal history of the emperors, their 
directives, bureaucracies, and palace intrigues involving the emperors' wives 
and sons. The eunuchs especially carried on these intrigues, but today they 
no longer exercise power. There are still eunuchs at court today, but they are 
no longer, as before~ in offices where they had many opportUnities for 
stirring up conflict. 42 So the history is a history of emperors and their 
households. These are the chief elements in Chinese history. 
Characteristics of the Chinese State 
Our more particular concern is to characterize the shape [of Chinese civili~ 
zation] more specificatly as a shape of the state, as ethical. Upon examina-
tion, the distinctive feature of this shape is that, in one aspect it has, for the 
most pan, the greatest similarity to European institutions-for example in 
ethics and the ans, such that the initial high point (Extrern) of the East 
resembles that of the West in later times. The difference lies simply in the fact 
that China has formed itself internally in an undisturbed process of cultiva-
tion, owing nothing to foreign peoples, whereas in the history of European 
states there is an ongoing linkage of traditions. The Chinese have brought 
everything about on their own. Chinese political institutions do not differ as 
much from ours as do those of states in between, such as India and Twkey. 
So a European in China is on the one hand more at home, on the other band 
42. Only the .lrd edn. o{ Grosier., De ld Chi~ links the eunuchs with paJau ~ 
~ 
lv. 220). Cf. AUgemeineHistorie, vi. 21; Mhnoires,ii. 412andvi.Jl9-20; HISUJn"et~·~· 
36; the German edn. of the account by George Staunton (oo which, s.ee die Bibhography), n. 
140-I. 
223 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
more alien, than elsewhere. Thus China, along with its greater similarity, is 
extremely different.43 
The principle of the Chinese state rests wholly on patriarchal relation· 
ships; they determine everything. This is what is most elementary and, as the 
life of a great people, it inherently involves maintaining, in this vast empire. a 
fonnation that makes orderly provision for the innumerable multitudes. 
133 
The I organization of the state is cultivated such that the family relation-
ship is the foundation. It can be more precisely characterized as a moral 
foundation. The basic element of this shape is that it is a patriarchal rela-
tionship~ a family relationship.44 
[1.] No duty is so strictly commanded as that of children to elders. 
Children have no possessions of their own, are perpetual minors, musr 
serve their elders, care for them, be deferential to them, and must mourn 
them for three years and during this period may not hold any office, marry, 
or anend public gatherings.45 Even the emperor may not rule or marcy 
during the period of mourning. The mother is honored as well as the father. 
Upon the death of his father, the emperor must thereafter visit his mother 
every fifth day, and in doing so he is not even allowed to ride beyond his 
palace gate; for the carriage must remain in the outer courtyard and the 
emperor must make his way through snow and rain to the mother's resi· 
dence. Thus the former emperor, Kien-long (Qianlong], received his 
mother's permission only at age 67 to ride forth from the gate. This fact 
was made known to the entire realm. When someone is summoned to be 
emperor, he cannot receive homage until he himself has acknowledged his 
mother as the dowager empress. He receives his mother's advice on all 
matters of demency.46 The parental relationship was held in this high 
H. On this point, and othe!'l> yet to oome in this presentation, there is an intellectual affini~· 
between Hegel and johann Gottfried Herder. In his ldeen :ur Pbilosophu d6 Geschicbu der 
Mmschheit, 4 vols. (Riga and Leipzig, 1784-91), Herder cites maoy admirable featuces of 
Chmcse ethical life and culture (pp. 7-9), and summarizes accordingly: 'It is as if the whole 
empire is a household of virtuous, well-brought-up, diligent, ethical, happy children and 
brothers.' ~I shares Herder's efforts to play down the favorable: portrayal of Chinese 
political institutions by thr missionaries., and his call for a happy medium between excessive 
praise and criticism of the Chinese. The two agree that the mechanical way rhar ethics is raught 
restrictS the spiril's free development, and that China lacks 'free spontaneitv on the pan ol 
spirit'. 
44. The terminology of patriarchy, of 'filial piety', occurs in M.?moires, v. 32 {d. iv. 1-28 and 
xi. 547). See also: Grosier, v. 90; Allgemeine Histone, vi. 319; Voltaire. £ssai. 263. 
45. Various of these durin and restrictions are mentioned in MimoiTes. iv. 11. 13-15. 160. 
162, aod v. 50; Grosier. v. 448-9. See also n. 49 belm..·. 
46. This information about the emperor's obligations to his mor:her comes from Grosier 
(v. 104-5) who, however, gives the age of Qianloog in the story as 63. The Memoires co«W' 
224 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
regard. Parents arrange the marriages of their children. "7 In China polygamy 
is not allowed, just one wife. The husband, however, can own several 
concubines who are servants to the true wife. Their children were viewed 
as legitimate children of the legitimate wife. These children roo must mourn 
the legitimate wife, not their own mother.48 The father is responsible for the 
misbehavior of the children. The harshest punishments are decreed for 
wrongs committed by family members against one another or for those of 
children against the parents. If a son speaks disparagingly of his elders he 
is I strangled, and the same applies if he raises his hand against them. If he 
134 
injures them he is grabbed with pincers and torn to pieces. Younger brothers 
are subject to older brothers in the same way. If they justly accuse of 
wrongdoing some person who outranks them, then they themselves are 
unjustly exiled or beheaded.49 
In Chinese families it is imponant above all for the head of the family to 
have children. If he has none from his lawful wife, he takes a concubine or 
even adopts children of outsiders. The father alone has possessions; the 
children have none. 50 The father has the legal right to sell the children as 
slaves. Doing so, however, is tolerated to some degree only among the lower 
classes. The son as well has the right to sell himself. Actors are a disreputable 
group, so sale of their children is forbidden. 51 A father has the greatest 
interest in having children to arrange for his burial after his death, to 
honor and adorn the gravesite. The relatives mourn for months at the graves 
of distinguished persons. Often a son keeps his father's remains in the house 
for three or four years and lives in strictest mourning for that length of time. 
with Crosier's version of the episode, while desaibing it more fully (iv. 142-3). Perhaps Grositt 
is drawing upon the Memoires, or perhaps both are utilizing a common source (possibly du 
Halde, although the Allgemeine Hlstorie does not recount the episode; see above, n. 2). 
47. On arranged marriage, see Grosier. v. 272; cf. Mbnoires, iv. 14-15; and Allgemeine 
Histone, vi. 157. 
48. On concubines and the status of their children, see Crosier, v. 42. The Atlgemeint! Hi$tork 
has a similar account (vi. 159), while rhar in the Memoires (vi. 311 and ix. 377) is rather 
d1iferem. 
49. This description of family responsibilities and of punishments for infractions combin~ 
statements from Grosier (v. 48 and 61) with ones from the Mimoires l•v. 161-2). That this 
punishment is 'unjust' is evidently the opinion of Hegel, not that of the Chinese themselves. 
50. Grosier is the source for these statements about adoption (v. 48) and about the father as 
sole owner of property (v. 50). He also says (v. 227-8) that taking a concubine is allowed in 
order to obtain a male offspring; d. Memoires,iv. 136 arul ix. 377. 
, . 
51. The rerm in our teJn for 'actors' (KcmWdianten) d.itectly reflects the French Comidlm5 of 
Memo;res, iv. 159~0, a passage that names various disreputable groups aiiiOIIg the poorer 
classes for whom sale of one's offspring is a punishable offence. The account IS Similar •n 
Grosier, v. 49-50. To 'actors' Griesheim adds •illusionists' (GORkler). 
225 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
For example, dUl"ing this time he sits on no chair, but only on a footstool. Just 
as important as the burial is the upkeep of the g.ravesite and the annual visit 
. Thi d 
' 
d 
. d 52 
to u. 
s emonstrates ones respect, sorrow, an gratatu e. 
In addition to maintaining and adorning the grave there is a third major 
obligation, to honor one's ancestors. For that purpose each family has a hall 
of its forebears in a large structure ringed with benches on which stand small 
plaques bearing the names of the deceased, or pictures if they were distin-
135 
guished persons. In spring and autumn entire families assemble, often I six 
to seven thousand individuals, with the eldest in the forefront. Age takes 
precedence and the wealthiest one provides the hospitality. 53 If the emperor 
wishes to honor someone, as the mark of honor for the living person he 
bestows a tide on that person's forebears. 54 A grave is so highly honored that 
a mandarin who became a Christian and then no longer held the grave in 
honor was attacked by his own family. 
(2.} The second topic for our consideration is the emperor and his power. 
(a.] He has the status of father, of patrian:h, and holds unlirni ted power. The 
empire is no theocracy like that of the Turks, where the Qur'an is the book of 
divine and human law. It is also unlike the Hebrews or Jews, whose sover-
eign only expresses the will of God. Chinese governance is not that sort of 
theocracy. Likewise it is no feudal state having, for instance, an inherent 
order of ranks or in which the countrymen are subject to the owner of the 
land and soil. In China there is no such aristocracy in virtue of birth any 
more than one based on wealth, nor one based on commerce (Handelszu-
stand) as in England. There are no relationships of those kinds, for the-
emperor alone wields every controlling, highest, and all-pervasive power. 55 
There are laws according to which he rules, but these are no laws that 
conflict with the will of the monarch, but instead the kind of laws by 
which all things are maintained in accord with his will. The government 
has a wholly paternal outlook. The emperor is accountable, has all matters 
reported to him, and sharpens or softens judgments by giving an account of 
52. These burial and mowning practices are recounted in Mimoires, vi. 325-6 and Grosia. , .. 
443 and 448-9. Hegel comes close to adop4:ing Crosier's very words (in v. 449). TIM account IP 
the Alfgemei~ Histone ~vi. 164-74), based on du Halde, is different. 
53. Grosier lv. -458-9) de5o.:ribes in detail the hall of the ancestors and the rites that occur 
there. See also Memoires, v. 30-1. 
54. Gros1er ~v. 99) says the brstowal of titles on people's amestorsis one of the most powerful 
means thl' emperor can employ to uphold the practice of filial pietv. 
55. Various of these remarks on the general nature of tbe Chin~ approach to government 
come from: Grosier, v. I 0; Mernoires. v. 32; Hist01re ginbllle, u. 446, iv. 302. Jll-13. 324.5.2-
and 42, and vol. xii. See also n. -43 above. 
226 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
his own reasoning. He frequently makes very wide-ranging declarations 
about his actions to I his people, ones that are published in the court 
136 
newspaper of Beijing. The previous emperor was entreated to name a 
successor. He made this matter widely known. So he always explained the 
reasons for his actions, with wisdom, gentleness, understanding, and con-
sideration. When the last English ambassador came to Beijing and was soon 
sent away, the emperor issued a declaration about the maner. These declara· 
tions are constructed most carefully, in the best style. They are scylisric 
masterpieces. 56 So the emperor counts as the most learned man of the 
empire. 
[b.] The second [poinr under this heading) is the fact that rhe emperor ot 
necessity must have officers of government, for he cannot govern by himself. 
These officials are of two kinds, both called mandarins, and rhey number 
some 15,000 scholars and 20,000 military personnel. One must study eXten-
sively to become a mandarin scholar. The scholarly mandarin has risen three 
levels by passing three difficult examinations. The foremost of them have a 
place in the royal palace, and the one who has proven himself to be first 
among them receives a robe of honor and entry to the palace (area) whert" 
only the emperor sets foot; he is hono.red, and given gifts by the emperor. The 
higher official posts are filled by these mandarins, of which there are eight 
levels. The empire is administered by these officials. The administration is 
highly organized; everything is subject ro the emperor's review; reports 
always proceed from below up through all the levels, and they are presented 
to him for his approval. The officials are honored by the people as is the 
emperor, and they have the right to make written or oral representations to 
him. 57 In each governing body there is a mandarin as censor, who does not 
participate or speak but who is present at all meetings, who says and imparts 
nothing ro the meeting but all to the emperor, and who brings complaints to 
him. Such a I censor is gready revered and feared, and cannot be removed. 
137 
These are called Ko-laos [Kelaos]. They in concert constitute in turn a 
tribunal and can present their views about all matters to the emperor. 
There are stories about the great energy expended in fulfilling their dury·. 
This fulfillment alone is their guiding principle. There are instances given in 
which such Kelaos presented views even at the risk of their own liv~. 
56. Grosier (v. 226) mentions this functioo of the court newspaper. "file MemoiTes cite dw 
iss11e of 16 Nov. 1778, as discussing the matter of a sua:essor to the throne (xi. 501-8 and "'"· 
297-315). On the Fnglish ambassador maner, see below, n. 82. 
. 
. 
s:r. These numbers of mandarins are in Grosiet (v. 10, 17, 127). Other ligurrs are g~vm 10 
Mem.olres ( v. 3+.5 ),Allgemeine Historie ( vi.4 35 ££.),and Sonnerat(ii. 37). Tht boll~ in which the>· 
are held is mentioned in Staunton (ii. 62), Mmwires (iv. 133, vi. 282-3), and Grosaer cv. 141. 
217 

THE LECTURES OF 1812-3 
Notwithstanding the consequences, they often, by their views, made them-
selves objects of the emperor's great displeasure. In doing so they entered the 
palace to reiterate their views, while bearing their own coffins. Others who 
incurred the emperor's wrath and were tom to pieces have nonetheless written 
on the earth with their own blood what they sought to say to the emperor. 58 
Also noteworthy is the fact that every five years each mandarin must submit 
a written confession of the errors of which he knows himself guilty and for 
which he will then be punished. 59 A mandarin may not exercise authority in the 
province where his family lives. 60 Likewise he may not acquire property where 
he holds office. The punishment is demotion and results in reduction in title. In 
office, the mandarin is responsible for all th.at takes place. He does not escape 
responsibility for anything, as if no blame at all could rest on him. Lapses of 
responsibility incur the harshest punishment. The most trifling matter can lead 
to the greatest punishment. The mandarin has a sword hanging over his head. 
Often they are demO[ed and must mention this with every subsequent decree 
[they issue].
61 The emperor rules over all things. Everything in the whole 
empire is organized to the highest degree. The lower level officials need not 
be mandarins, but instead are the local patresfamilias. 
The strictest police ue in the cities. 62 Throughout the empire there are 
138 
granaries I situated under the strictest supervision and always only one 
how [of travel] apart. The granaries are opened when the harvest is poor 
in a province.63 In Chinese travel narratives it is striking that infanticide is 
very common, in particular by exposure. In Beijing, however, every morning 
carts pass around to collect abandoned children and bring them to foundling 
58. Hegel bases chis account of mandarins as censors upon Grosier ~v. 34 ff.), from a passage 
first added in the Jrd edn. of De Ia Chitte, and then included in Mimoires, viii. 242-3. The 
version in Memoires bas fewer similarities to Hegel's presentation (cf. also iv. 164 ff.). The 
M~ires does not use the term 'Kolaos' where Hegel does, but instead speaks of•m.inisttrs of 
the state' (v. 351. It says this tribunal examines the recommendations of that other tribunal (of 
censors) and in tum passes them on to the emperor; the account in the Allgemeine Historie (vi. 
419, 436--7) is s.imila.r on this point. Al;:cording to Crosier's fuller account 1v. 38), the hierarchy 
includes 'mandarins' (the general title for officials), with the ,ensors ('Cotaos') as a group 
subordioate to the most high!y qualified, scholarly mandarins.. who are the I<elaos. 
59. Sec Crosier (v. 233), where the time interval is said to be every three years (in agrecmeot 
with Memoires, iv. 132 and v. 4!91. There is n.o explanation for the.- discrepancy. 
60. Sec Mbnoires, iv. 313 for this restriction; cf. Allgemeltte Historie, vi. 444. 
61. On the responsibility of a mandarin (even for the acnons of bis subordinaus), and his 
vulnerability, see Mbnoires, iv. 328 and 166. Grosier (v. 232l reporu that a demotai mandarin 
must declare that fact on his subseqllC"llt decrees. 
62. On the police, see: Grosier, v. 107-12; Mbnoites, v. 37 and viii. 2.18-19; Allgenrein£ 
Historie, vi. 452-3. 
63. On these: provisiom for famine, see: Mhnoires, viii. 218; Grosier., v. 211; Allgemeinl! 
HJStorie, vi. 216; Rine~ Erdltunde, i. 259; Stauuton, ii 58. 
228 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
hospitals where they are very well cared for and conscientiousJy raised. The 
dead among children so discovered are cremated. The closest supervision 
governs all these matters. A Chinese must be very impoverished to abandon 
a child, since he loves his children so dearly. 64 This, then, is the feature of the 
administration. 
[3.) As for the rights of citizens, it is noteworthy that there are no castes 
and no birthrights other than that regarding inheritance of property. Who-
ever seeks admission to the class of mandarins must distinguish himself by 
his aptitude. The foremost mandarins alone have the right to insist that their 
sons occupy a post. But these are very minor posts. So there is no class of 
officials to which only certain families belong. Thus there is no preference 
based on birth. The institution of private property was introduced in China. 
So there is private property and definite legal right with operative laws 
concerning it. Laws and courts are of course in place for its protection. 65 
In the history of right, landed property undergoes the same sequence as in 
Europe. In the most ancient dynasties landed property was not private 
property but instead the state's public property, which it apportioned to 
the patresfamilias for annual tithes or some other share of its production. 
66 
This arrangement lasted for three dynasties. Under the last dynasty six. 
hundred to nine hundred acres provided for ten patresfamilias. 
67 History 
says that was the arrangement for two millennia. Later on, under Shi 
Huangdi I (238 or 221-210 BC), who built the Great Wall of China and 
139 
had books bwned, the powerful landowners and the people became serfs. 
For that reason his regime was detested. His subjects were compelled to 
construct the waU.68 Free landed property had been introduced only at a 
very late date. Today, however, there is free private property and landed 
property. A third factor pertaining to rights of citizens is that slavery is stiU 
64. Hegel is not drawing directly upon travelers' accouuts. The Mimoires and Grosier both 
review pertinent reports. those of Cornelius de Pauw, tnJ, and John Barrow, 1805; see 
1VIimoires, ii. 365 ff., vi. 320 and 323-4, as well as Grosier, v. 75-81. See also the favorable 
judgments of Sonnerat (ii. 19) and Staunton (ii. 64) on Chinese practices. 
65. On rights and Jaws., see: Grosier. v. 239; Mbnoires, iv. 127 and 312-13; Allgemeine 
Historie, vi. 414. 
66. On the tribute or tithe, see Mimoires, vii. 65. 
. 
. 
67. The Gennan reads: 'batten 1000 Morgen zehn Farnilienvater'. A Morgen IS a vanable 
land measure of six-tenths ro nine-tenths of an acrr. lBe term 'morning' comes from dJe idea of 
how much land a team could plow in a moming. 
. 
68. On this forced labor, see Memoires, iv. 35-6. 'The Hi5toire gb!irale reports on ~ 
re.~gn 
U46-210 BC) of Tsin~hi-hoang-ti (Qinshi Huangdi) of the Tsin d~ 
(pp. 36~5), anclud-
iog construction of the wall (373) and the book-burning (401);d. Ritter, Enibnde.•· 528; a.od 
Staunroo, ii. 75 ff. See also above, n. 40. 
229 

THE LECTURES. OF 1822-3 
practiced. Anyone can sell himself as a slave, and a father can even sell a son. 
Also, the courts have committed into slavery the women, children, and 
concubines of criminals, especially in cases of high treason. Women, how· 
ever, commit suicide (rather than live as slavcs].69 
It remains for us to fathom and evaluate the principle of the state. The 
whole rests upon the person of a monarch, on his officials, whose activity 
derives from him, and on oversight of these officials, ranging from top to 
bottom. This hierarchy (subordination) of officials from bottom to top 
constitutes a cohesiveness, and its main feature is that the reins are tightly 
held. Every inferior is overseen by his superior. What matters, then, is the 
moral personality of the superior; for there are no spheres at all that, acting 
independently on their own, take care of their own domain as do social 
classes and the like (elsewhere]; rather. everything derives solely from the 
emperor. At the apex is an individual person with unlimited power. What 
matters is the moral condition of the emperor. In the long series ot these 
emperors, over four to five millennia, China has had a great number of 
virtuous, excellent rulers. The sterling qualities of the Oriental emerge in 
140 
the fonn of moral excellence and propriety. 70 1 
The image of Solomonic wisdom and governance is a familiar one. Quite 
recently people set forth a portrait of the ideal ruler, as in Fenelon's Tele-
maque, 71 and said that the well-being of the people depends on this indi vid· 
ual personality. If they wanted to cite examples, they could have taken them 
from Chinese history, above all from the princes of the Manchu dynas~·. 
Especially distinguished are the emperors Kangxi and Qianlong; Macartney 
himself was received by the latter. 72 We find them uniting a simple way of life 
with the highest scientific culture. They reviewed the operations of the 
69. The Mmroires too link slavery in China with Shi Huangdi (xv. 142-3); see also ii. 
410-11, and vii. 37, on judicial commiunents into slavery. Grosier (v. 73-41 remarks on iemalt 
suicide. 
70. On tbt emperor as father-figure for the empire, see Mimoires, v. 32-3. and xi. 547. Set 
also above, n. 43, aod, on the time span. n. 5. 
71. Hegel rakes the reference to Fenelon's Telimaqru from the Memorres, wh.ich menuons n 
in connection with the topic of slavery (ii. 410) in a passage cired just above inn. 69, and so hr 
brings it into his own discussion as wdl. The volume by Fenelon (st'l' th~ Bibhogra phy), conarm 
the ancient Grak character Telemachus from the Odyssey of Homer. 
72. Lord George Macartney led an English legation to China, in t 79 3-4. For ru~ rrrepuon b,· 
emperor Qianlong, see Staunton (who is himself Lord Macartney). ii. ~4--122. Other panic•· 
panes wrote about China and their published accounts were widelv known. The: Bibliothec.; 
Sinica by Henri Cordier. S books in 3 vols. {2nd edn.; Paris. t904-61 includes enuies on 
George leonard Staunton, Aeneas Anderron, Samuel Holmes, John Bonow, J. C. Huttner. 
and W. Alexander. In Hegel's day all these accounts were available in SL'veral edm;. and io 
German us. (see Cordier, cols. 2381-2393). There is no clea.r evidence that Hegel used one of 
230 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
government themselves and, over the lengthy duration of their government. 
they were indefatigable and had a thoroughgoing sense of justice and benev-
olence. 73 [The ideal rulers are portrayed as) moral, plastic shapes that are all 
of a piece like the artworks of the ancients, in the way that we represent to 
ourselves the ideals of the ancients; they are figures who express in their 
every feature a unity or harmony of character, dignity, circumspection, and 
beauty. This plasticity or simple unity is not so suited to European culture, 
which is more diverse; our particular features have their own multifaceted 
aspects and satisfactions. Princes and other persons have pastimes and 
pleasures outside the sphere of their occupations, in their roles as private 
persons. In plasticity, on the contrary, the idea pervades all the features and 
aspects of life. 
It is not a given that an emperor's personality be so constituted. Thus the 
educating of royal princes is very much directed to inculcating this morality 
into their character, for all depends upon ir. Their mode of life is in one 
respect strictly regulated, while in another respect it involves being treated 
with pronounced deference; but it is not a given that they will become moral 
in character. I If this effort miscarries and vigilance is not exercised from 
141 
the center, if the emperor does not watch over the state, then the whole 
comes apan, for there is no lawful power, no explicitly formed conscience ot 
the officials; for what ought to be law is something determined from the top 
down. So the laws depend more or less on the individual personality of the 
emperor. 74 And this loosening of the reins can readily occur even without the 
thcone being occupied by a tyrant who has unruly desires (as indeed French 
tragedies portray tyrants). There only need be a certain indolence, a faith or 
confidence of the monarch in his associates, ministers or courtiers. or in his 
spouse or mother, in those who are perhaps highly unworthy of it, and so the 
slackening sets in. And such confidence is quite possible in tandem with a 
moral education. It is even insisted on morally. In that case this moral virtue 
is not linked to energy of character that sticks only to itself. disavows all 
confidence in others and keeps an eye on those close to it. In this way private, 
personal interests range freely. When the monarch has favorites so dear ro 
him that he places his trust in them. and these favorites have private interests 
these edns. The same is theca~ for reports arising from rheAmhersrlegarionof 1816 too wh.ich.. 
see below. n. 82). 
73. Others ~enerally share Hegel's favorable opmion of the Manchu emperon. The Mem· 
oires, ior instance. is full of praise for them. 
74. The proper education oi emperors is referred to in Memoires, i,·. 67. 81; and In Allge· 
meirre Historie, vi. 413. 
231 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
that gain force and exen influence on the governmenr, then, owing to mutual 
142 
jealousy, these favorites descend further into private interests. I So then the 
empire, under entirely noble sovereigns, falls or transforms into a condition 
of injustice, of arbitrariness, of bureaucratic domination. We find this mosr 
often in the Orient, with the result that, under the government of well-
intentioned, noble sovereigns, corruption pervades all classes and conse-
quenrly there is revolution. For the whole only stands fum i.n virtue of the 
monarch's strict vigilance. The destruction of the Ming dynasty apparently 
fits this description; it was overthrown by the Manchus, only to be tom 
apan. In particular the last Ming emperor was said to be hostile to adula-
tion, devoted to the sciences, patron of Christians, and so forth. But when, 
through no fault of his own, uprisings and revolts broke out in response to 
pressure from the mandarins under him, he did not take charge energetically 
bur instead sought the advice of his ministers and took his own life. His 
character exhibited greatness and complete moral beauty. 75 On the whole 
there are in general scarcely any limiting factors when the character of an 
emperor has brought the empire to ruin. An easy slide into moral slackness 
can engulf everything. 
The Moral Sphere, Subjective Freedom, 
and their Violation 
The drawback of the patriarchal principle lies, on the whole, in reliance on 
the personality of the emperor. Its distinctive feature is that there is no 
separation of the legal aspect from the moral aspect. A rational political 
institution must have produced and must uphold both aspects, each for its 
own sake, each according to its own necessary position. The characteristic 
143 
Oriental feature, however, I consists precisely in the fact that these two 
principles are still in immediate unity, which is the case in the ethical sphere 
and in the condition of a stare where the ethical sphere still rules. So the 
entire state rests on ethical custom. In any event custom rules, and the laws 
are in part insufficient, or else they base themselves on custom. 76 As soon as 
the element of reflection comes into play the legal aspect splits off from 
custom, and the latter in part passes over into the moral realm. Then the 
political institution rests upon legal right, and this is given expression by 
the laws. The ethical sphere is in fact the province of the individual, just as 
75. Tbe Historre gmerale (x. 491-2) recounts the words of the last Ming emperor. Hoai-
Tsong, to his ministers, prior to his suicide in 1644. 
76. According to Mmrowe5, v. 26 and viii. 236, the political system. and a wide rangr oi 
social practices, are basec:l on custom or tradition. 
232 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
are the moral and the religious spheres. But the ethical sphere too must be 
the object of law, although not directly but instead indirecdy as the object ot 
fulfillment and practice. It ought to be upheld, but in its own characteristic 
way. Laws, in contrast, deal with what is right as the concrete existence of 
free volition, albeit not within itself, whereas the moral sphere is the con-
crete existence of free volition indeed within itself~ morality determines itself 
internally according to intentions, purposes, plans, and points of view. The 
legal sphere is the external concrete existence of free volition; will gives to 
itself its existence in an external sphere. Will gives itself material expression; 
a person is only free as a possessor of property. Property is external matter. 
So it is not permissible for a person to be a slave. Legal obligations toward 
other private individuals, the laws of the state with respect to private rights, 
concern external circumstances and the kind of issues and behaviors that can 
indeed be based on sentiment but also arise apan from it. I Morality, 
144 
however, is quite a different domain. Laws can compel because they apply 
to an individual's external being. Morality, on the contrary, is the domain of 
inwardness, the area of my own insight, my own self-determination com-
mensurate with my aims, intentions, and so forth. This inner domain cart 
take the fonn of respect, reverence, or affection. This internal disposition of 
the individual, this inwardness, cannot be commanded, cannot be made the 
direct object of laws. Civil or political legislation pertains to external exis-
tence. But the moral domain has its own expression too. It is a source of the 
action or conduct of persons with reference to the state and to individuals. 
These expressions have matters of legality as their content. The other aspect, 
however, is that there are also expressions that arise solely from moral 
sentiments, such as signs of respect or affections among relatives or between 
married couples. There is indeed a point at which legality plays a pan; 
Yet that point is difficult to specify, inasmuch as legality is not allowed 
to intrude into matters penaining to the individual as such. Legality may 
not intrude into matters of sentiment. If some moral point is commanded, 
the laws doing so can have an excellent resonance, can be in Solomonic 
language, although rhis in turn opens the door to a despotism that is all the 
greater in proportion to how excellent the law sounds. 
In the Chinese state what is ethical is made to be the law. What has value 
only as a sentiment is supposed to have the force of law, as its o.bia::r· ~~r 
by nature is moral, namely what belongs to inward self-derennrnano~, 
15 
thus commanded by law. It is commanded by those who hold the rems of 
77. Griesheim reads: 'What is to be left completely to the h-er spirit · · • ' 
233 

145 
146 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
government. In introducing the laws of families, we saw several examples 
of this. An endless number of civil laws bear upon the conduct of citizens 
vis-a-vis one another and their superiors, the officers of the emperor. One of 
the ancient }ing, the Li-iing, contains only customs, which are very compre-
hensively stipulated, and the neglect of which incurs very strict punishments, 
and [by following them) life runs smoothly. 78 So what concerns outward 
decorum is thus necessary and is commanded, although as a system of legal 
ordinances it loses its essential meaning. Thus the fundamental characteris-
tic of Chinese political institutions is that the moral domain is posited as 
strict legality. A government of the kind that issues such legislation takes the 
place of my own inner being, and by doing so the principle of subjective 
freedom is annulled or goes unacknowledged. 
And this principle of subjective freedom is what is foremost~ is what is above 
all understood as freedom. This subjective freedom, the intangible sphere of 
inwacdn~ is a characteristic proper especially to the European principle. Thus 
all that is fine and true proceeds from this formal source. So, when governments 
make the moral domain into their principle, this characteristic in the subject 
goes unacknowledged; it is no longer present as what is proper to the particular 
'iubject. Morality seems indeed to be the principle of the whole state; but linked 
to it is the failure to acknowledge the morality that must be in the inwardness of 
the subject. Accordingly this system lacks the free soul, the source from which 
arise free, self-supporting ethical life, free science, free religion. Nothing is 
allowed to emerge that is the subject's own creation. I For that would be a 
second enterprise in opposition to that of the government. The government has 
made itself the master of morals, has seized control of inwardness. So the ideal 
enterprise of freedom cannot flourish. What is inwardly free .. what has its 
concrete existence in the subject, is permitted no entree into the laws. 
In the shape in which we represent it, subjective freedom is ordinarily 
considered to reside in our demand that this inwardness ought to be respected 
in human beings. By making this demand as such we stand on this principle, 
and it expresses itself chiefly in the form of respect. Respect fundamentally 
involves an inviolable zone that ought to exist for me. I have subjected myself to 
this zone by my own volition; 1 exist in it through my own volition. What I am 
through my own volition belongs to me and is inviolable. It is an infinite harm 
for me if someone infringes on this sphere. I have my own existence in what 
I have decided for myself. Respect presupposes such a being-for-self, and its 
inviolability; and it is its formal aspect. This being-for-itself is not respected 
78. The Memoires says this about the Li-jing (vii. 193-4), as also does Grosier (iv. 350--1 ). 
Some of these elements faU under the beading of what Hegel regards as 'sentiments •. 
234 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
among the Chinese, since there I am subject to moral governance; for chat 
reason there is no room for respect in this case, nor for what chis inner freedom 
produces. These are the abstract characteristics [of the Chinese principle]. lt 
remains for us to consider rhis abscract principle in its concrete features, albeit 
not in all of its detail. 
[ 1.] The first thing to mention has already been brought up, the fact that 
in China there is slavery. People can sell themselves, and parents can sell 
their children. In addition, being sold into slavery I becomes a punishment. 
147 
The Manchu-Tatars regarded everyone as slaves of the emperor/9 So here 
there is no acknowledgment of the primary respect a human being has, that 
of being a free person, this abstract inwardness. 
[2.] The second point concerns punishment as such. When a crime is 
committed the entire family-wife, children, parents, brothers, friends--
undergo the pwt.ishments. This is wholly contrary to the recognition of 
moral freedom, to imputation of wrongdoing, to moral autonomy as such. 
For the Chinese this punishment in which, for instance, all the children are 
put to death, is all the more horrible because the family relationship is 
supreme and owing to the punishment the family's ancestors will no longer 
be honored now, because there are no survivors capable of honoring and 
avenging the deceased. 80 The punishments include confiscation of goods 
regarded as questionable, as stolen, as unlawful, and this has the effect of 
punishment because someone whose goods are confiscated is viewed hence· 
fonh as a slave since the whole of his property is taken irom him. A further 
punishment is flogging, to which even the highest mandarin is subject. Such 
flogging is incompatible with our sense of respect. Any mandarin can have 
any citizen flogged. h is not as a rule done sparingly with a cane. 
81 When the 
last legation from England departed after visiting the supreme mandui~ the 
householder used a whip to dear a path for all the imperial dignitaries. 
82 
7"9. On slavery as punishment, and on all as slaves of the emperor, see Mimoires. li. 410 and 
vii. 16. 
80. The Memvires mentions the punishment oi family members !vii. 37), although none of 
Hegel's possible sources state explicitly lhat the children of criminals would be put to death. 
These penal practices are regarded as deterring potential criminals from carrying out their 
intended acts, for no one would be left who is capable oi honoring and avenging them (on 
which, see Allgemeine Historie, vi. 486-97). 
_ 
_ 
81. On corporal punishment, see Memoires, iv. 157 fl. On all mandarins as authoriud to 
inflict pun.ishment, see Gro~ier, v. S8, and Sonnerat, ii. 17-111. 
S2. The legation to China in 1816 was led by Wilbam Pitt AmhersL Many repons appea~ 
about it, prior to 1822, including ones in GeJJDao translation. Cordier's Bihliothe€4 Siru€4 (u, 
cols. 2393---ii) includes those of Henry Ellis, Clark Abel, Roben Morrison, and J. F. DaVIS. Jt 
235 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Corporal punishment can in one sense be considered something utterly 
148 
insignificant, I since the human being is only injured in his lesser aspect, 
merely outwardly, in mere mortal existence. Rut corporal punishment is the 
most humiliating for the very reason that a human being so afflicted is 
supposed to be coerced with regard to his inner being. This presupposes the 
absolute connection between inner and outer aspects, for human beings know 
themselves as morally independent of this connection. Hence the humiliation 
is greateL An assault on such a subordinate aspect of a person serves to label it 
as one•s highest aspect, an aspect that is supposed to coerce one's inner aspect. 
The educated or cultivated person has more important aspects, and views a 
subordinate aspect of that kind as of no importance whatsoever. To the 
educated person the punishmem that is as a rule most extreme expresses 
the nullity of his will before the law. So punishment that is not corporal 
acknowledges the educated person as a moral, inward being, as the kind 
who acknowledges the law as what is supreme. The latter punishments are for 
this reason more creditable, since the one punished is respected as a moral 
being. The greater the cultivation, the greater the sensitivity to corporal 
punishment. So a mandarin who acknowledges the laws and holds them in 
honor is degraded by corporal pwtishment, since it robs him of moral 
standing.83 
[3] A further point is that the administration itself relies upon oversight by 
the higher officials, of which the emperor is the highest. Every superior 
always has in tum the highest, wtcircumscribed authority within his own 
sphere. The emperor's oversight can be exercised only by his also entrusting 
such power to the various governors. Each mandarin is the chief justice in 
149 
his city. A viceroy can pronounce a death sentence. 84 1 In that way officials 
are given broad jurisdiction~ which depends upon their moralicy, and as 
soon as oversight is relaxed, oppression and arbitrariness increase greatly. 
In that way the inner feeling of moral dignity is lost. Citizens have no 
recourse against the mandarins, have no inherent moral consciousness of 
their own. 
cannot be proved that Hegel unlized one of these reports; he could have gotten his information 
as well from newspapers or from discussions. See also above, nn. 2 and 72. 
83. Herder (ldeen, 15~ points to the link between corporal punishment and, for mandarin5 
especially, the resulting loss or lack o( respect. On Herder, see above, n. B. 
84. Crosier states (v. 231) that a viceroy can pronounce a death sentc:nce, but the execution 
must await ratificatioo by the mooatth. 
236 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
Ethical Customs 
The next poinr concerns the ethical customs of the Chinese people. The 
customs too of this people have the inherent character of not arising from 
their own inwardness. 
The Chinese were governed as an Wlderage people; so their ethics too has the 
character of dependency. The Chinese are pleasant and mild·mannered, 
extremely courteous and ceremonious. Everything involves its own specific 
etiquette. They become regulated in the most exacting way by precepts, even in 
more or less insignificant matters. 85 So in China the human being has an 
external ex:istence, not an internal one. A Chinese person is externally moved 
above all by vengeance for an injury, especially one done to his father, or to an 
elder brother. He takes the injury to be something absolute, and has no internal 
restraint regarding it. The entirety of his individual personality reacts against 
this injury. He is extremely vengeful and reacts quite vehemently because he 
feels himself powerless in face of rhe injury. The same is evident in other Asian 
peoples. It is evident, for instance, in the killing of oneself in order to cast blame 
on others by the act, as was formerly done in our culture by soldiers. Among the 
Chinese it is common for someone hostile to another to kill himself, in this way 
precipitating a thorough investigation of the matter and leading to the torture 
of the other person, for torture is practiced in China. The I other person will 
150 
be executed himself, as being to blame for the death of another person. 
For blame is so widely spread that, in dte case of death, I need only have been 
its cause even without willing it, in order to be executed myself. 
Individual responsibility (Imputation) for crime is not a consideration in 
China. The suicide who wishes to revenge himself on another wiD plunge that 
person's entire family into ruin; so he takes his own life because by doing that 
he plunges into ruin the other as well as the other's family too. What the 
Chinese person gains from such a revenge is that a penalty cannot be imposed 
on him and his family together, nor can there be confiscation of his goods. 
86 
The Chinese thus continue this vengefulness right up to the present day. The 
people of Ceylon (Sri Lanka] do the same, revenging themselves in this way 
[by suicide] while bathing. In addition, the Chinese are extremely cunning, 
thievish, and deteitful, like the Indians. (They have great flexibility of their 
limbs, are supple in body and versatile in sleight-of-hand tricks and artifices. 1 
85. Crosier remarks fv. %21 on the affability and scrupulosity ol the Chincst; d. Alig~ 
Histone. vi. 119-56. 
86. Crosier (v. -404) says the Chinese are vindictive, and. he describes in detail (v. ?3-5) ~­
one's enemy and his family are destroyed in this way. See similar sutemenlS ur Mimoires, ~~-. 
289-90, 439, and vii. 37. 
237 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
They are especiaUy deceitful toward the Europeans because they [the Chi-
nese] lack inner integrity.87 
The Sciences 
The next point concerns the sciences, art, and religion. 
Lack of proper inwardness extends also to the sciences. There is no free, 
liberal science. When the topic is Chinese sciences, we hear of their great 
reputation. They are highly valued and honored in China. 
[1.] In ancient times the Chinese were very famous tor their science and were 
actually held in high regard. The emperor stood at the apex of me sciences; he 
was most fastidiously educated and, especially during the Manchu dynasty, he 
was also actually taught and instructed in science. The emperor is held to be the 
151 
final judge of scientific 1 value. In the coun newspaper the emperor criticizes 
erroneous expressions in the decrees of the mandarins and often composes his 
own editorials, essays, and poems.88 There is even a high tribunal at court, 
composed of the most learned men, which has no other business than the 
development of science and, above all, of history. The emperor himself selects 
the members of the tribunal, Han-Line, based on strict examinations. They have 
a suitably scientific life, laboring in particular on general works under the 
emperor's supervision, and he writes the prefaces for most of them himself. 
From these men the emperor chooses his secretaries, who provide his brush 
strokes [i.e. are his stenographers]; from them the highest state officials are 
appointed. The compilation of great works and new editions there are handled 
by the state. In his last years (from 1772 on] the previous emperor saw to a new 
edition of the collected literature, consisting of 16 8,000 volumes. It was decreed 
that the edition should be enor-free in its entirety. One volume of this sort does 
not contain as much material as our books do. The accounts in the state 
newspaper declared how many printing errors particular mandarins left uncor-
rected, and how many lashes had been the punishment of each for doing so. 89 
87. This passage shows that Hegel is not adopting wtthout exceptiOn the positi\·e Judgments 
of the Memoires about the Chinese, for this otherwise so tmponant source for him says nothing 
about deceitfulness or thievery. Grosier indicates these complaints in saying (v. 462) that "they 
take advantage ot strangers and deceive them'. Older accounts (such as Allgemeine Histo11e, vi. 
131-21 nevertheless appear robe full of negative judgments on this is-sue. 
88. The Histoire generale praises the skill of emperor Qianlong in his various published 
works lix. 609-10). Ritter too praises the Manchu emperors Kanghi (Kangxi) and Qianlong as 
being philosophen, poets, and skilled in various branches of literature (Erdkursde, i. 5271. See 
al~o Gmsier, vi. 58--9. 
89. Hegel bases this accouru of thtse imperial coun bodies and tbeu publishing activities 
mostly on Grosier (vi. 66-71), with additional material from the Mt!moires (xv. 351~) drawn 
from tbe court newspaper. See also above, n. 56. Hegel mistakenly speaks of the one behind the 
238 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
So the sciences seem in one respect to be greatly esteemed, and yet the 
main thing is lacking, namely, the free soil (Boden) of inwardness, the 
intellect that comprises a wealth of thoughts within itself, that makes all of 
concrete existence the object of thought. The interest of science rhus lies in 
its own internal satisfaction, its inner life in possessing a world of thought. 
This grounding (Boden) eludes the Chinese, who pursue the sciences but not 
in the free interest of science. So science and culture, I the compiling of 
152 
information, is in the main empirical in nature, nor theoretical, not a free 
interest of thought as such; instead the sciences essentially stand to serve the 
utility and benefit of the state. The state has the sciences under its control, as 
means, and for that reason a purely scholarly life, or pure interest in science 
for its own sake, is neither encouraged nor patronized by the state. When we 
consider the condition of the sciences themselves, then the exalted reputa· 
rion of Chinese science vanishes before our eyes.~
0 
[2.] As for the written Chinese language, it is distinctively Chinese and is 
in many respects something admirable. There are two aspects to it. The one 
that concerns us is that the written language is viewed as a great obstacle to 
the development of the sciences; one can put the point differently by saying 
that because there is no science as such, the medium for it is so poor. The 
written language is hieroglyphic in form; it is not the expression of sounds. 
For us sounds are representational signs (Zeichen der Vorsteflung), and we 
have in tum signs for these signs. Letters are thus signs of representational 
signs. The Chinese do not take this roundabout way of signifying sounds by 
letters and representation by sounds. The signs for letters are equally so signs 
for representation. That feature impressed eminent men, so they have held it 
to be universally desirable. 
What we can say with regard to the spoken language (Tonsprache) of the 
Chinese is that it is meager and monosyllabic. Our spoken language is 
structured by the written language. Our spoken language involves little 
more than is found in the writing. That is not the case with the Chinese. 
Their spoken language is meager. Many words of rhe spoken language I 
153 
have twenty-five wholly different meanings. Distinction among these mean-
ings arises from the fact that the words are accented differently, are spoken 
literary colloction as ·the previous emperor', for he has in mind Qian.loog, wbo acrually had two 
successors prior to 1822. 
90. Herder says ~omething similar about Chine~ sciencr (!dun, 1 2); he UY"' it ladc..o; the "fret 
autonomy oi spirit' (p. 21 ). He also parallels Hegel's remark about its subservience to the state's 
needs, in Allgemeinen Betrachtungen uber die Geschichte kser Staaten (pp. 45-8); see a.lso 
A/Tgememe Historie, vi. 318-19. 
239 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
slower, faster, softer or louder. The Chinese have very sensitive ears. This 
[aspect of the language] is therefore a major defect.91 
The fact that the written language is the greatest obstacle to the advance-
ment of science is one of its conspicuous features. Our written language is 
extremely simple. Its multiplicity of sounds is limited and specified by the 
small nwnber of our written signs. Unlike ours, their written language does 
not limit the variety of sounds. On account of the intermediate sounds, an 
unstructwed language does not lend itself to writing. Structured language is 
specific in its sounds and letters, and these are readily learned. The rest 
involves the combining of sounds, and nothing further about them needs 
to be remembered. The Chinese do not have twenty-six letters, but instead 
many thousands of characters (Zeichen). The number of them necessary for 
ordinary purposes is 9,351, and in the opinion of some more than 10,000; 
scholars need 80,00~90,000. 92 Still to be learned are the combinations of 
words, combinations some of which are conventional (symbolisch) and 
some are wholly arbitrary. So one must also learn the combinations them-
selves. Therefore not much is gained from the fact that many characters are 
only juxtapositions. People have declared the utility of hieroglyphics to 
reside for us in the fact that many peoples can learn and understand the 
same characters without understanding one another's spoken language. This 
advantage is of no avail to the Chinese, because from time immemorial they 
154 
have kept to themselves.~
3 I 
[3.] As for the science itself, it has received much praise. The most 
renowned scientific man is Confucius [Kongzi]. He is for the most part a 
moral educator. He was a moralist as such, not actually a philosopher; for in 
his case we do not find theory that occupies itself in thought as such. For a 
few years he was a morally virtuous minister, and then he traveled about 
with his disciples. His teachings are expressed like the proverbs of Solomon; 
and yet, more than this is required for scientific knowledge. We have one of 
91. For these aspects of the Chinese laoguage, see: Grosicr, vis. 8-9; Memoires, viii. 145-6,202. 
92. Grosier states (vi. 1.5-16) that knowledge of 8.000 or 9,000 suffices for ooe to read maoy 
books. His 3rd edn. adds, accor-ding to a letter of de Mailla to Etierme Soucet. the more sprciJic 
range of 9,53.5 to 10,.516 for ordinary usage. If Hegel is not utilizing a source unltnowo to us. he 
may be basing his numbers on Grosier, despite the minor discrepancies. In any case these exact 
numbers ace found io Gaubil, Le Chou-king, 380--98, csp. HJ.-..4. For other accounts, ser: 
Mimoires, viii. 146-7; Staumon, ii 132; Herder, Ideen, 11; Allgemeine Histone, vi. 334--4~-ln 
any event, 80,000 appean as the upper limit. 
93. Either Hegel is reinterpreting for his own purposes a pa55age from Memoires (iv. 168~ 
that is on the whole negative about the possibility of translating Chinest poetry, or else be is 
referring to an actual discussion in his day about the translatabilirv of the ,haracter... The latter 
alternative is supponed by the way our text is npressed. 
-
240 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
his books [the Lun yii] in a modern translation; according to the reviews, 
however, it does little to enhance his reputation. He is not to be compared to 
Plato, Aristotle, or Socrates. He was about the same as Solon, if we under-
stand by this that he was the lawgiver of his people. His teachings are the 
foundation for moral instruction, espa:ially that of princes.94 
We wish to remark only briefly about the specifics of this topic [of 
science). Early on the Chinese did indeed make great strides in particular 
sciences, although this point has often been disputed. In modern times 
people have become better acquainted with the condition of their science 
and so are in a position to evaluate it. Physics is regarded as their most 
developed science. They knew about magnets and the use of the compass 
needle before we did. They say that the magnet points to the south, and this 
is equally correct. They first learned about the thermometer, barometer, 
pneumatic pump, pendulwn dock, and lever from Europeans, as well as 
the theories behind these too, the actual scientific theories. So it seems that 
they did not advance very far even in physics.95 I 
155 
The Chinese have become most renowned for their astronomy. Delambre 
and Laplace have reported on it specifically, and credit them with a series of 
long~term, ancient observations by which they calculated the duration of the 
year rather accurately, observed a solar eclipse in 1100 sc, and also quite 
acclll"ately noted the procession of the equinoxes.96 So they are credited with 
94. In Hegel's day there was good published infonnarion about the Ilk and work of Con-
fucius. Vol. xii of the MtimoiTes contains an account of his life (pp. 1-403), one that mort reant 
authorities regard as accurate. Following it is a chronological table (pp. 406-30) of events in bi5 
life. According to it, he lived from 551 to 479 JC, was an official at the age of 20, arul at age JO 
began to attract disciples and to travel about. He is deemed •the sage par excellence' (Mirrroires, 
xii. 6; Grosier, vii. 4091. The translation of the Lin yii rtferRd to is by 'Wilhelm SchOit and is 
comaint<f in The Works of Con{uctiiS, by joshua Manlunan (see the Bibliography). p11bl. in 
180~. Cordier refers (in BibliotheC4 Si11ica, col. 1404) to a Frmch review of it by Jean Pian 
Abti-Remusat (in Extr4it du Moniteur, 36 (1814)) that became widely influential Wilhebn 
Lauterbach (pseud. for Heinrich Julius von Klaproth) publ. a critique o( Schott's German tr. 
!Halle, 1826); see Dr. Wilhelm Schott's vergebliche UbeTSetzung tier Werke des Con{Miw aus 
der UrsprQChe, eine litnarische Betriigerei {Leipzig and Paris, 1828). Possibly Hegel is reacting 
here to still other reviews in newspapers. It is doubtful that his reference is to other and earlier 
translations, by Couplet, Noel, Intorcena, et aJ. 
95. 1bese comments about the physics of the Chinese are found in Grosier (vi. 80). 
96. Hegel dearly relies on Grosier (vi. 129 ff.), wbo cites testimonies intbeSinl·jing whereas 
Hegel just summarizes the results and does not mention that text by oame. Apan &om it be does 
cite Grosier's informant, Pierre Simon de Laplace, author of ~tiorr d. systeme riM MonJe. 
l vols. (Paris, 1796), ii. 266, discussed by Grosier (vi. 131 ff.l. Hegel's depeodeoce on bis sources 
is also evident in his adoption of connections between points found there. For iasr.auce, Grosier 
tpp. 133-4) mentions closely together the observation of the eclipse aod !be cakulatioa ol 
equinolCes. As his second authority Hegel mentions tbut Grosier does oot!) Jean jasepb 
241 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
very long-term observations, but this by itself is no science. They have also 
made meteorological observations for over 2,000 years, although not with 
barometer and thermometer but by noting rain and wind.97 Europeans can 
learn nothing at all from them. A proper astronomical science must not be 
sought from the Chinese. One reason is that its mathematical component, 
the calendar, has for the past two to three centuries been drawn up by 
European missionaries who give regular lectures there, because the Chinese 
are ignorant in such matters. The Chinese furnish the astronomical compo-
nent. The other reason is that from ancient times the Chinese have indeed 
made use of tubes for observation of the stars, but employed no telescopes 
and pendulum clocks (which they first learned about from the Europeans). 
The finest European telescopes and pendulum clocks are found today in the 
imperial palace in Beijing. ones that the emperor has received as gifts from 
the English. And yet, on the astronomical towers of Beijing they do nor make 
use of them as innovations. 98 
The other sciences are pursued in comparably empirical fashion. The 
circulation of fluids is the foundation in medicine. So the principal cure 
156 
consists in the bodily postures of I the sick. Linle is to be said about 
mathematics in China. Their mathematics consists of geometry. It is claimed 
that they know the Pythagorean theorem; but there is no evidence of that, 
even less so the proof. The Chinese understand how to calculate very well 
indeed, but by using mechanical devices. Algebra, in its higher forms espe-
cially, is not found there. Their system for counting is not the decimal system 
like ours, but is binary; they write all numbers with one and zero. which 
proves how inferior the Chinese generally are in comparison with ocher 
peoples. Also noteworthy with regard to algebra is the fact that they are 
completely unaware, for instance, of logarithms, sine, and tangents. They do 
have knowledge of chemistry, but only for its immediate application. It is the 
same with mechanics and hydraulics, a field where they are ingenious in the 
Delambre, author of Histoire de l'astronomie ancienne, 2 vols. (Paris. 1817); 1. 34 7-400 
discusses ancient Ch.inese astronomy. Even more noteworthy is that, of all the pervious edns. 
of these lectures.., none but LasS()n even mentions Delambre. 
97. Memoires, xi. 2, introduces this topic (including mention of earthquakes. drought!>. and 
floods), followoo by detailed chromcles from individual Cities that rdtr to such evenB. 
98. Grosirr states (v. 225) that the Chinelie use the c.1lendar ior administrauve purposes and 
for predi,tion of eclipses and other celestial phenomena, but rei)· on the European missionaries 
tor their preci!.l' mathematical measurement and verification. Cf. Mtim01res. ii. 369 and , .. 44. 
and Allg<mu>inR Hutorie. vi. 291 ff. Grosier also is the source 1vi. 145-61 for this account of 
Chinese faillli'e to utilize thtse modern astronomical instruments rhar Europeans have made 
available to them. Cf. Sonnerat, ii. 23, and Staunton, ii. 239 ff_ See also n. %. 
242 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
invention of simple machines, often cleverer than Europeans; that, however, 
is nor science. In addition they are skillful in a number of things having to 
do, for instance, with insects and copper metalworking (Sammlungen von 
Kupferblechen ). 99 
Art 
In the field of fine ans rhe consequence of all this is that ideal art cannot 
flourish among the Chinese. The ideal seeks to he conceived from the 
inward, free spirit, not prosaically but in such a way that it directly dispenses 
with something bodily. The Chinese are, to be sure, skilled in the mechanical 
arts, but they lack the creative power of spirit, the free inwardness. Thev 
have no lack of productivity. They have beautiful landscape painting and 
portraits, but they never attain the brilliance that is produced in ours by 
means of shadows and light. They are very precise in sketching, for instance, 
the scales of carp. Their floral painting is well-executed in this respect. In all 
these ways they are extremely precise, but the ideal is extremely alien ro 
them. Only rn horticulture 1 do they excel. Their gardens are quire beauti-
157 
ful, not rigid and formal. 100 
Religion 
Finally, information with regard ro religion is difficult to come by because 
the Europeans could only obtain it in the ro)e of missionaries. although as 
missionaries their own religion was an obstacle to their doing so.
101 
99. Grosier remarks on rhe empirical nature of Chinese medicine and its focqs on bodil~· 
fluids ivi. 190, 192). Voltaire refers ro the demoostratioo of tbe Pythagorean theorem to rhf 
Chinese bv a French priest !Essai, 262). Grosier (\'. 154-7) describes rheir binary s~stem and 
calcularing machines; see also Sraunton, ii. 4(}-1, and Allgemeine Historie, vi. 285-312 (with 
illusrration of an abacus, p. 237). No source refers tO logarithms, etc. Grosier mentions Chinest 
chemisrry (vi. 94 ), and describes rheir skill in mechanical artS (vi. 80-1 ), cf. Allgemeine HIStone, 
vi. 241 ff. Herder says (ldeen. 21-2) thar some of their shlls and artifacts are eadier than their 
European counterpans. These passages say nothing about insects or metalworking. although 
anorher Grosier passage (seen. 104) menuons the effects of a locust plague. 
100. These appraisals oi Chinest' fine art occur in Grosier., vi. 388-90. 393:; ci. Allgm-u!iN 
Historie, vi. 241, and Staunron, ii. 138. Crosier (vi. 321-68) has a very full account of Chillt'Sf 
honiculrure; see esp. p. 346. Hegel's positive 3Sl>essment of Chinese gardens reSects~ chan~­
ing taste of Europeans, who had formerly taken the formal Frencb garden as exemplary. but in 
his day inclined more to the style of the English garden. See e.g. Ursula Aurich, 'China im Spiegel 
der deutschen Llreratur des 18. Jahrhunderu'. Gf?T11'1(lrri5che Studien, 169 18erlin,l93S I. which 
says that Kew Gardens in London, with its Chmese pagoda and narurallandscapes designed b,· 
William Chambers. became the model for all of Europe (pp. 5(}.-11. 
101. Hegel is expressing the skepticism, current in tbe Janer pan of the 18th cent .. about 
missionary reports oo China. The Allgemeine Historie (vi. 349) says the: Jesuits' reporn an 
243 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
In China the state religion must first of all be distinguished from private 
religion. The main thing is that the state religion here is in one aspect 
patriarchal religion, although it has still other aspects distinguishing it 
from patriarchal religion. We can express this ancient, simple, patriarchal 
religion briefly in the following way: Human beings pray to God as the ruler 
of earth and heaven, who is one {einfach), eternal, benevolent, and just, and 
who rewards goodness and virtue, and punishes evil and crime. This pure, 
simple religion is essentially the state religion of the Chinese. It is pure and 
simple on account of its absuaction. This son of view excludes the richness 
and profundity of nature and of spirit. Justice and benevolence are modes of 
activity of the absolute; but what the absolute is does not get expressed. In 
this patriarchal view, human beings are in the condition or abstraction in 
which they have not yet plumbed their own depths or the depths of nature, 
nor will they find the problems of nature and of spirit resolved in the divine. 
This simple view thus comprises the state religion of the Chinese. 
(1.] They call their supreme being Thien [Tian] or heaven, and also 
158 
Schang-ti [Shangdi], the supreme lord.102 The Jesuits have alleged I that 
lian or Shangdi is our God, the one we too recognize as God. Other 
missionaries, however, declared the religion of the Chinese to be paganism 
and in no way Christian. A second point of controversy was that the Jesuits 
allowed the Chinese to honor their ancestors, whereas the other missionaries 
forbade it. Some have placed these ancestors on a par with the saints; others 
have decreed that only the saints of the Catholic Chwch are intercessors. 
The kind of reverence that the Chinese have is evident in most ancient 
peoples. 'Tian' literally means 'heaven', and so there was dispute as ro 
whether it is supposed to be heaven in its natural aspect, or else what we 
call God.103 This dispute occws in the case of all ancient peoples, for 
incomplete, erroneous, and in some respectS untruthful, owing perhaps to their perfunctory 
inquiries or to a hostility to religions other than their own. See the fuller discussion of Chinese 
rdigion in Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion (Oxford, 2007), ii. 299-303, 547-62. 
102. SeeGrosier, iv. 367-8, and MimoiTe.s, iv. 90 (d. v. 53 and Allge:me;, Histone, vi. 350-1). 
103. Hegel treats the controversy over religious accoliUJIOdation ro Chinese rituals rather 
tersely; d. RudoH Merkd, Leilmn und ChiM (Berlin, 1952), 20. He probably can presuppose 
that his audito~ are informed about it, since he remarks funher on in our text: 'Thisconuoversy 
with respect to all mythology continues right up [to] the present day.' He docs not expressly 
menrion the detail.s. such as the controversies betwcm jesuits and Dominicans, or the stanCe 
taken by Leibniz and Wolff (d. Europa und die Kai$er V01I ChinQ, 212, 243, 306-7). His sources 
have much fullu explanation. The Histoire ghrirak (ix. 3~1 publishes an appeal (placet I of 
several Europeans resident in China, made in 1699 to the empero(, imploring him to take a 
position on tbt conuoversy mentiooed by Hegel. The Mimoires contain aD edict of Kangx:i, 
malting known tilt irnperiaJ religion in dUs conoection (v. 5+-5). It is unclear whether Hegel is 
244 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHJNA 
instance, with the Persians pertaining to light: Did they mean by it narural 
light or the light of thought? It is the same with the Egyptian Osiris: Is it the 
Nile, or is it a symbol of something inward? So poople ask themselves if 
heaven, light, and Osiris are supposed to be signs of something purely 
spiritual and inward, or if it is the natural things themselves that these 
signs are supposed to signify. A third opinion holds that deceased individuals 
were revered under these images. This controversy with respect to all 
myrhology continues right up to the present day. If a sharp distinction 
between these views is drawn, then they are opposed. It is surely correct, 
however, that no people can be said to have taken what is simply sensible to 
be the divine, since it is necessarily spirit's nature not to stop short with its 
natural aspect, bur to proceed to something inward. All pwe religions 
involve a metaphorical transposition (HiniJberspielen) from the sensible 
into thought. When the thought (Gedanke) in the object makes itself more 
profound, then it is something conceived (ein Gedachtes), something 
universal. 
We could say a lot about the more specific implications in how the 
Chinese speak of their lian. Nevertheless we only wish to recount chis one 
episode. I In 1711, under Kangxi, the Jesuits built a chwch, on the pedi-
159 
ment of which the reigning emperor himself had three inscriptions placed. 
The first reads: 'The true principle of all things'. The second is: ~It has no 
beginning and it will have no end; it created all things and sustains all 
things. • The third is: 'It is infinite, is infinitely good and infinitely just; it 
governs everything with supreme power: The Chinese speak in this way 
about their god, similar to what we cead about Jehovah in the Old Testa-
ment. Kangxi's successor issued a declaration when several mandarins wrote 
to the emperor about a stunted growth of plants. They told that there was no 
stunted growth where the likeness of an ancient general bad been erected. 
The emperor replied that it had not been his intention to erect the .image for 
that purpose. There is an ongoing relationship berween human beings and 
lian. When a misfortune occws, people must pause and ask whether their 
failures, and which ones, have brought these punishments upon them. The 
emperor does this himself when he hears of such misfortune, by asking 
himself how he brought it upon his empire. If the people do what is right, 
then lian will even come ro their assistance; for empire and people would be 
ovenhrown or overwhelmed only if the people were to neglect what is right 
drawing directly &om one of these passages for. despitt the agreement io contents. be _is 
obviously sum.rnarizing io few words an already familiar discussion For ~ ~ 
aCCOUDt III 
his own words, in 1827, see Philosaphy of Religimt, ii. 548-SO. Sec also Miwtoires. v. S7-8. 
245 

THE LECTURES OF 18 22-3 
and good. If human beings shirk their duty, then lian changes his favorable 
disposition into one of chastisement.104 These are the thoughts about the 
supreme being, and these views are wholly compatible with what one finds 
160 
in the Old Testament. I 
So we can call this aspect of the religion patriarchal. Thus for the Chinese 
this simple, abstract being stands at the apex. Learned Chinese, whom the 
missionaries call atheists105 in the state religion, take this abstract being as 
the primary element (das Primitive) of the understanding, as the innermost 
essence of the world with the significance one can give to fate, approximat-
ing to the laws of nature as what nature produces. Everything is supposed to 
have come forth from this primary element. The Chinese have in general the 
representation of a just sovereign over nature and human action. The corol-
lary is that the emperor alone is called 'son of heaven', of Tian, and he alone 
presents the offering on behalf of his entire people. The emperor alone 
presents the offering; he alone carries out the act of worship. The Chinese 
have several festivals at which the emperor makes the offering in a public 
procession. The principal festivals occur at our Christmastime, at the winter 
solstice, and the second ones at the spring equinox, at which time the 
emperor rills the soil, not so as to honor this site politically but as worship. 
The empress for her part tends the silkworms. A third festival is at midsum-
mer, at the summer solstice. A fourth would take place at the onset of 
autumn but is in any event celebrated earlier; because the emperor issues a 
declaration stating that he will not wait until autumn to thank heaven for its 
fruitfulness. So the principal festivals correlate with the four seasons of the 
year. In earlier rimes the emperor made the offerings on high mountains that 
are called Yo (Yue). There are four of them, corresponding to the four 
cardinal directions. Later, however, the location of the festivals was trans-
ferred to the palace. Here the emperor paid homage to Shangdi. There is a 
grand procession. In such a festival procession there are often two thousand 
104. Hegel draW$ upon Grosier for tht- accounts of the church inscriptions (iv. 387) and tht-
likeness of the ancient general (iv.487-4!). Grosier says the first inscription is on the pediment. and 
each of the others is on a separate column. In Grosier the second reads {in pan) 'it govems them {all 
dungs] and is their true lord'. The lhird reads: 'It is inlin.itely good and infinitely just; it iUwnines.. n 
sustains, it regula res all with supreme authority and with sovereign justice. • Voltaire too menti011~ 
this inscnption, based on du Halde; S« Essm, 87; d. Eu,.opaund die Kaiser von Cbjna.l39. whidl 
cites the Gennan tt of du Halde that has a nearly identical version of the ins:riptions. In Grosier's 
account the mallonnanon of plants occurred as the result of a locust plague. 
105. The Allgemei~ Historie (vi. 349-50, 387) says that, according to the missionaries.. the 
Ju-kvau sect, which they accuse of atheism and hru; scholars in its membership. carries on iu 
own form of worship as an apparent 'tidying-up' of the prevailing religion. to counter thf' 
accusations. See also Mernoires, v. 54. 
246 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
mandarin scholars and an equal number of mandarin military. Especially 
large festivals are still observed at the onset of a solar or IWlar eclipse~ at 
which time the people prostrate themselves. But the mandarin scholars 
observe the eclipse. In all these practices that we cite there is a very precise 
link between religious intuition and specific features of nature.106 1 
161 
[2.] A second element of this religion is that while Tian is indeed the one 
lord, the religion is not so exclusive (polemisch) that he alone is h.onored, for 
many others find a place under this One, with the result that there are man~· 
sects in China-Jews for more than a millennium as well as many Mus-
lims. 107 The spread of Christians too is not prevented when their religion 
does not seem to involve incitement against the ordinances of the Chinese 
empire. In addition to Tian, the Chinese revere Tschen [Shen] or spirits 
(Genien), similar to Greek dryads and the like, 108 the souls of natural things. 
represented as distinct from the objects of which they are the essences. 
It is rationally essential that the absolute not be something indeterminate 
but instead particularize itself, and that the particular oc the determinate 
even be posited within the absolute and be recognized, known, and envi-
saged in it. Our thoughtful understanding grasps the solar system in its 
motion as self-detennining according to laws. These laws are tile soul ot 
the solar system. So law is something universal, although only as particular-
ity elevated to the universal. This particular is thereby linked to the One. 
This universal is to be known in God, in the one universal, and so we say that 
God has made it so. Thus we speak of this [particular] universal as posired 
by the one universal, but we do not yet know the fonner in the latter, because 
we grasp the one universal as power, whereas this particular universal lies 
outside it. 1 This absolute is still not comprehended as itself rhus deter-
162 
mined within itself. Inasmuch then as the Tian of the Chinese lacks derermi-
nacy, it rhus falls outside the absolute, and this universal status to which rhe 
particular is exalted lies outside it. In th.is way we have, in the Old Testa-
ment, Jehovah set on one side, the Elohim on the other side. 
109 
106. All of Hegel's possible sources are in su~tantial agreemmt about the ritual offerings 01. 
the Chinese. On the emperor as chief priest who alone may preseru the offering, see: Memoires. 
ii. 39, xi. 535, xiii. 105, and xv. 215; Allgemeine Histone. vi. 351. 
107. Grosier(iv. 4841 says jews have been in China since the Han dynasty, which commenced 
in 206 Be; Mbnoires, v. 58, concurs. See also Grosier, iv. 507, which savs dterc arc a p-ear ~n' 
more Muslims in China than there a~ jews; cf. Memoires, v. 68 and Allg~w HIStor-re, v•. 
391-407". 
108. A similar comparison occurs in the Histoire gmerale (xi. 3031. Tht Mimomes calls them 
·wandering spirits' (X\'. ll9J. 
. 
l 09. ln this difficult and unusual paragraph, H~l draws a dist:incrioo between tht- parucuJar 
Uni\'etsaJ (instantiated in the laws governing me motions of bodies in the solar system I and the 
247 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
The initial exaltation~ which does not yet grasp the universal itself in its 
determinacy, is one of bestowing universal status on the souls of particular 
things, 110 as we find with the spirits of the Chinese. All things have such 
spirits--sun, moon, stars, time, the years and hours--each with its own 
Shen. The Shen love human beings and are arrayed in ranks as are the 
mandarins. 111 Each province and each city has its own Shen. There are 
superior and inferior spirits, ones beneficial to human beings and ones that 
are evil. The evil spirits are called Gui. and these are in conflict with the 
Shen. 112 Some Shen are fully occupied, others not; the latter can then 
transform themselves into human beings or animals. As human beings, 
they are immune to physical deteriorarion.n 3 The emperor, the son of 
lian, can even assign the Shen their places and instructions and offices; he 
does so through the court calendar. In Chinese history there are narratives, 
always lengthy ones, concerning a dynastic change, whereupon the emperor 
in fact rearranges the invisible world as well as changing all the state offices. 
Also appointed as Shen were the deceased who had been loyal to the state. 
The Shen have their temples everywhere. People turn to them in the convic-
tion that all natural events depend on them. If a misfonune befalls a 
163 
province, then the Shen are I reviled and the chief mandarin can strike 
one universal (lhe absolute, or God who establishes these Jaws). Aher excluding Tian (which 
docs not comprehend its.:lf) from such an absolute, Hegel then concludes with a refererx:e to 
Jehovah and the Elohirn of the Old Testamcm. So 'Jehovah' is presumably the particular 
universal, the one who discloses himself to Moses in the burning hush (Exod. 3), whereas 
"Elohim' is a generic term for God. The paragraph suggesiS that a cmrcept of tbe absolute 
must unite determinate or panicular, and universal or absolute, elements, and that Chinese 
religion fails to do so. 
110. Griesheim reads: 'The initial exaltation of particularity inro tht universal [is such) that 
the representation of sucb particularities wiU be given particular shapes ... • 
111. For his treatment of the Shen, Hegel relies essentially on Mirrwires, xv, as oa::asionally 
augmented &om Crosier. As a result his presentation, perhaps owing to the p~ 
of time, 
St'ems to be a bit of a grab bag. See Mbnoires, xv. 21-4; d. AUgemeine Historie, vi. 350 where, 
however, the 'spirits' are not precisely designated. 
Ill. On good and evil spirits, see Memoires, i. -468. It is striking that none of the available 
edns. speak of 'Gui'. This expression has its counterpan in the 'Kouei' of Memoires, xv. 219, to 
which H~el turns (see the three following notes). Grosier speaks about these evil spirits only in 
connection with an episode in which a successor to Kangxi is reponed to have opposed the 
erection oi specific statues for the prevention oi wrong. There (iv. 389) Gror.iercalls them 'coeui· 
chine'. See also Mem01res, xv. 221. 
113. Hegel bases t.besc statements on a passage in Mbnoires, xv . .!19, which he severely 
abridged, and which is lihed out of its context within 'Extract from a letter of M. Anriot, 
missionary' (Mmroires, xv . .20s-59). ActuaUy the contents of the extraCt coocem the Daoist sect 
and its teaching on metempsychosis, a topic our text takes up only later. 
248 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: CHINA 
them from the next year's calendar as punishment. 114 The Shen were not 
actually honored as deities, but instead as subordinates to Tian. 115 The 
Chinese have idols or graven images of these Shen.ln their temples frighten-
ing graven images are installed. Temples of the Shen have priests. There are a 
great many monasteries of these bonzes, where they live in celibacy. and 
there are convents too. In Beijing there are 10,000 temples. 116 The monas-
teries have increased in such numbers that the emperor must limit them. One 
emperor had twenty-five men or bonzes return to civic life and dosed 5,000 
monasteries. 117 The great superstition of the Chinese relates to this point 
about the Shen and monasteries. Upon any misfortune they turn to bonzes 
and idols. These bonzes are constant givers of advice, as well as being 
soothsayers and the like. One of their main concerns is the arrangement of 
houses and even more of gravesites, for they are convinced that the fortune 
or misfonune of a family hinges on these things. Nooks and crannies 
(Winkel) are exorcized by means of dragons, and auspicious burial places 
located by them. 113 And this superstition presupposes the subjugation of the 
inner spirit that we saw among the Chinese. 
[3.] We now take note of particular sects. One is that of Lao-Tse [Lao-tzu, 
or Laozi]. These sects mark the beginning of a quite different ordeL 'Through 
withdrawal into self, through study and the like, they represent themselves 
as attaining a mastery over the Shen. In addition, the more profound devo-
tees become Shen themselves, through strenuous discipline. So here there is a 
beginning of the elevation of human beings to the divine, of the absolute 
identification with the divine absolute. 119 A second point is that the worship 
114. See Memoires, xv. 213-14. Hegel adds from Grosier, iv. 395, the point about booorillg 
tht de<:eased as Shm. 
115. See Mimoires, v. 55 and xv. 219. See also Allgemeitre Historie, vi. 3SO. 
116. Only the 3rd edn. of Grosier agrees with Hegel's account (iv. 416), and refers to the 
proliferation of temples as owing to the government's tolerana! 'of novel seers and popular 
supem:itions'. In this connectioP Grosier (iv. 423 ff.) cites HiitUl«'s report oo 1M~ 
legation and its description of the temple of Gehol. See also Staunton, ii. t 42. Today the tem1 
"bonze' is usually applied to a Buddhist monk, not to those of other sectS. Its derivation is from 
Japanese, through Portuguese, to French. 
117. Several times in Chinese history SIKh measures were taken against tbe bonza, tor 
instance in 845 and 955 (ser HistoiTe generale, vi. 489-91 and vii. 445, as well as Allgemeine 
Histone, vi. 394-5). No statements have been found that agree with tbe DtUOhcrs Hegel 
provides. 
I 18. The Memoires (iv. 290-1) reports on faith in idols in connection with the bot1z:n ~'Tao­
tsee and the lamas' in a context similar to this ont:. Hegel, however, draws upoo GJ"OSKt (IV. 443 
and 481 ff.). 
119. Based on du Halde {i. 665), the Allgemeine Histone (vi. 356--SJ castS Laoz.i in ave~· 
poor light. So Hegel's contrastingly positive opinion must thereiorr be in8~ 
~y different 
SOllrea. It seems tha io Hegel's day morr was known about Laozi aad his wnanp tba.a IS 
249 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
of lamas is very widespread. The imperial families, in particular those of the 
164 
Manchu line, rely on the lama. The emperor's private religion is I Lamaism, 
with its regard for a living human being in whom, at the present rime, 
divinity has its concrete ex:istence. 120 This belief is linked to the religion of 
the Buddha. The religion of Fo is quite renowned, although it is doubtful 
rhat this religion is the same as that of the Buddha. One of the main views 
held by the religion of Fo is that of metempsychosis, according to which all 
shapes-human beings, stars, and so on-are only forms or revelations of 
the One, the absolute. In addition, followers of this religion locate what is 
supreme in nothingness (das Nichts), such that human beings then elevate 
themselves to God when they renounce all sensations of what is particular 
and make themselves into abstract intuition, reaching a point where good 
and evil, as well as all differences, vanish; (these people] immerse themselves 
wholly in emptiness, in impassivity (das Unbewegte). Thus what should be 
sought is utter emptiness. 121 
From this presentation of the firsr patriarchal empire we pass over to the 
second, to India. 
usually thought to be the case. See, for instance, the Preliminary Discoune in Gaubil's ~­
king tdn. (pp. xlix-c) and Grosier's remark (iv. 380-1) that this text nas lxtn known in Europe 
for a long time. No comparable edn. is known. In his ucannent of the sect o( Laori, Hegel bases 
himself on the most r«ent available version of vol. xv of the Memoires (pp. 208-59), published 
io 1791, because it conforms to the state of research about 1820; or perhaps b«ause he is 
pressed for time. In vol. iv ( 1779) the teachings of Laozi and his tollowen are linked witb 
superstition and idolatry, although the account aJso speaks of 'commerce with spirits' and 
preseots a positive evaluation; nevertheless Hegel does not use it; nor does he utilize Memoire5, 
iii. 41 and v. 56-7, also on this topic. Instead he employs Memoires, xv. 209-10, while 
disreprding refereoces there to occult S~;:ieoc;es, magic, and the like. Also, he defers the topic 
of metempsychosis (mm.tioned in xv. 211) to later in these lectures tsee also n. 113). 
120. See Grosier, iv. 418, on the imperial ties to Lamaism. 
121. Hegel is surely influenced by his sources in setting up a link between Lamaimt and 
Buddhism. although he is dobious about the identity of Fo with Buddha. See Mbnoirts, v. 58-9, 
which says that emperor Ming·ti (Mingdi) sent envoys to India, who brought back to China the 
religion of Fo, together with various Indian fables and supustitions. Hegel's, sources arr not in 
agreement on this issue. Mtmoirf!5, I. 408 says the religion of Fo is foreign to China. Sonnerat (ii. 
!91 a.nd Staunton (ii.43) have little to repon about the religion of Fo. Perhaps Hegel's skepticism 
about the identity oi the two figures is, influenced by an actual discussion he learnt about &om 
periodicals. Wilhelm Traugott Krug says some take Buddha to be the same as the Tibetan 
teacher lo, Olhers the same as the Chinese figu.-e Fo; see his Allgemeirre HandwOrterbuch dn 
philosophischen Wi5sen.sdla{len, rubst ihrer Literlltur and Gescbic.hte, 2nd edn. (Leipzig, 
l!B2 ), i. 40.1. There Krug cites 'Nachrichten i.iher die B\lddha-Religion .au!i engli!';Chcn Zeit· 
>ehritten', in Miscellen III4Ji derneuestm ausliindischen Literlltur t1816), viii. 2~2 ff. and 404. As 
ior the more specific content of the religion of Fo, Hegel turns to Grosier, iv. 447-8; see also 
.-4./lgemeine Historie, vi. 359--60. 
250 

INDIA 1 
India comprises the river valley of the Indus and that of the Ganges. Here 
commences a more specific involvement with the mountains. India has 
been receptive toward the rest of the world, and thus it appears as an 
effective link in the chain of world history. The Chinese Empire, in con-
trast~ lies outside this history; it is an initiaJ point that, howeve~ still has 
not gotten under way or moved outside itself. India presents the very 
image of a world-historical people. Ir has been a sowce of wisdom, 
science, and culture, as well as of natural treasures. There is nothing that 
it does not have to offer. Thus all peoples have turned their attention to 
India, to find a route to it I in order to access its treasures. All peoples 
165 
without exception seek to gain for themselves a connection with this 
source. There is no great nation that has not to some degree acquired a 
foothold in India. 
The Principle of India 
[1.) First we shalt attempt to grasp the Indian principle in contrast to the 
Chinese principle. As opposed to China, India appears to be a land of fantasy 
IPhantasie~, a land of wonders. In China everything was understanding 
devoid of fantasy, a prosaic life in which even a person's disposition is 
externally determined, established, and regulated, by law. In India, con-
versely, no object is inaccessible to poetry and fantasy, for fantasy transforms 
each one and makes it wondrous. In China morals constitute the content of 
the law. In India there are of course set regulations and laws, indeed an 
enormous number of stipulations regarding conduct, albeit ones whose 
content is devoid of what is ethical, sociable, or moral, for their content 
instead consists of superstitions. These superstitious actions are lacking in 
spirit and are unfeeling, in both fonn and content. The lives of the Indians 
are comprised of spiritless and unfeeling forms of this kind. Inasmuch as one 
1. In contrast to the section on China, Hegel's presentation oi India is based on English 
sources. In Hegel's day the front rank of research OP India belonged to the E.oglisb. as was ooly 
na1uraJ given the historical and political circumstances. Hegel gives pl'iority to E.oglish presmta· 
rions over German ones because the English acquired their informanon finr-baod fr0111 their 
own experience in India. While the English concerned thePJSdves witb all the topi<:s of Indian 
history and society. German authors confined wmselves to presc:n~ the. language, a~ 
religion, and philosophy, and for rha1 rea.~on arrived at a strongly idealiud unage of Ind1a. 
That Hegel adopts the largely negative judgment formed by the English is~ 
oot o~y- 00 ~ 
sources but also on his own hisroricaJ-philosophical stance. For Hegel,~~ ~tJoQ 
IS 
the actual bearer of history. Hegel saw in India a total inability to oqamzr life politicaiJy. 
251 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
aspect of the Chinese is their prosaic prudence and another is that the 
sovereignty of their rulers extends over all things, they have an abiding 
superstition as opposed to intelligence. The Indians do nor have the same 
sort of superstitions that the Chinese have, for their entire condition can be 
summed up as one of dreaming or fantasy. Rationality, morality, and 
subjectivity are nullified or cast aside~ and thus the human being is simply 
self-absorbed and arrives at something positive through the vagaries of the 
imagination. The extremes are, respectively, wild imagination involving 
sensuous enjoyment, and a totally inanimate abstraction of inwardness; 
166 
the Indian vacillates between them. 1 So the Indians are like wholly de-
based persons who, devoid of all spirituality, empty and in despair, acquire 
for themselves a dream world by the use of opium, a world or bliss of 
insanity. 
For the Chinese, historical knowledge is the most developed science. We 
saw Chinese history ordered and arranged over some five thousand years, in 
chronicle-like, prosaic narratives of external matters, deeds, and events, 
embellished now and again with practical applications. In the case of the 
Indians, in contrast, there is no thought of history, of chronology or the 
presentation of an actuality. For them all that subsists in the present evapo-
rates into colorful dreams. So for them no authentic history is possible. Their 
grasp of things is affected by a weakness or irritability of the nerves that 
makes objects, a fixed and determinate existence, unbearable to them; 
instead, when concrete existence malc:es itself felt it turns into a hallucination 
for them. They cannot endure any determinate actuality, and so mwt drearo 
and deceive. Nor are they in any better position to deceive with knowledge. 
Their scriptures are no more reliable than are their narratives. These are the 
most pertinent features. A dream or a lovely atmosphere has pervaded views 
of the nature of things Indian. More recendy, however, after people became 
acquainted with the Indian spirit, this auca was destroyed or dissipated. The 
verdict today is quite at odds with how the fantasy of this wonderland 
represents itself. 
[2.] Now we need a more specific grasp of the Indian principle. With the 
Chinese we encountered the patriarchal principle that governs dependency. 
The Chinese lack ful6lled inwardness, for their inwardness still has no content. 
For them the content of self-determination is given in an external regime, in 
167 
external laws that define that content. This is the most abstract I inwardness. 
The next step is a necessary advance, one that indeed generates a world of 
inwardness; hence the fulfillment is the coming into being of an inward 
world. For the Chinese the world of thought exists only in relation to 
the state and to utility. The next step is for the determinacy, heretofore 
252 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
posited externally, to become inward, to configure itself into a spiritual 
world such that what is inward not be merely abstract, such that spirit 
construct from itself a world of its own and the world be configured into 
an idealism. 
We see this advance with the Indians, although here the idealism is one 
of sheer imagination devoid of reason and of freedom, a mere dreaming 
in which there is only a simulation of truth and in which the preponder-
ance of the content is abstract imagination. What is objective appears as 
spirit's imaginative construct, but as nonconceptual and accordingly as 
unfree. Thus Indian life is a life of dreaming. Precisely the case in dreaming 
is that a person's actuality, which exists on its own account, which is one's 
own personality for irself, is not distinguished from what is external to it, 
and thus the entire connection to externality, the understanding of the 
external world, drops out. In the dreaming life of the Indian there is no 
free being-for-itself of the subject nor of the obj~ and no subject's 
distance from them and theirs from the subject. Funhennore, although 
the profoundest depths of spirit express themselves in dreams too, in 
another respect dreams are nonsensical and the greatest silliness. So 
with the Indians we see the consciousness of the highest idea, the most 
sublime characteristics, but intermingled with the most arbitrary, cloudy 
shapes ( Wolkengestalten). 
There is a well-known, characteristically feminine beauty in which the 
face possesses not the rosy complexion of health I but instead a more 
delicate rosy glow like a spiritual emanation from within, one in which aU 
the features possess a gentleness. Women have this geode beauty for a few 
days after giving birth. We also see this beauty in a sleepwalking state, a 
beauty in the dying [Virgin] Mary as depicted by a great painter such as 
Scorel. z We see this beauty of nervous exhaustion take shape in India as the 
beauty of the sensitive soul that, however, suffers from weakness, the soul 
that lacks a free spirit, a spirit grounded within itself. 
[3.] In our dearer grasp of the Indian condition in light of this compari-
son, the underlying idea of Indian life is the oneness of the concrete existence 
of what is external with what is internal. Indian intuition has as its founda-
tion the absolute substantiality that is not yet intem..ally separated by the 
understanding; accidental phenomena are not separated from essential 
being. Separation of that sort depends on the understanding. And we find 
an absence of understanding in India. Understanding calls for a secure 
2. Duu:b artist jao vau Xord (14~5-15621. 
253 
168 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
subject distinguishing itself from a manifold that, within itself and by the 
same token, is securely defined and stands over against the one understand-
ing it. The manifold standing over against the individual exists itself in an 
understandable interconnection. This division of subject from object, and of 
169 
objects from their interconnection, does not obtain for the Indians. I 
The way things exist in their interconnection is that they are, above all, 
singular, but they have laws governing their deeper interconnection; they 
have something inner, something universally essential that is distinct from 
their singularity. The most universal expression of this essential character is 
the abstract God of the Chinese; the Indians do not distinguish the singula-
rities of things from their interconnection or their essential being. For that 
reason the Indians are pantheists. Theirs is no polytheism, for their intuition 
is one of universal pantheism; it is not the pantheism of thought, as in 
Spinozism, but the pantheism of representation. Spinozism, which considers 
what is itself singular to be null (nichtig) and holds fast only to what in it is 
abstract substance~ thinks that only what is u.rllversal is substance. 
Among the Indians, then, the universal is not thought, for sensible stuff is 
directly and crudely imported into what is universal; this stuff is not made 
ideal by the energy of spirit, not elevated to free beauty in such a way that 
what is sensible would be only the expression of what is universal; instead 
the Indians just take up sensible stuff into the universal, and this stuff is 
expanded so limitlessly that the divine is bizarrely swallowed up by it and 
itself made to be ridiculous. That is because the divine is grasped in finite 
form, the finite spun out extravagantly. For the Indians this is no mere game; 
they are not making up fairy tales or standing above and beyond imagina-
tion; instead these dreams are intended seriously. The divine is not indivi-
dualized by this construct but instead is just wholly debased by such lowly 
170 
shapes; it is completely de£led and 1 absurd, like the finite just set out in 
miniature, in the miraculous, and it is cast wholly into an abyss. This is the 
divinizing of the finite and the finitizing of the divine. Thus our representa-
tion of God's becoming a hwnan being, the incarnation of the divine. cannot 
impress them. For it is not a particularly important thought, inasmuch as 
everything is the incarnation of God-the ape, the parrot, as well as the cow. 
and so forth; the divine is incarnate in everything. The divine universal, its 
inner being, is imaged in what is sensible, which was not the case for the 
Chinese. 
There is an extant world of representation for the Indians, a replete 
inwardness, but not one shaped by reason, by the concept, for what is 
brought about is simply a crude uniting of the two extremes. The basic 
thought is the representation of the unity of the singular with the universal. 
254 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
So what is sensible is the particular element that is posited in unity with the 
universal. This unity~ regarded in and for itself, constitutes the foundation of 
all trurh; however, taken here in singularity, thus merely given for represen-
tation, this unity becomes bizarre, absurd, and contemptible. 
This rendering of God in sensuous form can have either of two meanings. 
In one, that of pantheism, the representation of this unity is thoroughly 
universa), and the entire sensible realm, without exception, is thusdivinized, 
is completely inclusive of the finite, which must count as God. In the other, 
the rendering of God in sensuous form concentrates or confines itself to an 
immediately present focal point. This distinction accounts for the distinction 
between peoples. The universal dispersal of pantheism belongs to the Brah-
manic Indians (the Hindus]; the second type is that of the Buddhist principle, 
or Lamaism. The peoples of the latter principle are mainly the Tibetans, 
Mongols, and Kalmucks, and also the Ceylonese 1 and those of the eastern 
171 
peninsula on the far side of the Ganges. Lamaism is the most widespread of 
all religions. First we have to speak of the Indians proper [namely, the 
Hindus}.3 Reverence for the Buddha is also known in India. To the Hindus, 
Buddha is the ninth incarnation of God, although Brahmanic pantheism is 
on the whole the universal principle. 
The Region of India 
(1.] As for the region of India proper, its fundamental features are the 
floodplains of the Ganges and the Indus Rivers, as well as what the English 
call 'Hindustan' and the Deccan peninsula. In the north is the river basin of 
the Ganges, a region looked upon as the actual focal point of Indian 
Brahmanism, the region of Bengal, Kashmir, and so forth. The other river 
basin is that of the Indus, the southern part of which consists mostly of sandy 
deserts interspersed by solitary oases. The northern part, the Punjab, sub-
divided by five rivers is fertile. Alexander the Great came as far as the Indus, 
, 
. 
4 
and the English came in tum, some 2,1 00. years later, m 1805. The name 
'Indian' derives from the Indus River. It is not known whether they called 
J. Hegel regards Hinduism as the religion of me Indian people, and. thus.~ uses 
'Indian' and its varianrs (lnder, Jndin; indiscb) when the position under diSCUSSIOn JS Hinduwu 
as such. Up to this point in the pn:seot section this has not bttn ao issue, and so we ~v~ let 
'Indian', etc. stand. But from now on wbm it is clear that his relllll~ are specific 10 ~~~ 
and not so applicable to Buddhism or other positions, we traOSlau his Gmnao tnmS br Hindu 
and iL~ variant-.. 
· 
4. In 11105 the East India Co. R".aCbed as far west in India as Delhi, oo the jllDUI& River.~ 
English did oot arrive at the I!Nius until the lina1 defeat and aDDCUtiOD o( the Sikh kiogdoln 
111 
1849. 
255 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
themselves 'Indians' or we called them that, nor whether they in fact had a 
common name for themselves. The term 'Hindu' was wholly unknown 
there. There are no sizeable highlands between the Ganges and the Indus. 
Fanher south, however, to the east of the Indus, there are extensive moun-
tain ranges, linked to the southern highlands of Hindustan. South of the 
mounrains is the Nerbudda [Narbada] River, the boundary between Hindu-
stan and the Deccan, the peninsula. The coastal regions to the west and those 
near Ceylon are very narrow and are only an edge between the highlands and 
the ocean. Behind them rise high mountains, as we saw in the case of Africa. 
The other coasts are more varied. Ceylon lies opposite Cape Comorin, quire 
dose to it. So Hindusran and the Deccan are separated from the two vast 
112 
river basins. In I the highlands dwell utter barbarians such as the Depla-
den, 5 a savage tribe wholly lacking in culture. In the river basins dwell 
mainly Brahmanic people characterized by the aforementioned principle., 
although intermingled with other individual peoples. 
[2.] Their political life, ethical life, and religion are very closely 
interconnected. We should delineate the basic tenet of life in the state more 
precisely as follows: The state as such is supposed to be the unity of the 
particular will with the universal, thus the actualization of the universal will. 
So the state presupposes consciousness of free will. The ob;ective will in 
China is law; objective will, howeve.; is beyond the purview of the world of 
the Indians. With the Chinese we saw what is moral made into the content of 
civil law, so that what is internal is handled as something external. For the 
Indians there is indeed a unity of external and internal, but one in which 
neither does nature constitute an understandable whole, nor does what is 
spiritual stand as free will over against this natural domain; instead there is 
still immediate unity. Lacking is spirit's withdrawal into itself, whereby it 
recognizes the Ia w of freedom as subsistent for it. So the principle of freedom 
is lacking, and so ladting too is will subsistent in itself as well as in the form 
of subjective will. So everything necessary for a state is lacking. Therefore in 
India there can be no state whatsoever. In China the state is everything; in 
India there is just a people but no state. 
As shall become evident, there is a governing element in virtue of the 
existence of a social~ communal life, and indeed a very structured life, 
inasmuch as this life has focal points. But for determination of what is said 
5. No mountain folk with this name is to be found in any of ~d's sources. Possibl~ the 
transcriber misheard Hegel's term for them. In aoy event there is a report of a savage mounuin 
folk in John Rawlins, 'On the Manners, Religion. and Laws of the Cu'ci's., or Mountaineers of 
Tripura', Asiatic Resur~s, Z (London., 17~). 187-93. 
256 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
to be ethical, right, and moral in this life, I there is no basic tenet of ethical 
173 
life and no piery as conscience and the like, because the principle of freedom 
is lacking; for spirit as freedom is the principle for aU of these things. So to 
the extent that there is government here, it is a despotism, a wholly unprin-
cipled, lawless despotism. Thus in India the determinative feature is the most 
degraded despotism. There is plenty of religion but no piety (Religiositiit). 
China, Persia, the Turks, and Asia as such are the breeding grounds (Boden) 
of despotism. If the ruler, the one holding power, is an evil ruler; despotism 
becomes tyranny. But then tyranny is known to be an objectionable condi-
tion, something individuals detest, an extraordinary state of affairs. In India, 
however, there is no feeling of one •s own freedom, no consciousness of what 
is moral; so tyranny is in order and is not detested. The Indians are left with 
nothing but the feeling of the sensible domain as a given for them. 
[3.] The third point, then, is that the Indians ace a people of an ancient 
culture. The greatest fertility exists in the Ganges river valley in particular, 
and likewise in the Narbada valley; in the alluvial soil crisscrossed by so 
many fine streams--in this warm, moist soil, in this luxuriance ot sensual 
nature-all needs may easily be satisfied, and from early times it produced a 
communal life and its elaboration. Here emerges a most noteworthy feature 
of absolute importance for the concept of the state, a feature opposed to that 
of the Chinese. What China lacks is the feature according to which the idea 
of the state is concrete in subdivisions internally detennined and organically 
articulated as distinct domains; there is no abstraction [as in China}, for 
what there is instead is the being of the distinctions posited on their own 
account, albeit in such a way that they exist by means of the whole, and the 
whole by means of them. These distinctions are something universal; they 
are universal 1 particularities. The entirety of the state is something sub-
174 
stantial; however; in particularizing itself it divides itself into multiple par-
ticular occupations that constitute the organic branches of the state. lhese 
are the distinct elements that we see emergent in India. 
The Castes 
Individuals and families are distinct elements as singular particularities, 
not as universal ones.6 Insofar as these distinct elements are individual 
6. In the somewhat unusual terminology of thii passage, 'singular panicularitics' (~lne 
Besondnheitnrl are self-coota.ined unii.S such as individuals or families. wbt-reas 'Wllversa.l 
particularities' (allgemeine Besorulerheitenl are distinctive elements of a society, each co~ISORg 
of many members wbo share the same characteristic and are present tfuougbout the sooetY· In 
U.dia they are called castes. 
157 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
penonalities, they involve the further distinction that some individuals can 
be free, while others can be slaves. This distinction regarding personal 
freedom cannot be found among the Indians; in their case we cannot speak 
of personal freedom. We likewise see no inner, subjective freedom of indivi-
duals for their own sake, no conscience. We have not observed this fearure in 
China, and it is even less to be sought in India. The genuine state must have 
moral subjects too; it must allow an inner moral freedom to its individual 
members. 
We saw the universal parrirularities arise in China with the organization 
of the occupations of the state. Now we have to remark about the extent to 
which these branches are permitted to organize themselves. China does not 
reach the point at which these distinct elements develop into actual, particu-
lar branches, into communities within the whole, for in China they are just 
different ways of meeting the state's needs. In India these universal panicu-
larities emerge, to be sure, in the characteristic determinacy of castes. The 
fust occupation of the state involves intelligent, spiritual, religious, and 
scientific life. The second is practical life, the occupation of power, the 
external and internal defenses, the occupation involving bravery and leader-
ship. The third occupation is that of the skilled trades designed to satisfy the 
needs of society. This one subdivides in multiple ways, just as ours does into 
urban and rural, the former manufacturing and the Iauer producing. The 
fourth occupation, attaching itself to the others, is that of the servants as 
individuals assigned to the personal service of the aforementioned occupa-
175 
tions, servants who cannot have 1 a standing of their own. The distinetion 
of occupations is derennined rationally, in accord with this concept. Then 
we have the question as to the fonn that these distinctions take in India. 
Distinction and classification of individuals into general occupations is 
necessary in every state. In India it emerges in a specific way. The fearure 
distinctive to the Hindus is that these determinacies of the concept become 
natural distinctions, ones based on birth. Our practice involves subjective 
freedom, in that people can settle upon any one of these specific roles for 
themselves, commensurate with their own views, intentions, and circum-
stances. For the Hindus, however, these distinctions are completely tied w a 
naturally determined status. 
Plato's political constitution recognizes these distinctions too, but he rules 
out free will. With the individual's own choice ruled out, the ones in charge. 
according to their own informed and ethical will, assign individuals to their 
social classes. So then, even for Plato there is still a human will that makes 
the assignments to classes. In this case the subjective freedom of individuals 
is not respected even though the determining factor is not based on nanue as 
258 

THE ORIENTAl WORLD: INDIA 
it is for the Hindus. For us, social class is generally a subordinate matter. The 
spiritual, religious, ethical, and legal sphere is something higher in which 
everyone has or can have equal, universal rights. The social classes belong to 
the particularity of civic life, from which the universality of volition is 
explicitly independent, as a sphere in which each one can be at home. For 
the Hindus, however, the distinctions are, as we said, natural ones. and they 
encapsulate the entire institution of Hindu life. All the religious and legal 
precepts hinge upon them. Hence in India they also have absolute signifi-
cance. Since each individual bears the label of such a class or caste and is 
bound to it, a widely held opinion about their historical origin I is that 
176 
these distinctions derive from racial distinctions (Stiimme), such that initially 
they would have been distinctions based on nationality, with the occupa-
tional distin<:tions being linked to them. This opinion has no historical 
evidence for it, and thus no explanation for its basis. There cannot be a 
priestly people, for a people has need of all occupations. The main thing is 
that each one of the distinct groups develops only in conjunction with the 
others. A division of labor is a mark of culture, the beginning of a people. So 
the castes are not to be explained by an external convergence of nationality 
groups; instead they presuppose a whole that has developed irs own distinc-
tions. What is characteristic of India is then simply that these distinctions are 
strictly determined in this way based on birth. How that took place, whether 
directly or unconsciously or through external despotism, is another ques-
tion. Despotism can decree that someone pursue a specifi<: occupation and 
pass it on to one's descendants, which is indeed a natural way of doing 
things. There is also the major consideration that these distinctions can 
emerge and become firmly established only within a whole that is indeed a 
whole, as they have with the Hindus. We find castes among the Egyptians, 
and funher traces of them among the Medes, the Persians, and a few other 
peoples. In Persia some cities had to supply attar of roses to the court of the 
despot, and others silk garments. The despot decided that and made it a 
permanent arrangement. This permanency is the same thing as what we see 
in the case of the Hindus. f 
1n 
All the ethical and religious determinations are a function of these Hindu 
caste divisions. The main principle with regard to religious intuition is 
the oneness of the individual with the universal, of the sensuous with the 
divine. We, however, distinguish the sensuous from the spiritual, distinguish 
essential being from contingency, and unite them by means of reflection. For 
the Hindus the oneness is no consequence of reflection; instead for them the 
unification is immediate. The distinction is only slight, to the extent to which 
the divine has what is universal as its point of departure, or else begins from 
259 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
what is sensuous-by first setting out from the sensuous and ending up, to a 
greater extent, with the universal, or else by beginning from the universal 
and passing over, to a greater extent, into the sensuous realm. Hence the 
Hindus count as divine the sun, moon, mountains, rivers, animals, and 
individual human beings-immediately sensible things. In another respect, 
moreover, they have representations that belong indeed to thought but ace 
entertained not as thoughts but instead as immediately sensuous. Thus the 
gods become immediately sensuous. This also applies to the division into 
castes, which is a kind of cultus in which one pan of the people appears as 
divine. Now since what is divine, what has validity, has become something 
earthly and fixed, the caste distinctions too are firmly set in the Hindu 
intuition. Here people relate themselves to the divine and to other people 
as they do to natural things. From this perspective human beings are in the 
kind of relationship with the divine in which their daily lives appear as a 
divine service. Here it is evident how the most extreme superstition finds its 
place under the banner of such a general proposition as 'God is in all things'. 
We, however., see how things stand with such a manner of speaking when it is 
178 
not subject to closer I examination. So, like the religious sphere~ the ethical 
life of Hindus also comes within the scope of caste distinctions. Subsequently 
we will speak more specifically about how the Hindu religion has for its 
object not only human beings and natural things, but also universal being. 
The first topic in a consideration of the castes concerns their rights. We 
find that four castes stand out for the Hindus. The first comprises the Brah~ 
mans, the second the Kshatriyas or warriors, from which come the rulers. 
Nevenheless, the last peshwa or head of the Marathas was a Brahman. 7 The 
third caste is called the Vaishyas. These people are in the main the land-
owners and landlords. The fourth consists of laborers, artisans, peasants, 
and servants, the Shudras. Appended to these is a fifth or ignoble caste of 
disdained people, the Nischadas or Pariahs. 8 In addition to this general 
7. The peshwa was not the king of rhe Marathas but instead the prime minister who. 
however, held the acrual power in the state alter the Macatha kings had to submit to Mogu) 
domination at the beginning of rhe 18th cent., and to become mere figureheads. The office of 
prime miruster was hl=reditary in a certain Brahman family. 
8. Hegel's abbreviated account of the castes is erroneous, confusing rwo disrinct circum· 
stances. Tbe Laws of Man., is the traditional and authoritative text setting fonh the casu 
sv!>tem. See lmtitNtes of Himlu Law; or the O...dina'fC.es of Men~~, o:. Sir William Jones (Calcutta., 
1794), a German tL of which was publ. in 1797 in Weimar. Inch. 10 of the English original the 
passage mentioning 'Nischada, Paria' bas tbe beading: 'On the mixed classtS; and on times o{ 
distress', whereas ch. I, paras. 87-93, contains the classical account of the four main castes and 
their mutual relations. Descrihiug the 'mixed classes' is complicated by the fact that they are 
quite numerous. Hegel's attribution of the lowest level to tbe 'Nischadas or Pariahs' does not 
260 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
classification, there are many subcategories that differ greatly from one 
another in various regions. They number between twenry-seven and thirty-
six. The Brahman and Kshatriya castes are strictly defined, whereas those of 
the artisans or Vaishyas, and the Shudras, are quite broad in many respects. 
Everyone has a particular occupation of one's own.9 
The Hindus themselves assign a historical origin to the majority of the 
castes, since by the indulgence of princes men and women of different castes 
intermarry, with the result that particular castes must be constituted from 
their children. So those without a caste were formed into new castes with 
their designated occupations. The ans and sciences originated in this way. 10 
This account is surely correct except for its attribution of the origin of arts 
and trades to this cause; for the specific features of the arts and trades 
brought about the specific caste distinctions. So there are a great many 
castes, and each one has its own trade: fisherman, tanner, barber., barrel 
maker, poner, palanquin bearer, mat weaver, t and so forth. No caste 
179 
departs from its designated occupation. Europeans have great difficulty 
with these caste distinctions, for instance, in military service where the 
individual must do everything but where the Hindus are disinclined to do 
anything above and beyond their caste occupation. Because of more long-
standing association, this capricious restriction has begun to diminish some-
what_ Soldiers from the military caste are unwilling to dig trenches, trans-
pon anything, or move the cannon; others must do those things. They are of 
even less use for other tasks. Hence when an English army of 20,000 in India 
takes to the field, it is accompanied by an entourage of 100,000 men. A 
lieutenant has chirty servants and a captain fifty, for each of them has his very 
own role. Lally-Tollendal, a French general who in his hfties was dispatched 
to India-and subsequently was guillotined in Paris-sought to force 
square with this source (cb. 10, paras. 8 and 12), which places it somewhat higher and mon 
oaten uses rhe term 'Chandala' for the very lowest class of persons (ch.. 10, paras. Sl ff.). 
&:counts of the Chandalas and the restrictions imposed upon them also iodude: James Mill. 
The History of British India, 2nd edn. (London. 1820), i. 173; H. T. Colebl"'Oke, •f.aumention 
of Indian Classes', &iatic ReseaTches, S (London, 1799), 53--67; Abbe Dubois. Dt$Criptiotl of 
tbe Character, MArmer.s, 13nJ Customs of the People of lndUl (Londoo, 1817), 454-5. The last oi 
these refers ro them as 'Pariahs', not 'Chandalas'. 
9. See Colebrooke 'Enumeration' 54 and 61. ~ 
nwnber 27 carmoc: be found in Hegel's 
sources. Cole brooke c~unts the 'mixl:d classes' variously as 36, 39, and 42. 0. Abbe Oubois.. 
~~ 
-
. 
10. Milllpp. 171-2) tells of an evil and corrupt kiog who allowed intcrirWfla.P, and his 
good successor who devised a dassi6cation system and occupations for their oHspnug, frOIP 
which various ans and manufactures sprang. 
261 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Hindus into different combat roles, but they deserted, with the result that he 
brought about his own downfall by the rigidity of his plans. 
11 
Each caste, then, has its own laws or rules concerning the minutest 
matters of daily life. One must have bathed before eating, and if not~ then 
one does not eat and often goes several days without eating until one has 
bathed. The different castes do not eat together, a practice that, owing to 
circumstances, is of cowse largely disregarded on the battlefield. A Euro-
pean or a horse drinking from the Hindus' pool renders it unclean. A Hindu 
may not touch a dead bird nor possess its feathers, nor wear leather made 
from cowhide. Hence one must see to one's own provisions. So each caste 
180 
has its own specific occupation, 1 and panicular rules to follow; as such it 
has the most distinctive civic rights. 
The Brahmans are at the apex, elevated above the others, particularly the 
Shudras, in the way that, for us, human beings are higher than animals. 
Brahmans alone ace allowed to pursue scientific knowledge and to read the 
holy books, the Vedas. A Shudra (from the fourth class) is not allowed to 
memorize passages of these books or learn any prayers. A Shudra who 
knows such things will be punished by death. According to the LAws of 
Manu, Brahmans cannot advise, or teach prayers to, a Shudra.12 A Brahman 
who finds a Shudra troublesome goes directly to the authorities, who con-
demn that person to death. Any contact with Shudras makes a Brahman 
unclean, and so they avoid contact with Brahmans on pain of death. 13 
A Brahman as such has the status of a god. Any Hindu can fall down before 
a Brahman and declare that person to be one's god. Brahmans wear a three· 
part cord about the neck. Upon seeing it the ordinary Hindu falls down 
and prays to it.14 A Brahman may receive something only from a Brahman. 
The Brahman is called •twice-born' and occupies a position so exalted that a 
king can in no way attain it no matter how high he ascends. 15 Learned. 
Brahmans can of cowse be distinguished from uneducated ones, and yet the 
11. Thomas Anhur, Count von Lally and Baron von Tollrndal, a French general, in 175!1 
drove the English from the Coroman<kl Coasr. lacking suitable support from France, he was 
surrounded at Pondicherry and in 1761, after a prolonged siege, was fon:ed to sunendeL 
Un,usrly cond~, he met his end on the scaffold in Pari~. 
12. On the5e restrictions about te3chiog aud advising, see IIIShtutes. ch. 4, paras. 8Q-l. 
13. On dM:St punishments. see The Code of Gentoo Law. ed. Nath Brassey Halhed 
(London, 1m), ch. 21,§ 7; see al!>O Mill, p. 169 with u. 1. 
14. Abbe Dubois \pp. 91-2) gives a full account of the s.acred cord borowed at the Upa· 
nayana ceremony to make a young male a Brahrnachari, thus beginning the swdent stage, the 
lim: of the four traditional stages of life. 
15. See Mill, p. 163. 
262 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
Wleducated ones are nevertheless equally exalted. 16 Punishments for the 
lower castes are harsher than for the higher castes, except for theft, where 
the reverse is true. 17 An ancient poem tells how a prince sought to attempt by 
force to become a Brahman. The cow, however, stood up for the Brahmans, 
striking down one hundred thousand men. Then the king did penance for ten 
thousand years, though he was still unable to become a Brahman. I That is 
181 
because, in vinue of birth, the Brahman indeed stands as God vis-a-vis all the 
other castes. 18 According to the Lo.ws of Manu, from binh the Brahman is 
chief of all creatures and is installed as guardian of all civic and religious 
duties. Whatever exists is the abundance of the Brahmans, which is theirs by 
right in virtue of their higher birth. 151 So a Brahman stands h.igher, at the apex 
of all the castes. Although the other castes are mutually distinct, and in each 
case the lower is responsible for showing deference to those above it, none of 
them has this exalted status except the Brahmans. 
Caste distinctions also detennine the general civic rights, and even come 
into play here so as to result in these rights being Wlequal. Commensurate 
with rheir relative levels, the lower castes are punished more harshly for 
the same crimes than are the higher castes, with the sole exception of theft, 
for which the punishment intensifies as the caste position becomes higher. In 
general the principle governing punishments is that of abstract reprisal. For 
instance, whoever slanders someone will be punished on his tongue, and so 
fonh. 20 The Laws of Manu stipulates ten places for physical punishment of 
the lowec castes: tongue, ears, eyes, hands, feet, hea~ body, nose, genitals, 
and possessions. However, a Brahman who commits a crime, which in me 
case of another caste makes one subject to exile and corporeal punishmellt, 
16. ~Institutes, ch. 9, para. 317. 
17. See Mill, pp. 161-2 and 225. 
18. Hegel is retelling an episode from the &m.ryana entitled 'Vi5vamitra's Penances·. a5 in 
the German cr. of Franz Bopp in his Uber das Conjugatiotrssyslem tkr Simskritspr..dn In 
Vngleichung (frankfun am Main, 1816). Hegel's retelling is urooeous. ~ 
VISbvamitra, 
born a Kshatriya. attained Brahman starus through penances, and brcame the teacher ol Ram.a.. 
central figure of the Ramavana. The cow Sabala belonged to Vashista, who wa5 al war with 
Vishvamitra. Hegel's numbers c:annoc be substantiated; vanous penances of Va.J"}-ing dw-abon 
are reponed, including a thousand years without breatbi.og and anothc1" thousand without 
speaking. Sabala tbe cow uners the statement about the superiority ol the Brilunans' power. 
Cf. Bopp, pp. 17 5 and 189 ff. 
. 
. 
19. See Institutes, ch. 1, paras. 98-100. In Griesheim the Srah.man tS ·~.of thr_ 
abundance of nature'. Griesheim also makes clear that the Br.ihman IS supnor ao VI~ of 
binhright or natural birth (i.e. not simply in vinue of the •second birth' ~ved at the inioaoo11 
ceremony as a youth I. 
20. See Institutes, ch. 8, para. 279, when punisb.mtnt of a lower caste person wbo h.arnxd a 
higher one is a slitting or cuning in pt"opottioo to the injury caused. 
263 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
is supposed to be exiled but not pwtished physically.21 In contrast~ a Shudra 
who, by hand or foot, injures a Brahman or a person from another higher 
caste, will have his own hand or foot cut off. A 'once-born' person who 
insults a Brahman with harsh invectives shall have injury done to his tongue; 
if he inveighs against the entire caste a red-hot rod shall be thrust into his 
182 
mouth.22 I So castes also differ in their civic rights. 
Caste status can be lost by one who is neglectful of the duties of one's 
caste. Such a person is an outcaste and beyond all protection of the laws, 
and is then shunned by everyone. But caste status can be reacquired, and 
indeed in various ways. In the case of minor infractions this is accomplished 
without difficulty. The ourcaste gives money to a Brabman and a meal to 
several other members of the caste; then reinstatement occurs. It is more 
difficult in the case of more severe crimes. A post is erected and a crossbeam 
attached, from the end of which hangs a rope with iron hooks. These hooks 
are stuck into the back of the one to be reinstated, and the crossbeam is 
swung around in a circle a certain number of times. Clemency is gained by 
this penance. Penitents even impose this upon themselves. There is a partic-
ular method by which BrMllnans can be reinstated. A cow or a woman must 
be fashioned from gold; in addition, many gifts must be given. In order to 
regain his principality~ an Indian prince dispatched two Brahmans to Eng-
land, and they were then ejected from their caste because they had crossed 
over the sea, and in particular because, on the return journey, they had 
crossed over the Indus River. The prince ordered the making of a metal 
cow with a golden birth canal. The Brahmans were enclosed in the hollow 
abdomen and in tum drawn fonh through the birth canal, thus undergoing a 
'second birth'. 23 
21. Institutes, ch. 8, paras. 123-5, names these ten loci (the 'whole body' for capital crimes) 
together with the Br:ihmans' exemptioo from physical punishment. 
22. These statements as to punislunents come directly from l11Sbtu~s. ch. 8, paras. 270-1. 
A 'once· born' person is one who receives no formal religious instruction and initiation, namely, 
a Shudra or an outcaste. 
23. See Francis Wilford, 'On Mount Caucasus', Asimic Researches, 6 (London, 1801), 
455--536. Wilford links the prohibition to crossing over the Indus, but n(J{ (as does Hegel) to 
traveliug across tbe sea (pp. 529, 535). He states, however, that tlu: prohibition only applic:s to 
the Attock, a tributary that enters the upper Indus from Afghanistan, and it does not include 
simply being in countries beyood the Auock. WiHord names the priiK:e. to which Hegel refers, as 
Raghu Na"th-R.a'ya, 01' Ragoba. He cites the two offenses of the Brahmans in the story as 
journeying in lands where 'impure tribes' live, and crossing the Auoclc. The srory as Hegel tells i1 
can.oot be extracted unambiguously from Wilford's lext. ll is also mentioned in Friedrich 
Creuur, Symbolik wnd Mythologie der allen Villker, bes.rmders der Griecbtm, pt. 1 (2nd edn-
Leipzig and Darmstadt, 1819), 614. Abbe Dubois bas a very full account of the procedures for 
reionatemem in a casac (pp. 28 ff.). 
264 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
Civil Legislation 
The second topic we now come to concerns legal specifications. Abstracr 
freedom, existence as a person, is the foundation for all ethical freedom. The 
civil legislation is contained in the Laws of Manu, and is found in collections 
and I compilations that have been translated by the English. This legisla-
183 
tion is very incomplete, deficient, and confused. 
[1.] An initial and very important point concerns whether or not those 
farming the land are its owners, and so whether they are property owners or 
day laborers. This is a very difficult question to answer. When the English 
first came into possession of Bengal with its 20 million inhabitants, and 
ultimately ruled the whole of India (in part directly, in part indirectly) with 
its 100 million inhabitants, the majority of whom are direct subjects of the 
English, it was of the greatest importance to determine whether the farmers 
are the landowners. Resolving the question became so difficuJt on account of 
the extensive encumbrances and levies on the land. There was no set regimen 
of taxation, for there were also many other imposts besides the particular 
property rents. If the encumbrance involves half the value of the propeny, 
then such a farmer is regarded equally as a day laborer because he is then to 
that extent supponed by the owne~ in that be receives remuneration for his 
labor. Since in many regions of India the landed estates have h«ome even 
more severely encumbered, the owners have thus disavowed their role 
because day laborers have deemed themselves better off. So a condition 
can arise in which the owner is worse off than the one working for pay. 
The English government and the Parliament in England have considered 
this issue from many angles, but have come to no actual decision. It is 
evident that in the most ancient times the rajah or prince was originaUy 
the sovereign owner of all the land, although the farmers had a hereditary 
and continuing 1 right that was an ownership too, with the result that there 
184 
were two ownership rights: the rent that must be paid to the prince, and 
what remained to the fanner above and beyond this rent. Ancient manu-
scripts in India contain inscriptions about bequests of princes' land to 
temples, and docwnents of the sale of land to private individuals. Colonel 
Mackenzie has collected over 2,000 documents.24 When rhe prince relin-
quishes land to those who farm ir, he is relinquishing only his right to rent, 
24. See Colin Maclcenzie, A Descriptive CAtalogue of the Oriental ~pts 
and Other 
Articles llliiStTative of the Literature, Histcn-y. StaUstics 4lrd AntiJI11ities of~ ~ 
of lwJia 
(Cakutta, 1828). Our text refers to bim as 'colonel' (Obentl rather dwa 'Colin· 
U5 

THE lECTURES OF 1822-3 
just as private individual sellers relinquish only their right, which remains 
distinct from a right to rents.25 
Each village constituted a community. In ancient times the villagers were 
all firmly united against the outsider (das andere) and against thieves, 
because property was not secure. Only in most recent times, when confi-
dence in the English government increased and property had become more 
secure, have the inhabitants dismantled these defenses. Lord Hastings stated 
this in a speech to Parliament two years ago. Such villages were entirely 
isolated; they were indifferent to any political changes and ofren felt the 
effects of regime changes only after much time had passed. Such a village 
would have its magistrate, a Brahman, and an astrologer who has to deter-
mine favorable and unfavorable days, and someone to see to the water 
supply. Also present and necessary were a potter, physician, baker, barber, 
laundryman, dancers, a seamster:, musicians, and finally a poet.26 Each of 
these persons received a percentage of the enri.ce income. The remaining 
185 
proceeds went half to the agricultural workers and 1 half to the govern-
ment. 
27 An authorized collector levied the government's share. This was the 
only tie with the government. These circumstances led to the conclusion that 
the government was the landlord. 
The English have accepted this unsatisfactory system inasmuch as they 
looked upon the collector of the revenue as the landlord and demanded from 
him a specific declaration to the effect that the system was empowered to 
dispossess the fanners from their property, such that they came to be viewed 
wholly as day laborers, whereby it came to pass that a few years ago more 
than a million Hindus died of hunger. Today there is once again more respect 
for property. So it is difficult to reach a decision about this capitaL 
[2.] The second point to note concerns testimony in court, thus the 
question as to who is capable of giving legal testimony. The king cannot~ 
nor the cook, nor public dancers and singers, nor can reputable persons who 
have no sons but only daughters; women can testify only against women.28 
.!5. See Mill, ch. 5, which discusses this issue and distinguishes three levels ot- 'ownership': the 
sovereign, who is the ultimate owner; the fanner; the sovereign's collector of revenue, an 
intermediate figure. See pp. 256, 265, 272., 274. 
16. Many of the village occupations mentioned here, as weU as some others. an: described by 
Mill, pp. 266 fl., wbo cites the 'Fihh Repon of the Cornm.inee on India Affairs'. produced in 
1810. He also describes the relative isolation of viUages vis-a-vis a central government. 
27. Mill (p. 26.i) mentioiL~ this allocatioo of rhe remaining proceed~ • 
.!8. Hegel does not distinguish being not oompet:t;nt w testify from bei.rlg free from an 
obligation to testify; nor does the text &om Instituw, cb. 8, paras_ 62-8- h makes clear that 
men with sons (who also meet other requirements) are competent. The status of w orhers 
266 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
The Laws of Manu allows the rendering of a false testimony when doing so 
can preserve the life of a man who otherwise must die. This also applies 
when the death of a severe offender, be he a Brahman or someone from 
another caste, would be brought about by a truthful testimony. Insofar as the 
harshness of kings is well known, falsehood is preferable to truth. The same 
applies if a wedding can be arranged by false attestation, or if falsehoods 
are spoken from impulsive desire for a maiden, or also against those who 
use tonure in the quest for valuables; finally, in many other cases, if false 
testimony proves advantageous, for instance, to a Brahman.29 I 
186 
(3.] Yet a third characteristic to bring in here concerns debts. Notable in 
this regard is that the amount of interest, the very amount itself, then and 
thereafter too, is a function of caste distinctions. According to the law the 
regular interest with collateral is as follows: for a Brahman, a monthly care 
of llA percent, or 2 percent without collateral; for the second caste, the 
Kshatriyas, it is 3 percent, or 3~ percent without collateral; for the third 
caste it is 4 percent; for Shudras the interest is 5 percent monthly. 30 These are 
specifications of the Laws of Manu. As to the manner of debt collection, 
the specification is that one ought to be pressed for payment. A further 
recourse involves transfer of the collateral to the authorities and authoriza-
tion of the creditor to confiscate the property of the worker-to discover 
whether he will pay. Also, the wife, childcen, livestock, and clothing of the 
debtor can be confiscated. Furthermore, it is lawful for the debtor to be 
compelled forcefully, even by the cudgel. Finally, one may sit ar the debtor's 
doorstep, to see whether that moves him to payment. If the debtor is of 
another caste he must pay by his service. 31 A notable exception is that if a 
Bcahman is the creditor, he goes with a dagger or with poison to the debtor 
and threatens to take his own life if he is not paid. The debtor lets himself be 
coerced by this threat. If chat does not happen, the Brahman can sit in front 
of the house of the debtor, who is then not pennitted to eat if the Brahman 
does nor eat, because he is not permitted to eat in the Brahman's presence, 
and so a competition in fasting is begun. If the Brahman dies of hunge~; the 
debtor imposes on himself the harshest of capital punishments involving 
mentioned is vague, although one would think that the king and distin~isbed persons are ones 
that have immunity. Hotho·s version more dearly suggests the iPUDumty of the Iring. 
29. For these tand other I cases where faJsehood is aUowable, see lTJStltuks, ch. 8,_paras. 103-
12; Mill, p. 239. However., conrrary to our ten, lmtitutes ~tat£~ daar fal<iehood IS a.llowahlr 
when a person is not a serious offender (para. 104). 
30. These rates I with one eX4:eption) are found in l11Stitutts, ch. 8, paras. 140-2. 
31. For these means of recourse, see Mill, pp. 206-7. 
267 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
frightful torrures, because he is guilty of the death of a Brahman. This very thing 
187 
has taken place under the English government, such that, when the I court 
denied me Brahman's claim, he made his appeal of the decision in such a 
fashion.32 
As for justice and personal freedom, there is thus no glimmer of it. The 
female gender is wholly excluded from a right of inheritance, and even 
debarred as sucb. from making a will. When there are no male heirs, the 
goods go to the rajah. 33 
[4.] Furthermore, the fourth of the legal specifications pertains to mar-
riage. What is stated about the circumstances of wives is that they are 
incapable of testifying in court, may not even make a will, and are in general 
subordinate and in a state of degradation. They are not allowed to eat in the 
presence of the husband, 34 just as a lower caste person is not allowed to eat 
in the presence of someone of higher caste. It is further the case that wives 
are more or less pwchased by tb.e bridegroom from the parents. This is 
traditional, an ancient custom, although the laws forbid it. For a fonnal, 
legal marriage the bridegroom must give a cow and an ox, the ancient form 
of purchase. Generally, howeve~ a contract is drawn up regarding the gift 
supposed to be given to the parents. But the arrangement nevertheless 
consists of a fonnal sale. 35 
The young woman has no choice regarding a husband, for the father makes 
the decision. The father's duty is to marry off his daughter, just as it is the duty 
of every Hindu to marry. If the father neglects to do so, then she is left to 
choose a spouse for herself. This is what happened in the story of Nala. 36 It 
only applies if the father is thus neglectful in the first three' years of her 
188 
womanhood.37 If the parents do not find a spouse, 1 then the young woman 
can be provided for in another way since polygamy, for instance, is allowed. 
Only monogamy, however, gives the wife her rightful place; only in 
monogamy is she of equal status to the husband. Without it her wifely 
32. For these strategies of a Brahman creditor, see John Shore, 'On Some Extraordinary Facts, 
Customs, and Practices of the Hindus', Asiatic Researches, 4 (London, 1799), 331-50, esp. 332. 
See also Mill (p. 209), regarding the reacti011 to a legal decision. 
33. See lrt!ititutes, ch. 9, para. 189, which, however, makes Brahman propertv an exception to 
this rule. 
· 
34. See Mill, p. 388. 
35. Ibid. 391-2; also, Abbe Dubois, p. 137. 
36. The story of Nala is an episode in the M.Jbabbarata epic. Seen. 45 below. 
37. Mill {p. 388lstates thai, with few exceptions, marriagt is a religious duty. The lnstiJuUS 
(ch. 9, paras. 3, 4, and 901 and Mill (pp. 391 ff.) both mention the three-year penod aiur whtch 
the ~ughur _ is free to choose for herself. The background assumption is that women arr 
routmely subject to, and cand for by, men throughout their lives. 
268 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
prerogatives are lost. There are regions in India and Tibet where there is also 
polyandry, and others where the female sex is treated even more contempt-
ibly, where, for example, several brothers keep one wife as servant and 
shared instrwnent of their desires. 38 A father can readily provide for his 
daughter by means of this Indian polygamous relationship, by giving his 
daughter as wife to a reputable Brahman; the result is that many a Brahman 
has thirty to forty wives, half of whom he has never seen, for the parents 
have merely informed him that they have given their daughters to him as 
wives. All these circumstances exhibit the lowly condition of women in 
India. 
In what we read of ethics we find that marital duties are often neglected 
and are viewed as of lesser importance. At the great festivals, for example, 
the Brahmans pass among the people and seek out wives pleasing to them, 
take them along into the temple, and retain them there for several years until 
their beauty has faded, thereby making their husbands feel very honored. 
Then they are rerumed. 39 Every household and every wife is thus available 
to the fakirs. These people travel about naked, individually or in crowds of 
as many as 10,000-12,000 from all castes, with the privilege of being fed. 
Women are at their disposaL They are held to be holy, and were known to 
the Greeks by the name 'gymnosophists'.40 Moreover, there are regions on 
the Malabar Coast in India where marriage relationships do not exist at 
all.41 The beginning of a political condition involves the recognition of 
marriage, and above all of monogamy. In many regions of India, I however, 
189 
families reside together. The brothers, who reside together with their sirters, 
do not take into the household the wives with which they wed. A young 
woman can marry a young man without becoming part of his family, with 
the result that the sisters' children make up the children of the household. 
These characteristics of marriage demonstrate how impecfect even this 
relationship is in India. 
38. ~Jonathan Duncan, 'Historical Remarks on the Coast of Malabar with Some .DEscrip-
tion of Manners of its Inhabitants' Asiatic ResesJrches, S {Loodon, 179~), 1-36; see esp.IJ-1-4. 
On Tibet., see Samuel Turner, An Aceoflnt of al'll Embassy (London, 1800); see pp. 391-2 in~ 
Gennan tr. (Hamburg, 18011. 
39. Abbe Dubois IPP· 416 ff.) has an extended li(XX)tlnt ol this practicr at me. remple of 
Vengata Rarnana in Tirupati in soum India. He depicts tbe husbands wbo gwe up their WJVC$ "to 
the god' as gullible, since the~ arc actually handed over 'to c:bt knavery of me BtDma.os:. ~any 
event. after their release these women are respectEd in, and supported by, !he ~
110
:
11Y· 
40. Derail about these 'Seoa55eyS' (SllJlllya.sinsl is fouod in Alexmder Dow, 11M H~S~ory of 
ffindostan, 2 vols. (2nd edn. Londoo, tnOl, i, pp . .xxxvii-xxxviii. Abbe Dubois (p. 3301 
mentions the term 'gymnosophiSlS'. 
41. See Mill. p. 3~5. as weU as DuDcan, p. 13. 
269 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
[5.) An important and fifth aspect is then the religious practices insofar as 
they determine the daily lives of the Hindus. Hindus, the Brahmans in 
particular, stand under a yoke of the most external practices~ which are 
repeated daily in the course of the most insignificant occupations. In 
human life elsewhere the actions of meeting daily needs are viewed as 
ethically neurral and are carried out without undue emphasis. For the 
Hindus, however, all the actions that penain to daily needs are carried out 
subject to a host of rules that are of themselves quite senseless, rules that 
make one's life into a sequence of senseless practices, with the result that the 
Hindus conduct their lives in a senseless bondage. 
The Brahmans have to keep in mind the most complex matters in this 
regard. Throughout the day a person has to perform specific ceremonies; 
upon arising, one must subject oneself to certain rules. Upon awakening one 
has to recite prayers,. to stand up using a specific foot, to clean the teeth with 
the leaf of a specific plant, to go to the river, taking water into the mouth and 
spitting it out again three times, and so forth, all the while reciting panicular 
formulas. One may not sneeze or cough while drinking water. For instance, 
one who sneezes while sipping water may not go on drinking but must pluck 
at one's right ear.42 A host of things can contaminate a person. For instance, 
when eating one must be wearing not one garment~ but two. One must not 
190 
be naked while bathing. In urinating a person has I much to take into 
account. One may not winate in the direction of wood-that is forbidden-
nor in rivers, nor turned toward the sun; instead one urinates toward the 
south in the evening, toward the north in daytirne.'0 There are thus some 
eighty rules. Someone who disregards one of these circumstances must 
perfonn a purification. All castes are forbidden to walk upon ashes, hair, 
flax seeds, or potsherds. 44 There are similar prescriptions of this kind. 
Already by a few hours after sunrise a Brahman can have committed thirty 
to forty transgressions. 
Peninent to the point about such contamination is the quite famous story 
of Nala in the Mahabharata, which turns upon a purification following such 
a transgression he committed.45 Nala, a prince, set out to marry a princess 
42. See H. T. Colc:brooke, 'On the Rdigious Ceremonies of the Hindus, il!ld of the Bra 'hmens 
Es~ially', essay I, Asiatic ReseMches, 5 ~London, 1799), 345-68, esp. 345-8. 
43. See lnstitules, ch. 4, paras. 45-50, for these regulations. 
44. See lnstitNtes, ch. 4, para. 78. 
4S. The MahiJbbtirata and the Rdmayana together form 1he oational epic of India. The s1ory 
concerns the struggle between rwo branches of one dynasty, dte Kaura was aiKf the Panda vas, for 
rule. Tbe title of the work as Mahabh.7riJttl is fouqd already in tM 4th cent.; it a ruined its 6nal 
fonn at tht latest in the 4th ant. AD. The NaJa episode of the Mllh®harata is named for the 
270 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
who was herself allowed to choose a spouse. Her other suitors were genies. 
She was clever enough to pick out the human being, for Nala alone stood on 
the ground. So Nala married the princess and lived blissfully and con-
tentedly. A vengeful genie, in association with a playful spirit~ lay in wait 
for the prince. It waited for a long time. At last the king allowed one lapse to 
make him guilty, by stepping on the spot where he had urinated. Now the 
playful devil had power over him. The prince gambled away fortune and 
realm and was ruined on account of this sin. So the whole interest of the 
story turns on this absurd circumstance. 
In this way the Hindu lives dependent on external matters. Inner freedom, 
morality, one's own intellect, can find no place here. The Hindus exist in this 
domination by externality, with the result that they can have no inherent 
ethical life. There was a time when Hindus were held to be exemplary 
human beings. In particular an Englishman, William jones, drew attention 
to them and disseminated very favorable assumptions about them.46 All the 
other Englishmen, however, framed a depressing account of the ethical 
depravity of Hindus in all social classes. These individuals I are credible, 
191 
for they are high-minded and come from all classes and occupations, one 
being the Frenchman Abbe Dubois,47 who lived among them as a missionary 
for twenty years, as well as the English officers who served there for a long 
rime, and others. The best sources of information for evaluating the ethical 
relationships of the Hindus, however, are the judicial responses to govern-
ment inquiries about ethical matters. These are submitted to Parliament, and 
the judgment in all cases concludes that in every sector Hindus live in utter 
moral degradation. But this must give one pause. This portrait very much 
contradicts the earlier views that people had of the Hindus.
48 
This phenomenon is in one respect connected with what we already 
stated. The most inane things are forbidden to Hindus. The Hindu institu-
tions rule out all that rests upon one's own free will. Everyday conditions are 
most closely linked to the principles of the castes and their entire way of life. 
Hindus refrain from slaying any animal. Their hospitals for sick cows and 
their abhorrence at killing animals can be set wholly apan from any 
prince. The princess, and later the wife of prince NaJa, IS Darnayanti. Aher lrogthy false paths 
and separations, Nala and D:unayanti find themselves and one another again. 
46. In 1783 Sir William Jones was a judge in the high court in Cakutu. He and Colebrook 
were founders of the discipline of Sanskrit studin. 
47. Ahl-le Jean Antoine Duhois lived in India a~ a mi!>.~ionary for rwenty·thrte years and 
published a book. about his experiences. As Hegel mentions bere, his judgment a bout me ethical 
life and moraliry of the Hindus is decidedly negative. 
48. See Mill, pp. 399 and 402, on their 'dissimulation and falsehood'. 
271 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
sympathy for life or any compassion for human life in particular; for this too 
is an external affair, as seen from many phenomena. The horrible way they 
treat their draft animals demonstrates just how external it is. The English do 
not spare their livestock, and yet they are put out at how the Hindus mistreat 
their beasts of bwden. They do not refrain from killing them out of sympa-
thy, but instead because it is forbidden; so even the English are appalled at 
this.49 The Hindus are not yet very advanced in animal husbandry or crop 
production. So when drought ensues, the livestock die off or else lead 
miserable, enfeebled lives, without arousing pity. Thus in a certain month 
of the year Hindus are obligated to provide water in their huts to any thirsty 
192 
person; I yet a day later that person receives not one swallow~ in panicular 
not from Brahmans, in whom any distress of others arouses no feeling 
whatsoever, especially since Brahmans are quite without feelin~ are proud 
and haughty. When parents, wives, husbands or relatives become ill, they are 
placed in the hands of an astrological physician who provides sympathetic 
remedies. If the illness is life threatening, however, they are brought to the 
Ganges or to another river and left or abandoned, alone in their final 
hours. 5° Thus all these are not features of human sensibility. 
People must not say, to the contrary, that there are beautiful, gracious 
portrayals of human sensibilities and situations in the Shakuntala and other 
poems, for they must know what these features involve. 51 These portrayals 
involve an idyllic sphere into which nothing intrudes that concerns princi~ 
pies of ethical life or morality, of freedom, of politics-namely, behavior 
toward their fellows (Gespielen). Where engagement in civic life ceases, as in 
Indian poetry, there pleasantness prevails. But where the prince and court 
life enter in, this pleasantness is over and done with. In the case of this 
disinterested state, with this lack of the feeling of freedom and of one's own 
independence, in the total unawareness of a universal purpose that has 
determined actions and has come from within, we can surely conclude that 
there can be no proper political life, no freedom of a political state; instead 
that only capricious despotism~ometimes cruel, sometimes milder-must 
prevail. 
49. Ibid. 403. 
50. Mill (p. 404) anributes this abandonment at the river to the Bengalesc. 
51. Fredrich Schlegel says 'the friends of poetry' hope that many other ponrayals of tbe Asian 
spirit will prove to display grace and love as found in the Sbakuntdla. See bis Ober die SIJTachf' 
und Wei5heil der lndier (Heidelberg. 1808), pp. iii-iv. Shakuntali is the main female c::haracttr 
of a play by Kalidasa (probably 3rd ant. AD); hence the play (Abhi~untalal is usuall,· 
just referred to as the ShaJumta/.2. The: story on which it is based occurs in book t of the 
MiJhahhtira/4. 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
Before we go into the political sphere we have first to mention the 
religious sphere. 
The Religious Sphere 
The topic of religiosity poses the difficulty as to which presentation one 
should rake up; for Hindu mythology is 1 extremely vast, and the other 
193 
aspect is that its images are very diverse. We see that what the lAws of Manu 
contains about God and the creation thus diverges from any other portrayal 
to be found in the Vedas and other books. 52 The portrayals are therefore 
extremely dissimilar and do not concur at all. One can escape their confu-
sion only by culling out the universal spirit of religion. 53 
The question is how a people so devoid of spiritual substantiality, of 
independence, can themselves become conscious of the highest life, of 
what is truly substantial. We concede that the One is of course given to the 
Hindus as absolute substance, albeit as subsisting world-sOul, as a subsisting 
stuff in which both spiritual and material aspects are annihilated. This one 
substantiality constitutes the foundation of Hindu representation, and 
everything detenninate is only something dreamed, is nothing secure. The 
basic representation lies in this One and All; everything else is just a modifi-
cation or vanishing fonn of the One. The world is its transitory revelation or 
manifestation. So pantheism constirutes the foundation. These configura-
tions into which this One passes over, within which this One manifests itself, 
are something indeterminate, are self-dissolving. There is no wtity present in 
the manifold. The human being is in no way posited in it. For someone who 
rises above this bondage, these distinctions principally become something 
Ouctoaring that deteriorates into this utter nonsense. I 
194 
For the Hindus there is nothing miraculous, because they have no set 
natural law; so everything is as such something miraculous. The Christian 
missionaries are faced with a difficulty when they tell of the miracle of 
Christ, because miracle is the Hindu's daily fare. 54 The Hindu's representa-
tion is this ceaseless whirl, this dreaming, and the more specific interest of 
religion is to secure something essential in this dreaming. One aspect is the 
contendess ground, the other the fact that multiplicity enters into it. Interest 
52. The Vedas are tbe most ancient religioos literature of the Aryan Indians.. which is 
composed in a more ancient form of language tOld lndic) tbao the later Sanskrit literature. 
'There are fow Vedas, or Vedic coUeaions of texts. 
53. Mill remarks {p. 283) that no coherent system of belief can be extr~ from thcic vague 
language~ multiple fictioos, and discrepant idea5. 
54. See Abbe Dubois, p. 421. 
273 

THE LECTURES OF 1821-3 
lies in apprehending what is essential in this dreaming, in these incipient 
shapes. This apprehending cannot come to fruition, however, because appre-
hension would preclude the dreaming. For the truth of consciousness is 
found55 where human beings freely know themselves as infinite self-con-
sciousness within itself, from which they distinguish the world as something 
inherently self-establishing. just as they acquire freedom and internal stabil-
ity, so too the objects acquire boundaries and stability; they receive a solid 
grounding for the first rime through the waking state (Wachsein). Hindus do 
not arrive at this waking state. Their religion, their endeavor to attain 
consciousness, is a struggling with this dreaming~ a dreaming struggling, a 
seeking or longing that only gets to the point of tossing oneself about from 
one antithesis to another. 
Now that we thus know the general character, we have to consider its 
more specific forms. We see two sorts of aspects, since the struggle of their 
dreaming is a buzzing about from one extreme to the other. Two aspects are 
in tum fowtd in each extreme. One is the representing of the object, the other 
195 
the consciousness I that strives to raise itself up to the essentiality of the 
object; the latter aspect is the cultus. 
The first extreme is then the sensuality of Hindu religion, the fact that it is 
a religion of nature, that it directly reveres natural objects as diviniry, and 
that human beings relate themselves to these natural objects as they relate 
themselves to their own essential being. 
Among these natural objects is first of all the sun. 56 The principal prayer 
of the Brahmans is a prayer to the sun that they must recite numerous times 
during the day, but which they do in great secrecy from the English. 57 In 
addition, the stars and mountains, and particularly one part of the Hima-
layas from which the Ganges has its source, are divine, as also are the rivers 
as such, foremost the Ganges but other streams too. To possess water from 
the Ganges can cost Hindus a lot of money, and it is most desirable for each 
Hindu to have some~ just as it is then that a particular elephant bearing 
Ganges water lead the way for a nabob. 58 Ganges water is brought to Tibet 
55. The Gennan edilors, surely cocrealy, have chanse-d thf reading here from ·not found' to 
•found' . 
.56. Mill sa~ (p. 333) that Brahman is the sun, and that Brahma, Vislmu, and Shiva are its 
heat, light, and t1ame respective!~ . 
.57. Colebrook describes the standing posture oi one offering this prayer ('On the Religio~ 
Ceremonies', 355). 
58. A 'nabob' i~ a Mu~lim prince, as Hegel correctly state; later in our text. and one woukl 
not expect Muslims to regard Ganges water as holy. The term 'ra1ah' (foe a Hmdu prince) might 
better have been used here. 
274 

THE ORJENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
and into the peninsula. Furthermore, particular animals are revered: bulls, 
cows, elephants, and particular monkeys, for the ape-prince is a great ally of 
Rama in the Ramayana. 59 Often these are mere images. There is, however. a 
city inhabited by monkeys, with fakirs there to serve them. These monkeys 
are highly vicious. A living thing as such is respected by the Hindu to the 
extent that it may not be killed even though it has indeed gotten out of 
control. 
This respect for animals is connected to the Hindu assumption about 
rransmigration of souls, which is not, howeve~ the sort of transmigration 
that we envisage. We envisage soul as a consciousness, the consciousness of 
oneself as this person. So our soul has consciousness of irs own self-identity 
(Diesselbigkeit). Hindus represent transmigration of the soul I as the soul 
196 
being unaware of its previous condition and living on in a different body. For 
~indus there is no personal continuation of the soul. There is a becoming 
one with the universal soul. There is a contradiction in holding at one time to 
maintenance of the individual in a different body, then to merging into the 
universal, the One, as what is highest. So here there is confusion too. They 
even take it so far that they regard their blind or crippled persons as though 
they are afflicted by these natural incapacities as punishment foe crimes from 
a prior life. 60 
So natural objects, sun and stars, are objects of worship. At least accord-
ing to some views, fire, air, and sun are regarded as the three main gods, 
those said to constitute the foundation of all the other deities, which reduce 
into these three gods. There is no consistency whatsoever in all these manen. 
To these natural objects that emerge as deities there then belong universal, 
natural powers, especially the powers of procreation, which are worshiped 
in the most disgraceful fashion. Male and female genitals are worshiped. The 
lingam and the yoni are the forms of male and female procreative powers. 
There are pervasive symbols for these powers.61 Mount M~ 
from which 
all srreams flow, is also just the male organ. Masts of ships are symbols for 
it too. 62 The English maintain that Hindus are so brazen and bawdy in this 
59. In the r-pic, Sita, the beloved o{ Rama (an avaW" of Vishnu' was tM:Jd aprive in Sri ~ 
(Ceylon) by tlw demon king Ravana, and the monkey-king Haouman a~ded Rallu 10 resew~~!.'! 
her. See Creuzer.. Symbolik, pt. l, 608-9. 
60. On this punishment, see Abbe Dubois, p. 481. 
. 
. 
. 
61. On lingam (symbolic phallus) and roni (symbolic female organ, depicted as a tnangle •. 
see Mill, p. J65. 
~ 
62. 'Meru' is rhe name ol a mountain in Hindu mythology. See William Jones, ·~ the 
o( Greece,ltaly, and India', Asiatic Researches, 1 (London. 1799), 241. Set also Franas \V"ilioni 
'On Mount Caucasus', ~iatic Researches, 6 (London, 1801 ), 491. Walford pn!Stllts (pp. 4 88-91 
275 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
worship of theirs, as they are in their conversation, that even the English 
197 
sailors are shocked and embarrassed by it. 1 
Linked with this worship is a cultus that is, from this aspect, an unbridled, 
liantious sensuality. A group of young women, the only ones to enjoy an 
education, is kept in the temple for the purpose of arousing the sensuality of 
anyone who comes there. They are instructed in the art of giving pleasure, 
partly for its own sake, panty to acquire valuables for the temple from 
strangers who come there.63 Likewise they have celebrated the most licen-
tious festivals in which the essential thing is the utmost lack of restraint. 
As the Hindu religion is but a giddy whirl from one extreme to the other, 
we also find in it an ascent to what is most abstract, and the most abstract 
relation of self-consciousness to that abstraction. Insofar as the universal is 
abstract, self-consciousness does not freely relate itself to it; for only in 
knowing itself in relation to God does self-consciousness know itself in 
that relationship and is it free. Since self-consciousness is not free in Hindu-
ism~ it also cannot relate itself freely to the absolute. As devoid of freedom, 
Hindu self-consciousness lacks the inwardness to stand before God; instead 
it can only relate itself to God as negating itself within God. This absolute 
negating of oneself is the highest point of Hindu self-consciousness. This 
complete renunciation must then count as what is supreme. The way of 
speaking here does not consider that God is something concrete, is a concre-
tion of reason. A more concrete definition involves at a minimum the point that 
God is wise and has determined the world according to rational decrees. The 
concrete representation of God must have as its foundation the human being as 
one who acts purposefully, and self-consciousness must then itself be moral. 
But t:h.is definition according to the opposite aspect of God's wisdom, or a 
198 
determining of the individual according to these laws 1 of a universal will, is 
not found in Hindu consciousness, which reaches its highest point only in this 
abstract negating, in coming to God in this unhappy state ( Vngluck) only via 
its own self-surrender. Since it relates to this culminating point as something 
negative, this (self-surrender) is thus to be regarded as unhappiness. 
In this abstraction self-i:onsciousness indeed comports itself in thinking 
fashion, and in this proximity to the supreme point the speculative echoes of 
a description of Mt. Meru drawn from the Puranas texts. See also Abbe Duoois. p. 40. Wilfoni 
~ 
links Mt. Meru to the primevalliogam and yoni, and the larter two 10 the mast and hwl of a 
sh1p (p. 522). See also Wilford, 'An Essay on the Sacred Isles in the West', Asiatic R.esarches, 
8 CCalcuna. 1805), 273-4. 
63. Abbe Dubois bas a YUy full account (pp. 401-2) of these temple prostitutes. See also Mill. 
pp.235~. 
276 

THE ORIENTAL WORlD: INDIA 
representation emerge; but they are confused and obscure, and are only 
fathomable by someone who knows the speculative as such. OnJy a few of 
the details from Hindu mythology can be mentioned, for it is extremdy diffuse. 
As for the Hindu representation of God, we do find God represented as 
One, and they call it '.Brahrna' as distinct from 'Bralunan', which is the 
One.64 This representation of Brahma is in a sense quite sublime, although 
for them it is found only alongside others. .Brahma is not the endwing, 
sovereign One; it is of course to be distinguished from the 'One' of mon~ 
theism. It is nothing enduring or independent into which everything per~ 
ishes. The distinctions to which we proceed from this •oneness' are no 
predicates nor are they persons, for they introduce once again the confusion 
of multiplicity. The Hindus have worthy views of the One. They say that this 
One is beyond all concept, beyond all understanding, is invisible, eternal, 
omnipotent, omnipresent. This is stated in the religious books.65 This One 
has no temple. no public I worship. Human beings have no positive rela-
199 
tion to it. Were the worship truly monotheistic, representation would have 
to function freely within this One, to abide there. But Brahma is not wor-
shiped and has no temple, just as in the Catholic religion individual saints 
are worshiped, not God~ as Canova himself says. 66 Hindu temples are 
dedicated to particular figures. In addition to Brahma, the Hindus have an 
endless number of gods; a .Brahman replied to an Englishman's query as to 
how many gods there are, by saying there are 33 crore of gods, each crore 
having 100 lakhs, and a lakh has 100,000 parts.67 All of them reduce to 
three. But this multiplicity does not amount to anything. 
64. In Hindu religion Bra.hma is one of the most imponant deities (the others are Sbiva and 
Vishnu); together tbe three constitute a trinity, the Trimurti ('three forms'). There is also 
Brahman, which embodies the worJd-sou.l; some say Brahman is tbe one reality underlying aJI 
else, the Trimurti and the world too. Hegel's interest focuses oo BraluoA, as 'tbe highest 
individual deity'. La.ter Hinduism actually gives a grealt'l" pnxnioena to VJSI:mu ~ 
Sbin 
than it does to Brahmi as an individual deity. In Hegel's day there was less precision amlin£ 
scholars in distinguishing the various written forms and their atteodaot meanings that derive 
from the Sanskrit root brahman. for Hegel's soU£ces. see jones, 'On rbe Gods' (p. 2-42) aod Abbe 
Dubois ( p. 367). 
65. Sec Dow, Hislory of Hirttlostml, i, pp. xli-xlii. Dow presents his accoonu in lbe form of a 
lengthy literary narrative in which the chancms and deities bave o.ames with exm:sndy 
oonstandard spellings; it would serve no purpose to present than here or in subsequmt ooteS. 
66. Antonio Caoova (1757-1822) was aP Italian scuJptor who ahapdootd tht baroque~~ 
and developed his own classically fresh style. From 1802 oo he was superintendent of arustJC 
monuments for the Papal States. 
67. See Mill (p. 285), who presems the grand total as 330 millioo. These termS for monetary 
values derive from Hindi. A crore :unounts to 10 million rupees, or 100 .lakhs; a lakh IJIIOIIDI5 to 
100,000 rupees. Hotbo reads: • •.. chert are 33 millioo [gods]'. 
277 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
In addition to :Srahma, the foremost figures are Vishnu and Shiva. We find 
then the characterization of Brahma as the Creator, Vishnu as the Preserver, 
and Shiva as the Destroyer. On this score, however, there are in tum many 
sects; each nolds a different god as supreme, and there is perpetual confu-
sion. The main view involves Vishnu, who is, however, also called Krishna; 
but others worship Shiva and opposite [characteristics]. In the same fashion 
Buddha, or Gautama, is God for the Buddhists, but the Brahmanic: Hindus 
have him too. The typical Hindu affirms all of these gods, with only one of 
them as supreme; in any event, for others a different one is supreme. We 
cannot say that there are Hindus for whom Brahma alone is the one god. 
They always have all the other gods as well. The typical worship is just 
idolatry. The god is worshiped in a specific sensual shape. Just as Brahrna is 
200 
called the Eternal, the One, so the same is ascribed to other gods too. I So 
no distinction is secure; instead everything is fluid. Typically they regard the 
One, what they call Brahman or even Parabrahman, as still not what is first, 
fixed, and at rest, even though it is what is supreme. The unsteadiness and 
irrationality in this representation is advantageous for the Hindu. Many 
representations that sound wholly absurd have at the same time the feature 
that the One or the abstract is considered to be one element, something 
derivative. When God as spirit is c;:alled •father', this is itself only one 
element. 
From this perspective we discover among the Hindus much that is funda-
mental to the speculative domain. Thus for them the One or the abstract is 
nothing fixed itself, but instead only insofar as they call Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Shiva, these three, the whole; the triad alone constitutes the true unity, such 
that for them an inkling of the trinity seems to be fundamental. 
The one that the Hindus call Brahma is therefore itself an element of the 
whole, although this in part comes out only in very sensuous representa-
tions. In the Laws of Manu it says: 'The first cause, Brahman, does not exist 
for the senses, is no sensible characteristic-it is and is not, is without 
beginning and end, is eternal; divine power is generated from it, the divine, 
the male, which is represented in all worlds as Brahm a. As inactive, this one 
rested in water. in an egg, for a thousand years, or one year of creation.' At 
the end of this time, through its own thought alone, it brought about the 
dividing of the egg, and from that division heaven and earth have emerged. 
68 
68. See l11Stitutes, ch. 1. paras. 11-13; Mill, p. 287. Both refer 10 ·a whole year of the 
Creator', neither to 1,000 vears. Mill adds that sucb a 'yl'ar' equals 1,155,200 millions of 
solar years. 
278 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
In another representation, Brahma has lived eternally. Love lay dormant 
together with him, and it produced the powet69 1 The particular deity 
201 
Brahma existed in the form of the endless expanse, and in his thus going 
hither and yon he became frightened for himself. For a thousand vears he 
wandered about to complete his expansion, the setting of his dimensions. 
Then he prostrated himself and the Almighty said: 'You have done well. 
Brahma, to prostrate yourself before us, for you cannot conceive of me. Go 
and create the world.' Brahma asked, 'How can I do that?' Brahman replied, 
'I will give you the power!' Brahma produced within himself the ideas of 
things in such a way that the ideas of things only shimmered before his eyes 
but then vanished from them; so Brahma called out, 'How shall I maintain 
these shapes?' Then there emerged from Brahma's mouth a blue exhalation 
that said, 'I will'. This was Vishnu, who gave reality to Brahma's merely 
ideal things. These things then possessed nothing but reality, without knowl-
edge or thought; they were idiots with fat bellies. Distressed by them, 
Brahma destroyed them and generated from his mouth four persons as 
regents whom Brahma designated to complete the mastery over the world. 
But they were unable to do it-for glory belongs to God alon~ince they 
had nothing destructive within them. Then Brahma created Shiva as this 
destroyer. 70 Shiva. who for the first time unites both aspects, is also called 
lsa, lshvara, Rudra, Hara, Sambhu, Mahadeva, and Mahesha.
71 In such 
representations there are thus fine echoes of dte speculative, many admirable 
ones, although such depictions are merely subjective, individual personages 
pertinent only to individual sects foreign to the popular religion. These are 
just intimations. Besides, such features are confused and intermingled with 
sensuous representations that are incompatible with the universal religion of 
ilieH~~~ 1 
~ 
Another issue is then the Hindu's relation to God in the culrus. The culrus 
is a commonplace idolatry. The most interesting thing to investigate is just 
what to them seems supreme in the relation w God. This supreme factor is 
the ordeal (Qual) or the slaying of the natural state, the self-mortification via 
abstraction that leads to actual loss of life. Hence we find continual sacrifice. 
in particular even human sacrifice. Sacrifice is in part relinquishing of what is 
earthly. in part recognition of its nullity, such rhat recognition of the 
69. ~Dow, History of Hindostan, pp. xliv-xh·. 
. 
. . 
. 
70. This lengthy account is taken from ibid., pp. xlvii1 ff., wilh mJDor vanaoons oo H~l s 
pan and with additional detail omitted. 
. 
. 1Mb 
71. This list of names for Shiva comes from Jones, 'On the Gc:lds , p.l-43. The last 10 
51 
may refer to eithec of the more (:om.moo Dam£$, Mahesana or Maheshvara. 
279 

THE lECTURES OF 1822-3 
worthlessness of the eanhly is evidenced by divesting oneself of these worth-
less possessions. Such sacrifice is something external. The higher sacrifice, 
the true one, is for a human being's free choice and subjective panicularity to 
be overcome by the universal. Hindus have only sacrifice of the former kind, 
and these sacrifices extend to the point of relinquishing all feeling for life, as 
well as relinquishing life itself. 
In the relationship to thought, however, the Hindus themselves only 
ascend abstractly; in doing so they do not arrive at their freedom, do not 
maintain themselves in it. To be sure, abstraction from natural existence is 
necessary for this ascent. So human beings have to break through the 
negative aspect of mere natural freedom, of mere natural existence; however, 
this standpoint must then be a positive standpoint; their relationship to pure 
thought must be something positive. Hindu ascent then indeed breaks 
through the natural, but in such a way that natural existence cannot main-
tain itself at this peak, cannot make itself concrete, cannot fulfill itself_ So 
this standpoint is only a hindrance, and its phenomena are the ordeals that 
Hindus impose upon themselves, penances they undergo, tortures and 
203 
suffering. So it is an ascent that remains negatively disposed toward I the 
natural state~ that cannot revert to life, that in this return cannot maintain 
what is absolute. So its phenomena are the ordeals in which human beings 
exhibit themselves as worthless in their natural existence but ones they 
cannot convert into the positive apprehension of the absolute. 
These phenomena are extremely diverse. Often whole groups of Hindus 
cast or plunge themselves into the Ganges, not from being tired of li.ving or 
depressed from ill health, but in order to sacrifice or dedicate themselves to 
God. Thus they even cast their children before crocodiles; they suspend them 
from trees in baskets-72 Hindus often take their own lives or allow them to 
be taken. In the procession they allow the carts of the deities to crush them to 
pieces. What takes place at the festival is that the idol in the temple is 
transported a bout, for instance, in the Jagannatha festival. The extremely 
ponderous cart, drawn by some one thousand people, is outfitted all around 
with lights. Many hundreds of people are upon it. The procession around the 
temple lasts for three days. Often at that time many penitents cast themselves 
in the path of the can, in order to be crushed to pieces by its wheels, for 
Hindus are very ingenious in their penances. 73 An Englishman encountered 
7'2. See Mill. pp. 3.57-8, who, however, speaks oot only of people drowning themstlvcs but 
also ot self-decapitation, and of 'hildren thrown to sharks (rather than crocodilesl. 
73. See the accounts in Mill (p. 357) and Abbe Dubois (pp. 413-14), which~ the 
devotees' deaths as volumary self-sarnoces. jagannatha is a local o.ame ol Vtshnu at the tan pie 
~80 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
one such person who for twenty years had forced himself to sleep exclusively 
in a standing position, and to that end had in the beginning tied himself to a 
tree, and other such things. Others force themselves to have their arms 
perpetually raised, or their hands constantly clasped so that their fingernails 
grow out through the opposite hand. They are beggars and must be fed bv 
others. One Hindu slept on a bed of sharp nails for thirty-four years; othe:S 
sit motionless, gazing at theic noses and in anticipation of being fed. If they 
are not fed they die of hunger. 74 There are a great many austerities and states 
of abstraction like this. 1 
204 
So this is the only way that Hindus know how to place themselves in unity 
with the One. To them the One is what is abstract, and the placing of oneself 
in unity with it is in any case this pure negation. The image is of being one 
with Brahman through such austerities. Those born as Brahmans are already 
one with Brahman in virtue of their birth. Hindus suppose that members of 
other castes become Brahman only through this endless abstraction~ through 
this mortification, this negation, the sheerly negative, the thought of the 
onefold (Einfach). Abstraction from all fulfillment is the means for becom-
ing one with Brahman. ?S The universal soul~ the lifeless, abstract soul-this 
is the supceme exaltation of the Hindu; it is a liberation that has merely a 
negative significance. It proceeds from the state of withdrawal from self, and 
this withdcawal exalts itself only through absolute abstraction. They do not 
know how to take hold of a fulfilled value. The whole of Hindu character is 
comprised in this feature. 
The State and its History 
Now that we have seen the fundamental features in their concrete form, the 
ultimate knowing of oneself as being something empty, we pass over to ow 
last topic, to the state and its history. As far as the state is concern~ we have 
defined the Hindu principle as complete lack of freedom. The view of 
freedom is not fulfilled freedom, but is instead empty abstraction. Every-
thing ethical determines its volition and actions from this standpoint; it 
elah<lrates itself from this point. But with this withdrawal from self and 
of Puri in Orissa. More likely the deaths resulted from accidents in pulling the enonnous feosrival 
cans, aJthough the colonial authorities interpreted them as relig}ous suicides. Fr0111 ~ 
repons 
of the Jagannatha festival comes the Eoglish word 'juggernaut". 
74. On these self-inflicted austerities, see MiU, pp. 352-3; Dow, Hi51~ of HD.Jos~a~~. 
p. x:xxviii; jonathan Duncan, 'An Accowu of Two Fakeers, wim ~Mir Portraits', Asiatr.: 
R~rc'"s, 5 (London, 1799), 37-52 (see pp. 37, 46). 
75. On this I'OUk for oon-B~ set~ P· 355. 
281 

205 
206 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
this lack of freedom that marks the Hindu's concrete life, what we call the 
state, purpose, wholeness, rational law, or ethical life can have no place, 
cannot be present. For the freedom of the Hindu remains utterly I indeter-
minate, abstract. So nothing is left for concrete relationships but contin-
gency of willing or caprice, which cannot arrive at a political constitution. 
The patriarchal principle of the Chinese also can have no place; there is no 
room for it. Its defect was having its moral content as civil law. for the 
Hindu freedom is only something negative, the withdrawal of self from all 
that is determinate in life and consciousness. So the Hindu principle of 
political life is caprice and contingency. 
The political condition, examined more closely, presents itself as the 
Europeans found it. We wish to mention its general features and then to 
inquire whether this is the enduring condition, or whether it has been 
preceded by something different with the present condition only its final 
dissolution, perhaps only the residue of a prior condition of splendor and 
prosperity. 
So our first concern is this condition as the Europeans found it. They 
found it to be a host of larger and smaller principalities ruled by Muslim and 
Hindu dynasties. In both kinds of principality internal conditions were the 
same. Hindu princes were called 'rajahs\ Muslim princes 'nabobs'. These 
lands of course had ruling families, some ancient and some more recently so, 
with the ancient ones mostly from the warrior caste but also occasionally 
from the Brahman caste, as is the peshwa of the Maratha kingdom. 76 We see 
at once that the succession within these families is utterly uncertain, is 
entirely a matter of chance. Even though we consider the distinction between 
determinate succession and chance succession to be merely an empirical 
issue, we are familiar with the importance of determinacy of succession 
and only learn to prize a definite line of succession when we have become 
acquainted with the history 1 of oriental despots. Secure succession in-
volves not merely the law of succession, but in general an ethical, legal 
condition; only where such is the case can the royal sequence be definite. 
We have attributed the succession in the Indian states to chance. The 
children are of course rhe successors, though it is unspecified as to which 
will be the one. lr is the same in private rights; according to the Laws ol 
Manu, b:others shall inherit in accord with their relatively good or bad 
qualities.' 
7 This text provides all the specificity there is to the law. So 
nothing is fixed even with respect to dynasties. 
76. See above, n. 7. 
77. See Institutes, ch. 9, paras. 114-17, and also Mill. p. 212. 
282 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
Hence the history of that Indian realm is a ceaseless interplay of uprisings, 
~onspiracies, and brutal episodes of princely family members vis-a-vis one 
another., the poisonings of princes, as well as a series of conspiracies of 
generals and public servants as such. The main history consists of these 
upheavals and intrigues, these murderous deeds, these atrocities. As soon 
as a minor child was supposed to rule, these circumstances came inro play. A 
prince who wants to maintain the royal succession for himself and his 
descendants can accomplish it only by violence, by constant distrust of rus 
surroundings in every way, and not through strictness of punishment but 
through harshness. Orderly conduct and statutory punishments are not the 
norm here. The main spectacle of Indian history is this atrocious and 
wearisome drama. 
To be more specific about the internal constitution of the state, about its 
inner condition, it can best be characterized by, or compared to, a feudal 
arrangement, subdivided among a host of minor masters, I elders from the 
207 
warrior caste. This warrior caste is master of the land; the warriors employ 
against one another and against the prince the same means of uprisings and 
atrocities as he employs himself. The powerful form an aristocracy and 
constitute the prince's council. They must pay a tax and provide military 
service; but their counsel in all matters must be sought, and they obey only 
when they feel under compulsion by the prince or some ocher authority. So 
the prince's chief means of maintaining himself is his own character or the 
power of gold. So long as princes have money to pay the soldiers, they have 
power. All comes apart; the chieftains carry on independently; they conquer 
and oppress. This was the condition that the Europeans found following the 
exhaustion of the Mongol princes who had held the whole together in unity. 
After its decline the realm fell apart into this multiplicity of rulerships 
maintained by force, attained by cunning or strength, in that a pack of 
thieves seized power. But sometimes too a stronger despot formed a larger 
realm, for instance the Maratha kingdom, which then exacted tribute from 
the others. 
So India was continuously up in arms, with warfare berween adjacent 
districts or with internal conflict. The violem pressed upon weaker neigh-
bors, compelling them to hand over a fourth of their aggregate income. In 
this setting the Marathas were the most violent. The fourth pan was often 
increased to a half. Even so there was still no peace, for the legacy of 
coercion was the neglect of payment, and so constant strife, pressure, and 
counter pressure. In rhis fashion the government was marked on_ the one 
hand by constant court intrigues, on the other by constant contentiousness. 
283 

208 
209 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
The question is then: Was this an age-old condition or I was it the final 
state of dissolution of an earlier, flourishing realm, of a beautiful, rational, 
earlier condition, of a more magnificent, more prosperous world-a disso-
lution preceded by a beautiful whole, by an ethical condition?
78 
The next topic before us involves the foreign conquerors, who can be 
viewed as the cause of the dissolution. What is noteworthy so far as the 
foreign conquerors, the Muslims, are concerned, is that they inserted them-
selves as a wholly alien world and so changed the condition of the Indians; 
they did so not in the way that the northern barbarians altered the Roman 
world but instead in the way in which the Manchus pressed into China. 
What is more, a large number of Indian states remained free. So foreign rule 
did not produce any wholesale change. 
The next point is what we discover of historical features of an earlier 
condition, in works containing traces of an earlier, splendid condition-that 
it is nothing but a condition of stupefaction, of warfare and the political 
controversies of the dynasties. A great expen on the Indians says that 
revolutions, massacres, barbaric conquests, and atrocities mark the history 
of this beautiful realm that to the casual observer seems to be a paradise. 
Only in the poems, with their panegyrics, are there traces of earlier splendor. 
The Brahmans dream and spin tales of a formerly existing and pure Indian 
realm that preceded the Muslim conquests. Upon closer examination, how-
ever, this realm collapses into a dream world or a poetic construct; it 
crumbles away entirely. 
Indian epic poems have no historical foundation. They entirely lack a 
relationship like th.at of Homer to the 1 Trojan War. (See the Ram4yana, the 
second and third volumes of which we have in Europe.) From the 'histories' 
one gleans nothing for history. The primordial setting in India seems to be 
the interactions of many states. The tradition of religious wars between 
Rrahmans and Buddhists finds its place here. These wars, as well as those 
of the devotees of Vishnu or of Shiva in opposition to the Brahmans., take 
place continuously and still go on today?9 The bloodiest conflicts, in which 
thousands perish, occur at festivals and in marketplaces where several 
millions are gathered. 
78. llus passage refers to !he Hindu division of history into four periods or •yugas'. ~ 
first 
is the golden ruga. tbe second silver, the third copper, with tbe founh and final one bei~~g 
'eanhen'. This terminology 1s according to jones, ·on the Gods', p. 236. 
79. On these con8icts, see Mill, p. 309, as well as j. D. Paterson, •of the Origin of the Hindu 
Religion', Asiatic R.eseMches, 8 (Calcutta., 1805}, 44-87 (csp. 45~). 
284 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
India's image today is largely still that of an earlier condition. Of course 
individual kingdoms do necessarily have splendid eras and flourishing con· 
dirions, especially the principality of Ayodhya, farther inland.80 As we said, 
however, these are only passing moments. For what they show is that the 
chance personality of the ruler is everything, and all hinges on it. Under 
despotism a weak prince can be the cause of greater internal conflict, 
whereas under a stronger master as successor the land, with its luxuriant 
soil, ditectly restores itself anew to splendor and brilliance. The condition of 
states in that setting is like nature when it exhibits constant oscillation 
between total desiccation and che most luxuriant vegetation; so India is in 
general the scene of the greatest contrasts. Because this was in the main the 
ancient condition in India, thus earlier ages and religion were simpler. The 
ancient books, rhe Vedas, are mostly prayers to the gods and hymns to 
princes, from all eras. These books exhibit greater simplicity than does the 
present day. Some incarnations of deities were not yet mentioned in them. I 
210 
The entire condition-the political and religious condition in general, and 
so forth-is determined by the caste distinctions that seem tO have ~n 
already in place at the time of Alexander the Great, although then there were 
still exceptions to the ban on imercaste marriages. Strabo, Ptolemaeus, Pliny, 
and Arrian indicate as much. 81 The Hindus have traditions of a prince who 
prescribed chese distinctions, although these castes were established prior to 
historical times. The Brahmans, for instance, are said to be an immigrant 
people but not a priestly people, so an external coming together of different 
racial stocks does not account for the situation. That is because castes are 
occupational distinctions, and these of course presuppose the unity of a 
state, in which these distinctions later come to be set in stone. 
The fact that these distinctions have spread throughout all of India 
(although no period is indicated in which the whole of India was one 
kingdom) can readily be explained when we see how the whole bas a single 
principle for its foundation, with the result that when, in a shared stage of 
80. See Jones, 'On the Gods' (p. 259) and Creuzer, Symbolilr. (pt. 1, 599). ~yodhya_ w~ a.n 
extremely large, ancient, and sacred city. Rq;arded as the birthplace o{ Rama., Jts locaaoo 1510 
Uttai" Pradesh, in the vicinity of Lucknow. 
. 
81. On Ptolemaeus or Ptolemy S« n. 89 below. For Arrian's repon, see his ltrdw2. 
pts. 11-12, an accou~t based on e:rlier writers that speaks of seven castes butul l~ sa~ 
inrermarriage is not allowed. English tr. P. A. Brunt. Arri.tll. 2 vols. (Loeb ?assical ':-
1~~; 
Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1983); the Indica is in ii. 306-433._ Arri~ saf$ (•~d. 
0
· 
336-41) that the seven castes consist of: sophisiS, fanners. herdsmen. arosans 
. shot* ~ 
. 
ff . 
"dJ -L- ki ' 5« i&D'V 
soldiers, 1lVerseers. and 'those who deliberate about public a ans W1 
uK 
og · 
Stralxl, GeograpfrY t 5. J .29 lf. (The Geography of Strabo, vii, tt. Horace L.eunud Jooes fi..oeb 
Classicall.ibracy; Cambridge, Mass., and London, 19301, 48 ff.). 
285 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
culture, at one point such an ethical condition arises, the less refined neigh-
bors are easily converted to what the cultured people show them. They 
willingly adopt what appears to them to be something superior. By the 
way, the caste distinctions are not all-pervasive in Indian states, for there 
are still many quite unrefined, savage peoples who have not yet arrived at 
this distinction of castes. No cultivation has begun for them. Their com-
merce consists in the salt trade, although apart from it they remain in their 
mountains, from which they just make single, wild forays. This is now what 
can be said in general terms about the ancient condition of the Hindus. 
Noteworthy in this context is a publication of Nikolaus Muller (Mainz, 
211 
1822).82 This man 1 holds the ancient Hindus in high regard. He seems to 
be entirely unfamiliar with Asiatic Researches. He seems to know only the 
work of William jones, and says that the golden age in India blossomed with 
these ancient Hindus. He seems to have a fairly low opinion of lieutenants 
and captains, and yet these men are the ones who often have spent the 
greatest part of their lives in India and are knowledgeable about the ethics, 
language, and religion of the Hindus. 
Now we wish to go over briefly the situation of the historian. We have 
already remarked that the Hindus have no historical perspective and are 
incapable of any historiography; this point serves to complete the picture of 
their characteristics. In order to portray the distinction to us, we need only 
look to what the Old Testament says about the condition of Israel's fore-
bears. Hindus cannot comprehend this at all. Hindus are wholly incapable of 
such an intelligible designation. For them everything blurs into extravagant 
images. They are incapable of anything intelligible. Improbability and 
impossibility are categories that do not occur to them. 83 
The historia rerum gestarum constitutes a necessary middle term in the 
ongoing development of a people; for a people must look upon its past in 
historical terms. It has something finn and endwing in these images. This 
becomes something by which caprice and contingency are dispelled. An 
established condition can secure itself only empirically. Only through history 
does a character fix itself in the case of a people, in that they have the image 
of an established prior condition whereby something firm also enters into the 
212 
political aspect, in part undergirds a political constitution, in part I is 
82. Glauben. Wisseft .,nJ KJmSt der alter~ Hind-, i. Hegel's remarks about Muller in the 
iollowing sentences of our text show that~ had not read this book. MUller explicitly mentions 
Asiatic Researches {see pp. 11 H. andch .. 1) m the course of expres..'iinghi" negative as.'le!l..'imentof 
the scientific value of those repons from Engi.Wunen. Miiller cires a publication that puts tbe 
contributions of soldiers oo the same lnel as those of scholars (p. 18). 
83. Sec Mill. pp. 142 a.od 1-44. 
286 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: lNDIA 
continually built up. Because the Hindus have no history in the subjective 
sense, they also have none in the objective sense. Precisely because the 
Hindus have no historia, they have no authentic history. 
The vast numbers that we find in the case of the Hindus for the reigns of 
rulers and the periods of history are remarkable. Many names are linked to 
these numbers, although the numbers are totally arbitrary, entirely lacking in 
historical significance. Examples include one king reigning for 70,000 years 
and another prince undertaking penances for 1 0,000 years. 114 We see that we 
are not to think of history (Historie) in these cases. The situation is compa· 
rable with the numbers of chronology. These huge numbers have an astro-
nomical sense, but not one as though the Hindus had such ancient 
observations that the numbers would have become so huge. 
To provide a brief perspective, we wish to compare our year with the 
Hindu numbers. When we calculate our year at 365 days and a few ho~ to 
express such numbers exactly we need to express them in relation to a 
determinate unity, to a day, to hours, and so forth, and to express such 
relationships in terms of intervals (Brnche). But if we do not do it with 
intervals, then the numbers become all the more decisive, all the larger. Thus 
the moon completes its cycle relative to the earth twelve times and then some 
in one of our years. There is then, however, the Metonic system, es according 
to which the moon completes 237 cycles over nineteen years, such that after 
nineteen of our years it finds itself once again at the starting point. So the 
Hindus sought to indicate when all the planets, as seen from eart~ wouJd 
have been in conjunction, I and they expressed the intervals by huge num~ 213 
bers, supposedly commensurate with such relationships. This is thus how 
their huge numbers came about. The Hindus have a distinctive asuonomical 
system, the accuracy of which depends upon the precision of the one doing 
the calculating. The main thing is that such numbers are nothing historical, 
but instead have astronomical meaning and express exactitude not via 
intervals but by large whole numbers. 
Another remarkable feature is that the best sources for Indian history are 
not the Hindus themselves, but the Greeks and Muslims. The Greek ac~ 
counts do not indicate that the Indians had been subject ro dte Persians. 
Alexander conquered only one part of India; he did not press on ro the 
R-4. See ahove, n. 18. 
. 
·oc1 o( 
85. Meton (5th cmL BC), ao Athenian astrODOIIlero ~ 
the ~~~me 
ninttttD years airer which the lunar month retums to an origiaal posmoa ol 
501ar year. 
287 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Ganges, but only as far as the Punjab. 86 Successive Greek monarchs also had 
possessions within India. The Seleucids held the Bactrian realm under their 
dominion. Only by AD 1000 does the narrative become more precise, when 
Muslim princes seized the Indian throne: Ghaznavids, Afghans whose 
dominion had its seat in Ghazni. Later, Timur and his followers conquered 
India and founded a Mongol empire. 8 7 But these Mongol princes, beroming 
soft, eventually met their downfall when the Europeans finally took control 
of almost the entire empire. 
More important as a historical source are the documents of the interior of 
India, the inscriptions on stone monuments, copper plates, and the like, 
some of which are in very ancient written characters similar to Sanskrit 
and provide specific dates, but only dates of these specific monuments. 
Funhermore, an indigenous source is the collection of lists of kings. Captain 
214 
Wilford in particular has collected and studied these lists, a few of which I are 
of the greatest consequence. 88 These lists are accepted in India as more or less 
accurate although, according to the testimony of Wilford, who possessed one 
of them himself, they are very discrepant from one another. Lately the English 
have devoted a lot of effort to such matters. The geographical statements of 
Ptolemaeus were found to be exact.89 Known to him were Allahabad, a region 
of the Ganges, as weU as many others. 
The lists of kings, then, are mutually contradictory in the extreme. The 
Brahmans deal with the lists in such a way that what is most important is 
arranging and establishing epochs panly in astronomical terms, partly his-
torically. They fill out these expanses with names of kings, which are often 
imaginary. They omit important kings and ascribe their periods of reign to 
others:> transposing kings and dynasties into a wholly different time~ based 
on prejudice or confusion. It is not uncommon for them to pass over from 
distant predecessors of one year to the latest descendant, omitting those in 
between. What is then indicated about these kings is completely mythologi· 
cal. Wilford provides us with these reports. He says that an Indian historian 
8~. See Arrian, Arzabasis 5.28 (Brunt, ii. 92-5). After debating with his l~adrrs, Alexandfi 
decided not to cross the Hyplw;is (Beas) River that Bows through lhe Punjab, but instead ro 
widadraw and return to the West. 
87. ~Mogul dynasty (consisting of Mongol, Turkish, and Persian groups} was founded in 
1526 by followers o{ limur (Tamedane}, and lasted until 185 7. The earlier empire ofTarnerlant 
(1336--1405), a Tatar, extended across south~m and western Asia, with its seat in Samarkand. 
88. Captain Fraores Wilford ~IVOO in India and furnished several importarlt conrriburions ro 
Asiatic Researdns. 
89. Claudius Ptolemaeus {II. AD 127-48), better known as Ptolemy. the famous ancien~ 
astronomtr of Alexandria, was also a geographer who wrotr a treatise on the geog:raph~· ol 
Europe, Africa. and Asia, complete with maps.. 
288 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
imparted to him that he quite casually filled in the expanses with names and 
conjoined realms, and that his doing so is justifiable because his predeces-
sors, the authors of the chronicles, have done likewise. 
Another remarkable circumstance that contributes to the confusion of 
Indian history is that the Indians have also incorporated into their history the 
histories of foreign peoples. The best-known to appear in those lists is 
Vikramaditya. who is reckoned to have lived about fifty years before Christ. 
It is highly uncertain who this person was. As the English investigated more 
precisely, I they found nine individuals having this famous name; one was 
215 
king of a small realm, another king of all of India. 90 One of them is said to 
have presented a great offering in order to attain a long life. Upon receiving 
an unfavorable response, he wished to kill himself, and the deity then 
promised him a thousand years of untroubled rule. Then a son was born 
to a virgin and a carpenter, and this son dethroned Vikramadirya. This child 
is obviously Christ; for what Christ has done is found in this history, 
reworked in Indian fashion.91 
We find that the books of the Apocrypha were distorted in wholly Indian 
fashion, and the Talmudic writings as well. In the same way too the story 
of Solomon is found interwoven into the Indian narrative, as well as the 
stories of the Muslim and of other Islamic kings.92 The detailed story of 
Muhammad is told and indeed so that he was born in India. The story of 
how he is then said to have come to Arabia is so shamefully sordid that it is 
not to be recounted.93 In particular, even the story of Noah and his three 
sons appears in Indian history too, but so that the sons' names are wuecog-
nizable. Indian 'history' consists of such connections. Bentley, who carries 
out the most exacting investigations, supposes that this Vikramaditya could 
only faJI in the eleventh or twelfth century after Christ. 
94 
90. On the multiple bearers of this name, see Wilford, ·An Essay', Asiatic Researches, 9 
/Calcutta, 1807),117. 
91. Ibid. 118, for dus account, drawn from several Hindu scriprures. 
92. Wilford (ibid. JIS-19), says these disparate materials include an apocrypbal gosptl of 
ChriM's infancy, various jewish writings about Solomon, as wdl as items abour Muhammad 
iHcgel's 'rhe Muslim') and Sassanid Persian kings. 
93. Wilford (ibid. 159--60) presents the story. In brief, a BrihmaoconceaJed a garmeut ~ed 
by Ius wet dream. A maiden in the house he was visiting found~ cloth, Ullkoowingl~liai 
11 
to her own body, and subsequently became pregnant. She and the RSuinog male 
. wrn 
ultimately dismissed from the household, like Hagar and Ishmael SEnt away by Akaham an the 
Bible. The son went abroad to stan a new religion (namely, Islam}. 
. 
_ 
94. 1: Bent~ey is the author of 'On the ~ndu S~srems of Asuonomy, and~~ ~ 
With History m Ancient and Modem Time , Asumc R.eSUTche5, 81Calcutta.. 80 ), 
289 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Astronomy and Art 
It is noteworthy concerning the writings on astronomy that, because they are 
inscribed on palm leaves, they do not last long, for which reason there are no 
ancient codices; instead the works must be recopied, and it has come to light 
216 
that the copyists 1 were not ashamed to make the most capricious altera-
tions. So the greatest uncertainty prevails in this regard. 
Wilford himself was a proof of what deception the Brahmans generaUy 
get away with. A learned Brahman was supposed to cull from the Puranas 
features bearing similarity to Greek myths and Egyptian elements. After 
utilizing this Rrahman for a year and then having a look for himself, Wilford 
found that different time periods were appropriate for certain words; in this 
way Wilford discovered that the Brahman had altered such dates in the 
originals to what Wilford could have wished them to be. The Brahman, 
rhus discredited, took a solemn oath and brought thirteen Brahmans who 
were said to attest likewise to the accuracy of the dates. 95 
As for the works of an in India, those found in Elora at the latitude of 
Bombay, and those in particular on the Coromandel Coast, have now been 
described and studied most precisely. Niebuhr was the first to call attention to 
them.96 Entire mountains were hollowed out, and temples, columns, huge 
figures, and a host of other objects. were carved in the rock-feats of admi-
rable diligence. The walls contain mythological depictions. Great antiquity is 
ascribed to these works; yet the images show that they involve nothing 
beyond the mythological system current at that time; for these images are 
the same shapes as we find even today among the Brahmans. The neglect of 
such temples is easily explained by Muslim fanaticism, which has polluted 
and desecrated them, and bombarded the interiors so that Hindus no longer 
come to serve these temples. The newer representations a hove their altars are 
ones produced since the birth of Christ; the Hindus mainly used Abyssinians 
217 
to fashion them, and these artists simply imitated 1 what they had seen in 
temples in Egy~ images partly of Greek origin, partly of Egyptian origin. 
Lines and relationships taken from Greek works were ones that could be 
depicted simply by untrained people. These untrained Abyssinians worked in 
accord with recollections of that son. 
95. See Wilford, 'Au Essay', 2.51 ff., which says the Br.ihman deO"ived by word cl\angC. 
eraliurts, and fotgei:V of exu-nsive passages, and that he brought in ten others to bade h1m_ 11P· 
96. Ellora lor Elura), located in Maba.rashtra, has manv cave and rock temples daring trom 
.w 400 to 900. lbere is no mention of them in the works of w his[orian Barthold Groq: 
Niebuhr (1776-1831). 
290 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
India in the Framework of World History 
The two world-historical questions are: Whar advance has the Indian world 
generally made as an advance of the idea in itself? Does the Indian world 
stand connected to the rest of the world and, if so, in what way? 
We already considered the first question at the outset. China is the 
patriarchal whole, and wholeness or oneness is its basic characteristic. The 
Indian principle is the second element of the idea, namely, that of distinction, 
of specific, firm distinction. As a human distinction that is said to be 
subordinate to the spirit of unicy, it remains something merely natural and 
becomes a setting of the social classes in stone, in relation to one another. 
Because the distinction was so ossified, there was only inequality, distinc-
tion, multiplicity; rationality, freedom, and a political condition could find 
no place here. Therefore this distinction was fixed, and this is the Hindu 
principle. 
his the other principle in the world-historical context, although it has no 
connection either backward with China or forward with the next principles. 
The world-historical 1 advance is therefore only implicitly present-as in 
218 
the case of animals and flowers that form a system, albeit a system in which, 
as individuals, they emerge from the soil by themselves, without one species 
appearing in connection with the others. The connection is not explicit, but 
instead exists only for the reflective mind. This is the most irrational mode~ 
that of nature, and in this naturalness the Indian principle exists in this 
connection only for the concept, not in the phenomena. 
The second question-whether the Indian world stands in a historical 
connection with the others-must be answered in the affumative. That is 
because the concept of the principle of distinction already involves differ-
ence, going-outward (Nachau{Iengehen). The Chinese principle is explicidy 
isolated. But distinction must go outward, and so the Indian principle also 
has an external, world-historical connection with the others. This, however, 
can only be a passive relationship, a mure, inactive expansion; for, inasmuch 
as the distinction is the abstract principle, the Indian wodd is without 
individuality. What there is of individuality is only the caprice of despotism-
So it is a connection devoid of individuality. We will discuss this aspect 
brieflY. 
O~e aspect of this connection has of course been stated previously. 
namely, that India was always an object of desire for all peoples, above_all 
the West. Hence early on India was a factor in conunerci_al trade. Foteipl 
peoples acquired for themselves Indian treasures--pearls, 1ewels, ~rfum~. 
The details of these elements are not our concern. This connecnon wa!> 
291 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
219 
partly by land, partly by sea. The Indians themselves were early I seafarers 
and traders, and they had been visited by a people from the ocean to the 
south. This already took place before the Greeks came. Egyptians, Greeks, 
and Romans had contacts with India. Sailing around the Cape of Good 
Hope is a principal feature of more recent history. This trade that the Indians 
themselves also carried on is in general something inconsequential and 
ancient; it had no influence on the situation as a whole and the Indians 
discontinued it very early on, just as advances wok place in the elaboration 
of the caste principles and the subservience to ceremonial observances, and 
stricter lines were drawn between the castes themselves, and between pure 
and impwe acts. 
So India had early visits from, and connections with, the ocean to the 
south. It is notable that the commercial connection with Asia and India had 
long been carried on by land, via Syria and Egypt, until at last the epochal 
discovery of the sea route around the Cape of Good Hope. People often have 
the image of this route around the Cape as just an expedient to avoid the 
barbaric conditions of Egypt, Syria, and Arabia-that the natural and closer 
route passes through Egypt, and so people in any event propose to cut 
through the isthmus of Suez.97 The ancient route does indeed go this way. 
But it is not the infinitely easier route, thus making the other one just an 
expedient. Seafaring from India to Suez can take place only three months of 
the year, because one has to contend with the monsoons, which blow in the 
opposite direction the greater part of the year. If one does not take advantage 
of the season and has gotten to the Gulf of Arabia, then here come the north 
winds as a hindrance. At the present time Egypt is peaceful, and yet people 
220 
favor the sea route. last year Lord Hastings98 dispatched two I captains to 
England via the two routes. The one sailing via the Cape reached London 
three weeks earlier than the other, who at that very time had been at the 
latitude of Bab-ei-Mandeb99 and had set out on the route via Suez. The one 
who sailed via Egypt had the most auspicious season but had to make part of 
his way over land and arrived three weeks later. Also, on the Arabian Gulf 
one sails only with small ships, ones that utilize the off-shore winds. Thus 
this apparently shorter route has disadvantages compared to the newer 
97. The Suez Canal was opened in 1869. 
98. Frances Rawdon, the first Marquis of Hastings, was governor-general of India from 1812 
to 1823. He expanded the Bntish domain and carried out internal reforms. 
99. The: Bab-el-Mandeb is the narrow strait at the south·westem np of the Arabian peninsula. 
separating it from the coast of Mrka, and the Gull of Aden from tb.e Red Sea. It is a long way 
still to Suez! 
292 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
ocean route. So India has in this connection a passive relationship with 
regard to commercial trade. 
The second aspect of it is the dispersal of Indians. A characteristic phe· 
nomenon has been observed in more recent times, one that places India in 
contact with the West. It is evident that Sanskrit, the ancient Indian Jan· 
guage, is not only the mother of all contemporary Indian languages, of 
which there are many, with all of them acknowledging Sanskrit as tbeir 
mother. The Vedas are written in Sanskrit. The Shakuntalti rThe Decisive 
Ring'), a drama by Kalidasa, is even partly in Sanskrit. 100 As for the Hindu-
stani language, 101 it is not typically Indian, but something composite. San-
skrit is not only the mother tongue of Indian languages but is also the 
original language underlying ancient Persian; it is also related, on one 
hand, to the Greek, Latin, and Germanic languages, on the other, to Egyp-
tian. The root words of these languages are also foWld in Sanskrit. Even 
more amazing than the evident identity of the roots is the comparability of 
the grammatical system and especially the conjugation system~ with those of 
the Greek, Latin, and Germanic languages. Professor Bopp in particular has 
carried out celebrated studies of these languages. tOl This has necessarily 
been very surprising to the European world. In India, Sanskrit is in fact the 
language I of the sacred books, as Latin is for us. In India we see Sanskrit, 
and in other places we see the Persian, Egyptian, Greek, Latin, and Ger-
manic languages. The [geographic] link is interrupted by Syciac and 
Hebrew. 103 So the linkage is not continuous, but is interrupted. 
This points to a quite ancient dispersal of tribes of people from India. Yet 
this is not to be represented as though India is to be viewed as the land of 
origin, because the ancient Persian or Zend language likewise proves to be 
connected with Sanskrit; Zend is not its daughter but parallels it, so that 
100. Kalidasa is held to be the greatest Indian poet. He lived in the 5th cent. AD, residing at the 
court of the kings of the Gupta dynasty. He composed both epics aDd dramas. The Shflktmt4ltl is 
his most famous work. Hegel most likely lcnew the tr. by Georg Forster, Stlltontala o4er tkr 
entscheidende Ring. Ein indisches Schauspiel von Kalidasa. AMS Jn Ursprachen S4nsirit wnd 
Praknt ins Engliscbe und aus diesen ins Deutsche ubersetzt mit Erliiutenmgen (Vienna, 1800). 
See above, n. 51. 
101. Hindustani, the lingua franca of much of India today, is Western Hindi with Arabic and 
Persian components too. 
. 
. 
. 
102. Franz Bopp (1791-1867}, professor at the University of Berlin, pubhsbed his mator 
work subsequent to these lectures by Hegel, in 6 vols., 1833-52. The tide of~- EPgl.isb a., by 
Edward R. Eastwick, is A Comparative GramrrJtlr of Sanskrit, Zmd. Greek. Lati7l. Uthwtrrian.. 
Gothic, German, .md Sclavonic LAnguages (Hildesheim and New York.. 19851. See also abovt, 
n.l8. 
103. In place of 'Syriac and Hebrew', Griesheim has 'the so-called Armenian languages, 
Syriac, Arabic'. 
293 
221 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-~ 
both seem to have an ancient, common source. Zend has its locus to the 
north of India, in the region of Bactria, of Kashmir, in the Afghan kingdom, 
in the Parapanisus Mountains. All these lands are ones where the predomi-
nant language is related to Sanskrit. There are regions where Sanskrit still 
today is the living vernacular and is spoken in purer form than in India 
proper. So we have this northern region that likewise belongs to the domain 
of the Sanskrit language; if we represent the dispersal as a displacement of 
peoples, we have to think of it as proceeding outward from this northern 
point, or that this point is rather the higher point than that from which. the 
antecedent diffusion took place. 
This migration of peoples that we see only in the language is itself a silent, 
mute feature prior to all the specificity of recorded history. It is a silent 
dispersal into circumstances where there was no inherent or extant culture 
222 
at all. The available historical I traces have been compiled very intelligently 
and cleverly, with great diligence, by Professor Ritter in his Vorhalle zur 
europaischen Welt. 10o1 This is, however, a very unstable field, very treacher· 
ous, with little credibility because connections often arise that reside mere1~· 
in phonemes. Since these people were spread out in Central Asia, this dispersal 
route is represented as going northward from India and around the Caspian 
Sea, panly to the somh and panty to the north, through Armenia and Asia 
Minor toward Greece, to the Black Sea, and so forth. As Ritter constructS 
them, the main connecting elements relate principally to points at the Black 
Sea: Colchis, Phasis, and the Sea of Azov. He delineates a commercial trade 
connection with these points, an inland trade that stretched from here to India 
and to China. The similarity of names of people in Phasis with those in 
India is remarkable. In this connection Herodotus transmits the legend that 
Egyptians dwelt in Phasis, since Herodotus assumed Egyptians to be the 
foreigners there.10
j These are the historical traces. These peoples were not 
imbued with the 'Indian spirit', for the dispersal took place in prehistoric 
times. As fonune or necessity would have it, what rhey were imbued with 
they cast off. So this is the historical connection of Indians with the outside 
world. Indians have not conquered but instead onlv have been conquered: 
they were no outwardly directed individuality. 
. 
104. •Entryway !o the European World'. Carl Riner.. Die Varhalle europiiiscber Volker· 
geschichten vor Herodotus, um Je,. Kaukasus und an den Gestaden tks Pontus (Berlin. 18201. 
105. Phas1s is the name: of the chief river in the ancient territorv of Colctus on the eastern 
shore of the Black Sea. and also the name of a settlement there es~blished bv the l'-1ileSians. It 
was a major trading center, with many resident foreigners and many languag~s in use. Herodo-
tus says 'the Colchians are clearly Egyptians' fii. 104). See The History. tr. David Grene 
{Chicago, 1987). 173. 
294 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
In comparing Sanskrit with the Greek, German, and Latin languages7 we 
find many roots chat are shared with the Persian language. This is the 
material aspect; the more ideal aspect is the grammatical affinity. The 
grammatical system proves to be not only very developed internally; I there 
223 
are also a number of scholarly works about grammar. In Indian literature 
too one finds a sublime cultivation of grammar. From this feature people 
customarily infer an early, sublime cultivation of the Indians as such. How· 
ever, this inference from the elaboration of languages to cultivation in 
general is wholly unwarranted. lf the matter is viewed empirically, we indeed 
find the opposite. In Europe very cultured peoples have a simple grammar. 
Fulsomeness of expression for sensible objects is more a sign of barbarism 
than of culture. The German language too has many distinct sounds. But this 
abundance is not one on which to place a high value. Previously people took 
grammatical cultivation as indicator of a people's culture. But this elabora-
tion is quite often a multiplicity of wholly insignificant distinctions. For 
instance, the English language has a very simple grammar; whereas with 
barbaric peoples we see that when they commence cultivation they engage in 
drawing minute distinctions. For example, in the Arab and Turkish gram-
marians we find the greatest acumen and the most extreme minutiae as signs 
of retrogression, or of a not yet highly flourishing culture. In the times of 
their decline the Greeks and Romans began to elaborate grammar. 
Buddhism and Lamaism 
We now have remaining for our brief consideration something yet related to 
the Indian world, namely, the range of peoples thar belong to the Buddhist 
religion, those linked to Lamaism. 106 I 
224 
We saw the Indian spirit as one of a dreaming that, in representation. 
splits into two extremes. The shapes are nevertheless related. We saw thar in 
representation this spirit goes wandering at random. Irs foundation is the 
One of all things rhat casts itself about in a grear many narural and spirirual 
106. The portrayal of Buddhism confronted lligel with various problem~. One_ is that~ 
overall pre!tl:ntarion of Asia had become so wide-ranging.rbarrbere was httle nme lelt ~or lt. ~ 
other was that, as a religion spanning many lands and peoples, Buddhism was n04 Ul Hettel~ 
sense, a bearer of history. which in his conception could only be a sure. So, owmg to nme 
lillUtations and systematic reasons, Hegel did oot succ~ in treating SU(Q:SSfull~ and IJl deph 
this religion that is so widespread in Asia-although the available sources wnr OOC: so wmpy as 
his ponra val would lead one to believe. Hegel limits himselt more m less to ~non of a le"· 
travelers' .reports and omits almost entirely a presentation of ~st. doctnnr. There~· 
however., some discussion of Buddhist doctrine in the philosophy ol reb~~JOO lecrures. I)O[a 
· 
those of 182 7 (Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion (Oxford, 20071, u. 562-79
1-
295 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
shapes, comprising, within itself, the presentation of thoughts that are on the 
one hand still sensible, on the other most profound. Over against this 
dreaming, on the other side, there is the actuality of a helpless servitude 
having a fixed mode of distinguishing human beings [into castes], one on 
which the whole culture depends. In contrast to this dream~life,. this whirl 
that is in actuality devoid of truth, stands first of all a naive dream-life that 
does not develop into that distinction of modes but also for that reason has 
not emerged into servitude; instead, in aauality, it grasps itself more crudely 
but also more simply; it is also simpler in its configuration of representation. 
The spirit of this shape is on the whole the same, bur it is more concentrated 
internally and hence brings its representation more to oneness and comports 
itself more freely in actuality; it is not amenable to caste distinctions. So caste 
distinction is a secondary feature. This is the character of the world that is 
related to India. 
A number of diverse peoples and lands fall under this heading. Their 
history is only partly confined to India; partly it is a vast spilling over of 
torrential proportions that cannot be considered here. Belonging to this 
world are regions to the east, sout~ south-east, and north-east of India, 
[including] Ceylon and Ava-the eastern peninsula of India, which is in part 
the kingdom of Ava, in part Siarn. 107 To this group belong all the nations of 
225 
the eastern peninsula of India, as well as 1 those to the north-east of India 
itself, the sequence from the Himalayas nonhward through all the Tatar 
region up to the eastern border of Asia. [These include] Tibe~ the Tatar 
region, especially the highlands, inhabited by Mongols and Kalmucks, all 
the way to the Arctic Ocean. These peoples all go under this heading. Indeed 
we already remarked in the case of India that Hindus proper are called 
Brahmanic people, and Buddhist peoples can be contrasted with them. 
Buddha constitutes the 'other' over against Brahrna; people believe that 
he is the same one as the Chinese Fo; in Ceylon he is called Gau£allla. 108 He 
was in India too, and his religion is still panly indigenous there. There is 
great controversy as to which of the two religions is the more ancient and 
elementary. There are reasons supporting both sides, but no definitive 
107. Presumably 'tbe eastern peninsula of India' n:fns here to the wescern part oi south-east 
Asia and the Malay Peninsula. Ava was tbe name., in malieval time;, of a capiul city and a 
regioo io what is today Runna (Myanmar). 
108. For the various names of Buddha in different regions, see Samuel T umer, A.n ~a{ 
.an Embassy to the Cotm of tbe Teshoo lAma. in Tibet (London, 1800). Hegd would have seeD 
it in the German ti., in Neu.ere Geschichte tier See- rmd LmJreisen (Hamburg. 1801), xiv. 307 · 
Turner says tbt name is 'Fohi' in China. 'Gautama' is Buddha's Sanskrit personal oamc:; in 
Ceylon rhe equivalent, in tbe Pali dialect, is 'Gorama'. 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
statement is possible. Obviously the Buddhist religion is the more elemen-
tary one and as such can be the oldest religion, although it could also have 
resulted from the reformation of an earlier one. 109 In any event we find 
among the Greeks this distinction with regard to Indian religion. The Greeks 
know of two kinds of priests of the Indians. They know of Samanas. 
Lamanas, and Garmanas ( Garmanen )-a term that passed over into 'Ger· 
manic' ( Germanen )-who were in the anny of Xerxes; and on the other side, 
of Brahmans and Magi. That Samanas were understood to be Buddhists is 
also dear from the fact that 'Samana' was a name used even as often as 
Gautama.110 So the Buddhist religion is the simpler one. 
According to the Brahmans, Buddha himself emerged as the ninth incar· 
nation of God and is also the founder of the first Maurya I dynasty; for 
226 
there is also a nadition drawing the distinction between solar and lunar 
kings. 
111 Buddha is represented as king, as teacher, as God, and his lase 
disciples are revered by the Buddhists. So he appears even in Brahmanic 
settings, just as, contrariwise, the Buddhists among themselves also in turn 
give currency to the Hindu representation of deities. They even have several 
sacred sites that are sacred to the other., Brahmanic Indians. In Tibet the 
Ganges is in any event [held to be] sacred. In Ceylon it is extremely merito-
rious to have visited such sacred sires. They acknowledge gaining wisdom 
and scientific knowledge from Benares, a city on the Ganges. So even the 
109. In Hegel's day there were very distioct opinions about the IF of tbe tWO rdigioos. But it 
was quite possible to find a scimti6cally reliable answer. Proponeoa of die greara age ol 
Hinduism included Turner (Acanmt, 306) aod Jones ('Oo the Gods', 2351). Appamdy 
straddling the fence were Mill (p. 310) aod AbiX Dubois (p. 45). Today sc:bolats repFCi 
Buddhism as having broken away from the anteadellcs of Hinduism. $OIIIelimes cdrtred to as 
'Bralunarusm; but as perhaps older than the specific shape later taken by what came to ~ 
koown as Hinduism in its developed, theistic form. 
110. The sources Hegd bad at his disposal are very confusia&, with the result that be caDJKX 
gain any clarity on this issue. See Francis Buchanan, 'Ou the Rdigioo and Litcratan ol abt 
Burmas•, Asiatic Resurches, 6 (Loodon, 1801), 16J-308, esp. l7.f.; H. T. Cokbroob., '()b. 
servarioos on the Sects of jains', As~ Researchu, ~(Calcutta., 18071, 287-:-J~ esp. 300; 
Ritta; Die VarhttUe, 27. Buchanan regards 'Samanians' as Buddhists aod as~ 
from the 
Magi. Colebrooke says the 'Sannanes' ('Ganna.oes'?) are distinct from Bc.ddlusts, aad ~ 
they may be Jains. He also says Strabo calls them 'Germanes'. Ritter says ~ 
an' 10 . ~ 
corurasttd with Brahmans, as 'Budier' are with the Magi. Aaually, a Samaoa 15 • ~ 
Hindu ascetic of ancient times who focused oo the Upanishads racher than tbt V~ 
A5ccUs ol 
Jainism and Buddhism came from similar origins, which adds ro the coofusioa. DOt oaly o{ 
Hegel but of his sources. 
· · 
· 
111. See Mill p. 109. Riner s"""ks (Die VOf'halle, 29-30) ol a lkihmaa U2ditioa a~ 
' 
...-
'childra oi dJI! moon' •u ..,.. 
to which the founder of the ancient Hindu dynasty rektmlto as 
!lOb of a Buddha. 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Buddhists and the Tibetans point to India. 112 This simple religion can be 
produced by a reformation of Brahmanic religion. More likely, however, is 
the greater age of Buddhism. 
There are, to be sure, also Hindu reformers. A few tribal groups in India 
have freed themselves from this bondage, in particular from the caste di\'i-
sions-chiefly the Sikhs, who inhabit a northern region of India. Two 
hundred years ago Muslim pressure likewise increased and there arose a 
reformer who, together with his people, sought to gain independence from 
the superstitions of both sides through viewpoints alone, not through force. 
Only when a follower of this man had been put to death by the Muslims did 
his friends rise up against Muslims and Hindus. Now this people lives as a 
kind of republic. So here we have a people that, by reformation, established 
its own religion.113 According to all the historical evidence, however, the 
Buddhists seem to be a much more ancient people. I 
The second thing is to indicate the character of this religion, and the th.ird, 
its historical path. It is a more humane religion in every respect. This is so 
much the case with regard to the representation of God that in one aspect 
their supreme GOO was a ltuman being~ in another their God is to them still 
living as a human being; so they revere a living human being as God. 
The first feature is the case with the Ruddha. They have extravagant 
stories about his eanhly life equivalent to those we see with the rest of 
the Indians. He is an incarnation, indeed the ninth, and is to be revered 
as God. 114 He attained nirvana, that is, a condition of supreme abstraction 
in which spirit was immersed within itself, in which he no longer held fast to 
anything, was freed from everything, a condition we can to that extent call 
bliss. Buddhists attain this condition after death. Whoever attains nicvana 
has become Buddha. So this one~ Gautama, is the true God. He was not some 
112. On Tibetan views of Benares and the Ganges.. see Turnei, Acc01171t, 3 21 and 348 (cited in 
dte Gennan edn.). 
113. Hegel may be drawing upon the account of Malcolm, •sk:etch of rhe Sikhs', Asiatic 
Resurcbes, 11 (Calcutta, 1810), 197-292 (see esp. 200, 212-13, and 2JS....19). Griesheim's 
version says that Hindu presswe also played a role in the origins of this movement. Sikhism. 
.:entered in the Punjab region., traces its origins to the ttachings of iiS lirst Guru, Nanak 
I 1469-1539), who was born a Hindu. It is a cype of monotheism tbat stresses ~itation and 
rejects the caste system. as well as ma.oy external religious tlements that Olll lead to superstitiOUS 
beliefs and practices. Th~ fifth in tht line of Sikh Gurus, or leaders. dt.at began with Nanak. was 
Arian 11563-16061, the fust compiler of Sikh s.;:riplures, the Adi Granth. He was put to death by 
Jahangir, succao;or m Akbar, who wa.~ the greatest, and more tolerant, Mogul emptro[. 
114. Hindus regard Buddha as the ninth incarnation ~avatar) of their dtiry VIShnu. Socne 
BuddhisiS regard Gautama as the reappearaoa in the world of a pre-existing. nanscc:ll(knt 
Buddba-Datun:; but tbe con«ppoo of bim as •nmtb" in a series is a specifically Hindu idea. 
298 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
sort of natural being, not heaven or the sun, but instead was essentially a 
human being. They say that he was at the same time eternal, immonal. They 
ascribe to him all the anributes that we assign to the supreme being. They 
revere him in images in temples, images of him sometimes as seated, some-
times standing erect, and also together with his disciples. One feature con-
sists of the temples that the Buddhists have, in which his image is erected. In 
addirion to these temples dedicated to him there are pyramid-shaped build-
ings, as in java, that are thoroughly massive, in which are preserved relics of 
him, some being of his body, although it is told that after his death his body 
was cremated on a funeral pyre of sandalwood. So we have here the feature 
that, in their representing God as having become a human being, his death is 
an element of their devotion. Gaurarna is God of Ceylon, but his religion 
extends through Tibet up to the Arctic Ocean. I 
228 
Here, however, the veneration of a living human being is linked to the fact 
that the supreme lama (priest) is the one in whom God is present for them. 
Such a living incarnation is also found in India itself, in the vicinity of 
Bombay, where this incarnation of a deity is hereditary in one family and 
the incarnation is Ganesha, represented and depicted in images with the 
head of an elephant. An English officer sought out the currently living 
individual. He was a man 30 years of age and was revered as God. 
115 A 
similar belief finds its home on a larger Kale in Tibet proper, in the land that 
extends northward beyond the Himalayas. Three such lamas are revered. 
The first is the Dalai Lama in Lhasa; the second is the TaKhi-Lama in Taschi-
Lumpo; the third, beyond the Himalayas and to the sourh of Lake Baikat, at 
the end of the highland, where Ghengis .Khan had his origin, is the Taranant 
Lama, also a Buddhist lama, in Urga in Karak. 116 These are human beings 
who are revered as God present today; their service is linked to the Buddhist 
115. Ganesha is a Hindu deity; so this part of the paragraph, which Hegel~ 
paraJl~ls 
Lamaism in this respect, pertains to Hinduism. not Buddhism- See E. Moor; ~~ 
of an 
Hereditary living Deity, to Whom Devotion Is Paid by Bramins of Poona and Its N~iP:~­
hood', As.iat1c Researches, 7 (London, 1803), 381-95. Moor says (pp. 394-5) that t1K indlvtd-
ual looked to be 55, and was said to be 60. 
the 
Dd -
116. Hegel's account here is erroneous. See Turner, Account, Jl4-l5, where ·G~ook ~ 
.:ailed the T eshoo Lama. T umer s.a ys all three are located'" Tiber and belong to tht 
· 
pa 
-
h 'Shammar' sect reside m BhUWl. but thtir 
sect, and that three more lamas belonpng to t e 
. 
. 
·1e who · brad of 
superior resides in Tibet The traditional scat of the Dalal Lama (now m CXI 
I, 
. 
JS 
.L_ 
· 
. 
od the p 
heo Lama, bas ~ scat at Ullt' 
the Gelukpa (Yellow Hat) sect, ism Lhasa. The seco 
• 
anc 
. uocl 
ft 
1-qcl' 
Tasctu-Lumpo Monastery. The location of the third (Gdukpal ~.:a 
~bn ':wrl U.: 
~tatement. Turner ~y~ he is in 'Kharka'. 'llrga' t~ a name foe l 
_ n 
~ 
_ Ce:ot:ral Asia 
capital ot Mongolia, a possible alternative, altho_"~ there are va~~· mi~ include tiK 
With 'Urga' or 'Karka' in their names. Other ~bllioes for~"' tbe ruins of 3 Moogol ciry 
Karakoram Mountains to the north of Kashmir. or Karakorum, 
299 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
religion, to the representation that this is Buddha present here and now, in 
living form. The more specific point here is the great confusion, albeit one 
preferable to the Hindu view, that the dominion of a One over all the many 
gods, demigods (Genien), and spirits is the foundation. More recently we 
have been better informed about the lamas, since Captain Turner has 
been an emissary to the Taschi Lama. When he stayed there, the previous 
lama had just died or, as they say, had gone away. The current lama was 
2 years old. 117 
229 
These lamas are spiritual as well as worldly leaders, but I 'worldly' only 
directly in libet. 118 They are revered as spiritual leaders by the Mongol 
tribes, and are consulted in political matters; they are revered spiritually as 
God. Besides the lama, however, there are then still many gods, Buddha or 
Gautama, and so forth. One could envisage such chief lamas as being most 
arrogant and, in their madness, becoming supremely haughty; yet that is by 
no means the case. In his embassy to the Taschi Lama, Turner found the 
current lama to be a 2-year-o)d child; in his stead there was a regenc to 
whom the English embassy paid its visit. Nothing much was of course to be 
said by this child. It sat there, erect and well-trained, listening and watching. 
Father and mother stood alongside, and the child behaved quite alertly and 
calmly. A pot of tea was presented, from which the regent himself drank. 
When the teapot had been emptied and the child remarked that it was empty, 
the child looked about several rimes in order to have more brought to them. 
for the child proved in general to be alert and intelligent.119 The priests 
selected individuals of the most superior disposition to be lamas. The previ· 
ous lama was extolled as the noblest, most modest, man. He was educated 
and, far from being haughty and proud, was gentle to subordinates, 
intending their best interests in all things, and the government of the lama 
is one of the most patriarchal sort that can be found. So the lama is then the 
one through whom the God of the people is present, such that God cares for 
them. The relationship is of a kind that in general comes quite dose to 
pantheism. Nevertheless it is not the Hindu pantheism where every moun-
tain, stream, and Brahman is divine, such that Brahmi is immediately 
on the Orkuo River io Mongolia. The other libeun Buddhisr soct is the Kanna-pa, or Red Har 
Sect. 
117. Samuel Turner visited tbe Ta.shi (Panchen) Lama ou 4 .Deamber 1783, and published a 
repon of his journey in AsUJtic Researches, 5 fl..ondon, 17991, 199-205, in abridged fonn. and 
in a book (on which see above, n. 1081. He says the rurnnt lama waseighm:o months old. 
118. See Tumet; Acc<~Nnt, 310. 
119. Ibid. 334-5; also, his account in AsWtic Resemches, 1 (Loodon, 1799), 200. 
300 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
present therein; instead, in the worship of the lamas the infinitely extrava-
gant pantheism has I coalesced into a unity. These people distinguish them-
230 
selves from the Hindus generally in virtue of their higher stance with respect 
to freedom. They know themselves in God inasmuch as they situate God as a 
human being and have a genial intuition of their God, and have thus arrived 
at a freer God. 
As for castes, they are present in Ceylon but not so strictly and also only 
for the tradespeople. They are, however, somewhat different than in India. 
There individual castes can have no dealings with alien castes, not even for 
their own sake. Here in Ceylon, however, this is allowed, since one can 
undertake for oneself what properly is the province of a different caste. Also, 
there are no higher castes, no warrior castes. Since 1813, people have also 
come to know the interior of Ceylon in this way. In the Burmese kingdom, in 
Siam, there are no castes, nor are there castes in Tibet and among the 
Mongols. This, therefore, surely constitutes a great distinction of a free, 
courageous, more genial existence. 
These peoples have priests, and in Tibet above all; in the Burmese king-
dom, they live together in large monasteries. In Tibet the priests in a 
monastery number over rwo thousand. 120 These priests do not make up a 
particular caste, but instead come from the entire people. In Tibet the rule is 
that one of four sons must be a priest and be brought up for that role. In 
Tibet these priests have their own land rents and live from charity. In the 
Bunnese kingdom they live principally from gifts freely given, since the 
priests pass through the streets early in the morning, anticipating gifts 
from the inhabitants. Here they are called 'Rahans'. 
121 So these priests differ 
from the Brahmans with regard to lheir entire behavior. The Tibetans call 
them 'Gylongs' and, as opposed to 1 the Brahmans, they are on the whole 
231 
quite without pride, are modest, educated, and affablt; whereas the Brah-
man is hardhearted and proud, unfriendly. Tibetan priests distribute surplus 
goods to the poor and give shelter to any wayfarer. 
122 
There are two kinds of sects, one of which marries and the other does nQf:. 
The latter is the most widespread today. They are distinguished by their 
robes, by red and yellow robes, and are hostile to the point of the bloodiest 
120. See Turner. Account, 310, where he says tbt:re areal least 3,700 IDOIIks in W ~ 
of Tasch.i- Lumpo. 
· 
121. See Buchanan. 'On the Rdigion', 285, for a ddailed ac.couot of~ 
dail~·I:OIIDCh. 
122. Buchanan attributes to the Burmese monks~-a~~ 
f-ksel ascribes 
10 ~ TI~ 
Ibid. 276-8. Hegel does not always observe such diswx:nons m his 2CCOUDIS ot vanoos 1 
On die COPtrast of these monks with the Br.IJunaps., S« T~ 
Aaollllt. JOJ. 
301 

THE LECTURES OF 1822~3 
conflicts. m They are pious, educated, and religiously observant in the 
temples as well as in the monasteries. The main thing in their services is 
chanting, which they raise to the highest volume. The emissaries dwelt in a 
monastery and could not have been more amazed at the enormously power· 
ful voices. 
Now as for the Mongols and Tibetans, they are described as extremely 
good-natured, open, trusting, observant, obliging, and far from the decep· 
tion, cowardice, and baseness of the Hindus. Trusting and friendly, these 
peoples carry on a peaceful life. The priests are pious on behalf of the entire 
land. Everyone of the laity performs his job peacefully and untroubled. They 
are not, on the whole, warlike. Even in Tibet most remain exempt from 
warfare. It can also be noted that the eating of meat is to an extent forbidden 
among these peoples, in particular the Bwmese. Nevertheless this rule is 
modified to a greater or lesser degree, and it depends in panicular on the 
prince as to whether he wishes to uphold it. The Mongols and Kalmucks 
refrain from eating meat and regard it as wrong to kill an animal. Very 
benevolent in particular are the Kalmucks, who will not even kill their game 
232 
animals I but instead till the soil. On the whole these Mongols and Tibetans 
live peacefully; the Mongols are chiefly nomadic, but not actually in a 
patriarchal condition such that by birth one person would have unlimited 
power. Their chieftains are of course panty determined by birth; but the 
heads of families in the main arrange these things among themselves, and 
politicaJ matters are more or less the affair of the entire people. Today most 
of these peoples are under Russian dominion, with some under Chinese rule. 
In 1769-70 a Russian clan of Kalmucks, some 70,000-80,000 families, 
departed from the Russian territory along the Volga and Don rivers and 
fled into Chinese territory, because the Russians had broken off relations 
with the Dalai Lama. 
These genial peoples, who are a freer sort than the charming, delicate 
weakness of the Indians, can, to be sure, expand outward and then, like 
rivers., wildly inundate everything; not sweeping through the world in war-
rior tribes but, as an entire people, they come into a state of inner, unsettled 
fennentation and then, restlessly expanding spatially, by laying waste they 
123._ As isevidem fromTwner's Accormt, 314-16, this sentence applies strictly to the T1betan 
Buddhi.sn, the two sects of which are the Gelukpas tYellow Hats) and tbe Karma-pas (Red 
Hats). (See also n. 116 above.} Turner (while using his antiquated spelling for the names} says 
that the Kanna-pa~ were the IIlO!tt powerful, and the Gelukpas a<;.<;emhled an anny 10 drive them 
b'om their lands: aqd gam the upper hand. Gelukpa power then stabilized when it gained the 
favor of the Chinese emperor. One should DOt mistake this sentence of Hegel's lor a general 
f~flm of Budc:lbism• it iS L.. __ -' 0D li•--' 
f 
'ogl 
' 
' 
L. 
hi 
• 
'-'iQCIU 
--.. s account o a Sl 
e ep1sode m li""'tan story. 
302 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: INDIA 
subject all to themselves. But such deluges abate just as they have started. 
They have never been long-lasting nor in panicular have they established a 
kingdom. Such surges took place especially under Genghis Khan, pressing all 
the way to the borders of Silesia. 124 After him in like fashion Timw, the 
Mongol prince or actually a Turk, was one who stormed through the world 
too. 125 His actual point of departure, the original tribe with which he surged 
fonh, consisted not of Mongols but of Turkish peoples. or Turks. I 
233 
So, this world belongs on the whole to India. But whereas the Hindus are 
one whole with rigid internal divisions~ these latter peoples have not arrived 
at this internal cultural shape, and instead are more disparate, although 
thereby freer. We proceed now from India to the third Asian realm, to Persia. 
124. Between 1215 and 1223, Genghis Khan undenook several (;alllpaigns of COTMJuest in all 
directions, and founded the Mongol Empire. 
125. Timur (Tarnerlane) was the leader of a confederation of Turks and Mongols that came to 
power in Central Asia. In 1398 he invaded India, not wirh the intention of anntxing Indian 
termory, but for plunder. 
303 

PERSIA 1 
Here we can be briefer because, on the one hand, we have fewer materiah 
and, on the other hand, they are better known. The materials pertinent to the 
Persian Empire are, however, largely incomplete. With this empire we enter 
for the first time into world history proper. Although China is an important, 
essential element, it lies outside the connections of world history, as also 
does India, the other element, which has only a mute, silent, inner connec-
tion that passes by inconsequentially ("tatlos). With Persia, however, there is 
in fact a conscious and clear COOJlection. In China and India there is less to 
say about a history that is directed outwards but enough to say about 
internal matters, whereas in Persia we know much more about external 
matters but less about the inner world. The Chinese and Indian world is 
still contemporaneous for us and therefore we can be more precise about it; 
the Persian world is one that has long vanished. What we know of the 
Persian world and what appears to us to be its most ancient aspect is an 
element that has survived all history and is still extant in venerable remains, 
234 
and has come to light only in recent times. I 
The Principle of the Persian Empire 
When we examine the Persian Empire more closely, we find here for the first 
time an empire, that is, a total domain comprising entirely heterogeneous 
elements (to be sure, only relatively so). The peoples who were combined 
into one here were extremely diverse in language, customs, and religion. 
This splendid empire lasted a very long rime, and the way ir was composed 
more closely resembles the idea of the state than do the preceding elements 
[in history]. That is because here there is neither the patriarchal~moral 
tradition as in China, nor rigidly distinct groups as with the Indians; not 
the rapidly dissolving world-inundation of the Mongols, nor the negativity 
of oppression as in the Turkish Empire. Instead we see here a unity of ethnic 
groups persisting jn their autonomy and yet dependent on a point of unity 
that held them in equilibrium and could keep them contem. The Indian and 
Mongol world belongs to the Far East, and the sense of self (Selbstge{Uhl) in 
the Far East is quite different from that of Europeans. It is otherwise with the 
sense of self that in Persia still holds sway. In Persia today there is a different 
. 1. 'Persia• refers to the ancient empire, centered in what is present-da~ Iran. that at its heittht 
10 the 6th cnr. IIC, starting with Cyrus the Great, spread from the Indus Ri.ver in Asia to the 
shores o( the Meditnnnean and Black Seas and comprisrd maoy cultures and peoples. It wti 
c:ontrolled by me Achaemenid dynasty until it was defeated by Alexaodrr the Great in 331 IC· 
304 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
stock, a finer race of people more related to Europeans. Elphinstone, an 
Englishman who has those lands under his oversight, has visited and made 
known to us the empire of Kabul and Kashmir. He conveys the impression of 
how greatly Persians and Indians differ, and says that, all the way [east] 
to the Indus River, Europeans could believe that they are still in Europe. 
Inunediately upon crossing the Indus, everything is different. 2 When we come 
to the Persians we find an empire outwardly direaed, and so for the first 
time an empire impinging upon world history. 
We have, then, to indicate the principle of this empire: it is the unification 
of the preceding principles. In Persia, the Chinese and I Indian principles 
235 
are united. In China there was the unification of the whole under the 
dominion of an external, moral will that determined a person's innermost 
will. The principle of the Indians, on the contrary, was that of absolute 
distinction set in stone by nature. In the Persian Empire we see the distinc-
tion of individualizations as nations too, and indeed in such a way that the 
distinctions are given free rein and yet overcome, held together by a point of 
unity. So here free individualization reverts into a point of cohesion; this is 
the third necessary element. What we have to consider more closely are the 
distinctions whose unity is the whole. 
The Geography of Ancient Persia 
In considering the distinctions externally, geographically, we can say that 
here the highland comes into conflict with the lowland, with the broad river 
valleys. In India we see the unfolding of life in sweltering valley regions 
separate from the highlands. In Persia the two principles are united in 
reciprocal conflict. One part of the whole is the highland that bears the 
general name of Persia. To it belong the mountain ranges more specific:aUy 
and the valleys that attach to them. The other part is the river va1ley regions 
of the Tigris, Euphrates, Oxus (Amu Darya)~ and Jaxartes. 
The highland is not to be characterized as a sort of elevated land like that 
of Chinese Tatary; instead it is somewh.at lower relative to the valley plains, 
and for that reason it has singular fearures of fertility. The Indus marks the 
boundary between India and Persia. Westward from this river, Persia rises up 
1. See Mountstuan Elphinstone, Ars Account of the Kmgtkmr of G1llbul ~ 
~;,. 
Penia, T.:Jrtary, andJruiio (Lo11don, 1815), 148 ff. He says an English traveler •nAfPancountry 
would be distu["bed by the institutional instability and evident disorder there. Howem; some-
one troSsing over to there from India would look. favorably upon the Afghans• iDdepcodcot aPd 
~c 
characta, their similarity to Europeans. in contrast to tbe swltifying cffut of goftTP· 
llleDt OD the ladian cbaractcT. 
305 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
above the valleys of the Indus and the Ganges. Farther on beyond the sowces 
236 
of the Indus I is a higher mountain range, generally called the Hindu Kush, 
and eastward from it is a yet loftier region in which the Chinese and the 
Mongols dwell. Crossing over to the west from the Hindu Kush to the 
Caspian Sea is a mountain chain from which the Oxus River., now called 
the Amu Darya, flows in a nonherly direction; it formerly emptied into the 
Caspian Sea but now it empties into the Aral Sea. Toward the sources of the 
Oxus (Arnu Darya] the valley narrows, and another mountain range takes 
up~ extending to the north. The Amu Darya originates in the junction 
(Winkel) of these two mowuain ranges, where there is a valley alongside 
the river. This junction is an important point where lies the city of Ralkh 
(formerly Ractria), the seat of an earlier culture. From here it is not far to 
Hindustan, in fact to Kabul. To the south-east lies the Hindu Kush; crossing 
over these mowttains, one comes to Kabul. Along this mountain chain whe~ 
Bactria lies to the east, Khorasan is to the west, then farther westward Aria,·' 
Media, Iraq, and Azerbaijan, where the Armenian mountains then take 
shape. To the south-west begins the valley of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, 
proceeding from the north-west in a south-easterly direction. Another chain 
of mountains extends to the Persian Gulf and alongside the gulf. Along this 
chain the ancient Farsi land of Persia principally lies.4 Ths land extends 
farther, to the Indian Ocean and along the Indus, and terminates at the 
Suleiman Mountains. This elevated plain is Iran as such in its nonspecific 
designation and constitutes the focal point for our examination. To the north 
is Ractria, to the south is India, and Babylon or Assyria lies to the west, with 
Syria and Armenia farther west, and farthest is Asia Minor. Persia plays its 
role on this stage. 
The components of this empire are then the Zend people in Bactria and, 
on the other side, the Assyrian and Babylonian peoples, with me third 
component being Media, or Persia proper, and the fourth Syria, extending 
W 
to the Mediterranean Sea. 5 1 
3. Aria was an eanern province of me Persian Empire, a region now located in eastern ltaD 
aDd the Herat afta of Mghanman. 
4. These: mountains, and the province of Fars, extend along rhe nonh-<"ast side of me Peman 
Gulf. Fan, ooe of the tl:n provinces of Iran, is the heanland of the Persian Empire in its ancien~ 
and mor:r recent forms. Today these arl' called the Zagros Mountains; they separate t:hr basin ol 
the lraman highland from the ooastal region with its harbor at Baodar-c Bi!shehr. 
5. Hegel's four geographic divisions of the Persian Empire, which he takes up in order. 
~ 
~~ witb me seaions H'ltO which we have divided the text from this point 00. 
with their_~ as follOVr"S. 'The Zend People ..• ' and 'The Religioo of Light' correspond to 
dlr ~division; 'Assyria aod Babylonia' corresponds to the second; the next fout, 'Sources for 
Persia aad the Penim. EmpiR', "The Medes and the Cbaldeans'. 'Tiw Founding of the PeniaJJ 
306 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
The Zend People, Language, and Books 
The Zend people has its name from the Zend language in which are written 
the books that a Frenchman, Anquetil du Perron, discovered in rhe 1750s 
and translated into Latin. 6 These books contain the teachings of the religion 
of light, which doubtless had been the religion of the ancient Persians, 
although not in the specific form of the Zend-Avesta. The name of the 
teacher is Zoroaster, as the ancients called him. This Zend people is doubt-
less connected with the ancient Persians, alchough it is certainly uncontest-
able that the ancient Persians who came to the fore under Cyrus were not 
made up exclusively of these Zend people. Anquetil discovered these 
books among the Parsis of his day, who stiU dwell in the East Indies as fire 
worshipers. One particular community is located south of the Caspian Sea.7" 
They are a self-contained community. These Zend books ace not without 
gaps, although the most imponant part of them is known. They were a new 
discovery [to Westerners]. The scriptures ace something self-con£ained; 
Empire by Cyrus', and 'features of the Persian Empire' correspond to the third; the last thn!e, 
'Phoenicia', 'The Religion of Astarte and Adonis', and 'Tbe ~b 
Religion' corrapond ID ~ 
founh. 
6. Anquetil du Perron'5 tr., Zerul-AvesttJ, 3 vols. (Paris. 1771) has been repubL in facsimile, 
with an Introduction by Robert D. Richardson, Jr., 3 vols. (New York and Loudon. 1984 ); it~ 
rmdered into German, tr. and ed. by j. F. Kleuke~; 5 vols. (Rip, ln6-83), an edn. ~to 
hereafter simply as 'Kleuker'. In 1754 Anquetil du Penoo went to Gujarat ia India. to leam die 
langua~ of the Parsis, who stiU practiced the ancient Peri!iiiaD religion there. LonB beKm tbat 
they had left Iran to escape Muslim persec;ution. (Below in our teJtt Hegel erroneously staus tbat 
they had their center in 'the East Indies', and that Anquetil du Perron discovaed their boob 
there_) In Hegel's day the Parsis were a prosperous commercial commiDity under British rule, iD 
the region of Mumbai. The correct name for these ancient scriptureS is simply 'Avesu\ or 
'injuDCtion' (of Zoroaster). What survived the lsla!DK pene;uti011 was acxomp:tnied byoom-
memary (Zand), hence the hyphenated name •and-Avesta' by which this saipmce came ro br 
known in the Wesr. Hegel refers to the people from whom Zoroaster's ~ 
~ 
or 
perhaps their forerunners too, as the 'Zend people', ahhougb chesr people oi anoml l'rrsia Gel 
not go by that name. Where possible, in what foi10W5, references to the tl!.nof ~ 
Zeod-Avesu. 
Itself wiU be given in Kleuker, in Anquetil du Perron, and in the English VftSIOil ed. James 
Darmesteter in the Sacred Books of the E&t, 3 vols. (Oxford, _1883, 188?, aad 189~--e ': 
edn.), hereafter abbreviated as SBE Modern scholiUS refer to this set of stnj:!Rim> as simply 
'Avesta'; to avoid confusion, howe~er, we will continue to speak of the 'ZaKI·AY5a', 35 does 
our teJCt. 
· 
· · · 
~- of L:~ Zoroaster's 
7. The Kleuker edn. (p. iii) states that, owmg to the VJClSSituoo:>o 
.........,.., 
followers had to separate into two groups, ont at that time still living ~ 
at ICemwl 
alo~ the Caspian Sea, the other driven to Siirat in Gujarat. (Actually, Kcnnao 
15 ~ 
~ 
lraruan Plateau. well south of the Caspian Sea._). It says ~ ~ 
z.ead.Awsa. 
Zoroaster carry on tbe worship of Onnazd and still possess the holy boob, 
307 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
connected to the religion of the ancient Persians but nevenheless a charac-
teristic whole. 
To begin with, people still disagree about the seat of the Zend people, 
which seems, according to all investigations, to be Bactria, with its main 
city Bactria on the Amu Darya River. Bactria itself lies adjacent to Balkh. 
8 
Bactria is not so far distant from Kabul. In Wilford's account the route there 
involves about an eight-day journey.9 Notable among the way-stations is 
Zohaksburg (Firdawsi), which plays a great role in ancient legends;
10 a 
second is Balkh-Bamiyan (BaUch is the name of a city as such), about 
which Wilford remarks that the Persians often confused this city with 
Balkh [the province ].11 Near to Ballm-Bamiyan there still exist remarkable 
ruins of another city, Galgaleh. 12 Here are foru1d innumerable hollowed-out 
places in the rock, some 12,000 of them.13 Also evident are the ruins of walls 
and two gargantuan statues severely damaged 1 by the Muslims, as well as 
when Akbar fired cannon at them, whereupon blood is said to have flowed 
&om the leg of one of them.14 1his point suffices to show that many 
fortifications must have existed here and that the tale associates many 
8. 8alkb is both a province in northernmost Afghanistan and a town there, close to 
coou:mporary Mazlr-e Sharif. 'The province of Balkh is bordered on the north by the Amu 
Darya Rive~: In ancient times Ba1kh was known as Bactra; it is in the larger region then knoWll as 
Bactria.. Medieval ode routes between East Asia aod the West passed through BaJkh. 
9. Fraoccs Wilford, 'On Moum CAucasus', A.sit.Jtic Resurches. 6 (London. 1801), 463, 
aaually says it is an eigbt-day journey irom Blm.iyin (or Samian) to Kabul. Baroiyin,' provioce 
aDd a city in cattral Afgbanisran, is coosiderably south of Ba.llch and to the north-west of Kabul 
(IIIUCb closer to it than is Balkh). Sine.: this whole area Jay within the large ancient region known 
as Ractria. it is bard to atw:h any precision to the statement in ow tut. This passage also refers 
to the 'fon of Zobauk', ncar Zdtauk (me 'ZobakshwK' ol the next sentence in our teXt) and 
8amiyin. 
10. See Joseph Gonts. D4s HelderJn.c.h von Inm aus ckm Schab Nameh des Firdusj, 2 vols. 
(JkrliD. 1820), csp. tb. 5. Abu-1-Qasim Mansur Firdawsi (940--1020) was a lamouslranian poet 
and author ol the hist"orical epic Shlllmameh. 
11. ~~~'On 
Mount Caucasus', 467, 470. Wilford says rhat BimiyiD was a center of 
Buddh•sm m auaenr times, and was later disparaged by Muslims in their opposition to idolatrY· 
12.. Walford suus ( p. -463) chat the ancimt city of Gbulgbweh. two miles south of Bamiyii.D. 
was desuoyed ear]y on by the Muslims. He also says (p. 4n) that rulers resided at this place. 
ailed 'the fon or palace ol Bantiyan', and that Genghis Khan destroyed it in 1221. 
l3. Wtlford says (p. 464) that somr of these reusses wue temples., and some coo~ained reliefs 
of human fig.ms. He is also the source for tbe number 12.000. The Muslim Taliban. recnt 
rulers of Afghanisao at the begiDDiag of the third millennium, destroyed some o£ the remaininS 
.lipfts at 1M site. 
l ... Wllfoni tells of two buge statues, one male and ooe female. He savs (p. ~I !hat shoU 
wae tired 011 the order of Mogul emperor Aurangt.eb ( 1618-1707Hot ~peror Akbar (1.542-
l~). as aar tat bas it-on his expedition to Ballth, and that the appearaoce of blood on -
leg ol OQt of tbe SUt\les aiiSCd him to ce:asr the bo.nbardmmt. 
308 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
memories with ancient heroes. Alexander the Great did not make his way to 
India via Balkh, but instead went around the Parapanisus Mountains to the 
south. The Parapanisus Mountains lie to the east of Bactria, a higher point of 
the Hindu Kush. 15 
This region of Bacrria is then doubtless the stage for the Zend people and 
the place where Zoroaster lived. Anquetil, and following him the Germans too, 
took Armenia to be his native land, but Bactria as the site of his activity. 
In Sactria, Zoroaster lived Wlder a king Gustasp, who has been held to be 
Darius Hystaspes. 16 But the fact that Zoroaster's time was more ancient rnaJces 
it prior to the entire state of affairs portrayed in the Zend~Avesta. The chron()-
logical combinations by which one transposes Darius into Gustasp rest upon 
dates the later Persian historians select. But these dates are extremely dubious. 
The Zend books call one people 'Turan', the Turanians, but the names 'Per-
sian\ 'Me<Je', 'Ninevah', 'Babylon', and 'Bactra' do noc appeal; nor is there 
reference to Cyrus, but instead Dschemscbid is named as the first mythological 
king.17 He is taken to be Achaemenes,18 from whom Cyrus is said to have 
descended. Extremely important is the fact that I nothing is to be found in the 
239 
Zend books about such famous peoples and princes of the Persian Empire. 
The other important point is the entire condition that the Zend books lay 
before our eyes, that of a people already possessing a great culture. There are 
four classes, as with the Hindus. 19 Also to be found are agriculture, village 
15. Actually tbe Parapanisus MoWltains lie mainly to the south-east of Bacaia ~the~ 
of .Balkh, and then extend northward toward the Hindu Kush; so the~ is perhaps only an 
apparent lellsion between these last rwo sentenCeS. 
16. The IGeuker edn. says (pt. 1, p. 57) that Gustasp was 'the fifth in rbe secood Persian 
dynasty'. The 'life of Zoroaster' in Anqoetil du Perron's ecln. says (ii. 331: 'Then Guswp, 
carried away by this multitude of wonders, embraced the Law ol Zoroaster. The new Prophet 
explained the Zend-Avesta to him the whole day long.' According to Friedrich Cmuer. ~ 
Iii lind Mythologie d4r altnt Villker; pt. 1 (Leipzig aod Darmstadt, 1819), 675, some scbolus 
take this Gus~sp to be Cyaxares 1. of Media (625-585 BC), whereas aoorhec view holds that lw 
is Darius Hystaspes {550-486 BC), namely, Darius I of Persia. 
17. According to the Kleulcer edn. (pt. 1, p. 38 n.), 'Djemsdlid'stoodfiftb or sinh in aline of 
descent from Noah, and Zoroaster was in tum bis dc:sceodant. He worshiped Ormazd {Ahura. 
Mazda), lived 716 yean, ruled for 616 years. aod issued many ordinances that Zoroasrer 
subsequently upheld. Cf. Anqueril du Perron, iii. 416 n. Ahura Mazda ('The Wise ~d', _01 
'The lord Wisdom') is the preferred name for Zoroaster's deity. Our text calls this de.tty 
'Onnuzd'; so we are using that name in the tr., although spelt with an •a• ('Onnazd'l, whicb 
is customary in English. 
18. According to Hr:rodotus (7. 11 ), Aclutemencs is the grandfather of CuD.byses. aod beott 
the founder of the Persian A,baemenid Dynasty of great kings, which bears his name. See 1M 
History, tr. David Grene (Chicago. 1987), 473. 
. 
19. T'bt Kleuker edn. (pt. 1, p. 58) says lour social~~ 'I1Rte csrab~ ~ 
Zoroaster's day, and tba.t he aacpted them. It is not 5UflXISliiC cha1 these 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
chiefs, roads, administrative districts, dries, provinces, and ocher similar 
features that indicate an internal organization and an advance in the ame-
nities of life. 20 But there are none of the characteristics of an empire that 
could possibly have been like the Persian Empire we know via the Greeks. It 
is the same with the religious laws and civic conditions, which all point to 
the circumstances of a much simpler people than that of the Persians. 
The name in the Zend books for this Zend people is 'Arier', and the land 
is likewise called 'Aria' or 'Ariene', with che soubriquet 'Vedjo' (the proper. 
pure Ariene).21 The principal seat of this land is Bactria. Ariene is called 
more specifically 'the great Arien'; this 'Iran' is then Persia. Iran exten~ 
farther over the highland, and Medes and Armenians are included within it. 
The Zend language, in which the ancient books are in part composed, is 
similar to Indian Sanskrit, so that both seem to have one root. The land is not 
linked down to the Indus on its southern part, but instead to the north from 
Kabul onward into the center of kan where, farther on, lies Khorasan. From 
the Zend books we learn that the people had simple customs, although we 
find chieftains and class distinctions. The main thing that we must consider 
240 
first I is the doctrine of the Zend, the doctrine of the Magi, which is extant 
even today, although in a more elaborate form. 
The Religion of Light 
This religion of the Magi involves the higher, spiritual element of the Per-
sians as such. In the Persian religion we see worship of nature (Naturdienst~ 
but not idolatry, something entirely different from Indian baseness; instead. 
a superior annosphere (Atem) wafts our way. Individual natural things such 
as sun and moon do not constitute the foundation of the configurations that 
are revered. Although the Indians comprise the universal operations [of 
nature] in a figure grasped by means of thought, the sense of such config-
urations is itself in tum something sensible, a merely natural operation. 
We saw Brahman as indeterminate unity, not actual concreteness of spirit. 
Of course there is nature worship with the Persians too, but only the worship 
of light, this universal, simple, physical essence that is pure like thoughL 
Thought longs for, or discovers, so to speak, its own self inasmuch as it has 
approximately with the {our main Hindu castes, for scholars believe that the ancjent Iranian 
people and the A.rraru of early Indian history caore &om the same, or similar., Central Asian 
stock and culture. 
20. 1lle Kleuker edn. {pt. l, pp. 62. 6 7~ orentions various of t.hes.e ieatwes. 
2
~· ~tells Zoroaster [hat he has created this beautiful place of Ariene, and he ~sit 
Eerieoe Veed1o (KINker cdo., pt. 2, p. 299); d. Anqurtil du Perron, ii. 26-4, aod SBE iv. 3. 
110 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
the light before it. Of course the Persians have not represented light to 
themselves in the way that Newton envisaged it. They prayed reverenrly 
to the light and not in sensible intuition alone; instead, in this intuition the 
soul goes within itself and thus also makes the object seen within itself; this 
being-within-itself of the pure object, of the light, is then immediately 
thought, or the spiritual as such. Free thought is not yet the free foundation; 
instead, something sensible is intuited. It is, however, something sensible as 
wholly universal, thus in the form of thought; insofar as this sensible element 
is known as something inward, the meaning is a thought, a cognition. a 
knowing, something good. This is the higher standpoint of the Persians as 
such. So their soul has raised itself up to this higher purity, to something 
sensible in the universal fonn of thought. I 
With any religion one must look first at its configuration, then at its 
meaning. With every religion intuition is something anthropomorphic, but 
what matters is the meaning. With the Indians the meaning is that their 
shapes themselves have in turn sensuous meaning, whereas with the Persians 
the sensuous element is in the form of thought. Directly tied to this, then, is 
the antithesis in the Persian religion, rhis great dualism. 
Considered philosophically, dualism is a determination that is not to be 
regarded as what is ultimate or fixed if its content is said to contain truth; the 
principle of truth is instead the unity of the antithesis. In the Persian religion 
we find the absolute antithesis of good and evil, of light and darkness, of 
Ormazd and Ahriman [Angra Mainyu], such that the two subsist indepen-
dently of one another:, contrary to the principle of all truth of philosoph,·, 
which is absolute unity; for only the natural sphere involves this equipollent 
mutual opposition. With the Indians there is absolute pantheism. With the 
Persians the endless variety of sensuous things was reduced to this dualism, 
and we have to say that it is precisely the greatness of the Persian intuition 
since, in its metaphorical significance, it is rhe dualism of good and evil, and 
so fonh. This shows that the requirement of thought appears as emergent 
here now with the Persians since the multifaceted confusion of the Indians is 
' 
diminished and resolved in the simpler determination of the antithesis. So. 
this Oriental dualism itself demonstrates the grandeur of the self-simplifying 
thought of the Zend religion. 
We have to distinguish two kinds of amitheses, the abstract antithesis of 
light and darkness, and an antithesis that is concrete. I 
{ 1] When we consider rhe Persians with respect to the first antithesis. we 
can exonerare them from standing pat with it as the ultimate position: 
instead we also find with them the unity from which the two sides originare. 
This unity, the first element, is called Zeruane Ak.e.rene or uncreated ti.me, as 
311 
241 
242 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
feminine creator of those two. 22 Onnazd, the prince of light and creator of 
the world, is depicted as created by this time. So where there is the need to 
exonerate the Zend books from the reproach of dualism, one would reach 
for this unity. But the unity is less impo.nant here; instead, the interesting 
point is the more concrete, later religion. That is because uncreated time is 
itself only an abstract unity, something of moderate but not absolute impor-
tance, and it is not the object of reverence like the light that is said to be the 
One, the light by which Ahriman, who is darkness and evil, is said to be 
eternally overcome. 
So Ormazd is the light. The name derives from 'Or', meaning 'Lord', the 
Supreme Lord, and from 'mazda', as 'maz', 'magnus' or 'great', as well as 
'dao', •Deus'. So Orrnazd is called the great Supreme Lord. He is the lord of 
the light, the creator of all things, namely, of his creation-the creator of the 
good. Ormazd is not, however, the sun and fire but instead is the fluidity of 
fire, just as the sun is a container (Hiille) of it. Fire and the sun are a 
corporeal aspect of Ormazd. Wherever there is light, Ormazd is present. 
As such, he is the excellence in all the creation. And wherever evil or 
darkness is found; Ahriman's presence is evident. 23 
In the simple Zend books themselves we also find more profound meta-
physical characteristics of Ormazd. Zoroaster's teaching is presented mostly 
in questions put to Ormazd. For instance, Zoroaster asks him, ·what are you 
called?', and he replies, 'Love, the basic seed of all good; the gift of knowl-
edge, mastery and mastery bestowing, ground of actuality and possibility, 
243 
fullness and blessedness, I the pure will of the good'. 24 So everything that 
comes from Onnazd is living, and in this connection a host of objects were 
revered as manifestation of Onnazd. The word~ the living word, the word of 
the teaching~ is revered in this way, as also are the Vendidad and prayer. 25 All 
of these are more or less personified, although in all of these personifications 
the unity of Onnazd remains of paramount importance. 
22. On Zeruane Akerene, the root of all things, see Creuz.ea::, Syrnbolik, 697. See also the 
Kleuktt edn., pl. I. p. 3. Anquctil du Perron, in his index, calls It original time, the 'Tem[p]s sans 
bomes, I'Eternel' ('tiiDt' without limits., the eternal'). Our Cerman text bas Sc.bopferm. which 
makes this creator feminine. 
_.!3. See the extensive SUmlll.afy discussion in the Kleuker edn. (pt.l, pp. 4 ff.) of these f~arures 
ot Onnazd and Ahriman (who IS caUed Angra Mainyu by the Zoroastrians). Scattered through· 
out Anquni.l du Penon'~ edo .• md SBE, there ue many statements about these two 
24 · See_ the Kleuker edn. tpt. l, p. 184) for these and other descriptive titJes of 0~. 
for a 
very full List. see Anquctil du Perron, iii. 145-8; SBE ii. 24-8. 
lS. See tbe sum~ statmrent of these poinrs in Cremer, Symbolik, 710. The Vendidad is a 
ft:IY lOQg tat oom.snng oE mythological malttial.laws of puri6ca.tioo, and various other topics. 
312 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
The moon, the sun, and five other heavenly bodies [Sterne] were revered 
too. 26 Among these five-and it cannot be ascertained whether they are 
planets and, if so, which ones-we come upon Mithra, bur only as one of 
these beings of light and not as Mithra is customarily designated in later 
times. 27 He appears part masculine, part feminine. 28 This figure was exalted 
later on and came to be revered during the era of the Roman emperors in 
the West, since the attribute of mediator was assigned to it.29 The worship 
of Mithra even came to Germany with the Roman legions. 30 In the Zend 
books, however, he stands only as one being among the others. 31 The same is 
true of the antithesis of good and evil, which later on was made more 
prominent than is the case in the Zend books. In circumstances such as 
these one must observe more closely how a figure has one shape ar one rime. 
a different shape at another time. More recently there have been many 
disputes about Mithra; however, one must not suppose that whar a later 
era made of such a figure was its original character in ancient times. 
The other beings revered apart from, or subordinate to, Ormazd are the 
Amschaspands [Amesa Spentas}. These are not the five planers (Sterne) in 
addition to the sun and moon; instead they are in general the guardian 
spirits I of the world. Ormazd is the first, the sun the second. This mani-
244 
foldness does not detract from the unity of the substance, which remains 
Onnazd, the light. Yet there are other personifications, just as there are, for 
instance, seven Amschaspands that always appear, however, only as aides to 
Ormazd, and from which too the seven days of the week have their names. 
So this is the chief representation.32 Opposed to the light stands darkness, 
the realm of Ahriman, to which belongs all that is evil, lifeless, impure. This 
is the one great antithesis. 
[2.] There is yet a different antithesis to note, a more concrete one. The 
Zend books in fact speak of the two pure worlds of Ormazd, one of which is 
26. Five of the planets orbiting the sun, in addition to earth. are visible to the naked eye and 
so were those known to the ancients. These five, as weH as the sun and the moon. und£rgo 
changes in their apparent positions relative to the fixed stars, and so played a major role iu 
ancient observatiQDa) asuonomy an6 astrology. 
. 
. _ 
27. See Kleuker's account (pt. 1, p. 16), which says Mithra is most splmdid and lS mvoled 
together with the sun, but is nor the sun. 
. 
.. 
28. Creu:ur, Symbo/ik, p. 734, says the Persian Mithra has a 1D3$CUI.me as~ lust as Osins 
correlates with Isis. 
29. Ibid. 729 and 760. 
30. Ibid. 765. 
-
31. There Michra is one of the Jzeds, which are good spirits of the SKOOd onier. This term and 
identilicarion also appears in the text cited in o. 27 ~e. 
15_161 
32. KJeuker's edn. sets forth these realms ol subordipa~eS to Ormazd IP. l, PP· 
· 
313 

THE lECTURES OF 1822-3 
the eanhly world as such, the immediately sensible world, the sensibly living 
existence of the human being. Established as distinct from this living actual-
ity is a kind of spirit world. To what is individual, to trees, streams, moun-
tains, and human beings, there is given a kind of spirit world, a world of 
fravasis (Feruers),. which are omnipresent and are at home in the realm of the 
blessed. Everywhere that there is activity and life the fravasis are present. 
They are said to be primordial, and everywhere.33 This representation is 
similar to how we in fact represent the Ideas of Plato to ourselves as souls set 
apan from the actual world. So it is a realm of representation, a realm of 
spirit also on its own account and juxtaposed to the actual world of the 
good. These are the main representations of the Zend religion. 
Now we have to speak about the cultus of the Zend people, about how 
rhey are supposed to conduct themselves in a legal, ethical, religious manner. 
245 
One serves Onnazd and reveres the light by planting trees and by I agricul-
ture. The rules as a whole make the point that every citizen of the Zend 
people is a citizen of the realm of Ormazd, with the result that one is 
enjoined to propagate goodness and vitality and is supposed to shield oneself 
from impurity, a commonplace practice in Oriental religion.34 A dead dog 
causes impurity. There are many rules for removing it. 
(1.] The first precepts for the servants of Onnazd are to keep themselves 
pure by holiness of thought, by holiness in word and deed, by offering prayers 
ro Onnazd, and also by worshipful actions and obeying the laws.35 These are 
in part civil regulations, which also include moral precepts. They were 
understood to contain the living spirit, the revelation of God. 
The Zend people have three kinds of laws. 36 The first pertains to personal 
security and penal codes, for instance, laws against doing harm. Whoever 
draws the blood of another or moves ro strike him undergoes punishment, 
primarily lashes.37 There is no capital punishment. Punishment for many 
things occws in the hereafter. It is remarkable that there is no mention at all 
of the crimes of murder and homicide, although the series of books 
B. Ibid., pt. 1, pp. 12-13, where it saySthe fra vasis are thdirst copies of being, made bphe 
daoughrot lheCreatot, and expressed io his creative word io the struggle against Ah.rinwl. Even 
0~ 
b~ a fnvasi of himself. Anquetil du Perron renders me plural term in French as 
f~, 
ev1dently the sour<:e for the non-German tcnn feriU!r in our ten. 
J4. The Grieshe1m transcript says 'bodily' impurity is to be avoided one instance of which 
would be 'touching' a dead dog. 
' 
H. See Kln~ker I pt. 1, p. 27). 
36. Ibid. 39, when the three kinds are sa.id to be: moral, rirual, and politicaJ-religious. 
3 7· Kleuker I pt. 2, PP· 316 ff.J spells outthe number oflashes for various offenses. See SB£ iv. 
~S 
for a looger list; d. Anqllttil du Perron, ii. 287 ff. 
314 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
containing the laws seems to be complete. Later on, w be suce, in more 
developed conditions, pW1ishments were enacted, although there is no pun-
ishment for murder of one's parents, because these crimes are too horrible to 
have possibly been committed. 1 
246 
The second kind of law is more concerned with religious precepts, as well 
as those dealing with purification. The first of these is that punishments 
befall anyone who speaks contemptuously of a holy man and deliberately 
lives contrary to the laws of Ormazd. 38 
The third kind contains the Mithra offenses, above all the moral laws. 
Mithra appears as the one who presides over the inner or higher aspect in the 
human being. This aspect is far more highly esteemed, and the punishment 
for a moral transgression is much harsher. The precepts of rectitude are 
found here. Thus in particular, for breaking one's word the punishment 
is three hundred lashes. Whoever steals money furthennoce receives in 
the other world three hundred years of punishment in hell. These then 
are the Mithra laws. The civil laws thus indicate extreme simplicity of the 
culture, and many of them are for the most part moral conunandments, for 
-
39 
mstance, to not neglect one's own sphere of work. 
[2.) The second kind of precept concerns the sacrificial offerings. These do 
not have the meaning they have for other peoples, where each one relin-
quishes something of his own property, declaring himself or his property to 
be nonessential as opposed to the deity, and so gives either a portion of that 
property or his own self, unconditionally (ganz nutzlos, ungebrauchn to the 
deity. For the Hindus this sacrifice extends to the swrendering of one's life ro 
the deity, so that in this absolute negativity a Hindu is just seeking to gain 
some worth. The Zend people themselves make offerings; animal offerings 
are enjoined and occur. The beast is not burnt nor is some of it discarded as 
useless; instead 1 the offering consists solely in the priest reciting certain 
247 
prayers while slaughtering the animal. So what takes place is only a dedica-
tion of the beast, and indeed onJy when iris supposed to be slaughtered on a 
festival occasion. 40 Explicit prayers are enjoined for daily consecrations; but 
38. See Kleuker 'pt. 1, p. 49; pt. 2, p. 364}. The second of these pas.sagessta~s that impWIIy 
involves both internal and external factors. External impurity iPvolves proximity to uodcan 
persons or animals, or contact with a dead thing, without foUowing prescribed pr~ccs for 
such circumstances. See SBE iv. 67-122, for many forms of puri6cation alter contaCt Wlth dead 
animals or people; cl. Anquetil du Perron, ii. 297-353. 
_ 
.l9. See Kleuker 'pt. 2, flP· J 1 'i-16), where Ormaul cit~ the!ie and other pwuslunentlli foe 
Mjthra offenses (but in this world, without mention ot' years in be.ll). See also n. 37 above. 
40. Kleuker (pt. 3, 206) says that the main offeriri!P' are meat that is coosecr.ued and then 
eaten, as well as a varirty of fruits, grains, dairy prodUCtS, and the like. 
315 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
these are not regarded. as offerings. There are no negative acts directed 
against oneself to prove one's respect for Ormazd. 
[3.] The religious action proper is that of the consecrated bread and 
chalice in remembrance and honor of Hom [Haoma), the actual founder 
of their religion, as Zoroaster is the reviver of it. There is a particular festival 
to honor Hom that consists of the consecration and partaking of unleavened 
bread, as well as the presentation and partaking of a chalice containing a 
beverage from Hom juice. So Hom is the revealer and is also a plant the juice 
of which is then consumed.41 So this is something mirroring our Christian 
sacrament of the lord"s Supper. The Church Fathers even found this obser-
vance in the Mithra worship of Roman times, even into the Christian era 
too, and they say that through it the evil demons sought to ride on the 
coattails of what is good, as a mockery of the Christian religion. Zoroaster 
has Hom say: •Whoever consumes me in thankful prayer is sacrificing to me, 
and receives from me the good things of the world.'42 This ceremony in 
remembrance of Hom was also celebrated in the slaughter of a beast as a 
sacrificial offering. 
This is the ancient religion of the Zend people, a foundation mat made its 
way over to the Persians and the Medes. It is the purest nature religion in 
that light is the object of reverence, and the entire relationship of the culrus is 
upheld just as purely as the object itself. It is nature religion as pure as there 
248 
can be. I So this is the spiritual element of the Persian Empire, one that has 
its seat wholly in the empire's eastern part. 
Assyria and Babylonia 
The other., more sumptuous element, rich and sensuous, one of outward 
abundance, we have to seek on the western side, in Babylon and Assyria in 
the river region of the Euphrates and the Tigris. Here we have not much 
more than historically factual accounts. Little is provided for us about the 
spiritual character of this side of the region. Tales of these peoples in their 
41. KleuUr (]X- 3, PP· 206-7) says that Hom is a sacred tree to which the Persians attributr 
me power of bestowing immortality; that it never decomposes. bears no &uit, aod is similar tO a 
p-apnine; that the iukr extracted from it is called the 'water of life'. 'Haoma' is the more usual 
rnJderiDg. This CODCtpt is paralle.led by tbe Indian 'soma', also a plant the juice of which. when 
r~aed _and ~ 
bestows immonality. 6oth plants ue said to be yellow or golden-
llais lranim tree of li&: was 6rst planed on earth by Abuca Mazda, or Ormazd; it has a 
hea~y prolotype. There aft nwnerOIIS refetmces to it in rbe Avesta; see, for instantt. SBE 
XJaJ. 235-46. The theme o{ a tn:e that bestows immonality was widespread in the ancient Near 
Easa; seE ~· 2: 9, 22-4, on the tree of life plaad by God in the Garden of Edm.. 
42. F~ this ~set Kleulter (pt. 1, p. 92). 
316 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
splendor have their setting in the most ancient history, which in any event is 
highly obscure and contradictory and multifaceted; the result is that the 
names of the kings and the lists of kingdoms pose many difficulties, and here 
in particular a critical stance is necessary. We are not, however, granted a 
glimpse into the inner character of these peoples; we have to be satisfied with 
the main elements. 
First is Assyria, a term of highly uncertain application. Assyria is proba· 
hi y a main district along the middle part of the Tigris River, principally to the 
east of it. Media lies fanher east, Armenia is to the north, and to the south is 
Mesopotamia, which was at one time part of Assyria, at another time pan of 
Babylonia. Assyria is one section of what today is Kurdistan. By the Greeks, 
Assyria is called Babylonia and Mesopotamia. In Assyria the ancient cities 
were called Assur and Ninevah, the great city of Ninus. 43 The setting is in 
fertile soil, and yet the culture here does not seem to have reached the high 
level of that in Babylonia. It cannot be determined precisely where Ninevah 
was located, although its site is in the area of present.day Mosul. I 
249 
The southern parr is Babylonia. Babylon, or Babel, is a name just as 
famous as Ninevah. Babylon lies on the Euphrates River, as Ninevah does 
on the ligris.lt is the city of Bel, of the s~ K()[.44 1n Babylonia as in Nioevah 
we see a twofold need: first, to abandon nomadic life and the raising of 
livestock, and to transition to agriculture, trades, and commerce, to adopt 
a law-based, civic life; second, to become secure against peoples who re-
mained nomadic. The ancient lales speak of this valley land as having been 
traversed in early times by nomads who were subsequently displaced by city 
life. Abraham came from the region of the Euphrates to Canaan in moun· 
tainous Palestine.45 The soil of rhe Euphrates region was shown to be 
extremely fertile, as valley soil, and Babylon furthennore was conveniendy 
situated for commerce along the Euphrates and Tigris, which were linked by 
43. Ninus was a king of Assyria and the husband of Semiramis, a woman ol Greek Jesmd 
who, after his death, supposedly built the city of Babylon. These are Greek aM ~till names~ 
the historical Assyrian king Shamshi·Adad IV and his wife Sammuramat. Nmus IS also the LabD 
name for Ninevab. 
44. 'Bel' derives from a Greek name for Marduk, tbe god of the city of Babylon. Brl was also 
associated with the sun. Another sun god, Shama.sh. was a priJKipal deity in Babyloo in dar bJIV 
of Hanunurabi (c.1700 Be). Perhaps ·Kor' refers here to the Babyloniall goddess lshtar. who was 
associated with fen:ility-cycle mythology, as was the Greek 6gure "Kou·, a •doubie' of the 
goddess DemeteL 
45. See Gen. 11: 31-12: 9. Abraham's father Terah took his family west to Haran. ~ 
wiUch point Abrah.a~ theo called Abram, Iarer I .at God's COflliiWldl ~ 
and took IW 
family to Canaan. 
317 

250 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
canals for pwposes of navigation as well as of agriculture. Navigation here 
extended over the Persian Gulf. 
What must strike us in panicular as characteristic of these cities is their 
vast size; just as famous are the huge edifices of temples and walls, which 
were phenomenal achievements and parts of which endured from ancient 
times or at least were still to be seen in ruins. Famous in particular are the 
magnificent buildings of Semiramis. There is no strictly historical indication 
as to the time of this splendor. The name of Semiramis was universally 
celebrated, and many great things have been associated with it. Babylon 
had a further period of resplendence seven hundred years before Christ, and 
for that reason it is uncertain whether the buildings were not erected until 
this later era. 
We know little about the spirit, customs, and character of the people. It 
has been suggested that the finest construction was the temple of Bel. People 
revere the sun. Besides, the worship of Mylitta 1 or nature is universal.46 In 
the Near East generally there is reverence for universal nature. 'Physis' even 
serves as the principal title for Greek or Ionic philosophy. 
Only Herodotus reports for us a few features of the customs of Babylon. 
One of them is that each woman of Babylon had to sit in the temple and offer 
herself to a stranger, who in return gave a monetary gift to the temple. We 
must not look upon this custom as something benefiting the strangers in 
the way it does the temple, but instead we have here a nature worship, the 
worship of Astarte, a religious feature. 47 A second feature concerns the same 
matter, in that maidens were married annually via an auction in which the 
fairest drew the highest bids and the unattractive and oldest ones were 
outfitted with that money. 48 We see no great respect for the woman in this 
practice, because her feelings play no part in the matter. It is not, howeve~ 
the general Oriental practice that the maiden have a voice in the choice of a 
husband; it is the practice only in Ewope. For what we see in it is a shared 
life, ethical equality, concern for everyone. Herodotus goes on to mention, as 
a third point, that a sick family member was set in the marketplace so rhat 
46. Mylina was a goddess at &abylon, linked to lsbtar aod associated with childbirth. 
Hcrocbus, _History ( 1.31; Greoe. p. 95) associate; her with Apbroditr. Her worship is linked 
ro the pracna Df temple prostitution described just below in our text. 
47. See Haodona. 1.199 (Grene, p. 124). Herodotus is critical of Ibis custom and says it is 
unf~ 
for homely w~ ~ 
a prr.inn ha.., to offer herself only once, and a homely 
woman ~ 
have to wait a loog lime before a stranger chooses bu. 
~8. Tbau as, the IDODC)' wau to tbosc mrn who would take the unattr:u:tive women as their 
WlftS. See Herodotus. 1.196 (<irene. pp. 122-3). 
318 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
the passersby were able to impan good advice to him.411 So this too bespeaks 
a shared life, a general sociability. 
We next have to mention the historical elements of the terrain on which 
we now find owselves. The most famous name is Ninus, the builder of the 
city of Ninevah and the savior of the Assyrian Empire, who is said to lu.ve 
lived 2,050 years before Christ.50 Here too I the legends are thus as ex:· 
251 
aggerated as they are elsewhere, for instance in China. The biblical tales of 
Nimrod as savior of the Babylonian Empire fall approximately in this same 
time period. 51 The story is that Nimrod subjugated Babylon, and then 
Bactria and Media to the north·east. Ccesias, a physician who was at the 
Persian coun during the time of Cyrus the Younger, furnishes these re· 
ports. 52 He speaks especially about a war of Ninus with Bactria that was a 
hard struggle for both sides. He gives special attention above aJI to the siege 
of Bactria, which was conquered by means of the counsel of Semiramis, 
the wife of a general. The locale indicated as 'Bactria' is not a good fit with 
the Balkh of today on the Amu Darya River, bur instead fits with Balkh· 
Bam ian; Semiramis is said to have assigned to irs conquest an infantry of one 
million, 700,000 men, a cavalry of 100,000 men, and 10,000 anned char-
iots. 53 Later on this Semiramis [allegedly] became the consort of Ninw, and 
subsequently was herself the sovereign;54 her story oscillates between myth· 
ological and historical features. Derceto, a fish-woman, a mythological 
figure, is reputedly her mother. 55 Ascribed to this Semiramis is in part tile 
construction of Babylon, in pan irs enlargement and selection as the main 
city, and construction of the temple of Bel. She caused to be installed three 
golden stames-of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva. 56 Ctesias himself claims to 
4~. See Herodorus, 1.197 {Grene, p. 123). 
50. See o. 43 above. The Oxford Classicol Dictionary puts the hlstorical ligures lying behind 
the ~nds o( Ninus and his quem Semiramis in tbe 9th cent. BC. 
51. SeeGcn.lO:Il-12. 
52. Ctesias, a Greek from Coidos, lived in the tare 5th and early 4th c:euts. BC, and was 
personal physician co Anaxerxe5 II. He authored Persia, a history of tbe Assyrian Empire aod 
the Persian Empire in 23 books, a historically unreliable source, as well as wOJks oo geography 
and on India. 
53. See Diodorus Sicutus, 2.4--5; Dwdorus Sicu/Ms. u, IL C. H. Oldfarl:aer (Loeb Oassical 
Library; Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1'33), 356-65. The ownbers Dioclorus ~(taken 
from Ctesias) are actually 210,000 cavalry aod 'sJjpdy less rbaa ten thousand sax hundred 
scythe-bearing chariots' (Oldfather, p • .363). 
54. Diodon.~s Siculus, 2.6 (Oldfather, pp. 365-71). 
JS. Diodorus Siculus, 2.4 (Oldfather:, pp. 3.51J-9). Diodoru~ says dJr: Syriam bare a goddc5.~ 
Derceto, with the head of a woman and the body of a fish, 
56. DiodorusSiculus gives an exta!Sive ao:oum ol cbe DeW city of Babylon ~ 
IIDder 
the direction of Semiramis (2.7--9; Oldfather, pp. 376-83). It includes thr ,pat :z!~~P~~at 
319 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
have seen a jupiter still there. But they probably have these names only from 
the Greek accounts. That is because the Greeks import their gods into all 
mythologies and, in doing so, deprive their depictions of part of their value. 
A1so recounted are further expeditions by Semiramis to Ethiopia, Egypt, and 
India. On the latter she suffered losses, although the king who defeated her 
was prevented from pursuing her beyond the Indus. 57 Her expeditions that 
252 
we hear about are like similar expeditions we read of by Dionysos I to 
India, as well as Dnes of Sesostris. 58 But it is to be assumed throughout that, 
if they do have some historical basis, these expeditions were quite unimpor-
tant. Should there be some historical basis to these narratives, it pertains to 
an age that still has nothing definitive about it, with the result that no 
[historical] progress is made by such expeditions. It is equally probable~ 
however, that these expeditions are only imaginary, are the unalloyed fic-
tions of Oriental nations. For it is typical of the Orientals, when they become 
acquainted. with foreign lands, that they enlarge upon the tales of their 
heroes and of events, commensurate with their wider acquaintance with 
new regions. We 6nd these phenomena everywhere. 
So Ninus and Semiramis are the principal figures at this rime. Ctesias and 
others provide lengthy and partly discrepant series of successive kin~ 
whereby the empire is said to have endured for 1,000 years, or even 1,300 
years. The main figure who emerges is Sardanapalus, whose downfall rook 
place in 820 BC. The previously subjugated provinces rebelled. Later on 
Sardanapa]us as such became a symbol, that of a wholly sensual prince. It 
was written about him that, a&er being besieged in Ninevah for three years, 
he burned himself to death on a pyre of wood, together with his whole 
family and bis treasures. 5' One feature that signifies the eastern nobility is in 
fact the Oriental inability to acknowledge oneself as being subordinate. 
(a temple dedicared to Bel= Zeus) wid! statues., be says, of :Uus, Hera, and Rhea (2.9.4-5~ 
Oldfatba; pp. 380-3). 
, 57· Di_odorus ~,tells of ber expeditions to Media, Egypt. and Ethiopia, and finally_ her 
war agamsuhe Indians (2.13-19; Oldfather, pp. 390-417). He says sbe built a pontOOO bridge 
to aoss the nvcr but lost tbe battle, having to ~ 
bad: to rbe other side. The Indian king. 
Sttobrubates, interpreted an omen to mean that be should not pursue her forces across the river . 
. ss. The~~ 
is to Dioo.}'5ius I (c.-430-367 Be). tyrant of Syucuse who, according to 
Diodorus Siculus (2.5.6; Oldfather, pp. 362-5). set out oo his campaigns with a comparably 
la.rgr ~Y~. 
surel~ not to India. Sesostti.s, a mythK:al king of Egypt, was said to have 
campaigaed widely JU. Africa and Asia (Diodonas Siculut., 1.53--8; Oldfathef, pp. 1B4-207; 5l:e 
also Herodotus, History 2. 102-11; Grene, pp. l72~l. 
59. Diodorus Siculus says that Sardanapalus 'was not sem by aov mao residing outSide the 
palace, be lmd 1be l* of a womaa' aod chat wbm fiDally besiqed ~ 
~ebel armies be set 6re to 
320 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
It is reported that, after the downfall of the Assyrian Empire, many 
independent states cropped up, ones now sustaining a more historical char-
acter. Media and Babylonia now come to the fore. Receiving special mention 
from this later Babylonian Empire is a I queen Nitocris, to whom in panic-
253 
ular are ascribed many works, including some said to have been completed 
by Semiramis. 60 In fact, in accord with Jewish accounts, people often feel 
inclined to asswne that there was a newly independent Assyrian Empire. 
Combining the diverse accounts of this and more ancient periods has been a 
perpetually attempted but fruitless endeavor; for the sources are in such a 
state that there can be no fundamental reconciliation of them. 
Sources for Persia and the Persian Empire 
The main sources we have are those of the Greeks. The foremost sources are 
Diodorus Siculus, Herodotus, and later, Cresias, the latter of which would 
have been created from the Greeks' own archives. There are discrepancies 
between Herodotus and Ctesias. A second kind of sowce consists of the 
sacred writings of the Jews; for the two [Hebrew) kingdoms stand in relation 
to the Assyrian Empire and the Babylonian Empire. 61 A third source consists 
of Persian legends and accounts, and of course later writers, and these are 
the most important ones. Especially famous is the epic poem of Firdawsi, the 
Shahnameh. The stories that he recites are compiled also by othecs in almost 
the same form. Firdawsi lived in the eleventh century, at the court of 
Mahmud, the Ghaznavid sultan; his poems have as their topic the ancient 
heroic sagas of Iran. Gorres provided an excerpt and endeavored to harmo-
nize it with the accounts by the Greeks. 61 Jt is nevertheless just a bit of flashy 
pyrotechnics that, upon closer examination, dissolves into smoke. 
With these heroic sagas we must take into account a circumstance like 
that of the other sources. The Greek accounts pertain to their closer neigh-
bor Media; the Jewish accounts pertain to Babylon. Firdawsi's sagas are said 
an enonnous pyre in the palace, burning up his coucubines, eunuchs. and tteasURS. as weU as 
himself and his entire palace (2.23-7; Oldladter, pp. 424-41). 
60. Herodotus says that Nitocris realigoed the Euphrates River, dug canals. .and created a 
lake, thus establishing for the ciry defenses against the Medes (1:185-7; Grme, PP· !1~181. 
61. According to the Bible, in 922 BC, after King Solomon's mgD. abe ~brews split mto two 
kingdoms. The nonhero kingdom, Israel, la.ste<l until ~ 
1-2, when 11 was cuaq= sS:: 
•ru:orporated into the Assyrian Empire. The southern kingdoiP. Judah, eodiii'Cd 
' 
when it was conquered by the Babylonians. 
. 
kingdom canem1 in 
62. On the Gorres edn., see n. 10 above. ~ 
was a MusliJn 
M.Iunud naJed 
AfgbanistaQ that at its height extended from the ligns to tht GaaFs- SukaP 
~97-1030. 
321 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
254 
ro concern the history of Persia as such, I but his field of action seems co 
involve a different sphere than those of the other accounts. One must take 
into consideration that he was after all a Muslim and by no means simply a 
Persian. He speaks only in faint echoes about the ancient religion of the 
heroes. The soul of the people no longer lives in him. The main contrast for 
him is that of Iran, the high plateau, with Turan, the land to the north of the 
Amu Darya and extending to the Caspian Sea. This area is his chief concern. 
It may be that either the events and deeds that he narrates actually took place 
there, or else that the region was the only one familiar to him, in which 
case this area alone was in his purview. He came east from Media, from the 
mountain range that descends to the valley of the Amu Darya, from Khor-
asan. The Ghaznavids were rulers of Khorasan, of the land of Kor, a people 
who waged war with the Twanians. Their sultan conducted campaigns to 
that region. For Ficdawsi's imagination, and for the dynasty under whkh he 
lived, this acc:a is of the greatest importance, and that is why he could have 
given it as the locale of his narratives. Johannes von Mii.ller too labored with 
these sagas and sought to impose a rigorous chronology on them, although 
fruitlessly aod unsuccessfully, which also is explicable from the foregoing 
circumstances. 63 
The manner in which Firdawsi and the Orientals treat history, however., 
can be seen in the histories that we know from elsewhere. In India no trace of 
Alexander the Great is to be found. And yet, for instance, Alexander is 
renowned far and wide in the Near East as 'Skander'. We see~ then, how 
255 
capriciously history I itself is dealt with. Thus Firdawsi tells how one of the 
princes of Iran waged war with Philip of Rum, overcoming him and forcing 
him to pay tribute. Ths Iranian prince then married a daughter of Philip. bur 
sent her away because she had bad breath. She subsequently bore Skander by 
him as fatheL So Alexander was said to be the ancestor of a Persian prince. 64 
The depiction of the deeds of Skander is similarly quixotic. 
The Medes and the Chaldeans 
The people who come to our attention now are the Medes. Their land is 
partly to the south of the Caspian Sea, partly southwesterly from it, on the 
63. See Miillcr's 'Versuch iiber die :Uitredumog der Vorwelt' in h.is satntlicbe Werke, viii 
flU~ 1810), 195-ZJO. 
' 
64. This episode is found on p. 255 of the Gorres edn. of t:M Shahttameh, 011 which see n. 10 
above. R~ 
01: Rwnelia, was a ngion of the early Ottoman Empire thar extended over 
~ 
~ 
Tbrac:e. So this is appateudy a garbled version (by Firdawsif of Philip D ot 
~~the 
father of~ 
The story Sftm5 to make Alexander taR descendant of a 
Peman ~ 
aDd yet our lEXI says 'ancestor' (Aim I. 
322 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
mountain heights that descend toward the Caspian Sea and toward the 
Tigris. In ancient times we see them in strife and at war with the Armenians, 
Syrians, and Bactrians, the people of Sardis, and the inhabitants of the plains 
to the nonh of the Amu Darya who are otherwise known as Turanians.65 
The Medes include the Magi. Their chief city is indicated as being Ecbatana, 
in the region of what is today Hamadan. They are mentioned in part with 
respect to Arbaces, who led the revolt against Sardanapalus, in part by 
Herodotus in relation to Deioces, who was the first to get the Medes to 
build citie~ to create laws, and to choose kings just as he too had been 
chosen. 66 The main thing that we see in the case of the Medes is that, for 
them as a mountain people, the era of their cultivation comes later than in 
the case of the Bactrians and the Babylonians. These Medes, a mountain 
people, are an imponant people. 
What emerges on the other side [of the cegion] is the Chaldean-Babylo-
nian Empire, the empire of the Chaldeans in union with the Babylonians. I 
256 
The Chaldeans appear to be a mountain people insofar as they remain to 
some extent in their mountains, and appear partly as the dominant people in 
Babylonia. In the Cyropaedia, Tigranes describes them to Cyrus as a moun-
tain people, whereupon he enters into relations wich them and makes them 
allies.67 ln this Chaldean Babylonia we become acquainted, principally via 
the jews, with a highly developed situation. Daniel himself was a governor 
in Babylon, and the regulations that he instituted are evidence of an eJCten-
sive commercial organization. 68 We even find multiple classes of the Magi, 
some as interpreters of scriptures or hieroglyphs, others as astrologers and 
prophesiers, just as the Chaldeans in turn fonn a particular class of prophe-
siers. This empire had gained renown at this time because of its commerce, 
its law enforcement, and its observations of the stars. Without a doubt they 
have no greater astronomical infonnation with all this than one can obtain 
from long and careful observation. The calendar of Nabonassa.r, the first 
65. Sardes, or Sardis, was the capitol of Lydia, io western Asiao Minor. Twm was the 1W1K 
for a vast region in north central Asia. 
. 
66. Herodotus has a fuller version of the :KCOtDplislunenls of Drioczs, the first .kio8 of lhr 
Medes (1.96-101; Grene, pp. 79-811. See DiodoiUS Siculus. 2.23-7 CO!dfalher. pp. 424-fl l for 
the full account of Arbaces' revolt. 
. 
. 
. 
boln w 
67. Xenophon's Cyropaedia is a fictional but historically based work m 8 books. a 
. 
lifl' and accomplishments of the Persian king. Cyrus the Gmt, who ruled c.S5~Sl~ IIC.It JSII:r. 
by Walter Miller (Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1914), as vols. S and 6 ol dlt 7 1..oeb 
Cbss.icall..ibrary vols. of Xeoophon's works. 
68. See the biblical book of Dmiel 2: 48-9. 
323 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
king, is renowned. 69 But the supposition is that it was certainly not in use by 
the people, and only later was it placed at the disposal of the historiographer. 
In any event this is a principal empire of the Near Eastern culture. 
The Founding of the Persian Empire by Cyrus 
Now, having examined the elements of the Persian Empire, we must consider 
how Cyrus consolidated it. The founding of the Persian Empire took place 
through Cyrus~ a Persian from the house of the Achaemenids of Persia and 
one related to the Median royal line. 70 We do not know the eastern bound· 
aries of this empire. There is even a king of Susa who regards himself as 
aUied with the Babylonians. 71 
The first thing Cyrus did was to become ruler of the Median Empire. 
According to Herodotus, the king of Media whom he subdued was his own 
grandfather. 72 I Like the Persians, the Medes were a mountain people and 
at that time were still unre6ned, little advanced in culture. We find very 
harsh features in the story of Astyages. For instance~ he had in his service 
Scythians who~ upon locating no wild game, slaughtered the hunter's sons 
and gave their flesh to Astyages the king. 73 1n a different story, the king had 
the son of Harpagus slaughtered and served to his father, because Harpagus 
had spared Cyrus. Enraged at this, Harpagus handed the anny over to 
conquest by Cyrus. 74 So we encounter harsh features of this sort. 
69. Nabupc:tlassar (his oame iD Greek) was king of Babylon 626-605 BC, the first ruler of 
ClWde:a.n liocage, and founder of the Neo-Babyloniao Empire. His Babylonian name is Nabu· 
apb.-usm 
70. Xeoophon mcntiom (1.2.1; Milltt, i. 8-11) that the father of Cyrus was Cambyses, a 
Persian, and his mctber was Mandane, a Mede. 
71. A«onniog to Xeo.opbon (5.1.2; Miller. ii. 2-S) Abradatas of Susa was allied with the king 
ol As5yria, aud was his emissary in relations with Bactria. Susa lay east of Babylonia and south· 
east of Assyria. 
72. Herodotus (1.75, 127-30; Greoe, pp. 67, 93-4} says mat the forces of Astyages. the 
grandfather of Cyns, were under the command of Harpagus, who allowed some of them to 
d£sert becawe of a dreadful thiDg Astyages bad dooe to him in me past, and so the army of 
Cyrus was victorious. "The full story is io Herodotus (1.107-30; Grene, pp. 83-95). Hegel 
recouots demeum of it just below iu our kXI. 
73. This _storr is in Herodotus (1.73; Grene, pp. 66--7) when:, contrary to Hegel's aa:ount, 
~ 
Sqtbians ~in 
the servi~ of Cyaxarn., king of Media. They were angry at hiiD, and s.o 
-~ 
a boy be bad appreruiced to them (DOt the bUIIter's own sons), wbom they served 
llllbdmowllSt .ro the court of Alyanes. king of Lydia, wbere Cyaxa.res was dining. 
74· Accordiog to 1-krodocus. Maodaoe, the daugbfCT of .Astyages. gave birth to Cyrus. Ill 
respoose tO a dream. Astyap:s sought to have the iufaot killed, and gave the task to Harpa.gus. 
~ 
~buatd a herdsmaD to expose baby Cyrus to die io tbe forest. Instead the herdsman aod 
~ 
'llrik ~Y ~ 
~ 
Yean later, when Astyap:s discowred this, be deceived 1-WpapS 
DO llllWittiogt, Cdllll his 0WD SOil as punishmem for his failwt 1:o any out the order. 
324 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
The second conquest by Cyrus was the victory over Croesus. Herodotus 
says Croesus was defeated because Astyages, whose kingdom extended to 
the Halys River, had married a sister of Croesus and for that reason Croesus 
hastened to him for assistance. Previously Croesus had waged war against 
the Medes and, after a five-year struggle, had concluded a truce the ~ondi­
rion of which was this marriage, mediated by a king of Babylon. And so we 
see a diplomatic connection between these kingdoms. We can pass ovec 
the story of the war. Cyrus conquered Sardis, and from that point on the 
Persians became wealthy, in light of the abundant goods there. 75 The Per-
sians are said in this way to have become acquainted for the first time with 
the finer things of life. Cyrus then straightway subjugated the coasts of Asia 
Minor to himself and conquered the multitude of Greek colonial city-states. 
Bias is said to have advised these Ionic Greeks to take to their ships in order 
to seek a new 1 homeland. But they did not prove sufficiently courageous to 
258 
leave the land of their birth. 76 lhrough this conquest the Persians came into 
contact with the Greeks. 
The third war of Cyrus was the conquest of the Babylonians and Syrians, 
right up to the Mediterranean. The last one was Cyrus' battle against the 
.Massagetae, a Scythian people beyond the Amu Darya, in a region that 
the Persian tales call Turan. Herodotus states that Cyrus was killed here. 
He says, in addition, that rhe Massagetae have gold and copper but do not 
possess silver and iron.77 In rhe prehistoric graves beside the Balri~ Sea only 
copper is found but no iron, just like with the Massagetae. Cyrus died in 
battle with the Massagetae. So he died pursuing his calling, which had no 
broader aim than the uniting of the Near East under one rule. His accom· 
plishment was the uniting of Near Eastern peoples throughout the West 
[of this region]. This unification had no further politicaJ or religious 
significance. 
Again years later is when Harpagus got his revenge. See Herodotus, History 1.119 and 1.127-8 
( Grene, pp. !19-90, 9.3--4) for these acts of retaliation. 
75. See Herodotus, History 1.73-91 (Great, pp. 66-77), for the full accounr of Croesus' 
defeat and submission to Cyrus. The last sentenCe refers to the fabulous wealth Croesus had 
accumulated at Sardis (see 1.30; Grene, p. 45). 
. 
. 
76. Herodotus (1.70; Grene, p. 110) says that Bias of Priene (an IODWI oryj, W~ was 
regarded as one of the 'Seven Sages of Greece', advised that •r aU migrate to Sardinia and 
set up a single colony there. 
. 
. 
n. He says \1.214; Grene, pp. 129-30) that most of dtt PeJSian anny, iacl~ C::yrus 
bUnself, were &tilled in the decisive battle ending this ill-fared campaign. Herodotus diiOaguisbe$ 
the Massagerae &om the Scytbians. although c:he twO are similar peoples. and stalES that dlt 
Massager.ae Jack silver and brooze (1.215; G.me, P· 130). 
325 

259 
260 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Features of the Persian Empire 
So we have to highlight the features of this Persian Empire. It is not so much 
a single shape as it is a tying of so many national groups together into one 
bundle; it is a unique entity, a kind of free union of peoples, thus reftecting in 
a single focal point the glory of all of them. There is no political whole of 
comparable customs and laws; instead the many peoples stick to their 
characteristic individuality. All of them retained their own characteristic 
features and they were not fused into one whole. The greatness of this 
empire is the very fact that each part is allowed its own characteristic 
shape-as, for instance, the jews were to.r---and that these peoples simply 
array themselves (sich konzentrieren) around a single point. Cyrus allowed 
the Jews to reconstitute their own folkways, and this allowance for individ-
uality is one of the great features of Cyrus. Princes remain in part rulers of 
their own I tribes; surely the magnanimity of Cyrus broadened the empire's 
domain. We can take a brief look at the characteristics of these many 
peoples. 
We see, however, that the Jews and the other peoples are caught up in 
inflexible individualityt incapable of uniting under universal thoughts and 
laws, for each people has its own wholly determinate nature, yet in such a 
way that they do not stand in isolation but instead enter into the most 
manifold relationships that lead to hostility, that are mutually irreconcilable, 
such that only the iron rule of the Persians can hold them together and 
forcibly prevent lhem from carrying on in an outwardly hostile way. In the 
prophets of the Jews we read the lamentations about the quanels between 
the two kingdoms of Judah and Israel, and those with the Egyptians and 
others; so we can easily conceive how the prophets could have arrived at 
such hatred of foreign peoples. From this we learn how beneficial for the 
Near East was the consolidation that came about through Cyrus. Later on. 
in place of this iron rule, we see entering on the scene the fanaticism of the 
religion of Islam that brought about the complete opposite, the utter demo-
lition of all reciprocal individuality. The Romans and the Greeks, as foreign 
powers, ruled directly over these peoples. But Islamic fanaticism emerged 
from the Near East itself, destroying every individuality of these peoples, 
wiping out all differences, as a principle in which all are equal but at the 
same time one evidendy incapable of forming a political relationship. The 
only rational relationship of the Near East therefore was one in which I an 
iron rule coerced these peoples into not bringing themselves to ruin. 
As for the more specific features of Persian rule, we thus see the Persians 
as being an uncultured mountain people. The Persians are only th.e core thar 
326 

THE ORIENTAl WORLD: PERSIA 
exercises rule over the other peoples who differ from it, a core that does not 
blend in with them but instead reserves for itself the ruling power. While 
making their way down into the valleys, the Persians still stand with only 
one foot in the valley and the other foot on their mountains, just as today the 
Manchus do of course still rule in China but also stand back and perpetuall}· 
remain a panicular warrior people, and the (Manchu] emperor annually 
lives for a time outside the wall in tents with his horsemen, devoted ro the 
hunt for wild animals. It is like this too in India, where the English govern 
but have their roots elsewhere, in order to reinvigorate themselves and nor 
lower themselves to the Indian principle, so that they do not descend to the 
principle of the subject people. Thus the Persians endeavored for a long rime 
to maintain themselves in this characteristic status, although they have nor 
sustained it. With the Persians we see independence, gallantry, freedom~ a 
cenain boldness and greamess-a customary disposition, which can onJy 
exist together with a savagery that gives way when particular factors in life 
intervene, so that in the face of greater diversity it dissolves into hannless 
mildness. The Persians therefore sought to mainrain themselves in this 
characteristic way. Their 'political constitution' was a simple way of con-
necting so many distinctly different peoples. 
The Persian prince was surrounded by his nobles and was educated by 
the Magi; the Greeks called him 'the Great King'; he stood at the apex of the 
empire, was cultured, and was educated in the sciences. In his early years I 
261 
raised by eunuchs, he was introduced to military activities and from the ages 
of 7 to 17 was trained in all physical skills. Then he received fow teacbe~ 
one of which, the uwf,Ot;, instructed him in the teachings of Zoroaster. 
78 We 
did state beforehand that the civic and religious laws of me Zend books 
could not endure with a cultivated world-people. Gathered around the 
prince we see the nobles of the empire, mostly Persians. We see traces of 
'the empire of light' reflected in their administration. Foe, just as the 
Zend people revered seven Amschaspands [Amesa Spentas), so we read 
78. The Greek sophos ('wiS('' ). which is surely intended hete, does not occur with an omega in 
place of the omicron (as it does in our text) in the standard references: dw ThtS4IIriiS Gru~ 
LinguM of Stephanus, and the Greek dictionary of Lidckll and Sc~. "Then: ~DO Greek 
111 dUs 
passage in tbe second edition of Hegel's Werke. So the omega JS most likely an error 
10 
typesetting or in transcription. Xenophon is heavily iPflueoad by Socratic ~pby, as see_n 
In various of his works; so his Cyropaedia presents the tutelage of Cyrus .as mrol~ ~~ 
elements /L2.6-7 31-4· Mill .... pp. 14-15 116-191. But there is no explicit meotiOD of lour 
• 
• 
~.. 
' 
and 
india . 
that dar VOUIII; 
teachers of Cyrus there, no designation of any one as s<JfJbos, 
no 
11011 _ 
· bit 
Cyrus was insmrcted in the teachings of Zoroasrrr. AU refc-edl%5 to dx Magi come 5U 
-
quendy in this work and apply to later in tbe life of Cyrus. 
327 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
often of the number seven when the Persians speak of the nobles and 
magistrates of the empire in such a way that the prince is compared to 
Onnazd. But there is no historical proof for a specific elaboration of this 
representation. 
Historically the Persian nobles exhibit a patriotic attitude in which main-
tenance of the empire was a higher interest than selfishness and one's own 
interest. The intrigues occw more often among princes of the royal line. 
After the death of Cambyses, the Magi seized the power of the throne and 
ruled for some time. The nobles of the empire united, howevet; in order to 
install the Achaemenids on the throne and maintain the dynasty of the 
Persians. 79 Their concern was the thought of the empire and its mainten· 
ance. Following the expulsion of the Magi we see, as HerodotuS depicts it, 
an impassioned deliberation among the nobles as to which constitution 
would be best for the empire, one in which no one is out for himself. 
262 
Subsequendy I they settled on a monarchical constimrion, and the decision 
as to who ought to be king was determined by whose horse would be the 
first to neigh at the rising sun.80 We see in these nobles, some 1,500 strong, 
the leaders of the army. For their maintenance and that of the king, the 
provinces paid a tribute, with each satrapy providing for four months.
81 
Xenopbon recounts that at a festival the king. at the head of all the cavalry, 
was escorted from the royal city. 82 Xenophon impans many things, such as 
that Cyrus gave to his army a constitution, caUing for complete discipline 
and strict obedience.83 Xenophon's Cyropaedia is of course a work of 
fiction, although its general features are cenainly accurate. The subject 
populations were ruled via satrapies, and this rule seems to have been 
79. Cambysc:s ~ tbe Persian king who ruled 52~522 Be, w=-s tht soo. of Cyrus tbe Gnat-
Herodotus tells of Cambyses' descent into insanity, and of how the Magi conspired to install and 
comrol ~s suc.c:essor (3.27-38, 61-79; Grene. pp. 222-8, 238-47), although the plot was foiled 
md Darius was chosen as king by the Persian leaders. 
80. Her~ 
tells of this deliberatioo and the ensuing events (3.80-8; Grene, pp. 247-52). 
The account places vuious theories of government (monarchy, democracy, oligarchy) in the 
mouths of tbt participaots. Baclters of Darius allcgedly insured bis victory by using a favorite 
mare to i.odute his stallion to oeigb at dawn. 
81. It is nac dear why Hegel says this. According to Hcrodo~ (3.89-94; Grme, pp. 252~), 
me~ 
peoples were grouped iuto twenty sattapics or provinces, and each of the twenty was 
subica to an annual taxation or uihut.e. 
82. Xeoophon describes in detail the grand prooeuioa in wbicb Cyrus appeared in state in 
IH'der to command nsptct fur bis govel'll!DQt, and lbe eii5Uing {cstivaJ events ( 8.3 .1-34; MilJu. 
ii. 348-65). 
83. _Aa:ording to Xeuopboo (8.5.1-16; Miller, u. 39-4--403), Cyrus was a firm believer in 
orderliness, and so pvc stritt iustructioos both foe the layout of his eocampment and for me 
mctic:s of his soldiers ill battle. 
328 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
more of a general oversight, since all the peoples continued on in their own 
customary ways of life. 
The Persian prince was, in effect, lord over all property. Wherever he 
came, gifts were brought to him as signs that everything belongs to him and 
that these people have everything only by his favor. Within Persia proper,. 
however, the king distributed gifts. It is evident that under this rule many 
individuals had great riches. Each {people) had to bestow a specific thing on 
the king and on the satraps. Thus Xerxes demanded earth and water from 
the Greeks. 84 The provinces sent only the most valuable things as uibute-
the Arabians sent incense, Tyre sent purple dye, through intermediaries. 
Each province sent its most excellent products to the king. 
Thus we see the Persian Empire as a consolidation of many peoples, with 
Persia as their master. So we observe this multiplicity of peoples engaging 
in wars against the Greeks, I in its characteristic fashion not divided 
263 
into regiments but instead made up of nations, distinct in their ranks, 
attire, weapons, military discipline, and mode of behavioc. Their march 
was a kind of movement of peoples, and Herodotus even says about it that 
the warriors with whom they dwelt at home were those they also wished to 
be with in battle. 85 We see the Far East completely self-enclosed, whereas in 
Western Asia there is, on the contrary, the opening up or &agmentation into 
particular individualities. We see these individualities united for the first~ 
under the Persian Empire, in such a way that individuality does not come on 
the scene in hostile fashion. The Persian, the worshiper of the light, of purity, 
hovers tolerandy over the whole, free of animosity and hostile particularity. 
According to Herodotus' historical account of Darius Hystaspes in con· 
rrast to Cambyses, what emerges is that the Persians were conscious of this 
tolerance. Herodotus ind.icares that Darius Hystaspes had brought the In-
dians and the Greeks together. Darius asked the Greeks whether they wished 
to consume their deceased puents, upon whkb they distinctly recoiled in 
horror. He then turned to the Indians, asking whether they wished to 
cremate the dead, and when these people then recoiled from what was in 
84. l1le emissarie~> of Darius made this demand of King Amynw of~ 
(Herodonas.. 
5.17-18; Grene, pp. 362-3). Prior to a later invasion, Xerxes~~ similar~ of~ 
Greeks tor a symbolic offering of 'eanh and water' as a sign of subtaissioo by fort~ (~ 
differs from the tributes paid by the sattapies for Sllpport of the monarchy) but If paniaUy 
backfired, and so he did not .maJc::e this demand oi AdJem and Sparta (Herodocus, 7.131-3; 
Greoe, PP- 511-12). 
85. Herodotus describes in considerable detail these featurtS of the VarKM ~ 
a.ud. navy 
units, ananged in oalionalities, as they passed in review bdorr Xerxa prior" 10 his IPvaoD ol 
~ 
(7.59-lOO;Grene, pp. 491-5011. 

THE lECTURES OF 1822-3 
fact the usual practice among the others, he expressed the view that each 
people must stick to its own customs.86 We cannot now enumerate the 
whole series of particular features. A few of them are to be highlighted, 
with their elements showing that they bring to fruition a condition we can 
say is more humane. 
First of all we have in mind especially these elements on the coast of Syria, 
264 
and aher that, as our fourth major topic, we pass over then to Egypt. I The 
Syrian elements are Phoenician conunerce, the religion of Astarte and of 
Adonis~ and the religion of the jews. 
Phoenicia 
Phoenician87 commerce had its locus on the Phoenician coast, a narrow strip 
in some places only two bows travel time in width, bordered behind it ro 
the east by Mount Lebanon, which protected it from the interior, from the 
continent. Along this coastal strip arose a series of cities--T yre and others-
in which there emerged commerce in its distinctive and particular form; this 
commerce was indeed an isolated feature and not just an element of the 
whole, of the state; instead it existed abstractly for its own sake. We see this 
commerce in part reaching into the interior of the land, extending itself 
[OWard the interior even as far as the Red Sea, although it was carried out 
especially on the Mediterranean Sea. The Phoenicians proved to be very 
productive and resourceful, as is shown by their purple dye, their glass, and 
so forth. What is most outstanding and particularly noteworthy about them, 
however, is their wide-ranging and bold seafaring on the Mediterranean Sea 
and on the Atlantic Ocean to the north and south; they went to all areas of 
the Mediterranean, everywhere founding colonies such as Rhodes, Cyprus~ 
Tha~ and others. There were gold mines there. Furthermore, there were at 
the same time colonies in Sardinia and in Spain-at Malaga and Cadiz---that 
have their origins inTyre. Along the southern side, in Africa, they founded 
Utica, Carthage, and so forth. From Cadiz they naviga[ed the Atlantic 
Ocean and far south down the African coast; indeed they circumnavigated 
Africa via the Arabian Sea. Farther to the north they sailed to the British 
86. 1hls aaccdot:e is in Herodotus, 3.38 (Grene, p. 128). The Indians in (juesOOD an: an 
atypkal group. die 'Cal.latians'. who <accm:diog to Herodotus) consume tbe ad. Most Indians 
of COUI"l;e do in faa practice cremation. 
87. Aocicot Phoenicia lay on a strip of ,oa.st~.i.J.e iu tbe eastern Mtd.ittrranean from 
~b. \.armel northward, approximating to tM modem countrY of Lebanon and the coa.~ 
portion of Syria. A Semitic people, dae Pboeniciaos an crcdi~ with tbe invention o{ tbe 
alphabet. as weD as witb the seafariog. colooizi.ng, and c:ommcrciaJ ventures IDmtiooed by 
Hegel. 
330 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
Isles, where in Cornwall they traded in tin, I and in magnificent amber from 
265 
the Baltic seacoast and from Holland. 
So we see a people that, by simply pursuing trade in its own fashion, is at 
these times a world-discovering people. Thus we see here a progression not 
previously apparent in Asia, one in which human beings, self·reliant in face 
of nature, become masters over nature, mastering its most savage power, the 
sea, whereas in Central Asia people worshiped nature as power over them. 
Here, however, they deliver themselves from nature, seek to guard against it, 
overcoming it. So here emerges an element incompatible with the natwe 
worship of Asia-an emancipation from this power. Human beings who 
undertake such a risk extricate themselves from the many petty, scrupulous, 
formal, and obscure fonns of worship. The spiritual existence and awaken· 
ing self-confidence of human beings turn them away from thls dependence~ 
from petty ceremonies. So this is one difference from what existed 
heretofore. 
The Religion of Astarte and Adonis 
A second element is a religious difference. Along this coast nature was wor-
shiped as a universal factor under the names of Astarte, Cybele, and others. 
This divine service is in one sense still very much sensual and licentious~ 
albeit not lifeless and cold like the worship of the Hindus, but instead 
enthusiastic and spirited in its celebration. Human beings have value for 
the Hindus only when they achieve a higher state beyond consciousness 
through the death of spirit, being devoid of consciousness or devoid of the 
natural state (Natwlosigkeit). Here in this religion, howe'l'er, we see 
emerging the element of spiritual lnfusion (Begeisterung); doubtless it even 
goes so far as the licentiousness that can be called orgiastic. In contrast to the 
Hindus~ however~ J there was in it an elevation to a higher state, one beyond 
266 
enmity, beyond finitude, coupled with a sustaining of the sense of self, one 
that still maintained self-consciousness. 
In this context we have to touch upon the worship of Adonis at Byblos., 
which accords with that of Cybele or that of Apis. The worship of Adonis 
consists of two pans. The first element is the observance of the death of 
Adonis and the second is his rediscovery. The first is a sorrowful festival in 
which the women mourn for the dead lord, for the dead god, and fall into the 
most extra'l'agant laments. This is a feature aJso found in I'Juygia and even 
more so in Egypt, and it is alien to the Oriental spirit. In India~ Hind~ 
torture themselves without lamenting, women plunge into the Ganges m 
similar fashion, and wives immolate themselves without painful suffering 
331 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
(schmerzlos);88 the Hindus are ingenious in tonures, and all this takes place 
without suffering, without lamenting and with indifference to doing so. The 
elevation consists in the heroism of impassivity. 
What lamentation entails is that the negative ought not to be. For the 
Hindus lamentation would have the opposite sense, because there the nega-
tive is supposed to be. But on the Syrian coast, in Phrygia, for the Phoeni· 
cians, and in Egypt, suHering is respected, is allowed. Here human suffering 
is expressly honored. Here the profoundest suffering is what is most palpa-
ble. In experiencing suffering, human beings discover themselves; they dis-
cover their bliss, their particularity, their 'thisness', their actuality, and this 
discovery here allows them to know themselves as being 'this one', here and 
now. lhis is what is human. Suffering is the discovery of the negative. But at 
the same rime suffering contains the infinite affinnarion; it is not the sheerly 
abstract negative but is instead at the same time the sense of self, the positive 
2IfT 
factor I that is related to this negative factor:. So here we see human feeling 
come on the scene. 89 
The Jewish Religion 
The third topic to touch on is the phenomenon of the Jewish religion, 
the principle of which is stiU singularized here, is still one-sided. It is the 
principle that God is not a being of nature, not what is visible ol' sensible; 
the principle here is the grasping of actual being as thought. 
The God of rhe Jews exists only for thought; here the light of the Persians 
has blossomed into thought, is completely spiritua~ but still abstractly 
88. The Germaa Sc.lnMrr. a.n <mer the raogc ot the Eoglish words 'pain', 'suffering', 
'aoguisb', 'sorrow', ud 'grief>. The Syrian worship of Astarte et aJ. involved both physical 
paiD (sometimes self·inflicted), and anguish~ grid at the (taoporary but real) demise of thr 
deity. All these tmse$ can play a role in '5Uffmng". Htgd's point about the Hirwlus is oot tbar 
they fEel DO physical pain (for they surely do), but rather that ia their worldview pain aod 
Sllffaiac have oo iDtriD.sic 5iplifirance; they~ SOIDethiJig to be endured, .igiKmd, aod uans· 
andcd. Io cuntru, for tbe Syrian and the eosuiog Watftu religion. suffcring in these variom 
5e~~ses is DOt to be devalued or ignored, but instead affinned as an essential (albeit ultimately ro 
bt overcoDJ£) danmr of baman e.xpeaieDLC, and i.odeed of die deity's experieoce roo. As liepl 
statn, Sdmren is essential to die blossc-ning oi a pttSOO'i self-affinnatioo as spirit. 
89. In thE philosophy of religion lecues Hegel gives fuller attentioo to this 'qrpe' of religioo 
that be discovers in (oc perllaps CODStiUCtS from) tbe aDcient myths eooteming Adonis, the 
phoenix, and ocher Near Easlnn belie& aod praa:ias. l"Mre this 'religioo of mguish' (the label 
~ gives it by 1831) is secu as a trausitioD away from Persiau and jewish qoa and rowanl a 
perspective in whic::b sdf~OQScious individual spirit clearly emerges as ~ 
in tbr specude 
of~ ~ 
responses-to, the God who overcomes me mgative by driat!; and rising apin. "'fbett his 
pllDClpal soaru IS Creum; SymboliJt. Sec ~ 
011 lb.! Pbilosopby of Religioll 40xford 
2007), ii. 452-5, 457, aad 743 II. 71. 
332 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: PERSIA 
so. One can wish to 'recollect' (wiedererkennen)90 the principle of thought 
in this world soul of the Hindus or in that .Brahman into which the Hindus 
transpose themselves. But we have noted that, as what is first, Brahman i.s 
only the ex:istent material foundation. The content is not thought itself~ but 
is instead the universally existent substantiality, the universal being of 
nature. The Brahman toward which the Hindus elevate themselves is nor 
worshiped by them, but instead is the Hindu's own self, drawn together into 
an empty intuiting. So if Hindus were to revere .Brahman they would be 
worshiping themselves, for to them this elevation to abstraction is Brahman. 
In the Jewish religion, however, pure thought, the way in which God is 
grasped--although essentially objectively-is in its purity the object of 
hwnan worship, is their God, and thus human beings have a relationship 
to this object; they relate themselves positively to it and maintain themselves 
within it, whereas in contrast the Hindus, in relating themselves to thought, 
surrender themselves in their submersion and render themselves empry. 
So the moment of the overturning of the Oriental principle conunences ar 
this point, the moment of the changeover from narure to spirit. Oriental 
people say that nature is the foundation, is what is first and eternal, and they 
proceed from nature to anything further: But here and now, conversely with 
the jews, we see the spiritual as the foundation for the first time. I However, 
288 
this religion has not yet given universality to its principle, that of spirituality. 
It is not yet free thought, but is instead bound up with locality. It is pure, 
abstract thought, and not yet concrete thought; for apart from its absttac· 
tion it is, moreover, just the God of the jewish people alone. 
What we see in these three elements is the elevation of the human being 
above nature, above the employment of the elements of oarure for their own 
sake; it is the fact that pure thought as what is abstract is acknowledged, and 
suffering retains its element of validity. These are the elementS of a new seH-
consc:iousness, which poses for human beings a new and different problem 
for them to solve. We have to examine Egypt, as the (first] land to which is 
relegated the carrying out of this task.91 
90. Hegel sometimes uses wiednerlt.ennen io speakiugol Plato's theory ot~ 
as a~ 
of 
:tttollettion'. Perhaps be is suggesting here that people !iftk lO ·~ 
~ ~ t 
Imagery 'rhought as completely spiritualized' -although he does not chink It 15 to be 
there. 
91. Alternatively, 'tbe solution to this problem' (diest ~ 
Dl ~~. ~ 
lhe llldl: 
section begins by staring that Egypt poses tbe 'eni~' (R.itull but does DOt solw JL 
333 

269 
EGYPT 
The answer (Losung) to this task or problem, however, seems rather to be 
that, in the individuality of the Egyptian people, the enigma (das Ratsel) is 
apparently posed and not solved.1 Egypt confronts our soul at the outset 
with the image of the sphi~ similar to how dragons, centaurs, and giants 
generaUy call to mind the East; distorted shapes are as such the rule in the 
Orient. The symbol of Egypt, however, is the sphinx, this twofold figure~ half 
animal and half human, and indeed female. It symbolizes the human spirit 
that tears itself away from the animal domain, that frees itself from the 
animal and casts its gaze about but has not yet completely grasped itself .. is 
not yet free, does not yet stand on its own two feet. 
The Land of Enigmatic Marvels 
Thus grand edifices of Egypt like the labyrinth, half above the eanh and 
half beneath it, divided the whole realm into the land of the living I and that 
of the dead, dedicated to Amenti. 2 Standing upright there is the Pillar of 
Memnon; the light of dawn falls upon this structure and causes it to resound. 
Memnon resounds in the bright dawn.3 But what sounds from it is not yet 
1. In (;Oocluding the preceding discussion of Persia, Hegel said that the Oriental principle is to 
~overturned by a shift in focus from nature to spirit. Egypt has this shift as tbe usk or problem 
tA.Nfg4be) set for it. Egypt tackles the task but fails to accomplish it; it poses the problem but 
iails to solve it. Egypt strives mightily to liberate spirit from its natural or animal forms in 
Egyptian religioq and daily life, but fails to enable a new self-.:onsciousness to appear. As Hegel 
states below in ow t~ the animal images are 'as it were, helmets from wbich the human visage 
peers outward', altboogb spirit never (ully emexges self-coosciously from wm. The Egyptians 
mnai.n io. a coodition of lh(mrgenheit, a term Hegel uses ~uendy to characterize them. It 
oooveys the senses of both •being self-mdosed' and •la.cltiDg self-conscioiiSDCSS'. In what follows 
we somnimes ~ 
it as •setf~' and sometimes as 'u!UI!lfconscious'. The hieroglyphs 
aod the udlitecture that the Egyptians produced are truly impressive but remain an enigma 
(l.itsd) became they just sttive fot, but never attain, tbe starus of self-interpreting spiritual 
produ.aiom, oi spiritual consciousocss as self-awareness. (At the time of tm5e lectures Hegel 
was apparently uoaware, as his commeot below reveals, that in 1821 a beginning had bftn 
made at deciphering the Rosetta Swne.) The Egyptians did not rise aoove the sphere of private 
O£ panicu.lar purposes, and bad oo genuine sense of the infinity or immonality of the self or soul. 
Fo~ tb05e adv~ we must wait for the Greeks. 
2. On the kingdom of Amenti, the underworld. see ua-es on tht Philo5ophy of Religion 
!Oxford, 1007}, ii. 371, 627, 633 o., and 745. The Greek • Amentbes' is a Hel)eQization of an 
Egyptian tmn referring to 'the lord of the dead'. 'Mcnthe' or 'Minthe'. a Naiad. was mistress to 
Hades; w was trampled by Persephone, and became tm sweet-smeUing mint plant. The 
"labyrinth' to which Hegel Rfen is prohahly the funeral temple of Al1lt'l1mlhrt 01. 
3. Mc:moon was a mythica] bog of E&:hiopia. Then: a:re legeads of JUs journeys and deeds, and 
sites were dedicated to him at various places io. the Ncar East and Egypt. The colossi at Thebes 
weft hut,C statues of pharaoh Ameubotep 1B; Memnon was linked to them because their stones 
334 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
the free light of spirit, resonating from itself, for the language of Egypt is still 
hieroglyphic; it is not yet the word itself, not yet script. We understand it 
only when we grasp it as hieroglyphic, and the definitive character of Egypr 
is as such the sphinx, the hieroglyphics, the enigma. Egypt appears as, and 
remains, a land of marvels. 
Herodotus saw everything in Egypt, was acquainted with its priests, and 
Yet said nothing about its profound religious nature; to him the history of the 
enigma remained enigmatic. 4 Diodorus too visited Egypt, during the rime of 
Augustus. He offers us a great deal of infonnation about its religion;5 despite 
this knowledge, this opportunity to become informed, views about the 
Egyptian religion indeed opposed or contrary to his were to be found 
among the ancients. Recently, over the past twenty-five years, the Frtnch 
have brought the land to light and opened it up anew for us, and new 
descriptions are continually forthcoming. 6 But ever laclcing for us still is 
the key for going more deeply into the discoveries; this key is an Egyptian 
literary work, although we have no such thing. 
It seems to be a matter of chance, and yet it is in keeping with the 
Egyptian standpoint, that they have no book in rhe language; instead they 
onJy knew how to express themselves in part by hieroglyphics or in sculp-
tures, and also by works of architecture, [inasmuch as they) bad no signs 
of the kind that written languages do. The signs of spirit here are still in 
immediacy. The writers of history mention I no Egyptian Homer, no dra-
270 
matists. Although Herodotus and Diodorus were in Egypt,. they impart 
nothing about books. Even later, when the Hebrew Bible was translated in 
Alexandria at the behest of an Egyptian king, the Egyptians still stuck to 
Greek works; there was no mention of any written works in Egyptian. 
were said to •sing', or to emit sounds like those of a harp, when strUclt by the light of die risiog 
SUO. sounds believed to be his response to Eos. goddess of the dawn aM IUs~ 
4. See Herodotus, The History 2.3 (tr. David Grene (Chicago, 1987), 132), when: be says that 
he wiU meJltioo the names of the Egyptian gods (which be in some cases regards as count~ 
to Greek deities), but will not go into other aspects of Egyptian beliefs and pnctJCeS reg:udiog 
me divine. All of the second book of bis History, and the fust part of !he third book, ate drvocrd 
tO Egypt. 
5 · In the first book of bis Library of History, Diodorus Siculus discusses a own~ of F.gypt:im 
religious topK:s. See Diodorus of Sidly, i, tr. C. H. Oldfather (Loeb Classicall:ibraty; Cam-
bridge, Mass., and London. 1933). These topk:s include the origins of the 11111vme (1.6-7; 
Oldfather. pp. 22-9), sacred animaJs (1.8~90; Oldfatbet; pp. 282-JOS),and cUStotnS involvq; 
the dead ( 1.91-3; Oldfather. pp. 305-19). 
. 
. 
6. T'be French research to which Hegel refer!~ i~ pre!le!lted in: .Jean-f~(ll~ Ownpnllioo.. 
L'EDf.!te sous Jes Phar«ms (Paris, 1814). Olampollioo was a major .6guce Ul rk scudy of 
hieroglyphics. Later than these lcaun!S, in 1825, 1u: deJDt)II.StrllCCd &om the Rosetta ScoPe that 
$IOOJe bier<Jglyphics have a pbonetic character. 
335 

271 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Ptolemy did commission Manetho, a priest, to write an Egyptian history, 
and it did come to fruition as Egyptian writing; but it is no more than lists, 
and seems not to have been something capable of serving as a national 
work/ So there are no works in their own language, ones in which their 
spirit expresses itself, but only books in foreign languages. Therefore we 
must draw conclusions about their life from the reports of foreigners and 
from the mute works of architecture. 
Egyptian History 
As for the principal historical elements, we have to mention Egypt's relation 
to the Persian Empire. Cambyses, not Cyrus, made the Egyptians into his 
subjects. We can describe what occasioned the conquest by following the 
account given by Herodotus. 8 As Herodotus tells it, Cambyses demanded to 
have the daughter of Amasis as his wife; he did so on the urging of an 
Egyptian eye doctor. (Eye diseases are commonplace in Egypt.) This doctor 
had prompted him to make the demand because the doctor sought revenge 
for the fact that Amasis had dispatched him to Cyrus {king of Persia and 
father of Cambyses) in a foreign land. Being fearful, Amasis did I not want 
to refuse this demand and dared not fail to give his daughter to Cambyses. 
Yet he was concerned that Cambyses would make his daughter into a mere 
concubine. For that reason he sent the daughter of the former king that he 
himself had dethroned. We see this cunning to be a feature of the Egyptian 
king. When this maidm came to Cambyses she revealed the trick, and the 
enraged monacch declared war. In the meantime Amasis had died, and 
Cambyses engaged Psammenitusy the son of Amasis, in several batdes. In 
this context Herodotus tells of a few touching events. Cambyses com-
manded the very highly re6ned daughter of Psammenitus to perfonn acts 
of servitude, to fetch water, and at the same time he ordered several persons 
to observe the king. Psammenitus remained coolly unmoved in the course of 
aU this degradation, as well as about his own son being condemned to death 
7 · Mamtbo. who lived iD lhe lrd catL BC and was the high priest of Heliopolis. chronicled in 
Gftdt the thirty EQptiaa. dynasties up to 323 BC. }tis work has sunived Ollly in excerpts quoud 
by other aaciem authon. Hededicam:l bis history to Ptolemy ~ Philadelpbus (308-246 acl. It is 
doubtful that Ptoleaiy bitusdf COIIllllissaone the Sepbaagint, as tkgc.l sates ;ust above in our 
ten. 
8. lkr-odotus oarrata dlt failed deapaoa tbat Am.asis, IWtg of Egypt, ananpred apiosl 
Cambyses, the Pasim kins, and the casuiDg battles that acamtplished the Pttmn cooq.a oi 
Egypt lsee l.l-16; ~ 
PP. 211-18). tk Slates (3.2) that this is bow the Persians trll it; be 
memioDs lWO aJternati"R n:planaricJas for the Persian fiasioo (one of them the f.gypliaD 
Ya'Sioa), but he does DOt fiRd them aedihle. 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
by Cambyses. Ultimately, however, he burst into tears when he saw an 
elderly man, his father's friend, on the threshold of death. All this caught 
Cambyses' attention, and when he asked the king why it was so, his reply 
was that the misfonunes of his daughter and his son were too great or too 
hard to bear, and rendered him immobile, but that the latter and lesser 
misfortune moved him to human sympathy, to tears. So Cambyses directly 
sought to rescind or haft the execution of the son of Amasis, but it had 
already been carried out. Then Cambyses returned the daughter to the king, 
treated him and the daughter with respect, and would even have reinstated 
him I in the government had he not been a rebel. Cyrus treated Croesus in m 
similar fashion. 9 So Carnbyses would even have kept the Egyptian king by 
rus side, had he deserved it. These uaits are interesting as illustrative of the 
Persian character. 
We take up only the principal elements from the ancient history of Egypt. 
It is noteworthy !hat the ancient history of Egypt reaches very far back. We 
know that the priests assured HerodotUS that the Egyptians are the most 
ancient people, the first human beings. 10 An extremely communal life is 
historically probable. In any event, the first state found historicaJ expression 
in the upper Nile vaJiey; it is the first formation of a state. Thebes, on the 
upper river, is the most ancient site where a community life emerged. With 
the passage of time commerce shifted more ro central Egypt, so that Mem-
phis, where the Nile divides into separate branches, became the principal 
sire. Later the principal site shifted into the delta, at Sais. This transfer from 
the Upper Nile to the Lower Nile is therefore rhe first historical feature. In 
Roman times the principal site shifted again, to Hennopolis, where Hadrian 
founded Antinoopolis, as a memorial to Antinous. 
11 
A second feature of its history is that at times Egypt disintegrated inro a 
number of sovereign domains (..OJLot) and at times it was Wtified under one 
rule. Sesostris is said to have united all the provinces (Staatm} for the iinr 
9. See Herodotus, History 1.86-93 (Greoe, pp. 73-7). Cyrus 1101' ouJr spared Croesus. but 
also relied on h.im as his advise& 
10. See Herodotus, History2.2 ff. (Grme,pp.l31 ff.). Actually Herodotus bcgimbis~2. 
00 Egypt. considering whether Egypt is to be repnied as jdSt the delta area and tbe_ Mediara-
nean coast, or includes the land extending far up the Nik (he accepcs ~ 
lam:r ~). ID the 
wurse ol tbis discussion be citeS the priests of Hephaesoas in Memphis 15 ~ 
dut_ the 
Pbrygi.ans are aP older peopk but that the Egyptians \fti'C 8 first to iDw. or dcrise yanous 
rulturaJ eJemenn (2.2 and 4; Grene, p. 132). Later oo ,2.15; Grear, P· 137) br says: 'I bdine 
that the E.gyptiaDS •.• have bem ever since the race of IIWI was'· 
. 
cirowDed . 8 Nile 
11. Aotiaow;. a handsome youog man md favorite ol anpenx Hadriaa. 
. 
111 
in AD 130. Hadrian insisted chat be be deifcd, aad iP bis hoaor foaDded dJe pew atp' ....... a 
him. 
J37 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
rime, in 1400 Be; a second unification is ascribed to Psammetichus. 12 
Herodotus remarks about the earlier disintegration that the Egyptians had 
273 
nevertheless wished to maintain a common link, I which is why the labyrinth 
was built in central Egypt, in a westward valley of Egypt, on Lake Meroe.13 
A third principal feature is that we find princes or pharaohs early on, and 
a priesthood associated with them, with the two sometimes united or linked 
and at other times separate or distinct. 
Today a popular representation of priestly states or priestly colonies is 
one in which the cardinals are at the same time generals, and so forth. This is 
an inane representation. Historically, there is most certainly a priesthood in 
Egypt, but one in addition to the ruler. That is because an actual state 
essentially is always at the same time a worldly state; spiritual and princely 
occupations are different and must be kept distinct. An individual can be 
both, but the roles are conceprually separate. 
So we see, historically, that the priesthoods and princes in Egypt are 
often united or linked within the state, but sometimes too they are in 
opposition and are wholly separate. Cheops (KhufuJ and Chephren 
[Khafre], the rulers who erected the largest pyramids, harassed the priests; 
they were hostile to the priesthoods. Then the priests called upon the 
Ethiopians for assistance against the kings by whom they believed them-
selves oppressed, and in this way the priests regained their dominance. 
These priests were kings themselves, and it is priest-kings of that sort who 
compel the warrior caste to withdraw to Meroe. 14 These two aspects, the 
priests and kings, are noteworthy. 
A fourth fearure is that on the whole the Egyptians kept themselves shut 
off from foreigners. 
12. Sesostru is a mythical Egyptian king, so there is little of historical value in the stories 
about him in Herodorus (2.102-11; Grene, pp. 172-6). Psa.mmetichus I (ruled 66~09 BC1 
founded the XXVl Dyna.sry, and by 6.B ht' had fret'd Egypt from Assyrian domipatiOil. 
Herodotus says 12.153; Grme, p. 199) that he 'became master of all Egypt•. 
13. See Herodot:u~ History 2.147-9 !Grene, pp. 195-71. He says the twelve kings of thr 
twelvr provinces desired to have rhis common link. 
14. Khufu reigned during the 26th cem. BC. He was succeeded by his brother. Khahe. 
Herodotus tells of lhe forced labor in pyramid building under Khufu and Khaire, saying that 
Khufu 'shut up all t:bt temples', and that the ruler Myceris (Mycerinus), successor to Khafre and 
son ?f ~ufu, ·opened up the temples and let the people ... go freely to their own work aod their 
sacrifices 12.124-9; Gnne, pp. 185-8). Herodotus states mat after several more: rule£'5 ·the 
Ethiopians and their king, Sabacos, invaded Egypt with a great armr •.. and the Ethiopian niled 
over Egypt for fiity year~· (2.137; Grene, p. 191). This lasr sen~nce of our teXt is perba~ 
ronfusi_ng. Ht'rodorus says. in the same passage, that die Ethiopians drove Anysis, the StCond 
ruler alter Mvcerinus. 'away to the marshes'. Meroe is a citv aod an 'island' situated betw«n 
branches of 1M Nile,~ a ma.nhy area. 
· 
338 

THE ORIENTAl WORLD: EGYPT 
Ancient tales speak of the great expeditions of Sesostris to Asia, and it is 
indeed said of Sesostris that he went far and wide in Asia. I If this is in fact 
274 
historically true, and if the bas-reliefs15 at Thebes pertain to it, such things 
nevenheless fall in ancient times, and this earlier era has had no lasting 
effect, has leh behind no traces. 
In later times Egypt had no naval power., and along its coastlines it barred 
foreigners from its territory. For a long time this policy of exclusion was a 
basic fearure of Egyptian life, and only in the latec period of its history did 
the Egyptian state once again interact with foreigners, with other peoples; 
from this time on, then, the history of Egypt also becomes more defined. 
This period fell [i.e. began] approximately 120 years prior to the conquest 
by Cambyses, and resulted in Egypt's decline. Psammerichus, most notably, 
transferred the chief city to Sais, united the many provinces (Staaten), and 
established external connections with other peoples. These peoples included 
Greeks as well as Carians from Asia Minor; often with the influx of as many as 
thirty thousand who constituted the essential component of the Egyptian army. 
The wars with Syria, with the Jews, and with the Babylonians occur in this 
period. In light of their historical dates, however, little import is to be attached 
to these wars. These later kings also waged war principally with Cyrene. Other 
relationships with Africa to the south and with the Hyksos ace more transitory~ 
occur in more ancient rimes, and are to some extent of no consequence. I 
215 
Features of the Land and Life of Egypt 
The features of Egyptian life must be of more specific interest to us. Egypt is 
a complex topic (schwere Aufgabe). Herodotus, Diodocus Siculus, and the 
[other] ancients who spoke about the Egyptians, provide the very best 
evidence about them. HerodotuS says they are the most rational (the 
Aoyu.U,-aTOt) of all the peoples that he has visited and observed.
16 These 
authors leave us amazed, on the one hand, by the African stupidity and, 
on the other hand, by this people's reflective understanding and spirit, by the 
H. As for the 'bas-reliefs' (Bassch~), ancient authon indicate that these 'IRn' _le_wd. ~­
odorus ( 2.1 06; Grene, p. 17 4) speaks in tbis way of inscriptioos be has seen in -~an S~ 
andofstarun in Ionia. Diodorus Siculus(1.55.7-10; Oldfatber,pp. 192-5) wntes•o mon-delail 
of ste~ that depicted warlike enemies with ~Nie geoitals and cowacdlv enemies with &:mak 
genitals. 
16. Herodotus devotes book 2 and the first part of book 3 ol his History to Egypt. Cooctrnnlf: 
their calendar. he states: 'Their reckoning., in my opinion, is much clevrrer dian_ that oi tM 
Greeks' (2.4; Grene, p. 132). Diodorus Siculus dev~ book 1 of _his Libr~ of H~ 
10
: 
myths, customs, and kings of Egypt. recounong m great detail the highly org.aniud 
regulated daily life of the king (1.70; Oldfather, pp. 240-S). 
33~ 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
intelligent order, optimal regulations, and admirable works of fine art, 
especially the architecture. 
The first thing it is essential to notice is Egypt's geographical circwnstances. 
It is common knowledge that Egypt consists of the Nile valley, about one 
thousand miles long overall, and that where it is [actually] a valley it is quite 
narrow. The Nile valley stretches or extends from south to north for a bout 71h 
degrtts of latitude.17 The delta, the flat land where hilly areas disappear. 
amoWJts to only about 1112 degrees of latitude. Where Egypt is valley it is 
only about five to six hours travel time (Stunden) in width. This valley is the 
Nile valley. The Nile and its flooding, in conjunction with the sun, constitute 
the overwhelming feature; the entire life of the Egyptians depends on it. Their 
soil is saturated by the Nile; it provides them with water. Rain almost never 
falls, or does so just as an omen, as happened once in the time of Cambyses.18 
Nile water serves as drinking water too. The population is dense and lacking 
in diversity; the vast Nile delta too is nearly lacking in diversity. The prevalent 
feature in the delta, in the Nile sedimentation, is agriculture. A few areas are 
marshlands, but for the most part the land is extremely uniform. The flooding 
and the sun are so related that the flooding emerges concurrent with certain 
276 
positions of the sun, and I so the Nile in conjunction with the sun totally 
acco\Ults for these geographical circumstances. 
The land is externally bounded, in part by the sea~ in part by scorching 
dese~ and connection to the south via the river is impossible owing to the 
cataracts. There are no weather cycles, but instead just the quantitative 
difference between greater and lesser inundation. So the isolated land is 
8ooded by the Nile in a set and specific sequence, since throughout the entire 
year there is no rain. Infertility is a consequence when the Nile rises too high 
or not high enough. Herodotus compares the land as inundated to the 
Aegean Sea, with the villages elevated like islands. 19 The villages are pro-
tected by dikes. After the runoff the land is saturated, then soon harvested, 
thus twice a year. Directly after the inundation the wildlife emerges: frogs 
and creeping things (Gewiirme) in endless numbers. An Arab general who 
had conquered Egypt wrote to his caliph that Egypt is an ocean of dust that 
transforms itself into a sea of fresh water and then into a sea of plants. 20 
These are, on the whole, the physical conditions. The agricultural principle 
17. That is the approximate extent of Egypt to the south. "I""m Nile and its tributaries ot 
murse extEnd much fanher south in Africa than this. 
18. See Herodotus, Ristory 3.10 (Grme, pp • .2.14-15). 
19. Herodotus, History 2.91 (Greoe, p. 170). 
20. Presumably dris reters to • Amr ibn al·'A$. the Muslim conqueror of qypt wbo governed 
there {64l-63). ~ 
to Caliph 'Umar., the-leader of Islam (634-44 ). 
340 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
constitutes the main theme of Egyptian life. AgricuJture was very far 
advanced, as the Egyptians are a very skillful agricultural people. 
The second thing to take into consideration is the castes that we encoun-
ter here (as in India), which are described by various authors. The main 
castes are the priests and the warriors. (Diodorus also has a caste of kings, 
but this can only be a social class. 21 ) Herodotus then also names other castes, 
the third and fourth being the cattle herders and swineherds, the fifth that of 
merchants, the sixth the interpreters and the sailors.22 He makes no mention 
of fanners. Diodorus says the third caste consists of farmers and artists. 23 
The supposition is I thus that agriculture did indeed occupy several cast~ 
277 
in particular even the warrior caste, which received a certain domain or 
landed estates for cultivation, especially in Lower Egypt. So overall we see 
here diverse castes that do not, howeve~ seem to have been so strictly 
isolated as are those of the Hindus. For instance, [the pharaoh) Amasis 
was from a lower class, from a lower caste. And when the warriors refused 
to line up for battle against Sennacherib, King Sethos, from the priestly 
lineage, struck against the enemy with an army from the castes of fanners~ 
assembled craftsmen, and so forth. 24 
Proof of how the Egyptians held back from engaging with other peoples is 
dte fact that the soldiers or warriors often refused to venture into foreign 
fields, to do battle outside the borders of the land, as happened under A pries. 
When A pries, the predecessor of Amasis, dispatched the warriors against the 
Cyrenaeans, they revolted and installed Amasis [as king], which goes to 
show that they preferred to remain in their own territoey.
25 So this people 
seems to be peaceable and agricultural, with the result that Greek mercen-
aries carried on the wars for them. In other instances toO we observe that 
Egypt brings little force to bear against attacks from outside. The Ethiopians 
often conquered the land, and Cambyses easily did so. 
A third topic concerns the more specific mode of daily life, the police 
regulations, and so forth. According to Herodotus and Diodorus, the 
21. Seen. 16 above. Diodorus says that 'the life wbich the kinp of the f«yptians lived was 
not like that of other men who enjoy autocratic power' (1.70; Oldfather. PP· 246-1). 
. 
22. The passage in Herodotus (2.164; Grene~ p. 204) _acnsally ~ 
as follows:~=~ 
Egypt seven classes, which are called, respecovely, pnesc:s, wamors, cowherds. 5 
shopkeepers, interpreters, and pilots.' 
.. 
23. He states U.74; Oldfather. pp. 25+-5): 'lbere are three otber classes of free QIIZieiiS, 
namely, the herdsmtn, the husbandmen, and the artisans.'. . 
1 41• 
24. This story of the Assyrian invasion undet Serwachenb IS told by Herodotus ( • .. Gmle. 
pp.l92-3). 
25. See Herodotus, History 2.161-2 and 4.159 (Qeue, PP· 202-3, 340). 
341 

278 
THE LECTURES OFt 822-3 
Egyptians' daily life is most amazing to the Greeks. Herodotus and Diodorus 
te!l us about its simple features; for they were amazed to find characteristic 
features in the very smallest details.26 Herodotus says that the Egyptians do 
all things the opposite of how other peoples do them, and he adduces several 
practices for those who seek to know the inner meaning from the externals. 
Such practices are, for instance, that the women urinate while standing, the 
men while seated, and that men have two garments but women only one. 
The order of the day here is cleanliness, frequent washing, in general con-
trast to the Hindus, since the Egyptians do not, like Hindus, simply wash the 
body our of superstition but otherwise keep nothing clean; instead they also 
wash their clothes. The Egyptians maintain bodily health I intelligentlr. 
Egyptian doctors are known to be very skillful, especially in treating indi-
vidual diseases. There are different doctors for different diseases. 
More important are the police ordinances, which are the basis of order. 
These are excellent. Annually each Egyptian had to give his name in writing 
to the governor; together with the information as to where he resided. It had 
to be correct~ on pain of death. The land was divided in an orderly way. and 
geometry was developed in doing so. The land had courts consisring of thirty 
judges, headed by a chief justice (Priisident). Trials were handled with 
precision and were conducted in writing, to the point of duplication, so 
that the lawyers and the way the parties appeared would not be disconcert-
ing or beguiling [to the court].27 Diodorus found this very beneficial in 
counteracting the eloquence of lawyers and the compassion of judges. The 
chief justice wore about his ne<:k a chain of precious stones, as the emblem of 
truth. The verdict ( Wahrheitsspruch) was given silently by means of the 
precious stones about the judge's neck. by their being turned toward the 
side of the party thar was said to be acknowledged as victorious. In addition 
to these fearwes, it is reported that the life of the king was highly regulated. 
His arising, the conducting of prayers, sitting in public judgment, the royal 
upkeep-this all rook place in the company of the priests. His bodily func-
tions likewise were precisely regulated. 28 
In addition, we know that the Egyptians made a number of discoveries 
and had manifold skills. Their way of dividing the year was like ours. They 
1.6. See Herodoru~ History 2.35 ff. (Grene, pp. 145 ff.l and Diodorus, 1.69 (OidfatheL 
PP· 23S-4! !. Herodotus goes into detail about the Egyptian practices Hegel specilicallv men-
ttons. below, as well as numerous others. 
27. See Diodorus, I. 75 !Oldfather, pp. 258--t;t ). Diodorus states that each side presented its 
ca54'_twtce. the second ttmr in a rebur:tal to the other side's presentation. He also speo1ks o( 
prectous. stones worn a bout the judge's neck las in our texr below) and their function m the trial. 
18. See n. 16 above. 
342 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
divided the year into 365 days, five of which were intercalary. As for 
marriage, there was monogamy in one part of Egypt, in Lower Egypt 
alone, and in the rest there was polygamy. Herodotus says that the men 
stick to household matters, whereas the women take care of external affairs 
and so are not in seclusion as they are in the East. 29 I When we see how the 
279 
Egyptians transformed their entire land (Boden) into a work of art, thev are 
exonerated from the charge of indolence that Winkelmann levels ar the.m. 3" 
Diodorus says the Egyptians are indeed the only people in which the citizem 
did not trouble themselves with the affairs of the state, but instead concerned 
themselves solely with their own affairs and lived tranquilly for themselves. 
Diodorus lived under Augustus and therefore of course was not thinking 
about a republic. 31 Herodotus states that each one carries on by himself his 
own specific and particular occupation, and we thus find this to be the case 
through all the social classes right up to the king, who also has his occupa-
tion defined by the law. J: 
So we see that in Egypt everything was in definite order, such that even the 
kings did not rule capriciously. This is a totally ordered condition, enforced 
by the authorities, in which all caprice is eliminated. So we see a defined. 
rule-governed condition all the way down to private matters. 
Religion and the Cycle of Nature 
It seems then that, complementary to these conditions, there must have been 
a comparably tranquil religion, that the impulse toward something higher 
had been satisfied in a comparably tranquil way. When we pass over to this 
topic, however, we are surprised when we behold and examine the most 
opposite and marvelous phenomena. The political condition is only one 
aspect, and in this other aspect we are dealing with an impulse set in motion 
internally, and an ardent, active, laboring spirit. We are dealing with an 
African people that, in its secluded condition, is inwardly aroused. is a 
people aglow and afire, exceedingly compact, a people staying ~If-enclosed 
29. Herodotus, History• 2.35 (Grene, p. 1451 sa1·s men do the weaving. whereas 'women run 
the market and shops·. 
30. Johann Joachim Winkelmann (1717--68), a German archaeologJSC and an h•sronan. 
stated as much in his Geschichte der Kunst des .4./teTtums (Dresden, 17641. P1· 1. ch . .:!. 111 
~;ontrast to rh.is. D1odorus describes in detail, and praises, the dili~trnce and excellence 
0
' 
E~·puan iarmers and artisans (1.74; Oldfather. PP· 154-~J. 
_ 
. 
31. What Diodorus actual!,- savs {see tbe previous note) is that Eg]ipuan anJsa.ns_ are. 
001 
II 
d 
· · · 
d 
-'-bbl · 
d 
r take nan 1n puhhc afta1r~ 
a owe to pursue other occupauons, and so o not ua 
e m tra e 0 
r 
(namely. the business of sovernmeml. 
32. This view actually fits Diodorus better tban it dot"S Herodohl5-
343 

280 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
and not dealing with anything external; instead the tremendous labor ac-
tively operates within its own horizons by means of the most extraordinary 
productions. I 
We notice this characteristic in the religious aspect: a pressing and labor-
ing within its own horizons, an unending pressure toward objectification 
within itself that, however, does not attain the free self-cons<.::iousness of 
spirit. There is still an iron band around the eyes of spirit, where the free 
apprehending of spirit is not yet set forth; instead spirit is still encircled by an 
iron band, so that the only thing to which spirit gives birth is what we called 
the enigma. And thus the enigma, namely Egypt, is a concrete individuality 
chat holds multiplicity fast within itself and unifies it, although in such a way 
that the unity does not advance to the free self-consciousness of spirit within 
itself. 
We cannot draw any retrospective conclusions when we hear that Pytha-
goras emulated the Egyptian setting for his teaching. For it is obvious from 
the (Egyptian] religion that Pythagoras just adopted a one-sided picture of 
the priesdy caste, one without any basis, and according to it he took no 
account of human impulses, passion, and reflection. So of course his com-
munity disintegrated. It did of course carey on, but not for long in that form. 
A circle of people rooted in itself soon proved to be a vacuous representa-
tion, one making it clear that human beings ought not to remain placidly 
isolated and self-(;ontained. 33 
For a closer look at the character of Egyptian religion, we must hold fast 
to the fact that in this case we are still within the bounds of a nature religion. 
In Egypt we find ourselves still within the bounds of the inmition of nature. 
When we say 'God', we are directly on the soil of thought, and so we 
represent to ourselves a being of thought; we then pass over from this 
abstract thought to further detenninations, passing over to just the attri-
butes. Here in Egypt, however; we have to set this standpoint entirely to one 
side; we have to hold fast to the natural intuition, to forgo our customary 
thought of a being I beyond the earth and the heavens, and simply keep our 
sensible eyes open and let the sensible power of imagination be active. 
With this nature intuition we do not even have before us the universal 
heaven of Ch.ina, or the universal natural foundation of India, the Indian 
soul of natwe, or the pure light of the Persians; we do not have to think of, or 
calJ to min~ any incarnation. The Egyptian deities are not even heroes 
having human nature as their foundation. We are dealing not with 
33. See the comparablt discwsion of the Pythagorean community ia uaures em the History 
of Pbilosoplry (Oxford, 2006, 2000). ii. 36-7. 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
something universal, but instead with a particular, specific intuition of 
nature. The Egyptians live in a dosed world as such, and this world is also 
the basic intuition in the religion of the Egyptians, is what they know as their 
substantial being, as their essence. 
Inasmuch as this dosed, private world becomes religious, it does not 
remain sensible but instead becomes distilled into a representation. How· 
ever, in keeping with the enclosed condition, and with the Egyptians' inner 
alermess, the inward state of this intuition gets transformed into further 
intuitions in that a funher meaning in it is called to mind as well, and in fact 
gets determined as a symbol. And so in the Egyptian religion we find 
ourselves utterly in the domain of the symbolic. Immediate intuition there-
fore has a meaning, although this meaning does not elevate iuelf to thought, 
for instead the meaning is in turn only the image or the symbol of what 
beforehand was itself a symbol. These are the images and aspects linked 
through a bond thar emerges here, but not as thought; instead this individual 
or inner point remains, binding or linking together these representations 
without revealing itself in thought. I 
282 
So we have here the individuality that ties together distinct phenomena, 
ones that have a foundation, but nor the universal foundation of thoughL 
The whole is therefore an anifact of the fanciful imagination (ein Phantas-
tisches) because it COJUlects such manifold or multifaceted elements. Its basis 
is an inward content, something that was pointed to in rhis way by an 
imaginative (phantastisch) connection, but this content was not actually 
set forth and did not lend itself to deciphering (erraten). So the imaginative 
element involves the task of grasping this inner element; however this inner 
element, then, is not grasped but is instead just pointed to symbolically; and 
what the symbol is remains unspecified (ist freigestellt)--somethlng other 
that is itself only a symbol of something else. 
To see more precisely what is involved, we have, ar least in a general way, 
to allow for a representation of it. What first confronts us is the closed 
physical cycle of nature that, for the Egyptians, is everything as a whole. 
For the Egyptians the Nile, the land, the sun, make up such a closed system 
that Herodotus learned nothing from the Egyptian priests about the sources 
of the Nile; he learned that only from the people of Cyrene.u 1De informa-
tion the priests had was therefore limited to their own locale. So then, the 
34. Sec Herodotus Historv2.19--32 (Grene,pp.l38-44).bu.oeneoded~tioP 
011 -~-
, 
· 
· 
L-- ~ aod 
J2 
the Nile floods, para. t 9 mentions the ignorance of the EgypoaoS aUUUL ..._ 
. ~ 
PRsems what Herodotus learnt from the people of Cyrene, in Libya., .,bot~~ me munor oi 
Africa, but not speci6cally about the 50IUCCS of die Nile. 

283 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Egyptians' representation was also limited to that locale and emphasized a 
particular contemporary era. 
This self-contained whole was the essential being or the main God of the 
Egyptians. Isis and Osiris, this duality, are the main deities here. Osiris is the 
sun in connection with the Nile; Isis is the earth and, in [her] connection with 
the sun, she is, correspondingly, the moon. This [duality] is the basic deity of 
the Egyptians; it is their distinctive feature and the foremost element of their 
religion. These two, Isis and Osiris, are themselves procreated, are them· 
selves in turn counterparts; for, wherever religion begins from nature, God is 
something emergent and not what is absolutely first as is the case in a 
religion of thought. So this Osiris and this Isis are the essentially Egyptian 
gods. I 
Yet this nature intuition is, furthermore, a history, a process: the sun, 
which becomes distant and returns; the Nile, which inundates and fructifies 
the land or Isis, which recedes from it and goes into opposition to the sun 
and is devoured by the sun, has in the sun its enemy, Typhon.35 So heat, the 
scorching wind, appears in a hostile way as Typhon, just as then too the Nile 
empties into the sea and dies. This cycle was transposed into the characteri· 
zation of the gods, and this divine twosome has its history too. Osiris, the 
sun, is born. After the sun has become distant it draws near once again, just 
like for us too [it recedes] during the shortest days. Osiris is born in the 
springtime, just as there is a temporal connection for all peoples and for us 
too, insofar as GOO~ that is., Christ~ is born after the shortest day. After his 
birth Osiris becomes the bringer of good fortune, of fertility, of blessing; he is 
said to have completed his course through the world, just as, according to 
the Greeks, Dionysius traversed the world. So this is then the felicitous 
period of Osiris, when the Nile overflows. 
However, the opposite also comes into play; the sun retraces its steps and 
goes away once more; the land is desolate, the water used up; the Nile dies 
out in the sea, and Isis alone rules in the absence of Osiris. Typhon hatches a 
plot and slays Osiris. Then ensues the lamentation of Isis, seeking her 
.>5. Typhon is a 6gure depicted in Creek mythology as a monster who engages m cooilicts 
with Zeus, aod is gmeraUy a cause or instigator of evil. Typhon is abo the Greek name for the 
~ptian god Set. Diodorus describes him as the brother, and murderer, of Osi.ris (1.21; Old· 
lather, PP·. 64-7). He also says Isis. the wife and sister of Osiris, avenged the mwder by killiog 
Typhon WJth the aad of her son, Horus. A sirn.ila.r account occurs in Plutarch, De lsitk et Osiritk 
13 ff. Hegel u.~ the name 'Typhon' here to stand for the 'evil' of the "iCill'ching de;en beat tha.r 
rowucracts lhe beneficial 6ooding oi tbt Nile associated with Osiris. Tbe sun 'becomes distant' 
istays lower in the sky in wintert and 'returns' or 'draws IIC&r again' (risa higher overhead io 
SUIIll1lt'l'). 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
conson who has been dismembered, and she collects the parts of his body. 
All of Egypt strikes up a dirge, the 'Maneros', over the dead God; according 
to Herodotus it was always sung by them and is the only song rhat they have. 
People do of course have a lot to say about Egyptian music; we find many 
instruments portrayed and I hear talk of Egyptian songs, contrary to the 
284 
assertion of Herodotus. In any event, he says that the Greeks call this dirge 
or this song 'Linos', and that it was the only song of the Egyptians; thus that 
they had no poetry and no songs. 36 
A principal element, then, is this lamentation over the god, which corre· 
sponds to the lamentation over [the Greek and Asian fenility deity] Adonis. 
Human grief upheld his honor. Isis then buried Osiris, and there are many 
holy gravesites of Osiris throughout Egypt. A further point to note in this 
conrext is that nothing of this sort is to be found among the Br4hmans or 
Hindus. In the case of the priests of Buddha, however, there is at each 
Buddhist temple a pyramid with relics of the Buddha. So this circumstance 
is a point of agreement with the Buddhist religion. 
Isis then has the body pans of Osiris embalmed, a task performed by 
Hennes. 37 The Egyptian manner of embahning as such, even embalming 
animals, essentially distinguishes them from the Hind~ who show no respect 
for the bodies of the dea~ casting them into the Ganges. The Egyptia~ 
however, are the first ones to have called the human soul immorta~ and 
showing respect for the dead is linked to this practice, in that here the 
individuality of the human character has attained an entirely different meaning 
and value than it has with the Hindus. So Osiris was buried in the earth and is 
lord in the realm of the dead; he is judge in the invisible reabn, that of Hades. 
We can also remark here that in later times, in the era of Alexander and 
subsequendy in Rome, the god Serapis rook over this function in place of 
Osiris, just as the invisible realm, tbar of thought, cil&m>, gained a greater 
ascendancy over the visible one. 38 1 In this cycle from the history of religion 
285 
36. See Herodotus, History 2. 79 (Grene, p. 164 ). Herodotus calls it~ 'LiJnas Soog' ~says 
that, in Egyptian. Linus is called Manuos. HerodotuS says that, accordiDg 10 ~ ~ 
It 
was the funeral chant upon the untimely deadt of me only SCIG ot Egypt's first king, and It 'was 
their fust and ooly soug'. In Greek mythology Linus. or Lino6. was a sou of Apollo. ~ 
il 
famous singer and poet. In HoD\el" tiUs song is sung by a boy during lhe grape barYal aad \VIIIC-
makiog. 
. 
the 
ol bisl 
.17. In the Egyptian account~ thi~ honor to the dead •~ pe:rformed ~ ~ 
( . -
aJMJ other Egyptian deities. The Greek figure Hermes is DOl typically idmtme.i wJib HMu5.. 
10 
perhaps the auditors misbeacd what Hegel said. 
38. The Greek wo.rd refers to what is unseen. 
347 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
there lies the history of the human individual-a person's birth, activity, 
enjoyment of the world, and death. 
Linked with this concrete, Egyptian imagination, with Isis and Osiris, is the 
benefit of the introduction of agriculture. Thus Nile, sun, and earth were 
essentially something useful, were means essential to meeting [hwnan} needs. 
So Isis and Osiris acquired the characteristic feature of being benefactors of the 
human race; they provided the means for living effectively (Benutzung). Isis 
discovered grain, not wheat or corn but barley. Attributed to Osiris were the 
plow, the broad hoe, draft animals, and the yoking of oxen, as well as the 
introduction of marriage, of laws, religion, and civic order. Osiris is then at 
the same time also the likeness of the seed that is buried in the ground, dies, and 
shoots up again. Thus all specific features come together in Isis and Osiris. 
Hence the Egyptian God is not some sort of general benefactor, not an abstrac-
tion. Thought does not project itself out beyond these specific features; instead, 
multiple inruirionsofnature are linked in one complex-Nile, sun, seed, hwnan 
activity, and so forth. So, what is fancifuJiy imagined is conjoined here in a unity. 
This Isis and Osiris thus link or bind together within themselves all the repre-
sentations, all the specific features; one symbol becomes symbol of the other. 
Osiris is the symbol of the Nile and the sun, the very same symbol is the symbol 
of human life and, vice versa, life is thus in tum symbol for the sun, the Nile, and 
so forth. Therefore each is the cowtterpart ( Gegensatz) and symbol of the othet. 
Nevertheless, the universal element in them has not yet emerged explic-
286 
itly. I When we speak of 'symbol', the repr~tation we have is expressed by 
means of a general representation, by an image: for instance, as an image, 
Mars is the general, abstract representation of war. In the case of Isis and 
Osiris, however, we do not have these two in one image, in a general, abstract 
representation. Instead we have a bwtdle of symbols, which themselves are 
another symbol of a sensible representatio~ not of an abstract representation. 
These basic Egyptian representations are typical of that people. 
Besides these, however, the Egyptians also have more abstract gods, in 
general three kinds of gods: as Herodotus says, eight ancient ones, twelve 
intermediate ones, and several more recent ones.39 These abstract gods are 
the ones especially that the Greeks adopted for themselves, for instance 
n oan~v, the sea. We have only a few vague reports as to what these 
39. Herodotus dUnks dtat most of the Greek gods came from Egypt (2.50; Grene, p. 153). 
and so for the mosr pan he I.I$C!; Greek names for the Egyptian gods he thinks are their Greek 
counrerpans and p~. 
Thus he states, in a discussion of Herades (2.43-5; G~­
pp. 149-511. that th~ EgypWru; 'say it was seventeen tho11sand years before the re1gn of Kinl: 
Am.asis when the Eight gods bttame Twelve'; but he does not follow up wich an expliat 
statement about then being ·several more recent ooes'. 
348 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
particular Egyptian gods and their cultus involved, and their particular 
significance. The most ancient god, Knef or Kronos is time and Ptah is 
40 
. 
' 
• 
fire. 
The representation of the planers and the starry heaven is connected 
with these gods, as it is with Isis and Osiris. Connected with Osiris is the 
representation of the passing of the year and its determinations, how chr 
year is divided; in keeping with this aspect, the festivals of the Egyptians 
are, up to today, something wholly governed by the calendar. Osiris, the sun, 
is called the prince of heavenly herds, which he leads, and the shepherd 
especially of the zodiac. All of this has its impact in these symbolic 
representations. 
Animal Worship 
We still have to speak about animal worship. We have covered universal 
inorganic nature, this universal foundation, as the Egyptians see it. The other 
most noteworthy point is that the Egyptians do not stop with reverence for 
inorganic nature, but instead pass over to reverence for animal life as 
something divine. According to the general image of natw'e in Egypt, after 
the Nile recedes, 1 animal activity ensues in tandem with human endeavor. 
'21f7 
Just as the animal realm reawakens along with the revival of the soil, so the 
existence of the Egyptians orients itself to that occurrence. Spirit, however, 
remains inaccessible (verschlossen) to them. And we see, then, that the 
thought or the being-for-self of spirit remains something in itself inaccessible 
to the Egyptians; they sympathize not with the free, spiritual soul but instead 
with the soul remaining confined within living things, for: the reason that 
their fanciful imagination merely works symbolically from the soul that is 
confined within sheer life itself. So we have to consider this mode of rever-
ence foe animal life. 
In seeking to grasp this point we must, in doing so, set aside as such, in 
thinking of what is higher or considering what is highe~ our customary 
practice of seeking it on the soil of thought and representation, and of 
dosing our eyes to what is sensible, present at hand, actUal. By sticking to 
sensible intuiting, the Egyptian grasps and holds fast to the living thing, the 
instinct of the animal, this marvelous feature that operates from within it. 
40. It is unclear to which deity the name 'Knef' applies. The lod edn. of ~ Wme reads 
tp. 278): ·rn the first class comes fire and its use, as Pta.h, as weU asKotf. wbois alsorepresenud 
as the good daimon.' The god Ptah is associated with Memphis; IUrodotUS calls him Hephaes-
tus (the Greek god of fire) in 2.3 (Grene, p. 132). It is UPCiea.r wh:.- 'Knef' IS hoked. ~rt ~ nmc. 
unless there is a possible confusion with the gudckss Neith. 'Ai!()IS(' temple tDSCnpllOD 10 ~ 
refers to her being "what was. what is, and what will be'. See Lectwes on th~ pbiJosoplry of 
Religiorl, ii. 639. See also Hegd's mention of Neidl below iP our reliL 
349 

THE. lECTURES OF 1822-3 
This intelligence that an animal has for the purpose of its vitality we can call 
something incomprehensible ro us. For although human beings might study 
animals and imagine themselves in their place, we cannot represent to 
ourselves how things appear within the soul of the animal. Human beings 
cannot succeed at imagining themselves inside the nature of a dog or a cat; it 
remains something alien, something incomprehensible to us. 
When we seek, then, to grasp the divine for ourselves as something higher 
and incomprehensible, there are two ways in which the incomprehensibility 
confronts us. The first is as the vitality in the animal; but although we are 
living ourselves, our vitality is determined by spirituality. The second way is 
the soil of representation, of reflection, of thought. In recent times it has been 
288 
the particular fashion I to call God something incomprehensible that we 
encounter in the course of seeking. by the use of thought, for the foundation 
of existing being, of all that there is. In the one way there is the vitality of the 
natural being, and in the other the aspect of reflection in which the incom-
prehensible thwarts us. We define this laner incomprehensible elemenr thus 
as something higher that is beyond us. The question is where the incompre-
hensible confronts us with greater legitimacy. Is it in the first way, or the 
second? Obviously we encounter what is incomprehensible more legiti-
mately in the first way, in the natural aspect, in the realm of nature. For 
spirit is self-understanding, presence to self, being free. The Greek stand-
point is the liberation of spirit, the understanding of the essence of spirit, 
knowing how God's essential being is defined; even more so, the Chri~tians 
know what God is. For them, and for the perspicacity of the Greek~. the 
incomprehensibility has vanished on the side of spirit, and it has retreated to 
the side of the spiritless, of the external, while still being a factor on that side 
of things. If then, we define the incomprehensibiliry as what is higher, we 
must grant that the Egyptians are justified if the abstract was for thern 
something beyond them, something enigmatic in animal life. And if this 
was the case, then they are even more justified in having found it in animal 
life than are we today who suppose we have kept the aspect of the incom-
prehensible safely within {the realm of] spirit. 
For the Egyptians truth was still the problem, still this enigma, and they of 
...:ourse possessed or determined it for themselves in their intuition oi the 
animal. Those who reckon truth to be incomprehensible in every respect are 
directed to the natural domain; for spirit is transparent to itself, is free, and 
289 
reveals itself to spirit; it has nothing alien within itself. Nature, 1 however, is 
what is hidden. With their thought in bondage, the Egyptians have to wrestle 
with something incomprehensible, and they possess it in the naturalness of 
animal life. They have defined this incomprehensibility. in the unselfconscious 
350 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
nature (Befangenheit) of the animal, as something remote from them, as 
something higher, and this remoteness from spirit is sheer life, what is devoid 
of spirit, the animal domain. This, then~ is therefore the most distinctive 
aspect that we find in the case of the Egyptians. 
We find this aspect-the fact that what is intuited in animal life is nor a 
lower life but a higher one-not with the Egyptians alone~ for it is also 
present in the case of the Indians, indeed even in that of the Greeks and 
Romans who saw knowledge and vision in {the flight of] birds, which 
discloses the furure to human beings and so could serve as an oracle. The 
main feature here is that, when human beings have not in fact arrived at 
freedom of spirit, they hold the incomprehensible to be something higher 
and consequently seek it in animal life rather than on the side of spirit. The 
Egyptians intuited animal life as somerhing higher and, in doing so, pro-
ceeded to the most obtuse and inhuman superstitions, as we see in the 
worship of Apis. They also worshiped two other oxen in addition ro Apis. 
When Cambyses came to Egypt he, as a noble Persian, called them dunder· 
heads for doing so. He himself wounded Apis and had [the animal] kiUed.41 
Among the Egyptians this superstition passed over into barbaric obtuseness. 
Apis was worshiped in one city in panicular; other cities or districts wor· 
shiped other individual kinds of animals: cats, the ibis, the crocodile. These 
animals were fed in enclosures (Hiiusern) and large endowments existed for 
their maintenance. After they died they were laid to rest, embalmed as 
carefully as human beings. For those not embalmed, their bones were I 
290 
collected and preserved, as was done with the bones of all cats, which 
were brought by ship ro Bubastis and laid to rest there. Their skeletons 
were deposited in large tombs. Splendid tombs were dedicated to Apis. In 
the second pyramid to be opened up after a few thousand years Belzoni 
discovered, in a major chamber, an alabaster coffin containing bones of 
oxen, thus showing that Apis had been laid ro rest here.42 
41. Herodotus savs that a calf born under special circumstances and with special markings 
was regarded by th~ pnests as rhe manifestation oi the god Apis, and ~r Camb,·ses mocked 
them, stabbed the animal in the thigh, and it died from the wound (3.27-9; Grrne, PP· 2.22-31. 
42. See Giovanni Battista Belzoni, Narrative of the Operations lind Recent ~01'tn4?5 
with;, the Pyramids, Temples, Tombs and Excavations ir~ Egypt and Nllhia (london, 18l0!. 
Somewhat at variance with Hegel's statement, Belzoni mentions lindiog mumnuo of ~·an.ous 
animals, includmg hulls (p. u;l!); he says only the head~ of thr~ liv~toclc :-vert: mummrhed, the 
rest ot the body bemg represen!ed by two pieces of wood'. He also found alabaster •-a.ses 
.:ontaining embalmed entrails of human mummies and having covers depiCting the ~ 
of 
various animals (p. 172). See also n. 52 below. 
351 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
It is also noteworthy that the death penalty applied for the killing of a 
revered animal of this sort, in some cases indeed only when it was killed 
intentionally, although in other cases even if the act was unintentional. 
Diodorus tells of a popular uprising when someone had unintentionally 
killed a cat, in the course of which the slayer lost his life. 43 When there is 
famine the supply of animals remains untouched and people are left to starve 
rather than slaying revered animals. So this further enhanced [respect for] 
the great vitality of the animal. The magnificent life of animals therefore 
counts as something infinitely higher. Sheer vitality for its own sake is thus 
highly honored in this way by the Egyptians. This includes reverence for 
vitality in the abstract and not merely for the particular vitality of individual 
animals. Thus the worship of the lingam constituted a principal focus for the 
Egyptians too; according to the testimony of Herodotus this practice of 
theirs was even brought to Greece and copied by the Greeks.44 Other 
offenses roo, such as sodomy, were commonplace for the Egyptians. So 
this worship of vitality is one aspect. 
As then vitality for its own sake counted as the supreme thing, it also 
transpired that the animal figure did not remain the absolute object of 
worship, but instead was transformed in tum into the symbol for something 
that is not said to represent itself; the animal figure is instead the means for 
pointing to something other than it. This is likewise a familiar and essential 
aspect [of Egypt], and we can caiJ to mind in this regard the falcon, sparrow 
291 
hawk, I dung beetle, and scarab, which were revered for their own sake but 
were demoted to being on]y the presentation of a significance they have 
within them. Yet we do not know what they are supposed to signify; che 
more precise symbolic characteristics are not given. The dung beetle was 
said to represent the power of procreation, then the path of the sun, and so 
on. This is something wholly impenetrable to us. We must not think of these 
symbolic representations, however, in such a way that rhe univecsa.l repre-
sentation was at hand and that then a symbol was sought for it; instead, 
what came first was the intuition of a kind of animal in which something 
universal, a universal representation of that sort, was then imaginatively 
envisaged, and not vice versa. The general idea (Gattung), the universal 
43. See Diodorus, 1.83 (Oldfather, pp. 282-5), who says ·me COIJUIIOP people gather m 
crowd~> and deal with the perpetrator most cruelly, somerimt'S doing this w1thou.r wairinl,! for 
a triaJ' · In this instance tbe cu-k.illcr was a Roman, who was punished even thou(th the 
E.gypt•ans were zealously seeking good relations with the Roman visiton. 
_«. t:Jerodotus states (2A9; Grene, pp. 152-3) that a ceruin Melampus learnt the ritual oi 
~onys~us from Egypt and instituted it for the Greeks, including a phallic procession 1D 
DionySius.. 
352 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
feature of the representation, sought to work itself out on the basis of an 
animal figure of this kind. We find traces of the respect for living things 
among all ancient peoples, which is why in the Old Testament it is forbidden 
to eat blood, because blood contains the soul or the life of the animal.45 
This is the mark of the reverence for life. To the spirit that is not free, the 
divine is something over yonder. The unfree spirit knows truth only as 
something 'over there'. The spirit that is free is spirit for itself, is not in the 
presence of something other. However the Orientals, not being free, relate to 
spirit as to an othe~ to a localized, specific vitality in particular fonn 
(partikularisiert), in which they situate spirit's essential nature. This particu· 
lar living thing, the 'other' to spirit, is therefore what is incomprehensible, 
and the unfreedom of spirit is its having its essential being in what is 
incomprehensible. Life as such, life in general, hwnan life, universal vitality, 
is of course to be conceptualized. But what is in particular form, the life of 
the animal, is just as incomprehensible as 1 is the nonconceptuaJ caprice 
292 
( Willkur) of human beings. Unfree caprice is to be apprehended in the same 
way as animal vitality. Unfree spirit or superficial will wants nothing more 
than to place itself on a par with particularity, to satisfy itself with particu· 
larities; and so we see people who get on well with animals, like old maids 
who are at home with cats or with dogs, who live with them as with like-
minded souls. For the more profound spirit, however, such a particular fonn 
is something other to it, and when spirit feels itself bound to such a particu-
lar form, then it proves to be still wholly unfree. 
We now have to say, furthermore, that the Egyptians were resistant to this 
severely Wlselfconscious state (Befangenheit), to this detenninacy in intuit-
ing the animal; so they downgraded this unselfconscious state to something 
said to represent something other than it. What they did was convect the 
animal element into a symbol, and 'symbol' is what does not bear its own 
explicit interpretation by itself, as it immediately exists, but instead has that 
interpretation in what is yet something other. Thus in Egypt we see animal 
figures as symbols, transformed and thus downgraded into the sheerly 
external reality of a representation or meaning that is supposed to be distinct 
from this immediate animal fonn. The dung beetle and the sparrow hawk 
are symbols in this way. A symbol, however, is always something opaque. In 
language there is free clarity; in the symbol, the representation is expressed 
only opaquely by human beings or by the sensible element. The representa-
tion does not become entirely clear; it merely makes use of the symbol. The 
45. SCI: Geo. 9: 4. 
353 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
power of procreation and the sun's path were expressed in this way via the 
symbol of the dung beetle. Here, then, there was the intuition of nature that 
imaginatively envisaged a general significance within the living thing. So, 
representation progresses from the exclusively immediate representation to 
something further. We have every reason to take such fonns as symbols. 
Posited explicitly as such, as symbols, they are, moreover, positioned differ-
ently here where the animal figure is transformed and thus not left to be as it 
exhibited itself in immediacy. Here belongs the juxtaposing of animal fig-
293 
uces, for instance 1 a snake with the head of a bull or ram, or a lion body 
with a crocodile tail and a ram's head, and so forth. 
Even more explicit, however, are the animal figures reduced to symbols in 
the actual sphinxes or animal bodies from which a human figure makes its 
way outward; lion bodies with female-male heads. Thus they also ha\le 
sparrow hawks from which human beings come forth. So animal images 
are, as it were, helmets from which the human visage peers outward. with 
the result that the animal aspect serves more as adornment or attribute. 
What this represents is the fact that something spiritual raises itself up out of 
the animal nature. The human being that immerses itself in the animal 
always, in doing so, still has human sensibilities. In such twofold beings 
the universal begins to project itself outward. The spiritual element is not yet 
free; thus the spiritual element is indeed expressed in the task of making itself 
free, in its detaching itself from the animal aspect. Vice versa, however, there 
ace also other formations in which the spirituai element is represented in the 
human figure. The human element or the human figure is no longer symbol 
but is instead the immediate, sensible expression, the distinctive figure. of the 
spiritual. The human figure appears, with the face having the characteristic 
of a spiritual soul. So the sensible figure of the spiritual is the human figure. 
In their proceeding to the point of bringing out the spiritual element in thif> 
figure, the Egyptians in tum perverted and distoned this figure by the use of 
the animal form or animal face; for it requires the higher kind of art to 
enliven the human figure into being a free and distinct expression of an 
[individual) character. The Egyptians were not yet capable of this. and in 
294 
order to render the figure in particular form, they 1 employed once again 
the animal aspect or animal figwe, and thus represented human beings with 
the heads of rams, sparrow hawks, bulls, lions, and apes. Greek art under-
stood how to achieve the particular, spiritual expression in beauty itself, so 
that the human countenance as such is intelligible of itself, whereas in Egypt 
the intelligibiliry is supposed to be brought about by means of animal 
figures. The Egyptians even put animal masks on human bodies; then even 
354 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
the priests had to attire themselves in such animal masks in order to indicate 
or identify which deities they served. 
How the Egyptians Envisaged Spirit 
These are then the Egyptians' ways of envisaging essential being; spirit's 
task of becoming self-conscious was, by the natural domain, bound up 
with the intuition of nature and breaking through this bondage, the transi-
tion to contradiction, the inversion of the spiritual element into the natural 
element and vice versa. But for human beings the spiritual element is also 
presenr in an existence proper to them, in the spiritual power of their own 
discoveries and aptitude. The arousal and power of the Egyptian con-
sciousness and spirit has not overlooked this, but instead this conscious-
ness has set itself up as something to be revered, something essential and 
substantial, just like the powers of nature, and this then constitutes the 
other aspect of the Egyptian religion. Human aptitudes are objectified 
(bypostasiert) in this way and looked upon as important and worthy. But 
the spiritual element has not then also become the object ( Gegenstand) as 
free spirit, as universal; instead it appears only as a particular power 
alongside the power of nature, something particular too in keeping with 
its particular I content. The Egyptians therefore also had gods whose 
295 
being was spiritual efficacy or activity, but it too was confined within a 
restricted, narrow scope (Partikularitift), and it was downgraded or 
demoted to symbolic status and was linked to natural things. This aspect 
of this spirituality is preserved for us above all in Hermes, also Teith or 
Thoth (Herodorus). As Egyprian, this deity (Hermes} is the god Anubis, 
friend and companion of Osiris, and his deeds include discovery of hiero-
glyphic writing, of surveying, astronomy, music, and medicine, of religion 
and teachings of sacred matters, and so forth.% The Egyptians say that 
Iarnblichus has set forth all their customs, the inventions of tbe priests, and 
the name Hermes. 4 7 
46. Herodotus mentions Hennes m various passages (2.51, 138, 145; Gnne, pp.153, 191-2.. 
195), but d~ not state explicitly that Hermes equals Thoth. The writings of~ 
Tns_mr-
gisrus are associated with Thoth, the reputed author o{ those pbilosophial-re~ wn~ 
lcn<Jwn as the Hermetica. Awxding to Tbe Oxford Classical Didi(mdry, ·~er:mes ~n~stUS 
durnstly rt'nden the Egyptian phrase 'Thoth !:he very grear'. In Greek Tn~rus me311S 
'thrice greatest'. Thoth is lhe Egyptian god of wisdom who presides over ~ 
_Judpleot of tbe 
5au)s of the dead. He is not the same one as Anubis, w_ho assists him by wrighlllg on a ~ 
scale the bean of the deceased, set over against an ostnch feather on the ocher pall of me sc 
· 
47. larnblichus. a Neoplawnist of lhe 3rd and 4th cents. AD, wrott various works on 
Pythagoras. mathematics, magic, the mysteries, and thewgy. 
355 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
This spirit is the inventor of particular, individual (besonderen partiku· 
liiren) inventions, not of free thought. As noted, the content of this divine 
element is then the particular natures of human arts and inventions, all 
lumped together here and grasped not as pure spirituality but instead in 
their individual essential being. This content was also in tum degraded into 
nature symbols and linked with natural figures. It is God in fact with the 
head of a dog. In addition to this natural, sensible mask, it also becomes 
linked on tb.e other side to a natural object, to Sirius (the Dog Star). Just as 
the content of this spirirual activity as such is constricted in this way, the 
mode of its appearance, its concrete being, is constricted too. Therefore this 
confusion [of spirit) with animal symbols that took place, a confusion 
evident with the sphinx, is also in part present in the most glaring fashion 
in other and broader circumstances. Thus, for instance, the sphere of hwnan 
purposes and interests-how people have to conduct themselves when deal-
ing with natural things and by which they have to define themselves-is in 
tum such a confused state that even one's own act is then constrained by the 
powers of nature. 
For example, in medicine the diagnosis of bodily illness is bound up with 
298 
the most diverse superstitions and is linked with 1 astrological or lunar 
influences, with mysterious, magical wisdom. Likewise, in cases where 
people wish to decide upon other matters such as building a house or 
going on a journey, decisions of that kind are controlJed by the influence 
of the stars; in all these contingent matters the Egyptians resorted to oracles~ 
especially consulting the oracle of Ammon,48 and doing aU this in the most 
extraordinary way, for there is a confusion of one's own understanding with 
the supposition of, and belief in, other influences. The fact that external 
contingency is at work carried over here to minor matters. The oracle of 
Ammon was extremely famous. In one city a shield with precious stones on 
it was the oracle~ in virtue of the fact that, when moved, these precious 
stones either were~ or were not, made to vibrate. 
The spiritual element, free science, constrained in this way from coming to 
consciousness, is not to be sought among the Egyptians and hence did not 
come to solve the enigma, did not arrive at free consciousness. It is a ridiculous 
supposition to believe that Greek sages or philosophers obtained their 
dtoughts and their wisdom from Egypt. Pythagoras had been there in Egypt~ 
but we do not know what he brought back with him. When we see, however. 
that he taught the Egyptians to calculate the size of the pyramids from their 
48. TM famous oracle of Ammoo wu located at his temple at the oasis of Siwa. 
356 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
shadow~ it is certain that they were not far advanced in geometry. What he 
brought back from them was of little consequence. Also, if we wish to assume 
that Pythagoras brought back philosophy, we see that Pythagoras himself did 
not yet arrive at free thought but only at number, inasmuch as he compre-
hended what is spiritual in the abstraction of number. And if we also assume 
that the Egyptians had such philosophical themes, they still had not yet 
arrived at pure thought. So the Egyptian priests could well have engaged in 
specu.Jation; but what others obtained from them was not pwe thought, and 
in any event it was different from the srandpoint of the [Egyptian] people. I 
So these are the principal features of the Egyptian religion, which has as 
its principal element the urge or impulse (Drang) of spirit to work its way 
free from the intuition of nature. This superstition is a harsh fate for the 
Egyptians themselves; here spirit is still in strict, harsh slavery, and spirit 
strives or longs to be free of (heTaus) it, yet has nothing but struggle. The 
Indians too long to be free of it, bur they remain stuck in negation, in self~ 
cenreredness (Si!lbstzwi!ck). The principle of this African spirit, however, is 
precisely to endure such harshness and to overcome it, whereas the Indians 
take their own lives. The Egyptian sustains the impulse and lives within it. So 
the content of Egyptian religion is then of a sort that cannot be only a 
subjective content of representation; instead the content is the tremendous 
urge itself, and since the content is this harsh driving force, it must, in going 
out beyond subjectivity, become objective to itself, must portray itself., must 
annul the onesidedness, must overcome the self~ndosed state (Befangen-
heit). Hence the Egyptian religion is in one aspect this content of representa-
tion, and is the urge to supersede the merely subjective status of the 
representation and to produce the object. 
So we see the Egyptian spirit as the laborer, the gr-eat master builder, 
whose wondrous works, after three thousand years, still deserve our com-
plete admiration. 
An and Architecture 
An is a principal feature of Egypt~ and it presented itself mainly in the 
Egyptian religion. Art can have no place in the religion of the abstract One 
[i.e. judaism and Islam] for the very reason that this religion's object is only 
something indeterminate and invisible. In that setting art is even something 
sinful because representation of the abstract One, of the indete~~te, 
ought to be ruled out. In the higher religion of spirit, in the Christian 
religion, art is something 1 subordinate and not the absolute way in. ~ch 
the need for understanding represents its content to itself, nor how sptnt can 
357 
298 

299 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
make a represenration of itself. In the fonn before us, to the contrary, the 
form we have before us in Egypt, in the spirit enclosed within the natural 
domain where spirit is an impulse but cannor come to itself, art from this 
standpoint is the ne<:essary means of self-knowledge, of bringing about self-
consciousness and making it into a representation. So what spirit makes 
representational is the very content that we have seen. 
The material in which spirit makes itself into the representation cannot be 
that of thought; it can only be the sensible, natural material, the material of 
the natural realm. Here spirit is the master builder that works or inscribes 
itself into stone and has only this [natural] material. So what it then makes 
into the object of its comciousness, what it produces, what know}ec:lge this 
spirit brings itself to, can only be this impulse, this task, this enigma itself, 
namely~ the hieroglyph. Therefore what this impulse produces are the hier-
oglyphics. We marvel at the power of trus tremendous impulse in these 
works of art, in their mechanics-how far advanced the Egyptians were in 
the mastery and movement of massive natural objects, in impressing upon 
them the form that spirit seeks to know in them. They developed the 
understanding of mechanics to the greatest extent. In more recent rimes 
people made much ado about the transporting of the obelisk to Rome and 
the head of the sphinx to England(1 they made a great ado aoout Egyptian 
mechanics; for all our works of this kind are trifles in comparison to what 
was accomplished in Egypt as to the workmanship on, and overcoming of, 
massive objects. They worked on what is hardest. 
The engraved forms that they carved into the hardest stone are, on the one 
band, hieroglyphics proper that were inscribed upon, and covered, vast 
walls, with the result that these walls had the appearance I of pressed 
cotton. These hieroglyphics have more to do with subjective representation. 
On the other hand there are the works in stone, the sculptures. or else in 
painting, although these too are more or less hieroglyphs. Up to now these 
hieroglyphs have not been deciphered. Most of the representations are 
religious, are enigmatic,. and more or less just express the task of resolving 
the enigma, the urge to do so. Even with the aid of the great discoveries of 
more recent times we are still not much further along in understanding the 
Egyptian hieroglYPhs. We have not yet given up the desire for actual works 
49. ~ 
Ledln'ts 01f the Philosophy of Religion. ii. 546, where Hegel savs 'Belzoni ... abc> 
transponed a colossal head of Memnon to Englaod, a srupendous work.' Belzoni describes •n 
conside-rable *uil the laborious and protracted endeavor of transponing the hugt> bust oi 
Memnon ovedand to h 
Nile, via which ir was sem by boat ro Eogland for displa\· in the British 
MU5nllll. See Belzoni, Nf#TIIhve, 3~50, 110-12., and 125-35. 
358 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
in the language; yet even actual works in the language themselves, their 
co~tent, would always be only what the works of an represent for us. The 
~gma that the Egyptian spirit made of itself would ever remain just an 
emgma for us and would not become wholly dear. These artistic produc· 
ri~ns in architecture and sculpture are the principal work of the Egyptians. 
Wtth other peoples the work of their effort is subjugation or domination of 
other peoples. The vast and abundant realm of the Egyptians' deeds is, in 
contrast, their works of art. 
Works of annihilation endure in memory, but we still possess the 
[actual] works of the Egyptians, though only in ruins. One hundred 
thousand men were engaged for ten years in the Trojan Wa~ and what 
they accomplished, the endeavor of the Trojan War, was the devastation 
of Troy. The chief result is the futility of both sides, of the besieged and 
the besiegers. What the Egyptians presented, and left behind them, is a 
far loftier achievement, a positive one that, albeit in ruins, is still some· 
thing more or less indestructible and enduring. These are works of the 
greatest kind; to Herodotus the works of the Greeks appear paltry 
indeed compared to those of the Egyptians, and especially compared, 
for instance, to the Ia byrinth with its three thousand chambers above 
ground and th..ree thousand below ground. 50 It is likewise with the walls. 
These works are as impressively grand as they are elegant. I The archi-
300 
tectural design is as impressively grand as it is beautiful like that of the 
Greeks. So the Egyptian spirit is this laborer, and tbis is the principal 
feature of Egypt as such. 
The Dead and Immortalitv 
Especially important amo~g these works is their novel aspect. one dedicated 
to the dead. A great many of these subterranean works that they dedicate to 
the dead still remain, and not just by chance, for this subterranean realm 
plays an essential and major part in the project of Egyptian !abo£ ~ere 
are countless ruins of temples to the gods, especially in the delta regaon, 
the arena (Tummelplatz) of the Greeks and rhe Arabs. All around The~~ 
the hillocks of the valley, are the sorts of tombs in which the _ma1onry 
preserved themse)ves, especially the works or cemetery vaults dedtcated. to 
the dead on the hillocks of the valley. 51 Belzoni esrablished that rhe pyram•ds 
SO. See hi~ account of the labyrinth, and of Lake Moe~, in 2.148--50 (~~. PP· ~~~ 
Sl. Belzoni describes his explorations of mummy ca~n m the~ 
• ~ 
11Jrbes• 
of rocks, about two miles in length. at the fOOl of the Libyan mouaWPS, 
359 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
too were dedicated to the dead.52 More recently they have been opened 
up. Belzoni made the second one accessible, investigated the walls, and 
discovered well-proportioned crystalline structures (Knstalle). These enor-
mous, well-proportioned crystalline structures are not organic hut rational 
"3 
(verst4ndige), straight-sided structures that enclose nothing but a cadaver . .) 
The tombs of kings are awe-inspiring. Belzoni opened up and investigated a 
king's tomb that was built into a hill. However, he did not reach its other 
end, which is probably on the other side of the mountain. Evident here is the 
importance that the Egyptians placed on this realm of Ameoti, of death, of 
the invisible, and the kind of representation they accordingly attached to it. 
It fits together with their representation of the essence of the human being as 
such; for this aspect of the realm of the dead relates w the individuality of 
human beings. What comes to light here is the representation of the human 
being by human beings, divested of all contingency and temporality; from 
this we see what the Egyptians themselves thought about the immortality of 
their souls. 
Dealing with this aspect of the realm of rhe dead involves g,oing over the 
301 
features I pertinent to what the Egyptians themselves thought about the 
immortality of their souls. 
The first noteworthy point is that Herodotus says the Egyptians were the 
tirst to have believed and taught that the human soul is immortal.-~
4 Chinese 
reverence for their ancestors and the Indians' transmigration of the soul-for 
the Indians dreamed of extensive wanderings of souls through many natural 
things~an lead us to believe that Herodotus, being uninformed or igno· 
rant, spoke in error. But to grasp his words solely with respect ro the 
meaning of his account, we must be clear as to what belief in the immortality 
o{ the soul means. Every people has a representation of the immortaliry of 
the soul, although this representation lends itself to quire diverse chara(:ter· 
izations; so we must of course examine whether there is agreement regarding 
'N11rr.1ti1·e, 1541, one so ertensJI"(" that he calls it ·a complete lab\·rinth' {p. 51); see pp. q~. 
120. 113--4, 155--8. 229-30. 
. 
:i.2. Ibid. 177. where he states about the pHainids: 'The circumstan,;e of h,\ nng d:urnl>ers 
~nd a sar~ophagus--. l think !ea,·e~ H~ little que>tion, bUt that they were ere.:ted :lS 
~epu~~~r~s - See h1s a,;c(>Unt nt the opening up ol the p~-ram 1 d of Chephren ( 1-:hafr<-"1 on 
pp. _,) -!! 1. 
5 ;_ &lzom notes 1Jb1d. 27.i) that 'it might be supposed these large ~an;ophagi were m~dc tll 
.:ontam tht" bone!> oi bulls, as the sar.:ophagus which we iound m the tOmbs ot the kings oi 
Thd-.es ~as M enormous size, and more tit tor a bull than a human boJ1 . 1 cannot agree u1 thi~ 
.lplnl<)n. 
'4. He '>a''" •1.113; Gren.:, p. 185) that they are the first to tell that the human soul is 
immortal and that, upon bodil~- dt"ath, it cycles through some other living tning. 
360 

THE ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
what we call immortality. lt is not a matter of mere representations, such a!> 
of rcspecr shown to the deceased. 
In the Oriental viewpoint no freedom is granted to the individual. So we 
saw that the subject is recognized not as being somt·thing infinitely fn.·e or 
inhercntlv self-subsisrent ( Fur-Sich-Bestehendes), bur instead onlv as som('-
thing that passes away. Indian 'Spinozism' does not allow that s~bjectivir~· 
could havt• an infinite, free self-subsistence; instead, the fact that substance 
modifies itself at one point is only a superficial modification. With the 
Chinese we see great respect shown to the deceased, the son ascribing all 
rhat he does to his forefathers_ It exalts them, not him. So we see in this 
instance the view that the deceased are a perennial factor, although thar does 
nor suffice for the belief in the immortality of the soul-quire the conrrarr. 
People suppose that, when the emperor elevates to a higher level the tat her of 
the person being honored, this is a proof I of belief in immonaliry. Bur 
3C2 
immortality of the soul means that the soul, this inwardness, is infinite ot 
itself. This inward, individual, private sphere, to which no temporal honor 
can any longer hefall or be shown, is supposed to be immonaliry, something 
that is over and done with temporality. The emperor cannot honor it by 
exalting it, and so this is the indication that for the Chinese there is no ~uch 
thing as this absolutely free, inner being-for-self of soul. Hence exaltation in 
time no longer has any meaning; for rhe soul resides where worldly honor 
can no longer reach it~ and if worldly honor does extend to it, then chis is a 
sign that what we have here is not what is called an immortal soul. 
So this absolutely free, inner being-for-self of the soul is something alien 
to the Oriental character. Even in the Old Testament, in rhe Jewish religion. 
there are only fainr traces of immortality, and we do not even find immor-
tality of the soul to be a dominant topic, so that here roo no light is shed 
upon it. If, then, we do not find it among the Orientals, the question is 
whether it is to be sought in the case of the Egyptians, namely, whether there 
the soul is considered to be something subsistent for itself that is granted 
release from the temporal sphere. Our view of imrnonality is essentiall~· the 
characteristic of the person as destined for eternity, the view that the spirit or 
the soul has an eternal purpose wholly distinct from its finite purpose. 
distinct from temporality. Where this depth of rhe soul ~ocs unmentiOned. 
what can appear to be a rmere) continuation IS meager and Jackmg m 
interest. This higher destiny that is conferred upon human lite m _t.:urn 
constitutes faith's genuine inren~sr in the soul's conrinuanon. for the F.g~r­
rians, rhc (Onsciousncss of rhe existence (Bestehenl of su.:h a higher rurpu'>t' 
has not yet arisen. 
361 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
We have to discover exactly what they expressed by saying the soul 1s 
303 
immortal, exactly what perspective this was. Herodotus attribures to I 
them a beginning of this mnsciousness of a higher destiny.55 For them the 
inruition of immortality was only at an initial stage. (Their concept otl spirit 
was nor yet fulfilled by rwo aspects: that spirit has a hight.>r, eternal purpose, 
and that, reflected within itself, spirit is inherently infinite. They apprehend 
immortality only in the sense of abstract oneness, of rhe atom, but rhi~ 
oneness does not suffice for the character or concept ot spirit. They thought 
of this oneness or this atom as ongoing and indestructible, yet nor ongoing in 
an eternal, universal existence but instead as existence in a particular form 
(partikularisiert) in which the soul passes over imo the body of an animal. 
They did not think of themselves as infinite in and for themselves. This I or 
this 'one', and the way in which the reality of the soul is represented. are 
what makes the difference. 
The objectivity of spirit is its eternal destiny. If the soul is nor viewed 
as this spirit, then its destiny is only being something in a particular form 
( Partikttliir), and so the soul indeed continues on as an a rom, though one 
tossing about within particular forms of existence. 
A further representation or feature that belongs here is the fact that 
Oo;iris dies, is buried, remains buried, and is nor in turn resurrected. So he 
has many graves. Another point is that, by embalming, by the mummies, 
the Egyptians give the dead a continuation; the body would be preserved in 
this way for the time being. People suppose that in this endeavor they have 
a prooffor the belief in genuine immortality, stncc it is said to have been a 
folk belief that the soul continues on together with a body preserved in this 
way and, when together with it, does nor decompose. Yet there is no 
historical evidence for this belief. In any event, this mon: re~.:ent or modern 
way of explaining things is unhisrorical and it is a silly view. The very fact 
that they sought to enable rhe body to endure reveals instead that they had 
304 
no genuine sense of immortality; for the latter, the body itself I or the 
bodily being is precisely the more insignificant feature, and only an out· 
ward respect ought to be shown it. This embalming instead testifies iar 
more to their infinirely high estet:m for the mortal, partiwlar, fimte, bodily 
heing that th~· soul has as its body. For wirh true immortality the: preserva· 
tion of the body is completely nonessential. So this mummification does nor 
point to the authentic scmc of immortality. 
SS. Herodotus describes m detail the embalming process that is designed to make the bod,· of 
the decear.ed as perfect a model as possible o{ the god Osiri~ (2.86; Grene, pp. 165--t.). 
362 

Hil ORifNTAl. WORL.D: EGYPT 
A furtht.·r circumstance is that we find the judging of the dead also in 
ins~riptions and in their surviving paintings too, as well as in the [writing~ 
otl historians. It is historical fact that, prior ro the burial of a private person 
and that of a king, there was a public tribunal and a funeral oration, with 
narration ot the person's lift' and the extolling of his virtues, at which rime 
anyone in the assembly was able to present a contrary view. If the bystan-
ders did not concur, they could make accusations against the deceased. 
Hence the tribunal for the dead is not represented as held in the under-
world, in the way it is with the Grn•b (in Minos and elsewhere), and still 
less so does it resemble our Last Judgment. In gem:ral, we have no justifi-
cation for adverting from chis image to our Last Judgment, because the 
JUd~ing ot' the dead here is done by the living, not by a judge in the beyond. 
These tribunals are to be understood as the sort that the living hold 
~oncerning the dead. 
Another circumstance. one recounted by Herodotus, is that images of 
deceased relatives wert.· set up at banquets, together with the admonition: 
·Eat and drink. for you will become such a one as this.' 56 So the reminder of 
death was no occasion for reminding the living that death involved knowl-
edge of a higher destiny; instead, the images of the dead were I used to 
305 
encourage taking advantage of the present by seizing upon life's sensual 
pleasures. So this spectacle served not as an admonition regarding a higher 
destiny, but instead as an inducement to the sensual pleasures of this life. 
This is what we observe in the case of the Egyptians concerning their view of 
the human being and of the soul. 
Privat(· or Particular Purpose 
The [Fg.yptianj orientation is to vitality in the present. On the om hand, here 
we see the Egyptians engaging themselves over against nature with a power· 
ful understanding of their own strength that is self-confident and is awesome 
in the operations of the state just as it is in the mechanical and technical 
features of rhcir edifices. On the orher hand, we see in rhis vicality too rhe 
power ot transforming the particular and the finite. We havr observed rhi~ 
.:·hara~o.'t-cristic of transforming natural particularity inro something symbolic. 
of represeming one representation in another, wherein rhe Egypnans repre· 
sent one sensible reprc'>entation in a differenr one in such a way that t~e one 
henmle-s svmbol for the other. Here we see the power ot the pamcular 
-
-4 
h 
h 
· lth · do th•s <1 t theJr banqueti b1 
:>6. HcrodoiU'> states (2. 78; Grc-nc, p. L 
) I at t e v.ea 
Y 
. 
luving someone (am· around a miniature coitin containing a human hkent"S'> . 
.363 

306 
307 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-J 
(Partikular) and the spiritual power of changing or transforming it-the 
presence of mind and steadfastness or good sense that is. on the one hand, 
immersed in the sensible, in particularity, and is stnctly bound to it, and on 
the other hand, however, also has the power to venture out beyond this 
particularity, to transform it, yet going forth nor into something spiritual or 
universal or freely emergent as such, not to thought, but instead into another 
particularity that only transforms the one intelligible representation into a 
different one, such that what is universal always remains something 'other' 
or inward. Herein lies the characteristic of subjection to what is private and 
particular (die Partikularitat und die Besonderheit), and the strength of 
seeking to break through it- I 
When, in this light. we turn to the consideration of personality and to the 
Egyptians' customary conduct, we find behavior that is correspondingly 
circumspect and appropriate. But we also find audacity and boldness on 
the part of king Amasis, who sent the daughter of his predecessor to Cam· 
byses. On the one hand he holds fast to the purpose of his own daughter's 
honor, and on the other hand he has the audacity ro substitute for her the 
daughter of the one he mucdered. 57 
Striking and just as noreworrhy is another story told hy Herodotus. He 
speaks of a king Rhampsinitus. This king Rampsinitus had a large amounr oi 
gold in a stone chamber of his palace. The builder of this chamber, on his 
deathbed, revealed to his sons that he provided for a life of riches for them by 
having inserted one stone of the chamber in such a way that it might easily be 
removed without that being noticed. (This extreme representation of the 
private purpose of providing for his sons in this way is authentically Egyp-
tian.} The sons put this information to use and laid their hands on the gold. 
The king spotted the loss and was amazed; he set traps, and one of the 
thieves, upon returning to the site, was ensnared in them. Then this thief 
called out to his brother and, despairing of escaping and out of concern for 
his brother, bade the brother to cut off his head and take it awav with him. 
("Ibis is one feature of a frightfully consistent representation of a heedless 
understanding, which sees what is necessary and heedlessly carries out what 
serves finite ends.) Upon finding only the torso. [ht.· king became ever more 
curious. Then he had the headless corpse displayed with )!.Uards posted hv ir 
who were charged to pay atrcnrion to th(• demeanor of rhe passersby. The 
mother of these sons became extremely angry about the suspended body and 
('Ommanded the remaining 1 and surviving son to fet(.:h the .:orpse of h1~ 
57. For the stol)·, see above, pp. 336-7 with n. 8. 
364 

THf ORIENTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
brother, to free the body of his brother from rhis humiliation; orherwise. 
she threatened to reveal all ro the king. So her son, the brother. carried out 
the command by loading donkeys with wineskins and cutting into one of 
the skins when they were near the guards. so that the guards came and 
ladled the wine. and drank it. growing merry until they were drunk. Then 
the brother removed the corpse and shaved the right cheeks of the guards. 
The king, having become even more exasperated, then in despair offered 
his daughter to someone who must tell her what has been the most intelli-
gent or wisest thing he has ever done, and the most outrageous or ungodly 
thing. Then the robber came too and told her the story of the theft, 
whereupon the king's daughter sought to grab hold of him. But he had 
cut off tile hand from his brother's body, and he extended it to her and 
made his escape. Then the king promised the bold robber a pardon and the 
daughter for his wife. ·58 
So we see brought out here the rypical (Egyptian] character; the private 
nature of the purpose is established throughout. In reading this story, 
I imagined it was from 'The Thousand and One Nights': in one aspect it is 
famastic, in another totally confined ro a private passion devoid of any wider 
reflection and scope and possible transformation of what is inward. Linked to 
this is the general lack of any integrity or any general ethical life. The private 
character of the passion is a thoroughly private purpose and is the ultimate 
thing; and this purpose is pursued and carried out with an understanding 
heedless of consequences and ever focused on the present, and with a mom en-
tary I dissimulation. This similariry to Arabian fairy tales is worthy of ~ 
admiration, and Herr von Hammer says that 'The Thousand and One Nights' 
is by no means Arabian but is instead of thoroughly and srricrly Egyptian 
origin. 59 For in the concerns of the Egyptians rhere is nothing of the Arabian 
character, which involves far simpler passions: courage, horse, sword, l~ve, 
woman. Thus we see the Egyptian character dearly realized in these stones, 
and so their Egyptian [origin) is to be inferred. 
'8 
1 d 
1 rhat he offen more detail 
' . HcroJotus td!s this !on<> •tnrv mu(:h as Hege 
oes. excep 
ld Sh · 
h 
" - . . 
. 
f I 
or "0 
a\'Jn!!: t e 
!LUI; Grene pp. 181-4). In Herodotus the treasure consJsts o SJ vee, n 
., 
· 
f 
·h 
' 
. 
. . 
d 
be rold that the t11coumer o 
l eeks oi the drunktn g,uards 1s an act of dermon. Also, wr nee w 
ld .. _1· 1 d "' 
L 1 
· h d k which IS ....-h•· she cou 
..,... ()(l e 
. 
tue 'r_other with the kin~·~ dau)!;hter rakes pbce 1111 e ar ' 
· 
( .. d 
d 
· 
· 
. 
·h h 
· i<1ct not that o r .. e e"\:ease 
gr<~_spmg tht> severed hand (and arm I ot a .-urp~. ~ JC 
was 
111 
d 
1 rth il that rhe 
b 
h 
. 
. . 
·rh 
1 r the pardon. an so o 
· 
t•>r er hut taken lr•>m a diUcrenr corpse. 
e reason ° 
. . d 
~ponse u>a 
'·. 
. 
. 
' 
. 
d d . 
. h had come torwar Jn r .. 
Klllg was \"C'rl •mprt·ssed w1th th~ man> wJI an 
armg, c 
. 
rrur rhe pan nf 
. . 
. 
. 
. 
xl 
h self dOt's nor au.<'"pl as 
prodam<tnon of_IJOIIlUIHt•· trom the_km~. lleH otus tm 
f h ... 
• dau<>hter. 
L. 
h 
h j b'" the use <> r e o.lllf: ' 
,... 
tne <.rorv reg;ard111~ rhc attempt to dt'i~::O>~'t t e 1 Ie 
· 
.. 
R •d L .. <tl! p .. ,5 ,..,5 t\"•enfla. 
'9 
. 
. 
h. I 
d 
schonen 
' e.:urL 
' . ~ee joseph von Hammer. (res.: •c 1te 
er 
18H!l. 6. 
365 

THE LECTlJRES OF 1~.!2-.1 
When we compare this private {individuell) character ot the Egyptians 
with thc.-ir religion and their civic life and their endless urge toward labor, we 
find in all this a uniform determinacy: this abstract immortality and fixity of 
individuality, tnis atom, but not yet something concrete, not yet concrele 
individuality. Since this [atom] is whar it becomes, it immerses itself in 
particular elements (Partikula·res) and for that vecy reason it is firmly ani-
mal, the firm understanding that operates within a privare domain of pur· 
poses and inruirions but is, just so, an endless impelling, a steadfast presence 
of mind and striving that, for private purposes, risks everything, invens 
everything, and knows no bounds. So we see that this compulsiveness or 
energy of the Egyptian soul is nor yet directed co what is universal anJ does 
nor yet know the universal as such, and rhus ir does not yet know itself~ ior the 
'roUl is this onefold and universal element on its own account. Grasping 
o;omething universal is immediately identical with the fact rhat rhis unyielding 
'one', the I, grasps itself and relates itself to itself, to this universal. abstract 
element. The very fact that rhe soul knows itself is its making itselt into the 
309 
conrent. lbe Egyptian understanding I or spirit stands at om:e in particularity 
and does not yet go back imo its own inner being, does not raise itself up w the 
poim ot grasping itself as universal and coming to be for itself. In this un· 
selfconscious state (Befangenheit) this spirit at the same time shows or proves 
itself to be free, bold and brave. It renders its natural intuition symbolically and 
positions itself as the means to something universal that, however, dat·s not 
make its appearance as universal.lt involves a self-enclosed state (Befan~enheit) 
and a struggle against it, an implicit struggle, or a mastery over particularity, but 
one that is not yer ideal particularity, is not yet for itself. The particularity 
already is this means implicitly, because the Egyptian spirit supersedes the self· 
enclosed state, utilizing it for the sake of another self-enclosed srare. Spirit does 
not yet have as its explicit purpose the positive result or the universal itself. Thar 
this particularity is also explicitly ideal is whar must now come forward as the 
joyous, free, cheerful spirit, and this is the spirit of Greece. 
Transition ro Greece 
An Egyptian priest said to Herodotus that rhr Greeks are perpetual childn:n. 
But we could with more justification say that rhc Egyptians are impulsi\'t' 
boys who lack the ideality of youths and who will become vouths only b~ 
means of rhe ideal iorm.60 
· 
bO. This i~ not corrt'<:t. See rhe passage!> cited above inn. 10. Whtle Hegel ts mJstJ.ken abotJr_ 
what Herodotus satd, be has in mind his own division of world lustor~·, starring with the age ol 
366 

Tl!F ORIENTAL WORLO: EGYPT 
The Orienral spirit is spirit remaining imm<.·rsed in narure, is this unal-
loyed unity immersed in nature. In Egypt we see spirit as sclf-enclmed, bur ir 
is impossi blc for spirit to keep itself within this self-enclosed condition 
because the impulse is to disrupt it. The Indians arc only disposed toward 
negativity and flee 10 it, whereas the Egyptians absorb themselves in their 
labor. Egypt is the land of conf]ict, of dialectic, the land of the task or the 
problem (Aufgabe). The rask stands higher than that [Indian] idmtitydevoid 
of interest-if no problem, then no solution; and if rhe problem is devised 
and defined, then the solution itself is accordingly given at the same time. 
The Egyptian spirit is one of liberation, of universal inwardness. Th~ strug-
gle is against particularity, and what must emerge or has to spring forth is 
JUSt the form of universality. It could have been interesting to investigate 
the historical intimations, and to consider, 1 how the cons..-iousness of the 
310 
Egyptians represented their own spirit in the form of a problem. 
In this regard we have to recall the Greek inscription of the goddess at Sais 
(the goddes~ called Neith in Egyprian, J/aX!o.O., in Greck): 'I am what is and 
what was., and no mortal has lifted my covering or my veil.' Expressed here is 
this unknown-the longing for, and supposition ot, something higher, and 
the added point thar it is not disclosed. This is how Plutarch puts it, and in 
his Commentary on the 1/maeus, Proclus introduces this inscription with the 
addition: 'The fruit that I bore is the sun, Helios'.ti 1 Heliosis the sun of spirit. 
The renowned prince of light was celebrated at Sais with a festival of lamps 
[ofNcith] (Pallas) 6 -'- corresponding to our Candlemas and the lantern festival 
of the Chinese. The fruit of Neith is the light, but her attributes, the 
predicates rhat are given her, one can equally well refer or relate to night, 
and that not in the specific sense (the Greek sense as such) ot Pallas, or 
.\thena, because Ncith is called 'night' in England too. So night gi\·es birth ro 
rhe sun. 
This sun or Helios, to which this veiled goddess has given birrh, is the 
Greek spirit or lhe Greek light, is Phoebu,. Apollo, who has rite sun as his 
radiance ( Nachha/1). As for the Greek Apollo, this god ot light, we know the 
f 
. 
. 
_ 
bo I od (' . r) ,outh 1 (;r~e~tl, aJuhhood 
Ill ann or chlldh.ood (Asta), then pnxeedlllg to 
~- tu 
~.gyp • · 
·Romel, and old a~~:e (Europt."l. Sec- above, pp. 206-8. 
-· 
.39 · 11 
'4'i wh·n·Hegdlbopn•sent~ 
I)]_ See Lectures on the Philosophv ofReli,::•<m,u. 6 
wtt n. ~ ·' _ < 
1· 
1 PL 1 . .-
. 
· 
) -· ·d · 'I 
d Pro..· uo;, " 
1 ""~' 
the,;e quorannn•- The ~ources are: Plutarch, De fs,.U• l't ( .• m 1 
• an 
1 h _ ... 
·fi-
.11 b . -. 
n •J lrom our t•'Xt. a 1 ou~o 
l?ll4eon 1.30. The additional phrase ·and what WI 
e ts Oml < 
Hegel indudes it in his le.:tures on orhc-r topics. 
. 
. 
he 
62. See Herodotus, Historv 2.62 (Grene, p. 158). 'Pallas' is a rule 01 .\r ru. 
367 

THE LECTURES OF 1!!22-3 
inscription of his chief temple: 'Human being, know thyself!'6·3 Apollo i!!. 
the knowing God. In this instam:c self-knowledge- is not the commonplace. 
psychological being of our human knowledge; instead it expresses a supreme 
command, the ab~olute command, that spirit should know and grasp itself in 
its own t:ssential nature. This knowledge is whar is primary, and the labor ot 
the world, the striving of every religion, ascends to it; there is no inscription 
more sublime than this. There is no utterance of the Greek spirit more 
distinctive than this, and so the contrast of the Greeks to the Egyptian spirit 
311 
was expressed in this way. I 
The definitive transition is expressed in these telling features, although we 
can call to mind even more clearly a familiar story. In Thebes [in Greece] 
a sphinx, the very image of Egypt, posed a riddle, asking; Who or what goc!!. 
on four legs in the morning, on two legs at mid-day, and on rhree legs in the 
evening? Since no one could solve the riddle, destruction and misfortune 
befell the people and the land. Oedipus, from the line of Cadmus, solved the 
riddle by stating that the answer is a human being, and the sphinx collapsed 
into a heap of stones. 64 The task for the Egyptian spirit is that what ought to 
emerge is the thought in which human beings grasp themselves. If this 
thought is grasped, then the human being is grasped. In considering the 
story more closely, we find this spiritual clarity linked in Oedipus with the 
greatest ignorance. Clarity of spirit dawns in this royal residence, but as still 
linked with appalling ignorance. Here we have the first rulership, the ancient 
patriarchal rule, ro which knowing is a foreign (heterogenes) principle, and 
which therefore disintegrates because of that. The Oriental [principle! must 
give way. This ancient knowledge anains clarity only via political freedom. 
lhis knowledge is only purified by political laws; as immediate, it is not 
salutary. The initial knowledge is something calamitous65 and must first 
develop itself into what we see in the Greeks. So rhis is the characteristic, 
and the mythological intimation, of the transition to thr Greek spirit. 
63. See the discussion of this motto, wnh reference to Apollo and <;c.:ratc-s. in the /..e<"trm•s on 
the Hr.story· of Phrlosophy, ii. 150. 
64. A sphinx is a ueature of ~·ptian mythology that m C.n:ek litetature IS re):!.trded a~ 
'.emale; it is repres.:-med in nurnerou~ examples of Egvptian ~tatuan ••nJ :tn 1 induding the 
lamous huge statue near the (;rear P.·ramid at G 1zal. In Greek lcge;uJ the <>phin' t~rroriz:ed 
Thebes (In Greece) b\· destruving pt"rsons who could not solw the riddle It pose-d I rhe on<' qated 
lfl our text I. Oedipus corre-ctlr gues>ed the answer-an infan1 crawls on all tours I the ·m~)mmt:" 
of hie). a !IJO"'nup I the 'mid-da,·') walk-; on two lc~. and an eldt'rh per~on lthe ·e~min~·· add$ 
a cane to make three ·]e!(s "-the sphin.x comm ined suicide lor el<,e was ki ll~d b,· h1m t. and so the-
city was re~ued b~· his ieat. 
. 
65. Oedipus unknowingly kills his father and mar-ries his mother. 
368 

THF. OR!FNTAL WORLD: EGYPT 
At the same time we musr recall that Egypt was a province of rhc vast 
Persian Empirt-, and for that reason we have juxtaposed to Greece nor jusr 
Egypt alone out the Persian Empire too. In the Persian Empire there was a 
political point ot unity in the power of the Persian race, rhis mountain 
people. In rh<.> religious mode this point of uniry rook the specific form of 
the pure light, as the knowing of rhe absolute, I in the existence of pure 
312 
knowledge. The Persians had this physical 'one' as their object and content, 
as also did the multiplicity of languages, cusroms, and other particular 
tcatures of the various peoples. So one aspect is an abstract, fixed point of 
unity, though implicitly so; what it holds together is only a mulripliciry ()t 
various parricular elements that are not interconnected organically. We have 
already mentioned these parricular elements. On the one hand there was the 
Persian intuition of light, on the other, a life of pleasure and physical valor, as 
weiJ as the Egyptian impulse. This is rhc vast totality of Persia that srands 
over against Greece. Greece is the land in which these elements that in Persia 
arc nor interconnected organically, but just juxtaposed, receive their aurhen-
tic integration through the deepening of spirit within itself; so Greece is 
where the partifular elements mutually link up and rise ro the highest uniry, 
by spirit idealizing rhese particular elements. All rhe materials, all rhe 
elements, arc present in the Persians, and what is lacking is just rhc spiritual 
unity and rhe rebirth of this material within spirit. The rebirth of spirit from 
our of this material is the characteristic feature of Greece. 
We still have to mention, with respect ro Persia, the fresh energy of the 
mountain people. Allowing the distinctiveness of their subjects proved to be 
a beamiful, noble relationship that in irs purity, however, was only of brief 
duration; for simple gallantry sank back suddenly into Asian primitiveness, 
in that ir could not withstand Asian excess and knew nor how to put a srop 
to it. The simple Persian srnst· enrered suddenly into Asian opulence and had 
no internal n:straint. Persian religion was nor fanatical; the absolutely basic 
intuition was the intuition of light as a still simple, narural essence, and only 
fanaric1sm would have 1 been able ro maintain itself over againsr opulence, 
313 
against this prinl·iple of multiplicity. But then fanaticism would also have 
proven to be neither noble-minded nor tolerant. The simplicity of the 
Pl·rsians, situated within the Asian multipliciry, was at a loss; tor the Persiam 
hroughr with them no political understanding, no organized system for 
holding rogerht·r rhcse peoples, one in which rhe various partic~lar den_tents 
would ha\'e had rhcir proper place. They discovered no orgamze~ pohncal 
,,:ondition, and since they encountered an endless diversity-not, mderd. an 
already structured condition that they could have adopted, as the Man~hus 
[did in China}-they thus remained simply in the relationship ot ruler m·cr 
369 

THF LECTURES OF 1822-3 
these peoples. As 'barbarians', this sufficed for them. 66 In their far-flung 
Asian expanse the Persians remain a people by itself, cut off and isolated 
over against this diversity. 
Thus, for instance, Herodotus narrates how, after the overthrow of the 
Magi by the eight great princes, Otanes wanted to have a democracy, Mega-
byzus an aristocracy, and Darius a monarchy.67 Here there is no evidence 
whatsoever of considering the governance ot so many peoples and the broad 
expanse of so many narions; here we see nothing bur regard for the Persian 
people. Each of the speakers is concerned exclusively with the Persians a!> 
such, who held themselves apart. There is no commonality of laws or eights 
shared wirh the other peoples, just as the Persians themselves evidently are not 
the parricular government officials for these peoples; the chief connecting 
elements were instead just tribute and military service. So, Persian rule gained 
no inner legitimacy among these peoples; that is, there was no law and right in 
common with the ruled. Defining themselves in this way as separate, the 
314 
Persians remain the abstract I masters, and such a relationship necessarily 
brings with it violence, lack of rights, and oppression. 
This circumstance, then, brought about the internal debilitation of the 
Persian power rhat came up against the Greeks. The encounter of these two 
peoples, the Greeks and the Persians, is the great topic, and the epoch, of 
what Herodotus thus called the 'Median Wars'.68 From here we pass over 
directly to Greece, and consider the culture of the land of Greece up to this 
point in time. 
66. The Greeks calll'd the Persians 'barbarian~· because of the wa~· rheir spttch sounded l'bar 
bar'l to th.e Greek l'llT. Th1s term came to mean not just foreign, but uncivilized. 
67. 5« Herodotus, Hi5tor;· 3.80-3 (Grene, pp. 247-50), a passage in which speeches auril:>· 
uted to the debaters can onJ, have rellecred Greek rheoi"ies oi form~ oi ~ovecnment, for Greek 
thinkers liked to dar.~ih 11arious types of 'constitutions'. The outcome iavored the view oi 
Darius, who sub~urntlr hecame king. Herodotus speaks of seven successful conspirators 
('princes') who overthrew the Magi, not e1ght. 
68. For Herodotus. the encounter of the Greeks with the Persian Empirl" as such has its 
beginnings with the attack~ of Croesus, king of Lydia, upon the Greeks of Asia 1\tinor in 
Ephesus, Ionia, and Aeolia 11.26; Grene, p. 43). Croe~us then lou~! a war with the MrM 
(I. 74; Grene, P· 67), who by this time had been bested in a revolt bv their Persian subje<.."tS and 
been mcorporated mto thr newly formed Persian Empire under Cv~s. Harpagus, a Mede aPd a 
general m the se£\"ice of the Persian king C~·rus, conquered Sardts, the capital of Lrdia (1.84; 
Grene, P· 72), whidt io; how Lydia, together with its Greek subjects in the westernmost part oi 
Asta m111or I who werr originally colonists placed there bv cin-·states on the Greek mainland1. 
came to be absorbed into the Persian Empire. 
. 
. 
370 

The Greek World 
Earlier we compared the Greek spirit with the age of youth.' The noblest 
figure that hovued before the Greek spirit was that of the Homeric youth 
Achilles. The Trojan War is, speaking generally, the beginning of the actual 
unity of the Greek totality, and Homer articulated this actuality in repre-
sentational form. Thus Homer is the basic literary source (Grundhuch) for 
the onset of intellectual representation, the source for the intuition of the 
nation, tht' source drawn upon for a period of a thousand years. His work h 
the mother's milk on which the Greek people have been reared. The Homeric 
youth, Achilles, son of the poet, of representation, is the beginning of the 
Greek spirit; but he is still subject to, subordinated to, the king of kings, 
Agamemnon. In this initial condition, he cannot be the leader without 
becoming a figure of fantasy, cannot yet step forward as leader. 2 I 
315 
The second youth of the Greek world, Alexander the Great, the actual 
youth, who stands at the pinnacle of the age of youth in its full maturity and 
concludes the whole, is the culmination of what is authentically Greek. This 
comparison of Greek life with the age of youth does nor capture the specific 
figure of a hwnan youth, but instead the concept [of youthfulness]. Young 
people are immature and incomplete, for their aims are outside themselves; and 
if they believe that they already possess within themselves the proper aim. if 
they regard their way as the ultimate aim, they would be mistaken. and tht 
wrong thing would result. 
In regard w Greek life, we can say that it does nor yet involve an activi~ 
or effort on behalf of abstract understanding, an effort that sets itself a 
univt'rsal goa) and roils ro achieve it. What is found here is a concrere yet 
sensuous vitality, which, though born of the spiritual, still has sensuous 
presence. This unity, this fusion of the spiritual and the sensuous, which 
I. See a bon, p. 207. The term used here is Jugendalter, earlier ir is fi.inglingsa~U!r-
. 
2. Hegel's prim:ipal ancient sources for the presentation of the Greek world are. m addu:~oo_ to 
Homer, Herodotus, The History; Thucydides, The Pelopon.nesian War; Diodorus of S~e•l~. 
Lihr<Jr)' of History; and Pausanias, Guid£ to Greea. Sii!Ct" rhese are wdl-knoW11 and acceS"St~le 
sounes, thr~rroan editors give cirarions only when required by specific referenct5. The Engl•sh 
t>dn. provides addirional notes. Hegel'slibrary cootained ropiesol Homer.,llias, 2 vols. Clripu&: 
1819-21}, and Odyssea. 2 vols. I Leipzig and Leiden, 1820!; Herodoru~ H1SI~,_ ~~bri I )I 
I Pans, 159.21; Thuqdides, De bello Peloponnesiaco libri VIII 1Franktun. I )94): Diodorm 
Sil'ulu~. BlbliotheCAR historicae libri XVII (Lyons. 1552); and Pausaruas, Cr.u<..u descnpto. 
3 \·ols. (leipzig. 1818). Hegel was thorougbJ~ familiar wirh rbe Greek philosophers. dramansu. 
and poets, and with modem works on Greek histo~·-
371 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
we see also among the Asians, is now, however, no longer something sub-
sisting and inunediate; rather it portrays itself as born from the spirit-a 
spiritualized sensuousness that exists for spirit. So we have here the sensu-
ous-spiritual intuition of the Orientals, but produced from individuality, 
from rhe individual spirit. Thus the Greek world has as its foundation the 
Oriental world; it starts out from the divinity of nature but reconstructs it, 
316 
giving it spirituality as its inner soul. This is the Greek principle. I 
THE PERIODS OF GREEK HISTORY 
Three periods are found in the Greek world, and this is the case with every 
people thereafter. The distinction among the periods can be indicated more 
precisely for the Greeks because here peoples are entering for the first 
rime into the concrete nexus of world history. The first period is that of the 
beginning. The second is that of the retrospective contact with an earlier 
world-historical people, the contact of the Greeks with rhe Persians. The 
third period is the contact with a later world-historical empire, in the case of 
the Greeks the contact with the Romans. 
The first period~ the period of beginning, starts in the first epoch; and it 
continues to the point of inner completion, to the sort of completion within 
itself that makes it possible for a people to engage with an earlier world-
historical people. This period comprises the first formation of a people up to 
a condition of real maturity in which it can come into contact with the 
people that precedes it. With the Asians this formation could only begin with 
nature, with what is immediate. With a people that has a precondition,3 
however, an alien culture appears at its beginning. lr has from the beginning 
a double factor within itself: on the one hand, it proceeds from itself, on the 
other hand, from something alien, a foreign stimulus; and its maturation 
consists in bringing this doubling into a unity, imo unification. For a people 
has to digest the foreign element and expel what remains alien. This first 
period ends, therefore, with the marshaling of a people's inner, real, distinc-
tive vigor, which is applied precisely against its predecessor. 
The second period is that of a people's triumph, its good fortune. Because 
317 
it I has tUrned so much to external relations and accomplishments, it lets 
internal matters go, and so feuds develop within it; it falls into disunity, 
3. Hegel pmumably means that, whereas the cultures of Asia arose directlv out o{ nature, all 
later peoples encountered cultures that preceded them and conditioned them·· thev do not sun 
·~Q 
. . 
172 

THE GREEK WORLD 
struggle, and conflict. Now the outwardly directed tension disappears. 
Having attained a pinnacle within itself, and having been victorious out-
wardly, the tension turns inward and brings about a disintegration within, a 
disintegration into a real existence and an ideal existence, so that it becomes 
objective to itself in this mode of thought as it portrays itself in art and 
science. This is rhe point at which a people founders. 
Now the third period begins, that of decline and destruction and of 
contact with the next world-historical people-a people called upon to 
construct a higher stage of the world spirit, a stage in which the higher spirit 
appears. These periods are to be distinguished in the case of the Greek 
people too. Thus we now move on to Europe. 
The sun takes its course from morning to evening (Abend), and so we move 
from Asia to Europe, the West (Abend/.and). First we will consider the land of 
the Greeks. The fourth location, 4 which we encounter here, aaoss the sea, is 
the group of islands of the Aegean Sea and a mainland that is just as insular in 
nature, panly a peninsula [the Peloponnesus], partly numerous narrow spits of 
land, and frequently bisected by bays. A diversity of landscape dominates the 
interior, alternating hilly areas or mountains with narrow plains and valleys 
intersected by small streams. Greece has no large rivers with the sort of alluvial 
plains whose I fenile soil nourishes only a race of people to whom the heavens 
318 
offer merely a type of dependence. Here in Greece this much-divided land is 
superficially connected. This is the elementary character of the geography and 
of the Greek spirit-the spirit of self-subsistent individuality, which was not 
unified from the start by a patriarchal realm but which stands on its own and by 
itself, and must find unity in a higher medium, that of law and spirirual custom. 
THE ORIGINS OF THE GREEK FOLK SPIRIT 
Who Are the Greeks? 
A closer consideration of the Greek spirit reveals the difficulty of knowing 
what the Greek people actually were originally; for the Hellenic first had to 
become the Greek.5 An inwardly heterogeneous character is what we first 
4. The preceding locations are the Far East (China, india), the Middle East (Persia), and the 
:'~lear East and North Africa (Egypt). 
. 
. 
5. Since 'Hellenic' (hellenisch) and 'Greek' (griechrschl have the 5ame mean:mg, Hegel ma~ 
simply be engaged in a wordplay meaning that the Greeks had to ~ome Greek. Tbe word 
"Hellenic' goes back to Hellen the legendary ancestor of the Hellen•c peoples--the Donans, 
lonians, Achaeans, and Aeolia'ns. Among the first HeJleruc tribes to coloaiu italr were the 
'Graecians' (so named aher Graecus. according to legend a oepbew of Helle1J), and rh.us the 
.373 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
encountet; and the free, beautiful spirit of Greece could only emerge out of 
such hererogeneity by surmounting it. The heterogeneity from which it 
emerges is not something that is basic and more profound, else the Greek 
spirit would have become something higher than it is. Thus the heterogene-
ity is a necessary principle. Only a superficial and foolish representation 
makes the claim that a beautiful ethical whole could come about through a 
s.imple, singular development of something of the same kind as it-a race 
that remains tied by blood and clan relationships. For even the plant needs and 
makes use of heterogeneous elements such as light and ale. The representation 
of a natural goodness and of the absence of need as the peaceful development 
319 
of such a goodness-this sort of notion must be abandoned I when spiritual 
development is to be considered. Such representations are contrary to ~ 
concept; the experiencc:s of history demonstrate the opposite. 
The beginning of Greek life reveals to us a mixture, intersection, and 
migration of tribes aDd peoples of whom we do not know the extent of their 
Greek nature, and of tribes whose entirely non-Greek nature is familiar to 
us. The Athenian people--Athens, the swnmit of the Greek spirit--came 
about as a place of refuge for individuals of various tribes, of the most 
diverse clans and peoples. Ukewise Persia, the genuinely Asiatic empire, is 
a coUection of varied and heterogeneous tribes; and even the Romans were a 
national coUection of castoffs (colluvies) from diverse peoples who, without 
family ties, were bound together solely through an interest in pillage. All the 
nations of Europe have arisen through a melding of peoples. Thus the aspect 
of heterogeneity is essential to a world-historical people. Greeks, Romans, 
Germanic peoples first became one out of heterogeneity. This is the necessary 
prerequisite for a people to claim wocld-historical signi.6ca.nce. 
In looking more closely at the Greek people, we cannot say which of the 
peoples were originally Greek in origin. Larez; a broad swath of countties that 
were inhabited by Greeks belonged to the Greek people, such as the lower part 
of Italy, the Black ~ 
tbc: coasts of Asia Minor, and Sicily. There were also 
Gredt colonies in France, such as Massilia, and Cyrme on the coast of Africa-6 
Based on the earlier situation, we do not know abour the relationship between 
Latins land lata the West) ostd the wont "Grttk' to designate the Helleoes twbereas lhe Greeks 
rdena:l to their COIUJ1r)' as 'Htllas'). But siDc.e 1-kgd qDOmi Thucydides' claim, based on 
Hc:mer, that qnally the term 'Hellenes' designated Ollly ooe of !he tribes, that of Achi1ks 
from Pbdliotis (~below, n. 1~), bis IDCallingmay be that the various pcopk:s who settled in dx 
ana had to acqwre a QMDIQOn Identity. In any eveut, the point of the lleJtt few paragraphs is that 
the Greek spirit emerged only gradually out ol heteroga1e0u5 elementS. 
6. ~ 
is praem-day Matseille, and CJRDe is an aucin1r city locared iD what is DOW 
eascan Libya. The Greek Empift rachal its~ euem iD the 71h cem. JC. 
374 

THE GREEK WORLD 
Gccece and the interior lands of Asia Minor. Nor do we know the extent to 
which we should pay attention to peoples other than Greeks, such as Phrygiaru 
and Carians. (In modem times a tomb of a King Midas I with an ancient 
320 
Greek inscription has been discovered in Phrygia.) Herodotus said that he did 
not know whether the Phrygians or the Egyptians were older; likewise Homer 
regarded the Carians as barbarians because, so be said, they did not understand 
Greek; and yet Thucydides reported that the oldest inhabitants of the Greek 
islands were Carians. 7 
The natural relationships thus cannot be determined with precision: we 
have no clear scientific knowledge nor does the nature of the case make ir 
clear. It is essential to remark that here we find ourselves in mwky waters 
because the natural relationships themselves are by nature obscure. The 
names of these tribes and clans are very changeable because the clans are 
constantly on the move. One of the important peoples here are the Pclas· 
gians, who were constantly on the move and were drawn also ro Iraly, the 
Peloponnesus, and Asia Minor:. Their name vanished; it is not known where 
they came from physically; and they melded with other peoples. Thus there 
are a host of names that later disappeared when one tribe mixed with 
another and, when united, formed a common body. The Pelasgians were 
absorbed into Hellenism and thus disappeared; as Herodotus says, the 
Pelasgians were present in Athens and became Hellenes. 8 
Nor only are tribes seen to wander back and forth; so, roo, various loci of 
adtuce arise only to disappear· again. Thcace, for example, where Orpheus 
and others once lived, is mentioned as an early locus of culture-a country 
that later, howevet; vanished so completely from the Greek world that it no 
longer counted 1 as part of Greece. 9 Thessaly too was mentioned: Deuca· 
321 
lion was an extremely famous man in antiquity, and we can observe in him 
7. Ser Herodotus, The History 2.2 (tr. David Grme (Cbi;ago, 1987), 131 ); Homer. I~ 2.1167 
(tt. E. V. Rieu, ~v. edn.. Pe~ Jones and D. C. H.llieu (LoDdon, 2003), 44); and TlmcydidEs. Thr 
Pe~ 
War 1.4, 8 (tr. Steven Lattim~ (Indianapolis, 1998), 5, 6). Pbryp aDd Caria \\'1ft 
:mcit:nt ~ 
locatrd in what is now central and south-wesrero Turkey. l1le l'brygiaP5 came from 
~Balkans about 1200 IC, and the Carians were probably native to the Iqioo. Mida5 WIIS a ~ol. 
Phrygi.a in the 8th cent. ac but also figured in Gn:ek mythology. 
. 
8. Herodotus., History 2.51 (Grene, pp. 153-4). uttk is knOWII of tb£ l'ei=ugiaas Olbftlhla dAt 
!:bey were an aboriginal people who inhabi~ parts of Gmce priOJ" to me Hd)rsJes ~ 
spokr a 
language other than G.reek. Tht:ir ori,pns and etbto-linguistic ;dmrity an: maaen ol ~ 
aod 
9 · The region of lluaa p(eSC!ldy comprises north~ Grecr;e, soutbEm Bulpt_ia. 
f.uropeao lurlr.ey. Tbe ancient Thraciaos were iodcpcDdeal; subsequmdy they.~ 511hi~ 
by die Greeks, later by ~Romans. and cvemually disappc&ftd imo me~ 
aad OttomaD 
Em.pira. In Greek mythology O.rpbeus was a cdebmcsi TbraciaD ......,.n 
375 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
the same restlessness as portended by his ancient origins. 10 According to a 
saga, he came from the Peloponnesus, then traveled to Locris to which he led 
the Tekbines, 11 whom he allied with the indigenous people, and he erected a 
permanent base at Mt. Pamassus. There, the second deluge caught him 
amware, and he moved on into the sacred land of Thessaly where, upon 
conquering the Pelasgjans, he founded a kingdom in Phthioris. One of his 
soos was named Hellen; one grandson was named Aeolus and another Dorus. 
Thucydides indeed mentioned that Homer uses the teem 'Hellenes' to 
designate a tribe nther than as a generic name.12 Since we have to do here 
with matters of spirit, the natural connection is secondary. The uniqueness 
of the Greek spirit, however, is seen in how it assimilates what is foreign. In 
lhis material that exemplifies this restlessness and adaptability, we see an 
even more alien and more heterogeneous element enter into play than what 
had thus far emetged: namely, the many colonies of aliens who settled in 
Greece (ancient lnachus is known in the ambiguous sense as a son of 
Oceanu~ hence as one who came &om the sea); additionally, colonies 
from Asia Minor (such as Deucalion's lineage from the Caucasus) and also 
&om Phoenicia. Settlers from Egypt, such as Cecrops, came to Athens. The 
Pdasgian oracle of Dodona, likewise, is traceable back to Egypt, supposedly 
foWlded by an Egyptian woman. 13 Even things of antiquity (das Alte) are 
thought to be of foreign origin. Cadmus, the founder of Thebes in Boeoti~ a 
son of Argenos, King ofT~ came from Phoenic~ bringing with him the 
322 
alphabet. Danaus in Argos likewise came 1 from Thebes. Pel~ the pro-
gcnitot- of the Atrides. 14 came to the Peloponnesus from Lydia. These, then, 
are the main elements that the Gceeks kept chidly in mind. Cccrops led the 
Egyptians to Athens. We have spoken of Nei~15 and on the citadel of 
Athens, the Aaopolis, Athena wu still depicted as riding upon a crocodile. 

THE GREEK WORLD 
The First Social and Political Organization 
Taken as a whole, what we refer to as the 'Greek people' is a conglomeration 
of tribes that came from elsewhere. It is from this foreign lineage that the 
many famous royal dynasties were establish~ descended, and so provided 
more enduring centers of authority and identity, taking on more definite 
contours. These dynasties formed the bond of small inner circles and 
behaved as lords and heroes in relation to a previously disunited group. So 
there were established more permanent centers, which emerged as cities or 
developed into them. The building of citadels was a major element through 
which the restless wanderers established themselves. Thucydides says in the 
introduction to his history16 that, over a long period of time, fanning 
activity remained threatened by constant plundering; hence fanning was 
not introduced until latec. Good soil alone was no guarantee of permanent 
settlement b«ause, being coveted by all, it was more likely to be subject to 
change of hands and conquest. The poor soil of Athens was the reason thar 
so many foreigners had found refuge there. However we do now see citadels 
established from time to time, fortifications on high ground. These ace the 
first works of architecture. 
These first works of architecture are of a peculiar construction and are 
called Cyclopean. In more recent rimes they have been searched out and 
found to have been construaed of large, ircegular building blocks of cock. 
The lateral sides are hewn into smooth I surfaces so as to firmly join, 
323 
forming a stable matrix. Hence very large buildings were erected in this 
fashion, in pacticula..; a royal treasury in Boeotia, the walls of Tll)'Ils and 
Mycenae, and the treasury of Atreus, structures that Pawanias had 
described;17 today ruins of these walls still stand and are only slightly 
more deteriorated than in Pausanias• time. What is unusual and coostitutes 
a funher connection is that when other examples of this type of wall were 
sought, they were fowtd elsewhere, namely, on Crete, Cerigo, 18 Milos, and 
in Smyrna; also in Asia Minor, in some Italian citi~ and on Sardinia and in 
Hegel refers to Neitb in the philosophy of religion lectures. where he wys that •Atbma [comes) 
out of Neith', meaning that lhe spiritual goddess Athena evolved OUt of the Da~ goddess 
Neitb. Sec Lea.es on the Philosophy of Religiort (Oxford, 2007), ii. 152, incl. D. 132. 
16. Th-=ydidcs, Pe~ 
War, 1.2 (Lattimoft., p. 4). 
17. Pausanias, Graeci« tksaipto, 2.4, 5, 16 (Descripliofl of Greece, .BookJ I atrd 11, tr. 
w. H. s. Joaes, Loeb aassKaJ library (Cambridp, Mass., and Loadon.t91B), 265-75, 327-33). 
18. Cerigo is the Venecian oame for the islaud of Kithira, soada ol: ck ~ 
We haw 
OOiteacd lbe German cda.,. which ~ 
•farieo'. 
377 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Spain. Thus citadels of this type were established centers of the oldest kind 
They have been attributed to the Cyclops. More precise details and the 
relationship of the peoples to each other are of no interest for us. 
Thus, these centers are the earliest to be fowtd. Of the ancient cities and 
citadels, Tbucydides remarks19 that they were not situated on the sea due to 
insecurity along the coast &om fear of pirates who stole livestock and 
abducted people~ enslaving the latter. According to Thucydides, it was not 
until later that cities were relocated to the coast and especially to landing 
places; and it was even later that coastal regions became densely settled. The 
centers of culture in Greece are situated either along the coast or nearby but 
somewhat inJ~ differing markedly from other centers. such as those in 
324 
Egypt and India, which are centrally located in those cowttries l and with-
our any connection to the sea. The second kind of [cultural] cente~ howeve.t, 
lay on the coast of Syria at water's edge, as in Phoenicia, for example. Just as 
with Carthage, the geography of these countries determined their orientation 
to the seacoast and offered them no possibility to extend inland. Even the 
Greek [states] of Asia Minor, such as Milerus, which sent out sixty to seventy 
colonies, still lay on the coast without expanding inland. The presence of well-
established populations inland prevemed them from doing so. In Greece itself. 
however, the populace was 6rmiy established on the land. Farming is integral to 
Greek identity, which nonetheless retains a tie to the sea. 
These centers thus are characterized. by this particular geography. 
Another aspect of these centers is political~ the rule of royal dynasties over 
me people. Here we find heroes who exercise control over the people, 
(nili.ng] families who are not separated from their subjects by caste diffel'-
ences. Nor is the relationship patriarchal; rather these heroes and sovereigns 
1ft of a particular. mostly foreign lineage. Nor ace their subiects opp~ 
as is seen with tyrants of a later time. Their relationship did not entail the 
nted fcx a legal-juridical nexus; rather it was a quite loose, open, and 
personal relationship. It was the respected families who ruled. In one respect 
their class, birth, and also !heir bravery natwally set them apart. As leaders 
needing to provide order, they were accustomed to ruling; they were in 
325 
charge. The need for order I per se thus elevated them above otben. How-
eva, another considcntion played a part. These circumstances were not at 
aU equivalent to those of the later monarchies. 
Roya] power was the prerogative of a family~ but it also resulted from 
their personal qualities, for example, bravery, and an understanding of 
378 

THE GREEK WORLD 
matters divine and human. Nestor showed such knowledge when, after the 
death of Achilles, he described the agitated sea as Achilles' mother; and he 
explained to the Greeks why the sea was restless, namely, because Thetis, 
Achilles' mOther, was mourning her son's deatb.20 Such an understanding 
belonged to the qualities possessed by royal families. This distinguishing 
feature, that kings are on the one hand honored because of their lineage, 
but on the other hand exercise and preserve royal power through their 
personal qualities, based mosdy on personal strength, was befitting such 
circumstances. 
The clearest depictions of those circumstances are found in the Homeric 
poems, concerning, for instance, the relationship of Agamemnon to the 
other kings~ and the relationship of the latter to their people. 21 Agamemnon 
had primacy over all other kings. Without them, he undertakes nothing of 
imponance. In camp, Agamemnon takes the counsel of his chieftains., each 
of whom brings his personality to bear. It is not a matter of simply voting; 
they express their opinions and the sovereign takes them into account, while 
it is be who decides which of their wishes is feasible. The people followed 
their chieftains into this war our of obedience, but also more or less out of 
trust and respect for them, just as the chieftains did with Agamemnon. They 
obeyed in complete confidence. If a leader is I dissatisfied with the sover-
326 
eign over the kings, then he withdra~ as did Achilles, and with him his 
retinue and people. The people, the soldiers, do very little in this war; rather 
it is the chieftains who do the most. They themselves must fight the battles. 
The people are not simply driven along like an apathetic herd, such as a caste 
in India. Nor are they fighting for a cause of their own but only as compa-
nions of a mighty representative~ as witnesses to the deeds and glory of their 
chieftains, magnifying both by their own suength. There is something quite 
unwual about conducting a war in this way. The leade~ the chieftains, are 
seen advancing on their chari~ the infantry following behind; no cavalry is 
in evidence. The infantry does very little. [leaving) the chieftains (to join 
battle ]-just the opposite of our way of waging war. It is only if a leader falls 
that lhe people fight to retrieve his weapons and his corpse, so as to avoid the 
shame of losing their commander's body or armor. 
!0. lion:ft, Odyswy 24.51-5 (tr. E. V. Rieu, rev. edo. D. C. H. Rieu (Lmdoo, 2003 ),312). 
Nesao.:. ruler of Pylos, was dae oldest of tbe Greek cbieftaius 6gbting a1 Troy. 1lKtis, AdWies' 
IIIOI:bet. wa\ a divine sea nymph. 
21. ~ 
IWd. Oa Apmtn!non's primacy, see 1.281, 1..577; 011 At.hilks' wilbdrawal, 
1.149-72 (Rleu, pp. 11, 36, 8). Desaipl:ioDs of the Greek army aod battle6"h ue fouDd 
~tbelliaJ. 
379 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Hen~ the relationship is still rather loose; the people do not really 
consider the affairs of their chieftain to be their own, just as the entire war 
was not their affair. The Trojan War as a whole was solely an affair of tbe 
chieftains. The people simply followed trustingly, scarcely championing it 
with their own lives. There is no discord between leaders and followers, no 
mistrust or rebellion. The figures in Homer ace timeless because they exist in 
and for themselves. In the Greek camp there is of course Thersites22 -a 
timeless, perpetually recurring figure [of literature]-a vituperative person, 
who blames and reviles the kings; however, he is the only one in the camp 
who does so. He is slight, hunched, and, to the ddight of the people, is 
327 
Bogged by Odysseus I with the rod. He is a demagogic troublemaker, 
insistent, noisy, and bea~ but quickly calms down-a person whose 
defiance and buffoonery are soon ove~ who sheds tears and withdraws. 
This literary type appears as a single individual. Portraits of the other 
characters are comparably done. 
In his homeland, Odysseus is surrounded by many people of stature. 
During his absence, as a young man Telemacbus has little say in things; 
coosequendy, the suitors and chieftains manage the affairs in his royal house 
as they see 6t. 23 Also Achilles, in the underworld, asks Odysseus how his 
elderly father Peleus is faring, who because of his age is probably no longer 
honored. 2"' It is clearly not royal power that is honored. Hen~ royal 
prerogati-.e is not valued foe its own sake. 
What is more, Zeus has the same celation to the other gods as Agamemnon 
has to the chieftams. On Olympus the other gods wrangle with Zeus Qupiter), 
but they have to resist extreme measures. Things must not come to a break in 
the bond that unifies them; and, in the face of Jupiter's thrtats and bluster, 
they again accede to his aims because he is, after all, the most powerful; all are 
subject to his sovereign power, and his will prevails. These circumstances are 
such that birth and lineage are one aspect, but nonetheless a figure musr 
establish his own authority. The people benefited little &om this royal dignity, 
and when popu1ar consensus became the pcactice, then the king was of little 
import, somewhat superfluous. For court could be held by an experienced 
328 
member of the community; I the bravest and best general could command in 
battle; the cleverest and wisest could attend to human and divine matterS 
during a sacrifice and during legislation. The development of [structUred) 
22. Hom«. IIUJ 2.212-n (Rieu, pp. 27-8). 
23. Dacriptioos of OdJSSa~S' royal bouse, of his son Tdemachas, of the suitors of his wife 
Penelope, etc., ~ 
found iD the Odyssey, SWtiDg in book 1. 
24. Homer, Otlys.wy 11.494-503 (Rieu, pp. 152-3). 
384) 

TH£ GREEK WORLD 
social bonds had not yet taken place. Royal tide and irs perpetuation through 
hereditary succession was not yet necessary. 
It is crucially imponant to recognize and to grasp this distinction and the 
conditions under which monarchy is absolutely necessary. Social conditions 
in early Greece were such that the royal title became superfluous of its own 
once it had fulfilled its purpose. It is remarkable that the kings were not 
driven out, but instead that the royal families stepped down without hatred 
and strife, without battle, simply dying out naturally or through mutual 
elimination. In part, they simply declined or sank back into the [common] 
people. The line of Cecrops existed for a long while in Athens. King 
Cleisthenes in Corinth died without male heirs, and his daughter moved to 
Athens with her treasuce where she married a commonec. Thus, in contrast 
to Rome, the kings in Greece were not exiled but simply died out, and dtey 
were always esteemed and loved in memory. 
History reports that numerous atrocities and crimes occurred within these 
royal dynasties, and that the main cause of their demise was internal unrest 
and atrocities, and dreadful palace revolutions. This upheaval is similar to the 
Old Franconian (altfrankisch) dynasties. Willful passion and caprice em~ 
unrestrained. and destructive. There is as yet no internalized I conscience, no 
329 
law, DO£ any church to fear; laws hold no sway over their minds. The people 
have no stake in such atrocities; they do not participate in these acts, they are 
not affected by them. The people represent the tragic chOl'US, and their 
rdkctions about fate are based on sentiment. although they aUow the royal 
parties to settle things among themselves. We see that sentiment is invol~ 
but not action. The people only watch passively; they appeal to the gods, but 
no power or authority exists to judge such [royal] individuals, neither exter-
nally in statutes nor internally in their conscience, in their minds. Hence, their 
passions play out destructively, but only for themselves, without bringing 
harm to the people. So the royal dynasties are superlluous to the social order, 
and they declined as a result of their own actions. 
Once they had formed, the diversity of such centers is remarkable. This 
multitude of states had its [common] ground in expeditions that drew the 
peoples together on more than one occasion. In these circumstanCCS no 
despotic power was present to unite them, as was the case in Asia. The 
individual as such is no longer without legal standing, without rights, and 
should no longer disappear into the collective whole. Nor is that other 
principle of purpose yet present: there is no abstract aim, no principle of 
universality, to which individuals could be subordinated.. As the Greeks 
evolve, we see them united just once, under Agamemnon, and here the 
youth Achilles is the foremost figure. However, by his reputation and 
3111 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
power in particular. as Thucydides reports, by his predominance, Agamem-
non prevailed upon the chieftains and peoples to go to sea, to war. 25 But this 
is a chance alliance based on personality. The Acamanians did not parrici-
330 
pate in the war against Troy, I and late~ even against the Persians, the 
Greeks were by no means unified. Only during their decline, as the states 
disintegrated, did the second youth, Alexander the Macedonian., who was ar 
once Greek and non-Greek, reunite them, unifying all of Greece. Greek unifi-
cation during the Trojan War., howeve~; was of no political consequence; it 
had no consequences for the whole, for the po~tical existence of Greece. 
It remained ephemeral with regard to the actuality. The poet [Homer), how-
ever, for the sake of popular representation, presented this uniry as the image of 
the Greek spirit and greater virtue; and it has always remained so in the eyes 
of the people. 
The association of the Amphictyony 26 can serve as an example. Its union, 
however, remained rather weak and endured neither in actuality nor in 
imagination. Stronger bonds resulted from the oracles and national games 
and festivals. What was politically unifying was the notion that the fonna-
tion of a Greek state was something sacred and revered. The individual state 
was not protected by federative arrangements. An actual unification by 
means of treaty never occurred, but unity did remain an honored and sacred 
notion that was of help to such a people. Even so the Lacedaemonians 
perpetrated the unholy deed of subjugating and enslaving a free people, 
the Messenians. It was not until centuries later that Epaminondas righted 
this heinous wrong. just as disastrous was the execution of the citizens of 
Plataea after its conquest in the first Peloponnesian War, when all the 
331 
inhabitants without exception were killed. 27 1 
Greek. CuJtwe and .AJ-t28 
One aspect in which the Greeks must be considered as one, as a single world-
historical people, is that of their culture. By means of this culture the 
.!5. Thucydides, Pel~ w., 1.9 (Lattimore, p. 7) . 
.!6. The Great Amphictyony was a league of twelve Greek tribes, which met in tbe spring at 
the umple of Demeter at Anthela and in the autumn at Delphi. G>numed at first with ~ligious 
mann'S, it gradually assumed a political role. 
27. Lacedaernoo or Laconia was a region in the south~ttrn Peloponnesus with its capital 
at Sparta. The ~~nians were their neighhors ro the west. The attack on and ~iege oi Plataea is 
descnbed in lbucydides, Pe/opomresiarJ War 2.2-7, 71-8 (Lattimore, pp. 74-8, 110-14). 
28. Set Hegel's extmsive discussion of Greek an in h.is Aestlntics: Lectures on Fine Art, tr. 
T. M. Knoz (Oxford, l97.S), i. 427-501. 
382 

THE GREEK WORLD 
Hellenes became a world-historical people and distinguished themselves 
from other peoples, whom they called 'barbarians'. Of interest are solely 
those Greeks who exhibit Greek culture. Each of us feels at home, and takes 
pleasure, in the realm of Greek culture, an, and science. Enjoyment of the 
beautiful is something ever-present that can educate us and that we must 
each acquire for ourselves. It is here, with Greek culture, that there begins 
the conscious connection of rhe chain of cultural tradition. 
We come from the Romans, who were educated by the Greeks. At the 
same rime, what we have received remains foreign to us, and, in the course of 
adopting it, we create something new. This is essentially the case with the 
cultwe of all peoples. Greek culture also has a cultural precursor. On the 
basis of such precursors a people educates itself and its educators, reworking 
in equal measure what has been received. 
In regard to Greek culture two positions can be taken, namely whether 
the an and science of the Greeks originated from external sources or from 
within themselves. Historically, it wholly appears that the Greeks produced 
their culture and all its subsequent stages completely from within. We 
observe a consistent sequence without a break, a continuous sucassion of 
cultural stages with no necessity of drawing from external sources. More-
over, what is authentically and specifically Greek is not found anywhere else, 
only in I Greece. But it is likewise a matter of history that the Greeks staned 
332 
with foreign material, and they did so necessarily. Mechanical and intellec· 
tual progress could remain in the form that it was received, and technical 
knowledge as well, such as stone cutting, geometry, and mathematics. 
Matters lacking in spirit are received just as they are passed down. Roman 
law, were it still valid today, would also be something lacking in spirit. What 
is spiritual, however, develops further within itself; it passes through inde-
pendent stages. So Greek culture too has its precursors. Having a precursor, 
one of foreign origin, is just as necessary as is a reworking that passes 
through its own independent stages. 
A closer look at Greek culture would reveal the concept of the exceptional 
or of excellence (das Ausgezeichnete) as its focus, primarily in the fute arts. 
The Greeks did not acquire their art through conquest, either actively like 
the Romans or passively like the Gauls. We Gennans have also acquired [art} 
in the latter manner, partly through being conquered, but we have also 
expressly learned it. The Greeks were neither conquered nor conquerors. 
We see them preserving the memory of the first stages of their civilization, of 
their earliest cul£ure, and all stages remain sacred to them. They honored the 
beginnings as gifts of the gods, and possessing them [the gifts] from all these 
myths, they celebrated this point and acknowledged it with respect to laws, 
383 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
marriage, agriculture. Thus, they celebrated the introduction of agriculture 
and of marriage, both historically and as myth. They also reverently attri-
bute fire to Prometheus; the horse was given to them by Neptune, the olive 
tree by Pallas [Athena]. Evil too is preserved in a myth. the myth of Pandora. 
Such beginnings are in pan ascribed to a foreign origin, but always one that 
333 
is honored. I 
The historical context as a whole points to the fact that the Greeks 
acquired many of their arts and many cultic elements-technical and other 
matters-from beyond the sea. Eastern Greece also is the most developed 
part; the western part-Acarnania, Aetolia, and Epirus-played only a 
minor role in the culture. The western peoples had been and remained 
uncultured and savage. Even in the Roman era the Aetolian League was 
more an association of thieves or the lawless than one of the law-abiding. 
And the uncultured Albanians are to be found there even to the present day. 
The Peloponnesus lies in between (the western peoples and eastern Greece]; 
Arcadia likewise kept to itself, and the western part, Elis, became sacred 
territory. The abstract element of Greek culture is to be found with the Eleans, 
where the [Olympic] games and sacrifices were established, and they re-
mained focused on them. Thus culnue took root predominantly in the east. 
A further aspect of Greek culture is the peaceful condition that was 
established on land (partly by the kings, panly by the heroes, e.g. Hercules) 
through arrangement in communities. Aggressive and hostile actions, espe-
cially robbery at sea and on land, remained a challenge. According to 
Thucydides~ 29 peace at sea was established by Minos, while peace on land 
was not achieved until later; the Locrians, for example, continued to raid for 
a long time. On land, however, [population] centers and individual heroes 
countered this plundering. 
A major element of enmity between uncivilized peoples, that of hostility 
between tribes, is not found in Greece. Vengeful tribal warfare did not exist 
with the Greeks because their associative ties were not based on family 
status. We see wars of conquest only later after stable states had been 
established. Wars of revenge had no place there because the Greeks did not 
334 
originate from tribes but from the mixture [of tribes and peoples). I 
Most of these associations had absorbed very diverse elements, and rhe 
second condition [of Greek culture] is the internal diversirv of the associa-
tions. Thus there was no patriarchal family structure that m-ight have spared 
individuals from needing to prove themselves; for in the patriarchal 
2~. Thucydides, Peloportnesitl,. W.:.~r-1.4 (LattimO£e, p. 5). 
384 

THE GREEK WORLD 
condition a person carries weight based on family, and each individual is of a 
particular standing, has recognition, because of his family, and precisely for 
that reason carries weight not on his own account, but only in and through 
the family. Such a [patriarchal] structure was not found in Greece, and in this 
respect Greece has similarities with North America. Just as, near [to GreeceJ, 
the great land mass of Asia underwent the dispersal, contact, and intermix-
ing [of peoples], something comparable took place in North America, 
where intermingling and settlement coincided, over and over again. The 
more complete segregation of tribes only occurred in the west of Greece, 
where peoples became more permanently settled. However, in these circum-
stances and spheres individuals worked their way to the fore, and the 
association thereby became something essential, valued, and highly es-
teemed, something into which individuals had to enter and to which they 
had to conform because it did not come from the family. In this association 
the singular appeared as something individual and self-sufficient. 
In addition to these elements, numerous intellectual stimuli came from 
foreign sources. Imagination ( Vorstellung) was aroused from the East, 
from Egypt and Asia Minor, and from Crete. Similarly, the fortunes of the 
nomadic tribes, their own early wanderings, provided an abundance of 
natwal and intellectual ferment, which, under the conditions of a tranquil 
common life and inner peace, could be revived and fashioned into cultural 
forms. So, in distinction from the barbarians, the Athenians for the first time 
refrained from the bearing of arms in peace, I thereby manifesting the 
335 
earliest culture. They were among the earliest, and later the most cultured, 
of peoples. They were [as a people] the most composed and established. 
Federations from early times formed the basis for peace with others and 
remained of such importance that wars were fought only in a limited 
fashion. 
Under these peaceful conditions we now see the emergence of the bound-
less drive of individuals-the drive to display and give evidence of oneself, to 
let it be seen what one has made of oneself and can make of oneself, and in 
this way to achieve status with others and to take pleasure in this status. 
Sensual pleasure did not form the basis of Greek life or peace, nor did 
superstition, dependence, apathy. The barbarians also wanted to display 
themselves, but go no further than preening and self-adornment. With 
other barbarians we see this as the drive to be seen and adorned. Adommenr 
is meant to make the body pleasing, thereby enhancing its beauty; the 
trappings are not intended to represent something for its own sake but are 
only meant for others to serve a different purpose. The Greek people are too 
individualistic, and V:e see them to be too strongly spirited, to be captive to 
385 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
outer adommen~ to be able to be content with that. From an early time they 
were marked by their self-awareness, by their self-respect. Individuals had 
first to prove themselves, ro show others what they are on their own account, 
and to see to it that this was acknowledged. This appears quite early with the 
Greeks in the form of peaceful competition; hence we do not see them 
enslaved to superstition or to vanity {the latter can become a factor later 
on). For in the beginning what is substantial must first be brought forth. I 
The drive to manifest this joyful self-awareness, to show themselves in 
contrast to savage self-aw~ to the merely sensuous, constirutes the 
major characteristic of the Greeks, and with them this drive progressed into 
fine art (schom Kunst). 3° Fine art begins with a satisfaction that is not a 
remedy for a need but an articulation of what resides in unspoiled human 
nature. The origins of Greek art are subjective. Art arises from the element of 
a labor that is &ee of need and consists in the fact that individuals make 
themselves into somethi~ that they comply with something other and thus 
exhibit i~ that the character of universality~ of universal validity, is imprinted 
upon it. The first and subjective beginning of art consists in the Greeks 
making something of their own bodies, giving them free versatility. It con-
sisted in me development of the body~ in the shaping of the body into a work 
of art. We recognize this to be the oldest fonn. 
In Homer we see no art works; for him the Palladiwn in Troy is not a 
piece of sculpture. 31 We find no minstrels in the Greek camps yet (these first 
appear among the Phaeacians) but rather costly gannents and attire. Like-
wise the weapons of the heroes are ornaments. The shield of Achilles is 
noteworthy and significant in this regard as a decorated weapon; but it 
is evident that it is not yet a free-standing work of art, not an art work 
that is said to count explicitly as such. 32 This shield is of significance ~ 
ponraying the cycle of life in ancient Greece. Mars and Minerva are, to be 
sure, executed on it in gold; but the main point is that the Greeks, before tber 
created such shapes and beautiful images, first developed theil' own bodies 
30. The Gennan term for 'fine an• means literally "beautifu1 an•, which 6ts Hegel's inmpre-
t.atiou of Greek culture per{mly: its an highlights the beauty of bUIIIaD aDd natural shapn. and 
its religioa is oue of beauty (em bannony of the scnsil* and the spi!"iruall ntber than oi tn~lh 
(spiritual truth). See lbe following discussion. 
11. The Paltadium was a~ 
statue I an irnage of Pallas! ou the preservation of which 
the safrty of Troy (Oium) was supposed to depend. It was stolen by Diomcdes and {)dysseu5-
thiJS enabling the Greeks finaJiy to captUre the city. So for Homer, claims Hegel, il was an ob;o:t 
d politica.l, noc artistic signiDcance. Howevr~; the reft1"CIXZ to the Palladium is found in v~ 
The Aeneid 2.166 (tL H. Rushton Fairclough, Loeb Oassical Library !Cambridge,~. and 
London, 1916), i. 327). 
32. Achilles' sbie.kl is described iD detail in Homa; flUid 18.-468-617 (ltieu. pp. 332-'l· 
386 

THE GREEK WORLD 
and themselves into beautiful shapes, into works of art. So we see games at 
an early date, for example, at the tomb of Patrodus. 33 Hence the games are 
ancient: wrestling, throwing the javelin and discus. Song and dance are tied 
to these activities, dance being the dominant form and song the subordinate; 
they ace the outward expression of an unrefined gaiety. I Such dances arc 
337 
mentioned as being depicted on the shield of Achilles; they are art works in 
their own right. Just as with the dance shown on the shield of Daedalus, the 
sole purpose of this dance is zest for life; it has no connection whatsoeVer to 
a sacred festival. Both exist for the sake of display, to allow admiration of 
form and skill. Song later became an independent form; it was given instru· 
mental accompaniment and thus called for a content drawn from represen· 
tation. And just as the image of representation becomes free on its own 
account in song, so the representation itself becomes something that likewise 
ought to be shown. In this way the representation as such becomes out· 
wardly a pleasing, autonomous shape, just as humans in the first instance 
displayed themselves in their beautiful [bodily] dexterity. 
Song as such is an immediate self-exprcssion of the cheerful, individual 
subject. This organ, the voice, is not merely a sensible articulation, nor 
merely an immediate manifesting of an existence; it is also a manifesting of 
representation. The content that properly belongs to representation and 
proceeds from it can be characterized in such a way that it is said to contain 
the essential. What exists has passed through spirit and is formed by it. This 
content, fonned by spirit, can be highly diverse in nature; but, to the extent 
that it is fonned by spirit, it is sensible content that is elevated to universality, 
and it captures sensible, immediate existence as something universal. This 
universal feature becomes religious content and is to be understood in its 
highest sense. 
Greek Religion34 
Religious content is the principal content of spirit, something brought forth 
from spirit within itself; and the question is what the nature of this religious 
content is for the Greeks, how what is essential must appear to rhem. I 
338 
With the Greeks we see that this essentiality became something that is nol 
exterior and natural bur interior and human, formed first ofaJI as a [human] 
shape and as its beauty, so that in it hwnan beings comprehend themselves as 
33. See Ho111er, Iliad 23.257 ff. (R.ieu, pp. 402 H.). 
34. See Hegel's ~atmmt of G~k religioo iD thr 1821 philosophy of religion kctures 
(l.eaura 011 the Philosophy of Rl!ligWN, ii. 122-34, l•U-52, 160-89). 
3B7 

THB LECTURES OF 1822-3 
free. Homan beings esteemed themselves, and what is esteemed is the pri· 
mary content~ their gesture, shape, expression, deeds and actions: the ela-
borated human being. If we proceed in this fashion from the subjettive side, 
we see how highly human self.·consciousness siruates itself. We discover that 
this was necessary. Human self-consciousness had to grasp this [exaltation} 
as being essential. God is for human beings their own essence. Humans 
conceive God to be i.n a positive relationship to them, as their 'other' to 
immediate contingency and finitude, as their essence and substantiality. 
Thus the true (tku WtJhrbafte) is in one aspect ~other' to human beings and 
yet, as what is true for them, it is their own truth and thus their own inner 
being. However, this true itself, this essentiality, is for the Greeks the beauti-
ful (das SchCintHpirit in its sensible manifestation. So sensibility is sheerly 
the appearance of the spiritual when sensibility is divested of its finitude, 
contingency, e:xteriority. The beautiful for the Greeks consists in this unity of 
sensibility with spirituality in and for itself; &ee beauty [is what coostitures] 
the divine. The Greeks occupy the standpoint of knowing themselves to be 
free. Knowing themselves to be free is their determinate characteristic. The 
characteristic of free individuality constitutes their fundamental principle. 
This principle of being &ee, the principle of thinking, has not yet itself been 
339 
explicidy conceptu.aliud; I it has not yet been thought, emphasized, and 
acknowledged; rather this knowing-oneself-to-be-free is still united with the 
natural sphere. 
Actuality, broadly construed, comprises both concept and reality. With 
the G~ 
however, the freedom of spirit is not yet itself the subject matter 
but is still associated with the human-natural form. The latter is the exttr· 
nalizing of seU (das Sich...auperi;ch-M4chen). It is possible to determine what 
fonns the basis of the Greek inruition of the universal when we consider twO 
aspects: first, the question why the Greeks do not yet worship the absolute in 
spirit and in truth, or why spirit does not yet appear to spirit in d:u: spirit; 
second, the fact that the God of the Greeks does not at the same time appear 
to them in the flesh, although they had what-subsists-in-and-for-itself, the 
divine, in unity with the human-they bad it in human shape. 
( 1. The Aspect of the Reality of the Idea or of the Divine.] The first aspect, 
then, is that spirit, God, bas not yet appeared for the Gceeks in pure thought, 
nor yet as the invisible, the spiritual, the nonsensuous; for the Greeks an the 
clOSCS( principle to the Orienta~ whose basic intuition is that of the sub-
stantial unity of spirit and nature. The Greeks are sublime in their intuition 
of this unity. They themselves reduced this substantial unity, the unity of 
substance and nature, to the aspect of the reality of the idea., to the statuS 
of ideality., and the other to it is the subjeaive or the individual aspect-
388 

THE GREEK WORLD 
The principle of subjectivity, of individual spirituality, emerges; but this 
subjectivity is as yet only emergent, and it has two aspects: one is the soul-
function (das Seelenhafte)/5 the other the natural aspect. First of all, the 
soul-function is imagined as belonging to the natural aspect; but it is also 
[something] on its own account, and emerges over against tbat natural 
image, which appears I as life. In this appearance, the soul-function and 
340 
the natural aspect are in immediate unity; this aspect is of itself the Oriental 
[intuition]. Now~ [in the Greek intuition), the subjective element [still] bas 
this aspect but only as a mode of existence. Thus the spiritual is encountered 
twice: as subjective being-for-self and in unity with the narwal. The animal 
likewise has a soul, paralleling the human being; the soul constitutes the life-
force (Lebendigkeit) of the hwnan being too. Howev~ m the case of the 
bwnan being this soul-function is opposed on its own account to the merely 
naturally imagined soul-function. The human being is a living being with a 
soul; however, this soul exists for itself in yet a second way and is distinct 
from the soul that is submerged in naturalness. It is in this fashion that the 
Greek {intuition] contrasts with the Oriental. For the Gree~ the Oriental 
intuition is merely that of reality. The immanence of the spiritual and natural is 
for the Greeks found only in the aspect of reality, and the spiritual opposes itself 
to what is merely submerged in materiality, to what is merely illll'WlJlellt to the 
natural. This is the first stage of elevation above a mere soul-function. 
But in this way spirit is not yet one with itself in thought. "Spirit thinks 
it&etr; 'God is revered in spirit as what is nonsensuous•: this simply means 
that God is posited in the element of thought, and simply for thoughL God 
has a mode of appearance in thought too; God appears for an other; but this 
aspect of appearance is the thought itself. 
The aspect [we have been discussing] is that of reality. The free was indeed 
one aspect for the Greeks, but the place where this freedom appears is a 
spirituality that is still immanent, submerged in materiality. Hen; there-
fore, I God cannot yet be revered in spirit. Spirit is not yet the knowing of 
341 
spirit. Its reality in this aspect is natural appearance. In temU of this aspect 
We must say that the Greek principle has not yet developed and risen into a 
world of thought; the object of its reflective, individual principle is rather the 
substantial unity of the spiritual and the physical. The higher, nonsensuous 
world does not yet stand above the sensuous world. 
_35. With its suffuc: -ba(te, this term seems to refer to the $OUI as still a~ 
to or m ~ 
wUh aature, but at the samt time as anagiDg from it. We haft ~ 
• loolely as soul-
&.aion• 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
[2. The Aspect of the Concept of the Idea or of Spirit or of the Divine.] 
The other aspect is that the Greeks possessed the spiritual in individual form 
and elevated spirit to subjectivity, so that the subject was the essemial aspect. 
and the natural as such was reduced to the aspect of appearance. This 
natural form serves as the expression of the appearance of subjective spirit. 
and so this natural can only be the humanly natural, can only have human 
shape; for only the latter can be a spiritual expression; only in the latter can 
spirit appear as such. But inasmuch as the Greeks portrayed essential being 
I Wesen] as human, we can ask why God does not appear ro them as human. 
why God does not appear in the flesh. in actual existence. and why they 
fashion God for themselves only in marble or in fanciful images. This 
characteristic is connected with the fact that human beings only counted 
and only would have their worth insofar as they made themselves to be the 
appearance of the beautiful, only to rhe extent that they have displayed and 
elaborated themselves in a beautiful form. 
Thus the divine itself has been brought forth by the subject, and the 
342 
contingency of the singular has been made subordinate to it. I Ir was onl~· 
the Greeks who developed themselves in this way; all the others were 
barbarians, and even among the Greeks there were true Greeks and there 
were slaves. Being born a Greek did not suffice to make one a Greek, and it is 
an essential quality of spirit to make oneself imo what spirit is. 
That spirit is what it makes of itself is only one aspect; the other is that 
spirit is essentially and intrinsically what is originally free. This is the 
concept of spirit that the Greeks did not yet grasp because they were not 
yet engaged in thinking. They did not yet grasp spirit as the in-itself (An-
sich )--in accord with its universality, its concept-but only in terms of how 
it is engendered in individuality. They did not yet have the view that the 
human being is created in the image of God and is intrinsically free. For this 
reason they could not yet have the conception, the Christian idea, of the 
unity of divine and human nature. For they did not yet regard human nature 
as such, humanity in its concept, to be capable of receiving the divine, but 
only those human beings who have elaborated, produced, spirirualized, and 
idealized themselves. The spirit that has produced and built within itself its 
own inner world is the only spirit that can recognize existing liberation and 
the divine natwe in what is singular; only it can convey the fact (hat tbe 
natural has envisaged the spiritual directly within itself. OnJy the spiri1 that 
has matured inwardly as a totality no longer needs to image the natural in 
spiritual form. When thought is free on its own accoum, it thinks the 
external; and, by thinking it, it can leave this externality in its immediacy. 
343 
in its immediate existence, just as iris. I If it [externality] is nor yet thought 
390 

THE GREEK WORlD 
but rather intuited in the connection [with the spiritual~ as with the Greeks], 
it cannot be grasped in its immediacy. If the divine is supposed to be 
represented and thought, it must be assimilated and adapted in order to 
express the spiritual. If, howeve.; thought is free for itself and reflective (as in 
the Christian religion), then there is no need for it to give form co the natural; 
rather, thought allows the sensible to remain what it is, namely, a this 
(Dieses), and it grasps the divine in this this. The totality of the idea requires 
that the idea should have consummated both aspects, thought on the one 
side and the sensible on the other, so that it should ramify itself into 
singularization. Only this infinite antithesis attains the profundity of the 
idea, which has the strength to hold the antithesis together in its profundity. 
Here for the first time is the profound idea, which contains within itself the 
infinite antithesis. 36 
One can indeed reproach the Greek religion for being anthropomorphic; 
but its defect, its liability, is that it is not anthropomorphic enough; it did not 
know God in immediate existence. The Greeks have heroes, to be sure, but 
with Homer they are not yet revered as divine. This came later and with a 
different significance (e.g., the emperor for rhe Romans). Thus the anthro-
pomorphism of the Greeks did not yet go far enough. Schiller has written an 
important poem, 'The Gods of Greece', which shows that the author was 
profoundly moved by the sublime (Hochsten), but that his idea is in part 
quite wrong. For the opposition 1 that he draws between the Christian and 
344 
Greek religions is false when he avers: • As the gods were more human, ... '. 37 
The Christian God is much more thoroughly human. But this can be ad-
dressed only speculatively. 
The next thing to note is that polytheism is directly implicated in the 
Greek mode of religious intuition. However, the being-one (Eines-Sein) of 
God is directly bound up with the incarnation of God. We can indeed say. 
'Cod appears in nature and in the human race', although in saying that we 
stop short with God's externalization or divestment (EntiiufSerung), with the 
outward appearance, since in nature God does not appear as God. For, 
36. The idea (Ilke) on Hegel's view is the unity of the concept and objectivity. or chouglu and 
sensibility. The unity appears in the singular or 1M individual I Vereimelne), whlch h~ 
the. quality of spirit. Only the profound idea (tie{e ldu) has the strength to hold tOS':ther the 
anuthesis between thought and reality, the mental and the physical. ~ 
Errcydopedaa o(the 
Philosophical Sciences,§§ 213-44 (The Encyclopaedia Logic, tL T. F. ~rae!S, W. A. Suchnng, 
and H. S. Hams (lndiana_pQlis, 19~1), 286-3071. On the this, see below,pp. 396-;". 
37. Friedrich Schiller, 'Die GOner Griechenlandes·, 11. 191-2: 'Sin« dle gods were mort" 
human, humans were more divine' (Da die Cotter merrschlicher noch waren, waren Memchen 
~ottlicher) ( Werke; Nationalausgabe, ed. julius Petersen and Gerhard Fricke (Weimat:, 1943), 
I. 195). 
391 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
appearing as spirit, God has sublated the externalization or divesnnent, and 
the latter is expressed as the Son and as one Son.38 In the Greek religion, 
which is still in the state of extemalizarion, there must be many gods; that is 
how the divine appears for the Greeks. 
With this portrayal we have staned out from the subjective side, from the 
human in its subjective aspect. The other side is that of nature. The divinity 
of the Greeks is humanity idealized into beauty. Just as rhe sensuous human 
being is idealized and exalted in its outer aspect, so also must it be in its 
inner, spiritual aspect, to which belong knowledge, justice, truth, goodness. 
When these attributes are exalted to their essential fonn, we refer to them as 
rhe highest good, ere.; but this is only a quantitative exaltation and distinc-
tion. The true exaltation would be the sublation of humanity's finitude. 
345 
The exalted spirit is the spirit I that at the same time has power over nature, 
as what initially appears as other to it. The spirit that is essential and non-
finite is precisely the spirit that has sublated the antithesis to nature and that 
therefore is itself a natural power. 
In modem times it is customary to say that Helios is the god of the sun, Rhea 
the goddess of earth, etc. The Greeks did not have such a notion, namely that 
the sun and a god are the same thing; rather they understood the sun in its 
essential nature to be divine. Poseidon is not the god of the sea; rather the god 
is the sea itself, the sea as god. If we speak of 'a God transcending nature', this 
already establishes a wholly different relationship than that found in the Greek 
gods. The Greek gods are not merely natural powers but essentially are 
spiritual individuality~ which for the Greeks is what is essential and supreme, 
but is not yet established as free individuality. Spirit is not yet comprehended in 
spirit. The Greeks are free individualities, but free individuality in its substan-
tiality. The spiritual is not yet its object. This free individuality is the free spirit. 
The Greeks, therefore, are free, bur just for this reason they still exist within the 
condition of naturalness. With the Greek gods, naturalness, the power of 
nature, is no longer the foundation, and this constitutes the difference from 
the Orientals. We shall now consider the difference between rhe two. 
Spiritual subjectivity is the principal matter with the Greeks. To be sure, 
natural power is maintained as a nanual divinity, but it functions in this way 
only as rhe beginning. the starting point that is sublated in spirirual progress, in 
the broad destiny of spirit. Thus the Greeks have Cronus and Selene, etc. But 
346 
they are of a wholly different race than that of Zeus; they are 1 the Tirans. 39 
38. Cf. Philippiansl: 6-7. God, in ChriSt, 'did not regard equaJity with GOO as. someching to 
be exploited, but emptied himself, taking che form of a slave, being born in human likmess'. 
39. The Tiuns were narure deitiei that were overthrown by the Olympian gods. 
392 

THE GREEK WORLD 
This distinction between the old and the new gods is an essential element 
in the conception of Greek intuition-it is essential that the Greeks distin-
guished these gods from the new gods who ruled with Zeus. The Titam 
dwelled outside the limpid earth; they were in part overthrown and in pan 
excluded from spirit that is becoming conscious of itself. They still hold 
sway but have above them a mighty ruling race [of gods]. So in part they are 
preserved as nature gods, but in part the resonance of the natural powers is 
preserved in the more recent gods-preserved only as a resonance, as an 
element. Thus Apollo is the knowing God, and this has the resonance of 
being the god of light. Poseidon is partly this but also partly the resonance 
of the nature god Oceanus, and still echoes elemental natural powers. 
There is much controversy over whether Apollo is the sun god, etc. But 
the succession in the races of gods is to be understood in this way. 
Such a distinction is also found among the Egyptians. The Egyptians 
have three races of gods. Isis and Osiris belong to the third creation~ the 
third race~ the third dass~ which approached closer to spirit; thus they have 
also the most abundant qualities, since the earlier gods were only aspects of 
nature. We note in this regard that the Greeks are oriented to the Oriental 
mode in having nature as the foundation. [Their view o~ nature as founda· 
tion comes to them from the Orient in such a way that springs, trees, waves, 
rivers are also represented in the fonn of divinities. They have maintained 
this in Helios, in the mountain nymphs, the river gods, etc. The Greeks, it is 
said, have animated and ensouled the whole of nature in a genial way. But 
such animation has an Oriental character. In the river god the merely natural 
acquires the 1 significance of divinity. Here, however, it is simply the merely 
347 
natural, this spring, the divinity. This fantasy of the Greeks is surely more 
beautiful and pleasing than that of the Orientals; and this comes precisely 
from their clinging to and revering the human as the form in which divinity 
reveals itself, because it alone is capable of being the sensible manifestation 
of the spiritual. Revering the finite in human form, they have humanized the 
configurations of knowledge, etc.; they have not, like the Orientals, distoned 
them. They have remained free of the Oriental absurdities. The shape of the 
absurd is precisely what diverges from the human. The Greeks, having on 
the one hand the Oriental outlook, merely added to it and, by transforming 
it, founded a higher order of rhe gods. 
Historically speaking, there are two schools of thought, rwo dominant 
views: that the Greeks took their gods from Asia and Egypt. and that _the 
Greeks let them emerge from within themselves in Greece. Herodotus ham-
~ 
self expresses this double view: he avers that Homer and Hesiod gave Greece 
its gods, but then he says that they, after consulting the oracle at Dodona 
393 

THE LECTURES OFt 822-3 
Uaninna),. got the names and the gods themselves from Egypt.40 At Dodona 
they asked whether these newly acquired gods should be accepted. The 
modem conuoversies draw upon these viewpoints. We have already indicated 
how tbey are to be reconciled. The Greeks adopted culture as well as hetero-
geneous dements from what remained standing in the sphere of nature; 
however, their labor, their cultural work, is the ttansfonnation of this aJien 
348 
dement. Thus they adopted the Asian principle. I The Asian principle lived 
in than, but they did not leave it as they received it; they exalted it as weU. 
To the alien and ancient elements that the Greeks adopted belong in 
particular the Greek mysteries, the distinctive mode of worship that has 
engaged curiosity over the centuries and elicited much conuoversy even to 
the present day. Their standpoint foUows directly from these circumstanas. 
They were an ancient form of worship (something that is expressly stated), 
deriving in pan &om fonign sources. Regarding their content, the historical 
material itself points to the fact that these mysteries contained traits of an 
ancient nature religion; and it is necessarily the case that they contained this 
and nothing more. 
The image people associated with the mysteries is that what in them is 
ancient, and in which the spirit of the people no longel' lives, delves into 
SC)IDC"thing obscure and veuerable that is the beginning or source of what 
follows from it, so that latu versions can be interpreted and understOOd 
from such ancient elements. When what develops and is noYel has become 
...alid and sacrosanct, and is something sprung from the earlier condition (as, 
for- instance, in political coosriturions), then the ancient elements, altbougb 
revered as the source, are nevertheless at variance with the new arrangement. 
It is, as it were, dangerous and forbidden to know the ancient source as 
something that readies the downfal) of the new-because one would know 
what the truth of things is; because one would accept that, in knowing the old, 
349 
one knows what justifies the new; I and because this new element then 
appears to be something without justification. This is the natural connection 
between what comes earlier and what follows, and it seems that if one is to 
know the new one must tum ro the old The mysteries bad this relationship to 
folk religion; a cuttomary pan of it is the representation.. the belief, that this 
mysterious and earlier source is much wiser because it facilitates knowledge 
of what is new. So it was partiaUy right to regard old and musty parchments to 
_ 40. ~History 2S2-7 (C"d'ene, pp. H~).ln 2 .. n, be suggcsu rhat the secODd ~ 
15 whar the pnesttSicS at Dodoaa say. but be iDclines to the first view (that Hooler and Hcsiod 
crated for the Greeks t:bcir gods). Janiona, also Yaoina., ~ 
lata oames tc. tbe aPcieur sitr of 
Docba. 
. 
394 

THE GREEK WORLD 
be the genuine basis for justifications~ the proper source of infonnation about 
the present. These are kept secret because the old source differs from what 
follows~ and subsequent validity could therefore be endangered if it were 
revealed to people what is present in the new. The rdationship of the mysteries 
to the folk religion is represented in the same way. 
The mysteries contained essential traits and cultic depictions &om the old 
nature religion; but the newer religion was genuinely spiritual, and so [for 
the Greeks) the folk religion had an advanrage over the old and more 
abstract religion. But it is the same for our understanding. For example, 
we call for an explanation of the Greek gods, and we take as an explanation 
the abstract natural element from which it [such a god} emerged; we say, for 
example, that Poseidon is the sea. But in fact the sea is something inferior to 
Poseidon. Such a natural element was only the beginning and in the mys-
teries there was no greater wisdom; the mysteries were not simply a secret. 
Mysterium does not at all mean a 'secret' (Geheimnis); for the meaning of 
~sterium is the speculative, 1 which to the understanding is in any event a 
350 
StCret.41 In Athens everyone but Socrates was initiated into the mysteries of 
Eleusis. He did not take part in them because he wanted to reserve a free 
hand; when he established something by means of thought, he did not want 
to be responsible for divulging E.leusinian secretS. In his history of Egypt 
Herodotus often said that he could not reveal what the priests told him. 42 He 
beard there about the foundations, the abstraCt beginninp, of tbe Greek 
gods. This is, the~ the relationship of the old gods to the new ones. Greek. 
mythology itself contains this transition; the battle of the gods is famous. 
Zeus and his siblings are a new and later race. From this it is clear that the 
Greek gods too are an emergent phenomenon. The resonance of the natural 
beginning is there; but it is only the gods that come &om thought that are 
eternal, and with these gods there can no longer be a theogony. These are the 
basic features. 
When we have beheld the nature of the Greek gods in tbis fashion, we see 
in them spirit in its freedom. Spirit is no longer iJnmersed in nature (even 
though people now regard this unity [with nature] as the most excellent 
feature). Spirit is no longer subject to superstition. H spirit is still ~thin this 
natural unity, it is bound and subjected within its other. in supersnnon. (But 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Greek religion is [essentially] devoid of superstition.) While detaching itself 
from nature, Greek religion still has an aspect where superstition rules; this 
is because the umnite breach on the pact of the subjectivity of human beings 
351 
within themselves has not yet happened; the infinite antithesis I is not yet 
present; the antithesis of good and evil does not yet exist, the [antithesis} 
disrupting that beautiful cheerfulness of the Greeks-the infinite break of 
human subjectivity within itself and consequendy the infinite antithesis of 
the 'this' to the universal. And in this respect Greek religion is therefore sriU 
superstitious, as is shown by the oracles. It is said that the antithesis of the 
individual as a this (Dieser) to the univenal is not yet present to thought and 
thus is not yet resolved. But the characteristic of infinite subjectivity is in fact 
already present in actuality because every individual is a this. But the 
character of the this is not yet religiously comprehended, has not yet been 
taken up into religioDt and so the antithesis is not yet reconciled and 
subjectivity is stiU bound. Thus superstition still is a factor here. 
The Christian is confideru that his particular destiny and welfare, tempo-
ral and etemal, is an object of God's care. His life journey rums out for the 
best. In his particular circumstances and with his particular aims, in these 
mattus, in prayer to Goc4 the Christian is God's object and aim, and is 
absolutely justified. This perso~ each and every person, should be redeemed 
and etemally blessed. The Greeks did not and could not arrive at this Yiew; 
for it is only in the Christian religion that God has become a this and has 
taken the character of the this into the character of the divine concept. 43 
We see that the Greeks consulted the oracles abour particular concerns. 
E.a.rliu oracles were found in a number of locations in Greece; there were 
352 
other places besides Delphi and Dodona. 1 Natural phenomena were 
included under the general category of oracles. They were nor consulred 
about etbical or legal issues but only about particular matters. Because we 
are comparing the attitude of rhe Christian religion [with that of the Greeks], 
we indicated that we found the God of Cluistians to be defined as a tbi$, as 
an actual human being, as being this God. In determining the nature of the 
Christian God to be this God, who has a Son who is an actual human being, 
the category of "this' is established. The familiar trust of Christians in God 
resides in the fact that God has experienced the feelings of human suHering 

THE GREEK WORLD 
and therefore particular concerns stand under the care of God. With this 
conception, this confidence, individual human beings can decide and resolve 
things themselves. It might be assumed that decision on the part of human 
beings, deciding for oneself, is superfluous here, since God will make things 
right. But this can be said only by empty and idle talk that does not assume 
that action must be taken. But since action is assumed, the only question 
concerns whence comes the determination of the action. But the indolent do 
not make this assumption of action. Thus the question is: Does the subject 
derive the determination from itself or from something exremal? Since 
infinite subjectivity (the •1 wiD'), since the determination of this will~ is 
not yet developed in God, is not yet taken up into this idea of ~ 
then 
abstract willing and abstract deciding, this •f wiU' of the subject, still bas no 
proper standing. The subject has not yet been able to derive from itself the 
characteristic of willing as a •this'. Humans have nOl yet grasped this power 
of decision as their own; and if their own being was the decisive thing, that 
would have no justification. Insofar as they have it, it is more in the form of 
an arbitrary will ( Willkiir), a sacrilegious presumption. For human beings 
are absolutely justified only insofar as nature knows the this in the divine 
nature. Thus the Greeks have 1 not yet taken their own counsel about 
953 
decisions affecting their particular concerns, but must rarher obtain the 
decision from an external source. This explains why it appears that this 
infinitely free and gifted people has nonetheless found a place foe 
SUperstition. 
In the this Christians recognize the divine nature, and tbq truSt in God 
that God might shape the circumstances of the this to the purpose of God's 
providence (Vorsorge). This is a very important consideration because the 
Greeks place their superstitious unst in the oracle. When someone, foe 
example the nobleman Pausanias prior to the Battle of Plataea. frets over 
[the entrails of] sacrificial animals, 44 it is essential to ask how tiUs is~ 
ent with the free Greek spirit. This apparendy bizarre ~ 
15 
connected with the Greek conception of spirit, and talk about_ pricsdy 
legerdemain, etc., is superficial chatter. Circumstances such as this reveal 
the difference between the Greek and the Christian religions. 
. 
Closely connected with the oracles is another Greek view, that~ fa~_ It 
15 
said that the Greeks did not yet inwardly grasp the absolute pnocaple of 
deciding for oneself about particular affairs or events. They had (not) yet 
J97 

354 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
established this ultimate determination in itself. This is connected with the 
fact that the principle that detennines the particular they grasped in objec-
tive fonn: the Greeks were still perplexed about the particularity of events. 
The category of providence, or fait~ for Christians stands opposed to what 
we call fate for the Greeks. In other respects, however, for Christians as well 
as for Greeks the connection of particularities to the universal is something 
incomprehensible and misunderstood. Destiny unfolds on a soil that must be 
called contingent in respect to particular purposes; I for it is a question of 
panicularities that are not justified vis-a-vis what exists in and for itself and 
on its own. The particularities of circumstances, the life-journey of the 
individual, are incomprehensible for Greeks and Christians; but Christians 
have the view that all these particularities serve for the best, that God guides 
aJI these contingencies and leads them to dte best outcome. Thus they 
assume that God's object is what is best for them. The Greeks lacked this 
view just because what is paniculac, the end of individuals, was not taken up 
into God They accepted individual events as they happened and where they 
found them, but they did not have the conception that what is best for them 
would be a final end, that as a 'this' they would be an end. So they wece just 
left with the thought that 'that's how it is'. They remained with the mere fact 
of being. 'I am such that I am an end' could not have entered their thinking. 
It only remained for them to think, 'That's bow it is, and humans must 
submit to it'. This was their ultimate [recourse]. 
At the same time we must say that no superstition is present in this fate, in 
the reiteration of 'That's how it is', in this representation of things, as there is 
in the view of the oracles, where the human being is unfree. Bu~ in the 
representation of fate, &eedom is still only formal &eedom, for if humans 
accept what is and let things fall as they may, then no discord occurs between 
them and things as they are, between what they want and what is. Hwnan 
being$ are only dissatisfied when external reality does not correspond to 
their aims and differs from their desires. But when persons do not regard 
themselves to be justified in a particular way, then they have no aims of their 
own and submerge everything in the simple notio~ 'That's the way it is'. 
Thus a unity exists between them, their representations, and the way things 
are. They are at one, at peace. Since they have no particular pw~ 
the I 'other' is annulled in them, and there is peace and freedom. However., 
this offers no solace, for solace presupposes that I have a purpose and that it 
was satisfied. Solace is not found. This disposition, this subjection, does not 
require solace precisely because it does not yet have the deeper need of 
subjectivity, and this is because individuals in their particularity do not 
view themselves as ends or purposes. The deeper demands of subjcctiviry 
398 

THE GREEK WORLD 
are not met here; but the situation is by no means unreasonable. If one were 
to view destiny as a blind power over right and ethical life, as is the case in 
modern tragedies, that would be a most spiritless and unreasonable outlook. 
But this was not the way that the Greeks viewed fate. The sphere of divine 
justice is something other than that of destiny. 
The Constitution of Greece 
Here we make a transition to the consrirution of Greece. The latter is directly 
connected with Greek religion. We have already spoken of the beginnings of 
Greek political organization and said that the sovereign power imported 
from foreign lineages finally fell away as superfluous. Let us now examine 
its positive aspects more closely. What distinguishes the Greek constitution 
is democracy, which could attain this development only here and only here 
be so admired, while the Oriental world offered a brilliant display of 
despotism. The Roman world is that of aristocracy, and the Germanic 
world that of monarchy. 
Oriental despotism is absent, then, from Greece because the [Greek 
political] condition did not begin from patriarchy (fundamentally, the two 
systems [democracy and patriarchy] remain alien to each other [even) when 
they are intertwined); rather the Greeks united as rational individuals, not as 
individuals linked and bound together by nature. On the other hand, how-
ever, the subject, or subjectivity, 1 was not yet infinite reflection within 
356 
itself, not yet the wholly free ideality of thought, nor the infinite subjectivity 
to which conscience belongs. An absolute detennination regarding the par-
ticularity of conscience did not yet have a place here; it was not [yet] 
expected here that everything should be justified before hwnan inwardness. 
Missing is what human beings justify with reference to themselves. There 
had not yet occurred this breach in which autonomous, independent inward· 
ness is fonned, seeking to determine for itself in thought what is right and 
ethical, recognizing only the latter to be justified, and not recognizing what 
is not justified according to its own insight. 
Since this breach has not yet occurred, this world (of subjectivity] is not 
Yet erected; the panicular will is not yet free; the particularity of conviction 
and intention does not yet carry weight. Passions are therefore not yet 
. 
I 
4s 
ch . 
dn 
mvo ved in the operations of the state. 
In regard to su 
mwar 
ess, to 
lnind are passioas based on a subjective sense of self. Jn place of dais ~~ ~ 
m 
~ 
Hotho continues the preceding sentence: '[the particularity of COilY1dJOil aad IDtell-
.u. Since the early Greek leader1; ~urely did act out of passicm, perba.ps wbat Hegel ba.~ ~ 
~ 
tiOo} does not yet come iato association with the stare'. 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
such particular powers of the spirit and will that inwardly strive to be &ec, 
the state is then [in the Germanic-Christian world} precisely what is of 
universal interest, appearing as something external. Since it is determined 
[as) something external to which the subjective free will is not subjectively 
bound~ the state must have its own distinctive mode of stabilization, its own 
distinctive bond, because [otherwise] only spirit, only conscience, is some· 
thing secure and stable. The only thing in my mind that is secure is my 
conviction; and the state, because it is external, must provide another 
mainstay over against this inwardness, this [personal] opinion. 
The time for monarchy has arrived when such a bond is required; thus 
monarchy emerges when external order mtuires a focus for lhe sake of 
stability. This bond can only be secure if it has occurred naturally and 
357 
been fonned natwally. I Hence, the moment of naturalness is taken up 
into the ethical order. This stable order can take up the element of natnnl-
ness and can support the state apart from and even contrary to the convic-
tion and coosciena of the individual, since the latter ace uncertain and ate 
left to one's own opinion. 
We do not yet find this situation or any of these characteristics with the 
Gfteks. However, in order to be able to do justice to the Greek constitution, 
we must have ma.saered these propositions and become sure of these con-
ceptions both abstractly and in external phenomena; it is only when we have 
its coocept that we are permitted to discuss conceptions of the constitution. 
Inwardness is very important to the Greek spirit and will soon surface in it, 
where botb the suh;ettive spirit and, together with it, [personal] opinions 
appeaL Their appc:arins, however, caD only be destructive, because the 
constitutioo has not yet developed to this point. Hence, the principle of 
subjective ~ 
appears only as something disruptive in it because it is 
still a heterogeneous principle for this constitution. 
The Greek constitmion, therefore,. proceeds from the unity of subjective 
and objective ~ 
whereas the Oriental world starts out from the parriarcbal 
principle, and the modem world statts out from subjeaive freedom. Sin~ 
these (other] two principles are not present in the Greek world, the central 
thing here is beauty, which in terms of the political aspect leads to the Greek 
constitution and SdS the Greek world apan. This world is beautiful, but the 
true [is) always highe.: Beauty is not yet trulb. This beautiful center of the 
ethical and the just [is what) is grasped and sought by the free individual. 
by free individuality-not yet in the specific quality of morality but instead 
as custo~ as the objectiw aspect of willing. 1be will has not yet been 
intensified into the ideality of being..for.sclf,. has not yet arrived at the interi-
368 
ority of the latter. The ethical and the just are based oo the fmedom I of the 
400 

THE GREEK WORLD 
will; they actualize this freedom. Thus the content is defined by the law of 
freedom, and it is rational. The will is indeed no longer bound from the 
outset and is no longer fixated in unity with the natural, as in the Orient. 
Thus the content is the free, the rational. As to the form, it is that of 
immediacy. The law of the ethical is valid here because in the condition 
of immediacy it is the law of one's own country. It is not valid because 
I regard it to be right and have convinced myself of it; rather it is the simple 
custom by which we live. What is natural, what befalls us, just is, and thus 
it must take place. Here this is simple reflection, simple ethicality, the 
custom of life. Here there is no higher ground for obedience. In beauty as 
such the idea is still the natural element in sensible representation and is 
expressed for sensible representation. Ir expresses the divine in the sensible; 
and thus ethical practice, which does not yet comprise morality, has here 
as such the character of custom and habit in the mode of nature and of 
necessity. 
Thus the law has here the fonn of immediacy; the particularity of will is 
not yet present. Hence the interest of the entire community, its common 
being, can reside in the decision of individuals, the citizens; and this wiD of 
the citizens must be the basis of the constitutio~ for there is no principle thar 
could hinder the existing ethical life in its acrualization. Thus here the 
democratic.: constitution is the absolutely necessary fonn. The will here is 
still the objective will; and Athena, the goddess, is still Athens, still tb.e spirit 
of the people, still the actual spirit of the citizens; this ceases to be only when 
object and subject separate. And this form is the justification and necessity of 
the democratic constitution; none other is possible here. The democratic 
constitution rests on this immanent ethicality. When the wiD I has retreated 
359 
into an interior conscience and the separation has occurred-only then bas 
the moment for the democratic constitution passed by. 
Of greater interest are the tenets that lead to the caU for a democratic 
constitution. If we speak of such a constitution, in our time in particular it is 
frequently represented to be the best. It is said that in~ 
decisions, and 
ordinances of the state should be the concern of all citizens; this is true and it 
is quite important. A further tenet adduced is that individuals, citizens as 
individuals, must have the right to deliberate and decide about public 
matters, because their own and their most essential concerns in this world 
ace at stake. It can be said dtat citizens will be motivated to choose what is 
best for themselves, and that they will best understand what that is, and thus 
should have the right to make this choice. 
However, an essential consideration is the question as to who these 
individuals are who are to detennine what is best, and where these 
401 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
individuals are who should understand these concerns. They are single 
individuals, citizens; and of them it must be said that they have this absolute 
justification only to the extent that their will is still the absolute and objec-
tive will and is not split between the imeriority of subjectivity and what is 
universal and objective-only to the extent, therefore, that their will is still 
the simple unity of substantial volition. This is indeed the standpoint of 
the Greeks, but no longer that of the modern world, where Christ says, 
360 
'My kingdom is not of this world'46-where, then, this split I exists and 
the inwardness and etemiry of spirit within itself are found. The objective 
and substantial will should not be called the good wiU, for the good will is 
precisely wbat is distinguished from the objective. The good will is the moral 
wiU; and the moral wiU judges what the individual and the state should do, 
acting in accord with an inner rational determination, in accord with the 
good as an idea within itself, as a knowledge of duty. This good will is no 
longer the substantial, objective wiU. It appears to be a remarkable destiny of 
the human race that, as soon as it arrives at subjective inwardness, at this 
religion of freedom and spirituality, its higher standpoint of subjective 
freedom inhibits the possibility of achieving what one ohen calls, preemi-
nendy, the freedom of a people, namely democracy. These are fundamental 
determinations at the core of the concept. One must be acquainted with these 
determinations [in order] to avoid idle talk about what a constitution is. 
1hree conditions relating to rhe democracy of the Greeks can be added here. 
1bc first [is) the orack.47 While the oracle was inseparably connecred with 
democracy in its older and purer peri~ democracy itself results in the oracle 
no longer being consulted about the most important circumstanceS and mal-
tees. There was a rapid transition to citizens deciding for themselves rather than 
consulting the oracle. Along with the rapid transition to assemblies to take 
counsel, the feeling soon arose that citizens themselves shou1d decide~ play an 
active role. We find this in Athens where democracy fully developed; there the 
people themseJves decided. The decision of the people reached its height in this 
361 
period, I when Socrates experienced his daimon, which did not yet appear to 
him as his interiority but as something alien, something that determined him. 
his oracle.48 He did not yet caU this subjectivity. 
46. john 18:36. 
47. The COIIIIeelioo of dlt oracle with democracy appears to be as foUows. When poJjtica) 
decisious wen no )<mgrf made by patriarchs or despors, they feJ] to individual citim~S. 
~vidual~ first consulted or:ades to detmnine bow they should act. Subsequenrly they gathered 
m assemblies and took votes based on their own decisions. deriving hom their inner oracle. 
48:_ On the dtUmon (or •gmiu&'l of Socrates,~ Hegel, I....ectvre$ on tbe History of P~ 
pb,l, 11. 145-SO. •What it implies is that bwnan beings will now reach decisious in~ 
402 

THE GREEK WORLD 
In the conflict between Achilles and Agamemnon, Homer ascribes to 
Pallas [Athena] Achilles' inner decision to refrain from fighting. 49 When 
such decisions are now made by citizens entirely in the state, the majorit)· 
decides. In earlier times, at the beginning, votes were not counted individu· 
ally but estimated as a whole with great imprecision. As evidence Thucy· 
dides reports that in Sparta an ephor proposed that, in order to decide 
whether to go tow~ [the Lacedaemonians] should not raise their hands 
but rather stand on different sides in different groups. 50 Later on, decisions 
were made by precise count. The greatest accuracy could be achieved only 
by counting, but there was also the awareness that such a decision appears to 
be a matter of chance, and all the more so the greater the number of voters. 
This can cause an uproar because the large number of votes is quickly tallied 
and the individual vote is devalued, is now regarded as insignificant. It is 
even said that, by increasing rhe number of votes so that individual votes 
become insignificant, the individual has less regard for his vore and casts it 
irresponsibly. Here is where contingency enters on every side: one [citizen] 
stays away for this or that reason while [another] speaks eloquently. The 
decision then appears to be a matter of chance. Indeed the majority I can 
362 
become indignant if, for [example], there are six hundred on both sides and 
only one insignificant vote decides the matter. If things come to this final 
exactitude, the decision also appears to be contingent and will be resented, 
especially if at the same time inner conviction, the rdlection of will, comes 
into play and is aware that whatever law alone, or whatever else, has been 
decided, contributes to the corruption of the state. And this strength of 
conviction enters the piaure as a result of education. Thus all the attention 
to, all the respect for, such decisions collapses, and this whole way of 
deciding collapses. With the daimon of Socrates, this interiority, we see in 
Athens itself the onset of the age of this &.ll""v, 51 and also of the age of 
decline. If the oracles are the first form for outwardly expressing what is 
with their inner being, insight, reasons, and consciousness in genera~ although geniu5 is not vet 
"CObscienc.e" • for that is a later expression' (p. 145). Refe~:mCeS to Socnues' Jai"""' las a 
divinity or voice rhat comes upoo him and decermines him) an: found in various pssages iD 
Xenophon's Memorabui4 and Plato's Apol~·· 
49. Homer, Iliad 1.190-220 (Rieu, pp. 9-10). As Achilles debated with bimsclf wbetber to 
disembowel Agamemnon or to control his angry impulses, Athena a~ 
and persuaded him 
to 6ght with wor<h; rather than weapons. 
SO. Thucydides, Pelopomtesi4n War 1.86-87 (Lattimore. p. 42). 11nxydides docs not refer W 
raising hands but to shouting as the alternative to standing iD groups. 'The ephors m Sputa ~ 
OVebeQs or magistrates, selected anoually. 
St. The German text adds a 6aal omiaon to tbis word. 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
determined-which stiU bas the advantage that what is outward comes in 
the form of a divine apparition-this changes into a second fonn, into a 
majority of votes, into a number; but the oracle has the advantage of being a 
divine authorization. 
History shows that a second condition is bound up, and necessarily so~ 
with Greek ethical life and its democracy, nameiy, slavery. For ethical life 
exists as custom and habit, and has in this respect a particular mode of 
concrete existence. It is only when human beings know that they are not 
things but persons, infinitely free on their own account, that slavery does not 
occur. It does not occur when the concept of the human is that human beings 
are free as such. But this is where the infinite inwardness of subjectivity 
comes into play. For the Greeks, freedom holds good only because they are 
Greeks, because they are these particular citizens. Thus we see that [only} 
these Athenians~ these Spartans, etc., are free; freedom is not yet grasped as 
363 
what is I universal but rather as something that is particular. Only when the 
&ee is thought are human beings free-free because they are free. This 
freedom pusuppcses that thought comes to itself. Thus slavery is necessary 
in Greece. 
A third observation is that democratic constitutions can be found only in 
states of small size. AgaiJ4 this is no mere contingency of history; a demo--
cratic state cannot spread out very far. One can also think differendy about 
this, in abstract terms; but that is of course a quite stagnant and lifeless 
picture. The character of democracy is an essentially plasti~ compact unity. 
Just this plastic character requires that it is not one person who decides; 
cathu it is the whole body that renders the decision, taking into account aU 
circumstances and intttes~ all sides and reasons. The citizens must there-
fore be present [together]; the picture of interests must be alive for them. 
This can only happen in small states. 
THE MATURITY OF THE GREEK SPIRlT 
According to our previously indicated division of the hisrory of a people/2 
the unfolding of a spiritual principle belongs in the first period. In the second 
period the principle itself is evident; and thus the Greek spirit in its maturity 
comes forth in all its brilliance. 
Sl. See above, pp. 372-3. 

THE GREEK WORLD 
First we shall indicate in more detail what the major elements of this 
5erond period are. What we have had up to this point is intrinsic to the first 
period of the Greek people-the period that constitutes its strength and 
formation. In the second period what bas reached maturity manifests itself: 
inwardness comes into concrete existence (Dasein), presents itself in its 
brilliance, comes into prominence; it does not simply remain within itseU 
bur appears in I wor4 ones that are for the world. Thus these works 
364 
constitute the second period of the Greek world. 
The Persian Wars 
The epoch with which such a second period begins involves contact with me 
antecedent world-historical people. [In the case of the Greeks,] the epoch 
with which this second period begins involves contact with the Persians. The 
individuality that has matured inwardly must tum outward and then recede 
back into itself. The first point, therefore, is the contact of the Greeks with 
the Persians and the events involving what Herodotus calls 'the War with the 
Medes'. 53 The history of the latter, brilliant as it is, caJUlot be considered 
further here; it is well-known. and here only the following needs to be 
recalled. 
We must recall that not all the Greeks participated in the war. A signifi-
cant number were allied with the Persians and fought with them against the 
Greeks. Even here, where the highest stakes were involved, particularity 
maintained the upper hand; for inwardly mature individuality is a person 
OUtwardly before it returns again into itself. 54 We see the Greeks united only 
once. Their separation is a necessary element, and particularity inevitably 
gained the upper hand over a common Hellenism. Athens and Sparta above 
all distinguished themselves. The Athenians alone led and won the tint~ 
against Dari~ which was decided at the Battle of Marathon. In the nexr 
war, with Xerxes in command (he invaded with all of Asia), ~ 
lhessaly, and even Argos were subjugated by the Persians. In the Pelopon-
nesus, Argos took no part in the defense of the islands; Sicily and Crete came 
. Sl The Mcdes became part of the Persian Empire in the 6th cent. 1C and played a ~jor ~ 
111 the Persian attacks on Greece. HerodotuS describes ahe Penian Wan (51)()--44' ec) 10 detail m 
bks. 5-!J of Tht History (Grcne, pp. 357-664): 
_ 
lint ~ 
oi Greek 
_54. ~l's argument throughout this sectJ.oa -:' as f~ 
_In ;!: ~.;:.... Ia the 
history, 10wardncss or lillb)ectivity matureS as an ~ 
po&Slbili~ 
iP the form ol 'prarriot-
~ 
pcnod, this inwardness takes on coocme ws~ ~ 
· -
who 
larity• (Partib/aritih) or 'individuality' (J~) 
•. dw., ~~- o1 
~ 
themselves over against commUPal idaJrity. Tb;s IS ll necesaarY *P 
SfUit. but it has oegative as well as positi..e ooue-qik"idS-

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
365 
under 1 Persian aegis; and thus only a few peoples stood on the Greek side. 
Only a few states withstood this great conflict. 55 
Also noteworthy here is rhe favor of destiny. Marathon, Salamis, Ther-
mopylae remain immortal names, which live eternally in human remem-
braoce. The small nwnber of Athenians who fought at Marathon, the three 
hundred Spartans under Leonidas at Thermopylae, the Athenians who took 
to their ships to battle against the Persians-these will always be examples of 
bravery. Since these battles and that age, many thousand times three hun-
dred have died just as bravely. There is no people that has not engaged in 
heroic deeds and had many defenders; all native lands are bravely defended. 
But for u.s, none of these countless battles and the men who died in them, 
these heroes, compare with the immortal glory of Thermopylae and the 
three hundred. It may appear to be good fortune, but fame decides according 
to the nature of the case. We must consider bow fame distributes its laurels. 
Fame rewards, deciding not according to moral, subjective values, nor on 
the basis of subjective merit; rather it decides in accord with objective values 
and the nature of the case. The defense of Greece is unique in its universal 
aspect. West and East stood so opposed here that the interests of world 
history lay in the balance. The defense of other interests, of one's native land 
and the like. have all been more limited. Pericles, in his funeral oration foe the 
366 
fal~n during the Peloponnesian War, 1 spoke in praise of Athens, for which 
the men bad died, and he said: 'It is for such a city that these men sD't.lggled and 
died. '56 He attributed the exceUence of their sacrifice to the greamess of the 
cause. Thus it is because of the cause that their fame here is so great. 
As to the powers that were opposed here, on the one side there was 
Oriental despotis114 the entire Eastern world united under a single master, 
mighty in numbers, having the great advantage of being under a single 
dominion. And these Persians, these Orientals, Xerxes in particular, are by 
no means to be seen as soft and weak or to be derided. Herodotus gives quite 
a different picture of them; while some groups were soh, many, indeed most, 
were the opposite: they were strong and belligeren~ and indeed displayed a 
raw and savage bravery. Over against these folk, who in pan were very 
SS. 11lf Battle of Marathoa ocamed in 490 BC. Tm yean laaer, Xerxes prevai.led ar Thermo-
pylae, OV«Whelming a valiant Spartan cODtingmt, but was decisiye•y dereated by a ...Ubed 
Greek uvy at tbe Battled Salamis in 480. Witb the defeat of the Persian army at: Platan in 
479, the tbrrat of Gredc destructiou. ended, but the Penims very nearly SUCCftded in tbrir 
OODquest. The pareathetical remark 'he invaded with aU of Asia' rekrs to the fact mat D 
Pnsiao fun::es (:()Osisted of liDits drawn from the many distinct ethnic groups contained withiP 
the Pmian fm.pire. 
56. Thucydides, P~l~ 
War, 2.41 (Lattimore. p. ~). 

THE GREEK WORLD 
warlike and were united under one leader, stood a few peoples of limited 
means but possessing free individualicy. Never in world history has the 
advantage and superiority of the noble power of spirituality over massed 
forces-who were indeed not to be disdained-been displayed so splendidly. 
In modern times it often happens that in a single battle a small force has 
prevailed over a large number: 400 French defeated 60,000 Indians in one 
battle. It is otherwise with a war of long duration, in which one battle is but 
a single and rather contingent matter. I This war, therefore, is the most 
367 
glorious [episode] of Greece, and it had as its author the father of historiog-
raphy, Herodotus. This war is decisive for this great epoch. The epoch was 
marked by tension; and as soon as these [foreign peoples] had been repelled 
in the outward tension, the tension had then to be directly inward, for the 
Greeks were stiU not capable of conquering the Persians. Having been 
aroused and no longer having an outward object of their activity, the people 
had to seek it inwardly, in inner dissension and conflict. Thus we see here the 
emergence of conflicts between Greek states within Greece itself. The con-
flicts are panty among individual states and partly among individual patties 
within each of the states. 
Athens versus Sparta 
Athens and Sparta were in the greatest and most substantial opp(Jsitio~ and 
the interests of the other states especially revolved about this antagonism. It 
provides a great deal of material for specialized histories-accounts of aU the 
separate states (lnselstaaten), of the factions and individuals within them. The 
particularity of the other regions, which have the greatest diversity of constitu· 
tions, comes into view; this is an anthill, in constant and continuous movement 
within itself and against itself. But the major interest focuses on Athens and 
Sparta; the whole struggle turns on their opposition; indeed, even the internal 
opposition within the other states defines itself by the struggle between these 
two. For already here. at the beginning of the conflict, the antithesis between 
democracy and aristocracy comes to the fore-an antithesis that Rome strove 
to end in a unity that was visibly accomplished in Rome. I The balance 
368 
quickly shifted back and forth becween Athens and Sparta. We shall examine 
more closely the character of these two peoples. 
Regarding Athens, we have already noted57 that early on it established 
peaceful conditions as a place of refuge for inhabitants from other regions. 
for other peoples of Greece; and so it had a mixed populace, made up pard~· 
57. See above, p. 374. 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
of Greeks and peoples from the islan~ and partly of foreigners, of Asians 
and Africans. 
A second thing to note is that its essential orientation was to the sea, 
trade~ and shipping commerce; but at the same time farming, olive culriva-
tio~ and landed property were related to these activities. We know histori-
caJly that from an early time opposition developed between differenr 
factions. 
We shall pass over the earlier or older [history of Athens], for example the 
unification under Theseus. The only noteworthy point is that the unification 
is attributable to the fact that he enabled the various autonomous coounu· 
nities to unite in Athens, in the city itself. He enabled all aspectS of the state 
to be 1mder a common authority and a single tribunal, all being in one 
central point. We see the opposite in Boeotia and Lacedaemoni~ where 
the authority was distributed across the whole region. 
5'7hus., in Athens, unification of the region and the city occurred earlier. 
But three groups began to emerge quire soon, which were related to 
different locales and the way of life associated with them: inhabitants of 
the sea coast and mariners, mountain dwellers, and plains dwellers. The 
three can be called classes (Stande) to the extent that they are based on 
:&1 
distinct ways of life. I The situation with these classes was unsettled; and 
insofar as Athens also constituted one whole, a union, in effect a state, 
there thus arose a see-saw between aristocracy and democracy. The legis-
lation of Solon resolved this situation. (Solon was one of the Seven Wtse 
Men; the other six bore this name for diverse reasons. Solon's legislation 
indicates a level of culture where the awareness of, and need for, a universal 
representation, e.g. of general well-being, emerges; this is the point at 
which the need for law arises. The Wise Men wece principally legislators, 
some being referred to as rulers and tyrants, the ones who were the noblest 
and wisest. 
59
) Thus Solon gave the laws to his fellow citizens. It is a care 
stroke of good fortune that an individual gives laws to such a people-this 
lot befalls few mortals. 
If wr say that an essential aspect of democracy is that the people them-
selves must make the laws, then it is remarkable, and can appear striking, 
58. &e aod at the be:ginniag of tbe oext 5n'e1'a1 pangrapbs t:be German editors add topical 
hadinp !hat~ omit. 
59. On Solon. 1ft lieroclorus, History 1.29-33, 2.177 (Grme, pp. 44-8, 208). His nforms 
date .&om bis arcboaship in Athens, 594-593 BC. The list of the ScveD Wise Men of aocieDt 
Greca diHaai widely but always iDcludecl SoiClll. It is not suict)y trot thJt all of thesn were 
'lawgjYen' iD the sense of aetcising politiaJ powa. Some wen sllnply penoos who pve good 
adrice for dJe baE -.ray to coadua ooe"s affain, potitica1 or odaerwise. 

THE GREEK WORLD 
that here one individual promulgated the constitutional law; what is more, 
Solon also established the civil law. However, it is quite supec:6cial to say that 
a democratic constitution should give me legislative power to the people, 
that in a democracy legislation should be in the hands of the people. For 
democracy is already a constitution; it is already the development I of a 
370 
)egal system in which its own great and important laws are already estalr 
lished, and further elaboration is unnecessary. Its own Jaws, on which things 
depend, are already established in every constitutio14 insofar as it i.s one. 
Solon gave the Athenians a democratic constitution, but in such a fashion 
that an aristocratic element was involved. Solon's laws do indeed specify 
equality among the citizens, but the wealthy stiiJ have an advantage over 
others, principally in regard to the administration of public offices; hence 
there is an aristocratic element. 
This difference was ameliorated, as we notice, by a ttansformation in 
the age that followed. At the instigation of Cleistenes~ the constitution 
became more democratic. Up to the age of Pericles the Areopagus had 
issued decrees about everything, decrees in which the people had no say. 
But following Pericles the actions of the Areopagus were suspended, so that 
for the first time in the age of Pericles a democratic constitution was firmly 
established. 60 
We should note that slavery was a major aspect of private life. In contrast 
to Sparta, however, slaves were an incidental private possession, acquired by 
purchase. In Athens no free Greek peoples were enslaved.61 We must keep in 
mind these major distinctions. 
Industriousness, and ethical and legal equality, are essentiaJ; they are the 
means by which the inequaliry of individuality and the diversiry of character 
could develop most effectively and be made acceptable. In the conduct 
of private persons toward each other, we see in Athens a re6nemenr62 
of customs and freedom that has taken a very 6ne and delicate form. 
60. The Areopagm was the prime council of Atheus, which met oo a rocky bill (also called 
tbe Areopagus) north-west of the Acropolis. It combined judicial and legisl:uive fuoctioos and 
through tbe Sib ant. ac was the stronghold of the aristocracy. By the 4th cent. its scopt bad beeP 
gready reduced. In 463 Pericles stripped the Areopagus of irs dUd political power, dws 
weakening tbr oliguchy. Cleistrnes (chief a.rdloo 525-524) is regarded as tbe fOUIIder of the 
democracy, because be ~:banged me political power structure from ODe based on fami]y or blood 
relaliorubips to one based on locale of residence. 
61. Arben.i.au slaves were typically foreigners captured in war--hmoe nor ~-
62. Hegel uses dw: term UTbarUtiit. It derives (rom the Latin word fur 'city' (ilrbs). and 
describes a quabty of life fouod in cities, namely a way ol beia8 police and ~ 
in a 
smooth, polislled way. 'Urbanity' is a form of 'rdoemcot', and we ba~ prdcnal the latur RJm 
in tnosluioa. 

THE lECTURES OF 1822-3 
371 
Refinement is civility in matters of substance without I expressly assuming 
forms that we associate with it, for example certain expressions and cour· 
tesies. Everything that for us is a matter of form is, in the refinement of the 
Greeks, the substance itself. These courtesies consist in the ongoing recogni· 
tion of the rights of other persons, and the conviction that, in expressing 
myself, I respect the right of others to their own opinions; I respect whether 
they want to listen to me or not. If I speak without knowing whether they 
want to listen~ I violate their rights, and the same is true in regard to what is 
said. If I speak in this way, then I preswne to speak on behalf of the listeners 
and, as it were, demand their agreement. This presumption upon the free-
dom of the other person is not foWld in refinement. This enduring respect for 
the othe.; this refinement, is developed into the highest form in the Platonic 
dialogues. If I am refined, I must do nothing that betrays an imposition of 
wiD on the other. Thus refinement consists of one person always acting and 
speaking in such a way as to acknowledge the rights of the other. 
In the more precise sense culrure (Bildung) is what distinguishes the Af.he.. 
nians formally-the form of their actions generally. As a consequence, the form 
of universality is expressed in works and activities in which there is respect for 
others, and they find themselves validated therein. The material content of this 
culture is constituted in pan by the state and in part by the religious cultus, the 
major aspect of which were festivals. The great political figures were shaped by 
the distinctive democratic constitution; they are found especiaUy in Athens, 
where all individuals are chaUenged and obliged ro demonstrate their own 
talents; and this is possible only when it is known how to meet the expectations 
372 
and carefree nature of a highly cultured people. I 
Talent was most deeply inspired to become art by religion, for the god is a 
beautiful individuality, elevated to ideality, the principle of the spirirual idea 
present in the element of sensibility so as to serve spirit. The cultus does not 
occur inwardly in prayer; so, then, the god is venera red outwardly in festinls, 
not inwacdly in the mind. Because inwardness does not yet exist, humans 
portray the god to themselves outwardly, in a wonby fashion. Because me 
cultus still lacked inwardness, it suffused its outward character with beauty. 
So Athens offered the spectacle of a state that lived for the purpose of beauty, 
and that, in doing so, was aware of the flux of public life and of life generaUy, 
and proved to be energetic in the pursuit of practical affairs. 
The funeral oration of Pericles, found in the second book of Thucydides' 
history, 
63 gives the best indication "f the Athenian spirit. Here he articulates 
63. Thucydides, P~~ 
War 2.35-46 (l.attimon, pp. 91-7). Hqpel\ quoutioPs ue 
hom 2.40, but his Yei'Sion differs widely &om sundard transl::nims. 
410 

THE GREEK WORLD 
his consciousness of what Athens is, showing that he had a deeper compre-
hension of his srate than a statesman normally would. He says in particular: 
'We love beauty without pomp, without wallowing in i~ without haughti-
ness, not for the purpose of display but rather for the sake of beaury (itselij. 
We philosophize without being indifferent and without becoming indolent. 
In other words, we are aware of what we do.' This is characteristic. The 
Athenians know what they are about, but this does not progress to the point 
of mere indulgence in thought that might lead to a disconnection from the 
practical. Thus they liked being aware of their action and their being, without 
that awareness adversely affecting practice. 'We are brave', Pericles says 
further, 'not from coarseness of spirit, not from ap.a8(a [ignorance), not 
from lack of culture-a lack in which the spirit that does not respect itself 
swrenders because it is nothing in itself and as yet has no content. Our souJ is 
cultured. We know I what is pleasant and what is difficult, but despite this 
373 
knowledge we do not avoid danger.' 
Sparta is the anti type to Athens. In tenus of their origins, the Spartans are 
called Dorians. This distinction is not yet found in Homer, where generally 
the [Greek] racial stocks are nor differentiated; so this distinction was first 
drawn later. 
Sparta's origin is completely different from that of Athens. As Dorians 
they came into the Peloponnesus from Thessaly-they came as conquerors 
who made slaves~ 'helots•, of the native people whom they encountered, as 
they did later also of the Messenians. Thus the Spartans lived in a relation-
ship to these peoples that is similar to that today of the Turks to the Greeks, 
who are deprived of equal rights by their conquerors. 64 But the condition of 
the Greeks still is not so harsh. The condition of the helots was much 
harsher; they were slaves and were not regarded as free9 i.n the way contem-
porary Greeks are regarded as free; the Greeks are only subjected to taxation 
and random maltreaanent. In this way the Spartans live in a continuous state 
of war; within their own society they are always perpetuafly involved in 
military exercises, in which the young Spartans, even in times of peace, were 
forever hunting down the increasing nwnber of slaves that ran away. This 
pwsuit was a state-sanctioned arrangement, whereas with the Twks today it 
happens only in momentary outbwsts of fury. The helots were often armed 
in times of war; but afterward the brave ones were killed treacherously, 
massacred m masse. So even in times of peace the Spartans perpetually lived 
in war and freedom. 1 
374 
64. In me early 19th cent. Gre«e was still part oi me Ouomao E.mpR. but the Greek War of 
lodepeodence began in 1821, aD evcm that must lie iD the blckpoaDdolHqd•soommmt. 
411 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
A second aspect is the legislation of Lycucgus. 65 It dealt with aU aspects of 
landed property, dividing it into thirty thousand sections; one section wa!o 
devoted to the Achaeans and another to the Lac:edaemonians proper, who 
among themselves were said to be equal. In this way the equality of resources 
was maintained and grounded. Rut this and other arrangements were in no 
way adequate to this purpose; for, counter to the intention and desire of 
Lycwgus, landed property fell into the hands of a few, and in the end we see 
the most extreme inequality. Moreover, Lycurgus permitted no other metal 
than that of iro~ thereby cutting off external trade and internal industcy.66 
Citizens were expected to dine together in order to maintain common customs 
and familiarity; this is a much-praised practice and is particularly highly 
regarded. 67 But no great import is to be attributed to it. It is of no consequence 
that they ate the same fare; for whoever is satisfied does not think of those 
who have feasted on better fare. Eating and drinking are in general a private 
matter, and it is natwal that this should take place in the family. There is no 
great virtue in dining in conunon. Everyone was supposed to contribute to 
the cost of the food, to this common meal; but whoever was roo poor to do so, 
the poor citize~ were excluded from the meal. With the Cretaos the food 
was paid for by the community; but it is well-known that they acquired a bad 
reputation. The New Testament calls the Cretans aya fhtpla and 'worthless 
bellies'. 68 and thus nothing much can be said for equality. The Athenians oi 
course did not dine in common, but they engaged in physical exercise (lebten 
sie in den Gymna.sim) in a spiritual way. 
Constitutionally, Sparta was a democracy with kings; the kings, however, 
375 
were at first only magistrates, public officials, 1 and military leaders. Later 
we find ephors who, as the most important persons, were in command, so 
that Sparta was a democracy in name only and was actually an aristocracy 
oc an oligarchy. 69 The apathy of spirit of the Spartan people allowed control 
of the government to fall into the hands of the few. As a consequence~ 
and art were banned. Individuality was uncompromisingly absorbed into the 
liS. Sec Herodotus. History 1.65-6 IGttne, pp. 61-2). Nothing is known of 1M life of 
Lycurgus. the traditiooa.l oamr of the founder of the Spartan constitution. 
66. These are examples, pteSWDably, of Spanao asceticism and i.oeptitude. 
67. Plato tteats this praaicr-not just dining together but sharing all goods iD commoo--as 
one of the key features of bis guardian groups (philosophers and soldienl in Tbe R.qu.bl«;. 
aldJoush ._.1 does D(Jf ~uss it specifically io his Lectwres on the History of l'bilcsoph:r 
(ii. 223--4), beyODd genrral remarks about private ~·. 
68. Titus I: 12. "I'm Greek t~xt reads: oca.rci 9Yjp(o., Y<''"pfP"~ G,yo1 ('vicious brutes. ~· 
gluttoos'). Hegel quote$ the .6rst two words in Greek and translates the second rwo. 
69- Ephors w~ 
elccaed officials who eli£Tcis.:d gmera1 roatro1 ~ 
the aaious of kings, as 
wdl as baYiug ocher fuuctiom. 
412 

THE GREEK WORLD 
state; it was unrelated to free and spiritual consciousness, and multiple 
viewpoints went unacknowledged. Science on the whole was excluded. 
General conceptions, principles of right and ethical life could nor come ro 
the fore here. The stringent relationship to the one, uncultured state sup-
pressed everything universal, and thus the Spartans could not determine 
their own actions. Even if they are said to have acted justly among them-
selves, we still know that in all things they were dishonest toward outsiders 
and were not guided by general principles. 
Nonetheless, it should be nored that many noble Athenians had a prefer-
ence for Sparta. 
In modern times we find great and profound men such as Rowseau70 
who look backwards for what is better, for example, to the wilderness 
conditions of North America in preference to the cultured European states; 
the belief is that what is better precedes the I introduction of culture. 
37fi 
However, this is nor the case; what is better lies ahead. So we always feel 
ourselves drawn to Greece. We regard Greek life in general, its ethical and 
political qualities, to be shaped in channing and beautiful and interesting 
ways. But spirit cannot find irs highest satisfaction here. The objective 
absolute that is beautiful lacks a principal element, namely truth; and 
here right and ethical life still lack the sublime freedom that comes from 
the subjective unity of self-consciousness. 
The higher principle always appears for the world in the shape of 
destruction vis-a-vis what is earlier and lower. What is earlier has devd-
oped its law and ethical life into a present world and actuality. Against this 
the higher principle seems to be something differeltt that disrupts this 
world, something that this world does not recognize, buc [by which it] is 
disavowed. This disavowal, which constitutes the next higbee principle, 
will rob the state of its staying power and individuals of their vinue; and 
consequently this higher principle appears as something revolutionary and 
demoralizing. 
DECLINE AND FALL 
It remains for us to consider the aspect of destruction as the third period, and 
here again the distinction between Sparta and Athens is of interest. In teems 
70. Oo Hobbes, Rousseau, aad others, see above, p. 102, n.lit. 
413 

THE LECTURES OF 182 2-3 
m 
of the external history that is related to this period~ l the great historical 
event is the Peloponnesian War. 71 
The Peloponnesian War 
At the beginning of the war, Pericles stood at the apex of the Athenian state. 
It is generally the case that, where there are many, a leader must come 
forward, ooe individual who always stands at the forefront. In a republic 
this leader is a distinctive personality, a person who must legitimate himself 
but can only do so when also accepted as leader. And the wisest, the freest, 
the most virtuous individual is Pericles, who exemplifies the highest perfec-
tion. Athens at this time had a league of allies in the islands and engaged in 
friendly commerce with them; the allies contributed funds that were depos-
ited in a central treasury, administered by Athens in equipping the fleet. 72 
Thus Xenophon asked: 'Who does not need Athens, who does not need all 
the wealthy regions, all the wise and gifted individuals who grasp what is 
worth seeing and hearing in politics and religion?' 73 Athens was the center of 
tb.e league since it administered the central treasury. If it was reproached for 
coUecting money by force and using it for itself, for temples and statues, at 
least nothing was squandered. But the league also had a share in all of this, 
and Xenophon reported how honestly Pericles cared for the city. 
In such confederations no single community has concrete power; rather 
an abstract center serves that purpose. But in Greece there was no universal 
order or organization, no abstract center; the latter developed for the first 
378 
time in Rome. I In Greece each community strove to be the whole on its 
own terms. The exigencies of war perpetually drove the Greeks into such a 
confederation, but its hegemony was temporary because each one no 
longer desired to be pan of a whole. The struggle between Athens and 
Spana hinged on the impossibility of producing such a center and the drive 
to do so. 
In the Peloponnesian War Athens was defeated by their enemy, the 
Lacedaemonians, who allied themselves with the Persians; it was a base 
-:"1. Hqd's priocipa.l sowa tor the next few paragraphs is ThucydicJes. Pelopormesian Wm. 
l1x war Jasted from 431 to 404 IIC. 
72. The Delian league, llllder Athenian leadership aod based on the island of Delos. and 
OOIIIprisiQg various member stales in the Aegean region and its islands. originated iD 478 IIC as a 
buffer against Persian power. Sparta disbanded the original Delian league in 404, after defcal-
ing A~' in tbc Peloponnesian War. 
73. Xeoopbon. Symposwm 8.39. Hegel gives a Yeiy loose paraphrase of the text, wbicb 
makes spcci6c cefttmce to Pericles.. Solon. aod other AtbaUan &eaders. ~ 
Xenopbon. ~ 
.sa-, tL A j. Bowea <Wannimtcr. 1!198). 83. 
414 

THE GREE.K WORLD 
act of Sparta to betray Greece by turning to the Persians for help. The 
Spanans' need for money required them to seek it from outside and to resort 
to the worst means. For a second time, Sparta acted in a vile and treacherous 
way. The Lacedaemonians turned against Greece; they promised to liberate 
the Greek cities and islands from Athens, but instead they made them 
dependent on themselves and in all the cities transformed democracies into 
oligarchies. In a third betrayal, at the Peace of Antalcidas, 74 the Lacedae-
monians, the Spartans, treacherously handed over the Greek cities in Asia 
Minor to the Persians. 
Now the cities, with Thebes at the head, revolted; they threw off the yoke 
of Sparta, and Sparta declined. We see the Messenians, and the Arcadians 
too, reestablished and forming a state. Thebes, lifted up by Pelopidas and 
Epaminondas, 75 again assumed irs earlier role. Pelopidas and Epaminondas 
died, and the previous situation almost repeated itself~ such that Greece 
found itself thus entangled now in mutual amity and hostility of every 
sort; I and without such [orderly] circumstances no state endured unless 
379 
some kind of authority had established peace and calm among them. This 
authority had to come from without. 
This brought about the external political destruction of Greece. Not only 
were the states divided among themselves, but also each state was split 
inwardly into factions, so that always a portion of the citizenry was living 
in exile, and when some returned others were banished. 
The Emergence of Thought 
However, the main form in which change came to the Greek people bas its 
basis in the beginning of a thinking (Denken) that is a self-comprehending. It 
came about through thought or conception (Gedanken), [and it resides] in 
the principle of interiority, of the freedom of subjective self-consciousness. 
With the Greeks we see art and philosophy, and marvel at these works: 
they are our eternal model. Despite these achievemen~ Greece on the whole 
exhibits a narrowness in principle. The deficiency in the Greek world lay not 
in their lack of one single legislation, nor in one or another particular law, 
nor in the passions of single individuals; rather it is with how they viewed the 
essence of things. The religion of the Greeks, their consciousness of the 
absolute, is found in beauty-a spiritual quality burdened with sensuous 
7 4. Antalcidas was a Spartan general who made an alliancr with~ apd, in 38ft IIC"~ fa.ad 
Athens aod its allies to accept me treaty called the 'Peace of Am!cida~' · 
. 
75. Pdopidas accompanied the military ~ 
EpaminoDdas .m ~ 
c:ampups 
against tbe Spanans (in the 370s ac) that restored 'Jheban power md iDflumac m Gna:e. 
415 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
elements. Therefore art was their religion and cultus. Their God is beautiful 
individuality-a beautiful God but not yet a true one. Likewise their 
380 
constitution, their laws, their justice and erhics were I a matter of cusrom. 
The manner by which they lived, and established what is valid, is still an 
immediate one of custom and practice. In their consciousness they srill 
lacked a knowledge of the principle of subjectivity and conscience-the 
reflection of thought within itself in such a way that what ought to count as 
true confirms itself through my reason, through the witness of my spirit, 
through my feeling. Thus what is lacking here is the infinitude of spirir-
spirit as an inner tribunal before which everything validated has to be 
justified. 
We now see this inwardness emerge in Greece in a twofold fashion. The 
ideality of thought threatens that beautiful religion, for thought is some-
thing other than the ideality of beauty; and the same principle threatens the 
laws and the political constitution. At the same time, the passions of 
individuals and the free will ( Willkiir) of particular subjectivity are also 
threatened by the ideality of thought. This very inwardness is twofold: 
on the one hand there is the universal, the idea of the true, from which 
the true principles emerge; on the other hand, subjectivity is what is 
particular, is inclination, in which passions and free will are conjoined. 
The principle of Greek freedom already comprises the idea that even 
thought has become free on its own account; thus the development of 
thought begins along with the development of art, the Greek religion, 
and the political constitution. The development of dtought runs parallel 
to the development of art and is hostile to the realism of art. From Thales 
on we see the philosophers making these advances, and this could only 
happen in G~. 
Initially, science ( Wissenschaft) emerges as a contentious undersranding 
(rason:nierenJer Verstand) that applies to aU objects. This activity and stir in 
the realm of representation is widely praised. 'The practitioners of knowing, 
381 
the I champions of this application of thought, were called Sophists, a tenn 
!hat has taken on a bad connotation for us. Inasmuch as thought was 
strengthened so as to venture everything and to begin to feel its force, it 
addressed all sons of topics, including ethical life, justice, belief, and confi-
dence [in one's views], treating them exhaustively and in ideal form, and 
resolving (au/IOsm) them. 'This knowing showed itself to be master of these 
topics. However, in the midst of this vacillating array of all sorts of topic, the 
Sophists did not yet comprehend themselves, did not yet discover their own 
centta1 point. Thus the essential thing, the science of the Sophists, remains the 
art of 'dialectic', whicb must seek and recognize something as a 6xed end 
416 

THE GREEK WORLD 
({esten Zweck). They situated this fixed end in hwnan beings; thus humans in 
their particularity have become the goal and end of all things, and utility the 
highest value?6 So the final end (letzten Zweck) is a matter of one's personal 
preference. This •dialectic' regarded itself to be universally valid. and has done 
so [againJ, even today. In this way objective truth is denied. Thought makes 
everything vacillate depending on the preference of subjectivity. 
At the beginning of and during the Peloponnesian War, Socrates77 was the 
one who finally grasped the independence of thought. Being-in-and-for-itself 
came to be recognized as the universal, and thinking as the final end, as what 
is valid, in that human beings ace able to discover and recognize from 
themselves--not from their own preferences but from themselves as univer-
sal and thinking beings-what is right and good, and that everything that is 
to be valued has to justify itself before this inner tribunal of thought. Jn this 
way Socrates discovered what is essential (das Eigentliche), what is called 
morality. Socrates is frequendy called a moral teacher. But he felt morality 
more than taught it, for the Greeks knew well what was ethical. Ethical life 
was present in the entire objective content [of their society} and was known 
in every relationship. 1 But the position at which Socrates arrived is that 
382 
human beings must essentially seek and find this within themselves, deter-
mining it from conviction and reasons for action. He is no mere agitator 
(Aufregender) and pedagogue (Bildender); rather conversation (das Gesagte) 
is his essential principle. 
By this principle, the discontinuity in which an inner world has found 
finn footing is expressed, an inner world that sets itself apan from what 
previously had been the sole objective world. The prior actual world is now 
defined as exterior vis-a-vis this interior world. Because human beings find 
their tribunal in their inwardness, the process began whereby from now on 
individuals sustained themselves inwardly, could find satisfaction in an 
ideal modality, taking pact in the life of the state without fettering them-
selves to the state. Thought began to want the validiry of everything to be 
justified in its own eyes. Now pa8u~la. [lack of passion] was introduced, and 
the question was raised as to whether there are gods and what they are. 
This is when Plato bans the poets Homer and Hesiod from his state: 
76. An allusion lO the view amibuted to Protagoras--'rbe humaa beiDg is the llleaSure of aU 
things• (sec Lectures em the History of PhiJoS(Jphy, ii. 121 ). 
. 
. 
n. Socrates ( 469--399 BC) began teaching in Athens atabout the time of the beginning of the 
Peloponnesian War. 431. Plato was born during the War, about 427BC, and Aristotle twenty 
rears after its end, in 384. The irony is that the ~ 
pbilosnphm of Greue emerged at the 
lime of its political destructioo. 
417 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
thought of the absolute is required instead of sensible representation 
of it. 78 Thus this higher principle of thought, of subjectivity, comes on 
the scene at this poim. 
The fate of Socrates is that of highest tragedy. He was condemned by the 
court. His death can be seen as the highest injustice because he completdy 
discharged his duties to his native land and opened up for his people an inner 
world. On his own behalf he had the justification of thought; but for their 
pan the Athenian people were completely in the right too: they must have 
been deeply aware that respect for the law of the state would be weakened 
and the Athenian state desuoyed by the principle that justification resides in 
383 
one's own inwardness. Thus I it is quite correct that the teaching of So-
crates appeared to the people as high treason; accordingly they condemned 
him to death, and Socrates' death was the highest justice. 
One of the peculiarities of Greek life is that the formative principle of the 
state is custom, something immediately valid, the Wlity of the subjective and 
the objective. Our political life is organized quite otherwise from that of the 
Athenian people and can regard the subjective disposition or inner life [of 
individuals)---even when it opposes religion-rather indifferently. What is 
inward and mocal is not a matter for the state. But the Athenian political life 
is still somewhat similar to that of the Asian, in that objectivity and subjec-
tivity are inseparably united. Aristophanes understood in dte most funda-
mental way what the Socratic principle involved.79 The Athenian people 
necessarily felt remorse over the condemnation of Soc;:rates, inasmuch as 
lhey must have realized that what they had condemned was indeed part of 
themselves. Thus they had condemned themselves too. Thus Socrates did nor 
die an innocent man; if he had, that would not be tragic but merely moving. 
The great tragic figures are those who do not die innocently. In Socrates the 
higher principle appears in its purest and freest form, that of thought. This is 
the break between actuality and thoughL 
Thought constitutes on the one side a break with actuality and on the 
other side a pure presence to se1f, identity with self, the ideality of peace. 
Thought has broken with actuality, and one can say: rhe heart of the world 
must first break and only then wiU reconciliation in the spirit come about. 
lhis is [what has happened through] Socrates. In Socrates the break with 
actuality is still abstract, and re<:onciliation is still an abstract thought. 
78: Plato, Republic 377d, 388c, 398a (The CollecteJ Dialogws of Plato, eel. Edith 
Hamilton and Hun~oo Cairns (Princeton, 1980), 624, 633, 642-3). 
79. See Aristophanes, The ao.uls. 
418 

THE GREEK WORLD 
Art itself is now what destroys the beautiful religion. I Art makes every-
384 
thing that is sensible manifest. If the material itself does not transcend the 
nature and idea of art, and if art has sprung wholly from itself and has 
wholly perfected it [the material], then everything sensible is made manifes~ 
and the object itself is no longer of interest. The only content that revelation 
can express and spirit can produce is the content that, for the understanding 
and sensible experience, is revealed and at the same time still remains 
hidden. And such an understanding is the higher content of spe<:ulative 
religion, a content that does not lose itself in exteriority. But this no longer 
happens in Greek religion. It is also the case with the Athenian people that 
an itself reaches the point at which its content loses interes~ at wiUch irs 
principle itself ceases to have an interest in being the content of religion.lt is 
ludicrous to say of Plato that he wanted to ban art and poetry. What Plato 
banned is not art and poetry in general, but what art [in his day] represented 
as the highest, which is said to be recognized as the absolute. Plato did not 
ban art, but he no longer let it have divine status.80 
The political aspect is similar. Democracy overshoots itself and on its own 
falls into contradiction because [on the one hand) individuality must be 
impelled to the highest extreme in order to be actual, and [on the other 
band) the people itself is said to rule. Democracy requires points of individ-
uality in order to carry out its decrees, and thus it contradicts itself because 
individuality is necessary to carry out the decision of the many. Thus if 
democracy is the political system not of an unrefined people but of a highly 
refined one, it can only be of short duration. Individuality was sacrificed by 
Pericles. In the individuality of [the rule of] Pericles~ universality (this highest 
pinnacle) was actual in this one beautiful, plastic whole, in which the people 
at the same time ruled. But this can happen only once, and after him the state 
was sacrificed to the individuality of panicular [persons], I just as previ-
385 
ously individuality was sacrificed to the stare. We have said that interiority~ 
subjectivity can exist as universality, as thought, for example as in Socrates; 
bur it can also exist as private concerns, as passion, as the greed of indivi· 
duals, and this latter aspect is principally the greed of corruption. lh.is is the 
case with the Athenians too; but with them individuality also appears in a 
more ideal and suitable fonn. So these [Athenian) individualities still belong 
to the state. The dark aspects of the principle, such as private concerns, thus 
are more moderate among the Athenian people tha~ foe example, among 
the Spartans. With the latter, the principle appears as the naked destruction 
80. See Plato, Republic 2.377-83 (Hamilton and Cairns, pp. 623-30). Plato objected to tht 
poets' depiction of gods and goddesses (who should be role models) as iDunoral and fickle. 
419 

THE LECTURES OF 18 22-3 
of lands, as the naked principle of the self-serving private concerns of the 
subject and its inner volition, as their power-seeking and greed. But with the 
Athenians we see that they acknowledged their corruption, made light of 
their shortcomings and depravity, played them down and ridiculed them-
selves. In no other people do we find this ability to laugh ar and ridicuJe 
themselves. It is not found among the Romans, except for the soldiers• 
mockery of the generals. The Roman people saw Julius Caesar in triumphal 
procession mocked as one of themselves. 
The End of Greek life and the Age of Alexander the Great 
We stiU have to touch upon the end of Greek life. After the humiliation of the 
Athenians, Sparta ruled, but only for a brief period inasmuch as it was 
defeated by Thebes. But the Thebans did not rule for long either; they 
were conquered by the Phocians, who plundered and destroyed the Temple 
of ApoUo at Delphi in a godless fashion. 81 
This completed the whole process: the determining will that was de-
stroyed in these tempi~ no longer ideally protected from [attack by} other 
peoples, now had to come &om outside and provide actual protection. And 
since this will no longer existed in the fonn of an oracle, a foreign king had, 
386 
by actual willing, to 1 be the decisive facto~ to become the master of 
Greece. Thus there had to be a transition from the oracle to an acmal 
king. The nature of this transition announced itself i.n the simplest way. 
This foreign king, Philip (of Macedon], established his power and authority 
in Greece; the power he assumed was odious. His son received the power 
and had a free hand to use it. 
This second youth of Greece gathered this land under his new banner-a 
land that had matured in every aptitude but was no longer effectual, that had 
lost the political life it developed within itself; [he) became its dettnnining 
wilL He consolidated the stiU~xisting agitation, the inner impulse of Greek 
life, hence turning it against the motherland of Greece, the East, the Orient, 
and bringing to an end, for this era, the old antagonism between East and 
West, which had broken out again aher a lengthy hiatus. In one respect, 
Alexander avenged the evil that had befallen Greece at the hands of the 
Orient; in another respect, however, he repaid a thousandfold all the good 
that Greece had received from the Orient in the form of early cultural 
impulses. In pan, he elevated the East to the maturity and weU-being that 
81. Pbocis was ooe ol the cities m the Delpbic Amphictyooy that was involved iD tbe three 
'Sacred Wars' (of the 6th-4th a:ms. IC), in wbich the shrine was held. piDed, or lost by vuious 
poops. The Pbociaa forces ~meier Pba1aecus Pllaf,ed the shrine in the third of tbae wars. 
420 

THE GREEK WORLD 
Greece had achieved based on these beginnings. The great work of 
Alexander, his great and immortal deed, is that he made the Near East into 
a Greece. 
We must not repeat what is usually said, and what one historian has said: 
although there is nothing but bloodshed, still, Alexander is great. One must 
be prepared for blood and strife I when one rums ro world history, for they 
387 
are the means by which the world spirit drives itself forward; they come 
from the concept. We must also not say that after Alexander's death this 
empire declined and broke up. To be sure, his dynasty did not rem~ did 
not continue to rule; what remained, however, is the Greek dominion, 
although his son, his wife Roxana together with her posthumous son 
(ihrem Postumo), were killed.82 Alexander's greatness and his fame repre-
sent the pinnacle of Greek individuality. He could indeed establish a Greek 
world empire, but not a family dynasty just because he was an individual 
decidedly set apart. The rime had not yet arrived for such a family dynasty-
that such a thing should be an essential element of state control. The 
possibility of building an abstract unity, of founding a unitary empire, no 
longer resided in the Greek principle; it would have to wait for the Romans. 
Alexander's empire embraced present-day Turkey, transforming it into 
a Greek world. An even closer connection can be found with Turkey. 
Alexander took his wife Roxana, the most beautiful woman of Asia, &om 
Sogdiana in Bactria, 83 where the T wkish tribes first lived. We could thus 
indeed say that the people of the husband ruled and possessed the land [i.e. 
Twkey] that is now ruled by the people of the wife. Alexander lived for two 
years in Bactria and advanced to the [land of the] Scythians, going to war 
with them, etc. If we had a historian of these events like Herodotus, I we 
388 
wouJd have much information about the condition of the peoples living 
there and about the broad connection between these peoples and those 
whom we later see turning up in Europe, such as the later Huns. 
84 The 
82. Roxana was the daughter of Oxyartes, a Bactrian baron. Alexander married her in 327ac 
to consolidate his power in Persia. Mtcr his sudden death in 323, she bon him a posthLUnous 
son, AJrxanda IV. Roxana and her son bc:carM involved in various political iDtrigucs after the 
~Uapse of the Alexandrian empire until they were both assassinated about 309. 
. 
. 
83. Bactria was an ancient kingdorn in the vicinity of what wa.s once castcm PetSJa, and 15 
DOW Uzbekistan and northern Mghanistan. Sogdiana lay betwceu the Amu Darya and Syr 
Darya Riven to the north of Bactria and well rast of the Turkey (i.e. the Ottoman Emp!R) of 
~l's day. The Turkish tribes originated from broad regions of antral Asia. 
. 
84. Herodotu5, writing a century before Alexander's conquestS, discusses the Sqthiaas ~ 
tbry wcfC, in and bcfofC his day. io History 4.1-142 (Gmle. pp. 27,....331). 11E Hum.~ 
peoples who originated in nonh central Asia, appeared in Europe iD the 4ch C2IIL AD aDd built up 
aa empn there. Attila, their greatest leader. had bis palaa iD praear-d.y Huaprr. Several 
421 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Bactrian kingdom lasted two hundred years, until it fell to the Romans. 
Greek kingdoms in Asia Minor, in Armenia, and in Egypt flourished for 
centuries. They became kingdoms in keeping with the narure of those 
regions. 
In Greece itself the earlier circumstances, including external political 
relationships, remained unchanged. Greek kings honored the republic in 
these small states, and considered themselves honored to have descended 
from them. They had their principal estateS in the cities in which they 
believed themselves to be revered because of their [efforts on behalf o~ 
preserving the city. Fame and glory came from liberating Greece; ('liberator 
of Greece'} now became a title of honor. lr became a slogan, but it only 
meant that the Greek states and communities were maintained in a condi-
tion of weakness; each individual city was isolated, and the whole wa!i 
dissolved and split up into a countless multitude of insignificant ciries85 
and communities. Thus Rome too challenged Greece, and the Roman prin-
ciple prevailed over the Greek. 
If we compare the condition of these states earlier and later, the person-
ality of Alexander is of central interest. Earlier the chief historical interest 
focused on Greece, and individuals were singled out only inasmuch as 
they labored for the state. Such distinction for such services necessarily 
aroused envy in a democracy, just as reward for meritorious service moti· 
vated individuals to serve. It was, however, subjective personality that was 
already rising to such importance. After Alexander, on the contrary, it is 
not the destiny of states that is of major interest; rather it is interest in 
389 
individuals I on whom this destiny now depends-the destiny that derer-
mine:s things for good or iU. With Alexander the greatness of the people and 
of individuals is in equilibrium. The enterprise (das Werk) is the personal 
greatness of individuals; the individual is precisely what belonged to 
such an enterprise. illewi~ the enterprise was only to be undertaken, 
and was necessarily carried out, by this particular individual. The individual, 
Alexander, is the pivotal point in mis transition. 
Through political and petty deal-making, his father, Philip, had to assem-
ble the means and had judiciousness and attention to derail; his son no 
longer needed to concern himself with these means because his father had 
cnttut'ks after their defat, in tbe !au 9th calL, the Magyars, a FlWlO-Ugric people from beyood 
the Urab, cooquered and smled most of Huogary. The Magyan might be wosidered 'later 
HUBS' lalrbough they are aot ethniW!y nlaud), or Hegel may simply mean that the Huns 
eu~CIN Europe later than tbe events described in this paragraph. 
85. Thus Griesbe:im, slisbdy ahaed; Hotbo rack: 'imo coandcss insigni6cna stalES' 
422 

THE GREEK WORLD 
perfected the instruments of power. These he handed ready-made over to his 
son. On the other hand, Alexander was educated by Aristode. the most 
fruitful and most profoWld philosopher of antiquicy, who, by means of his 
most profound philosophy, his profound metaphysics (which even today 
many professors of metaphysics do not understand), conducted Alexander 
into an understanding of the nature of history. He did not educate him as a 
prince but taught him worthwhile things in a serious manner. Alexander's 
disposition, his profound genius, was thus liberated in the element of 
thought in such a way that, by his being open-minded, he could devote 
himself wholly to the deed. His great genius for, and extensive grasp of, 
ruling led him boldly to make Asia into a credit to Greece, and to found 
Alexandria, for many centuries a great world city. 
Equally commendable was his relationship with his troops, whom he led 
as a prince and field-commander. Furthennore, having a broad oudook and 
his goal in his sights, he knew how to speak to his troops as Pericles did to 
the Athenians. What he imposed on the soldiers enlarged the sphere of their 
lives. He had a more difficult relationship with the old subordinates of his 
father. These former subordinates were accomplished men, and such men 
regarded their preceding accomplishments as of supreme value. They wen 
jealous I of the young man who engaged in great works. It was humiliating 
390 
for them to acknowledge that the deeds of the youth were grearer, that he 
was accomplishing something greater than the basis for their fame, greater 
than what they had thought about, what they had developed. With Clirus
86 
in Bactria, this jealously boiled over into the blind rage and fury of indigna-
tion, to which there was a full response, one perhaps entirely deserved but 
still unfortunate. Alexander's great personal bravery was renowned; he was 
always the first in battle and to confront every danger. Equally great, finally, 
is Alexander's death. Lying on his death bed, speaking to his army, he bade 
farewell to his friends; he died, like Achilles, at the right time. His work was 
finished, his image scaled, and he left his accomplishments behind for us. 
The grand and unsurpassable image of this personality was of a statwe that 
could at most be tarnished by petty reproaches. 
This individuality could arise and come to prominence only i.n Greece. 
But such individuality could not be borne and sustained by a Greek political 
constitution. Plato's deep insight grasped this very well and t:rUiy.
87 He 
86. Clitus, a ~cedonian officer, became agitated at a diDner party ud made insulting 
remarks to Alexander, who in a drunken rage killed him oo abe spot. Lata Alexaoder regrmed 
his action and even considered suicide. 
87. Plato diiCilSSC!S these manm generally iD the ~· 
423 

THE LECTURES OF 18 22-3 
pictured a constitution as simply apprehending and portraying the actual-
ity of Greek ethical life; the actual nature of Greek ethical life is not an 
ideal but rather what Greek life expresses. But since he observed that the 
corruption of subjectivity threatened this principle~ he wanted to exclude 
subjectivity from the family and private property; he banished it and 
portrayed a situation in which only substantial ethicality should rule. In 
this subjectivity~ in this personality, howevet; lay the kernel and principle of 
the spirit of higher freedom-the principle that should now enter into 
world history. 
just as the particular personalities of individuals have become free, and 
3191 
cannot endure and abide Greek lif~ so 1 too particular qualities now 
defined the individual shapes into which the Greek states had differentiated 
themselves. It was [like] a distinctiveness between beautiful gods, in which 
the differences in shape were not detrimental to their divinity. If, however, 
their cooneaing links fall away, then only a distorted~ barren, abstrad 
particularity remains, focusing obstinately and Wlexibly on itself, and it 
stands in conflict with other such particularities. Greek history presents us 
with this spectacle for a century and a half after Alexander's death~ up to 
about the year 146. The situation in this interim period is regrettable. On the 
one ban~ the relationship between the states is diplomatic in such a way 
that only a wholly arti6cial web and play of various combinations could 
preserve the states. On the other han~ in this period there are particular 
personalities on whom the destiny of states now depends; through the 
particular interests and passions of these individuals, the state is now 
inwardly tom asunder into parties and factions, each of which seeks to 
acquire outward prominence in order to appeal to the favor of the king 
and bring it to bear on the conduct of the state. Athens still retained a modest 
position; in the sciences Athens stiU enjoyed respect. The Aetolian Confed-
eration was an association of robbers. From the outset, the Achaean or 
Peloponnesian League was properly and wonhily maintained for a long 
time with fame and honor until it was reduced to, and collapsed under, the 
baseness of its chiefs, who then found support from the Romans. 
What still interests us in this period are the great personalities, the great 
tragic characters. Howeve.; the best they could do was ward off hanD; 
392 
through their administration I and skill, chiefly directed outwardly, they 
preserved their native land for a while but were unable to establish a secure 
and sound state of affairs. They fai)ed in ~ 
efforts and struggles. without 
the vindication of having provided peace and security to their native land; 
and thus we cannot determine whether they always conducted themselves in 
a pure and appropriate manner. What interests us in this period are the 
424 

THE GREEK WORLD 
biographical wntangs of Plutarch and Polybius. 88 Polybius gives us the 
history of the stares at that time, but this is of less interest because then 
individuals were of primary importance. Plutarch's Lives is renowned as 
great scholarship. The biographies of older writers such as Theseus are 
partly mythological, and partly their lives are intertWined with the stare. 
(At least in former times both of these authors were popular reading.) The 
best accounts fall into the period that we are now considering. Two states, 
Sparta and the Achaean Confederation, furnish the best examples. Persons 
loyal to their native land also had to contend with inner factions that always 
found outside support and were enemies of the state. Two kings, Agis and 
leonidas, 89 sought to resist evil, but without success since they could not 
avoid creating enemies within and without. The Achaean Confederation 
provides good examples from which, through The Histories of Polybius, 
we gain the impression how, in such circumstances and after futile efforts, 
good and practical persons must either despair or withdraw. And such 
circumstances, together with such personalities, call for a power to which 
they themselves finally succumb-a power that judges and discloses the 
impotence of the old ways. Over against these parochial concerns, and the 
fixation in these finite circumstances in which all that is particular in stares 
and personalities rigidifies itself, a destiny appears I that can only negate 
~ 
what has gone before; it is blin~ harsh, and abstract. And the Roman 
Empire plays the role of this fate. 
88. See Plutar~ Tin Paralhl Lives (a series of biographies pairing Gn:t.k a.od Roman lives); and 
Polybius, The Histories (which covered the Mcditettaoean world froJP before 220 to 146JC). 
89. A probable Rfereoce to the Spartan 1Gog Agis IV (c.265-241 BC). who opposed CODCell· 
tratioo of power in larF estates and burnt mortgageS tbat bound the citizens. Leonidas n was 
also a Spartan king (254-235 BC), but in a different dynasty. 
425 

The Roman World 
THE ROMAN SPlRIT 
Introduction 
Napoleon said to Goethe that what is of interest in tragedy is destiny (Scbick-
sal), and since we no longer have this fate (Fatwn) of the ancienrs, what takes 
its place for us is politics. 1 Merely private concerns and personalities must 
be subject 10 the inesistible authority of two factors-the purpose and the 
authority of the state, this irresistible entity-and politics as power cannot 
take individuals into account but instead must sacrifice them. 
The achievement of the Roman Empire is power as purely abstract 
universality, through which destiny, which is abstractly universal, entered 
into the world. In the Roman Empire the life of private concerns was 
severely constrained (in Banden geschlagen). In the Pantheon of its world 
dominion Rome assembled and sequestered all the gods and spirits, amas-
sing every misfonune and all suffering. Rome broke the hean of the world, 
and only out of the world's heartfelt misery, out of this wretchedness of 
spirit's natural state, could free spirit develop and arise. 
In the Greek world we have individuality; in the Roman Empire we have 
abstract universality. What is concrete in this universality is just self-seeking, 
is prosaic, practical dominion. In the case of the Romans we are not dealing 
with any inherendy spiritual, free life; joy is envisaged theoretically, yet there 
is only a lifeless existmce, a vitality that has, as irs exclusive purpost; 
practicaJ understanding, the validating of what is inflexibly universal, a 
394 
universality that sticks to practical matters. 1 For that reason we c:an be 
brief, because the manifold materials are reducible to these characteristics. 
1be fim thing we have to speak about is the Roman spirit as such. 
1. 5« Goethe's Ti.~gebic:-kr, conversation with Napoleon. Sept. 1808. Goethe reports as 
follows: 'The emperor .•• returned to the" topic of clr.una and made very signi6c.anl obsetvations. 
in particolar about bow SOIDrOIIe who studies the ttagK: stage with the greatest atteDtitJO, like a 
criminal COIU1 i ... in doing so would be vuy profowdy a~ 
of bow Fread~ theater departs 
from nature aud troth.. '"Thus he came with disapproval M die plays cuocmliug ~oy 
fK Eatt. 
They wou.ld bave beJoogcd to a more obscure time. He said: •What does one iutrod today by 
"destioy'? Politics is destiny. •' See ]obmrn Wolfgang Goethe Silmll~ Werie, div. 1, vol. xri. 
cd. lrmtra111: Schmid (Frankfurt am Main, 1994). 381. 
426 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
The Origins of Rome 
The locus of the world spirit is moving more to the West. It is still on the far 
side of the Alps [from Germany], in the Mediterranean theater, and only 
later does it make its way to the north. Rome was founded along a river, but 
this river is no longer the warm, incubating element as in the East; it forms 
no Asian river valley. Instead the river is of interest in virtue of its link to the 
sea. Rome has a firm basis directly in the land and is set back from the sea, 
whereas Tyre and Canhage had to take shape exclusively along the sea. 
We should state, however, that the particular land in which the Roman 
Empire had its origin is not a major factor, and we can say that Rome took 
shape abroad. That is because in this case the hub was the starting point, the 
reverse of the situation in Greece, and what ensued was the expansion 
outward from this center. Three territories came together at this point, 
those of the Latins, the Sabines, and the Etruscans, and so it is a matter of 
indifference as to which one of them Rome more belongs. Rome first 
becomes evident in this confluence [of peoples]. 
Here there is no staning out from a family or a pattiarchal fom~ and not 
even a uniting or intermingling for the purpose of a peaceful life. Instead the 
vacant land is the goal of a robber band in circumstances also involving 
Romulus, Aeneas, Numitor, and so forth.2 The historical point is that Romu-
lus and Remus founded here a new historical hub, the kingdom. An ancient 
connection with Troy is something very widespread in the tradition, I and 
395 
later on it became a truly literal fancy of the Italians that their lineage stems 
from Troy. 3 Livy refers to four places that are called Troy. Thus according 
to Livy his native city is a colony of Antenor's, and we find a comparable 
fancy in ancient German legends. 4 So in chronicles even the ancient Germans 
2. Nwnitor is the legendary grandfather of Romulus and Remus. and is king of Alba, a tmm 
oa Mt. Alba. a place sacred ro the Lat:ius. Moc:h of tbe infonnation in this and subseqwot 
footnotes i$ ohfained from entries in The Oxford ClassiUJI Diaimw1y (Oxford, 1m1. 
3. The Aennd of Vugil builds on earlier stories of how the Trojan hero Aeoca.s wauden:d 
about the Medittrn~nean after the war, eventuaUy roming to the later site of Rome. Virgil 
!70-19 BC) turned this material into an epic of the founding ot Rome. 
4. See Lvy, Ab urbe rorrdila lihri, book 1; tt. B. 0. Fosret; in LWy, i (Loeb <lassical Lib.-ary; 
Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1919), 1.1.1-1.3.11 (FOSte; pp. 9-17). Livy says that two 
Trojans, Aeneas a"d AoteDOr, founded colonies in Italy after the Trojao War. AnfeDor oo tbe 
Adriatic (wbere the people are called Veneti) and Aeneas at Laurennun (oo the Tyrrbmiap 
coastl. and that bom places are called 'Troy'. Ht states tbat Amcas founded a town called 
'lavin.ium', that Aeneas' son 5\l~uent.ly went &om Lariniwn to esbbhsb a colony at Alba 
Longa. and that the city of Rome ultimately derived &an Albai..AJop. Livy was born in Padua. a 
city under the control of Venice in 1W day, which makes Hl:gel's statemmt about his •oat:m city' 
coma:. A1ueno.-. a Trojan elder, was spared br the Greeks, aad (iD die bisl:orimiJy dubio.H 
427 

THE LECTURES Of 1822-3 
are descended from Troy; however, we [Germans] are spiritual descendants of 
the Greeks, not of the Trojans. Rome's connection with Troy be as it may, 
Rome took shape as a brotherhood of shepherds and bandits, fonned by 
Romulus and Remus. This initial community expanded to include castoffs 
(colluvies), 5 and in doing so made itself into a free city for all these convergent 
people, into a sanctuary city for all (urbs omnis asyle), for the emancipated, 
those with no homeland, and criminals. 
Marriage and lhe Social Order 
A tradition just as specific is that the first Romans had no wives. Being 
wifel~ they invited the neighboring peoples to a religious festival. The 
only ones to come were the Sabines, a mountain people; the Etruscans and 
Latins did not. Since these peoples, even in later times, had no bonds of 
marriage with their women and did not wish to, tbe Romans robbed these 
people of their women, revealing thereby how the Romans wtderstood the 
use of religion as a subterfuge. This expresses the main character of Roman 
religion, that its purpose is political in nature. Here we have the genesis of 
the community, and it is typical for all the subsequent history of Rome. We 
see dtcse two factors, the locale that is isolated by both choice and circum-
stance (activ rnul pas.siv), and then the method of abduction by which the 
community was enlarged. 
The third thing to notice is the direct consequence of such a bond: the 
marriage relationship for the Romans. In the Greek case the forerunner of 
the genesis of the state was not a patriarchal relationship, but was neverthe-
less the family relationship. Also~ the Greeks united for peaceful purposes 
396 
because7 I in contrast to the marauding Romans, they required the forma-
tion of defenses of the land, for then too the eradication of pirates was the 
primary requisite for their prosperity. Quite the reve~ Romulus and 
Remus were expeUcd &om the family, 6 and so too Romans acquired meir 
wives not legitimately via courtship, but insread by force and abduction. So 
they are far removed from the instinct of natural ethical life, and this leads to 
Roman Vftlii(Jil) led a Papblagonia.n people to fotmd Patavium (laru Padua) in lht Venetia 
regioo ot Italy. 
5. The unusual tam colb,.,;a is cog;nare with 'coUuviWD', for whidJ W~ter"s Nilrtb Nnt• 
Col/egi4k Dictionary gives the mealliug of ·rock detritus and soil aa:anmlat.rd at the loot of a 
slope'. and it gives • 
drrivaboo as &om Latin~ 
1o tum &om rom + Iavine. 
6. Accon1iug to lq,eDd me twins Romulus and Remus, repub!d founders of Rome, as infaDG 
were abuldomed 10 die br exposure, md ._ ~ 
by a wolf. 
428 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
harshness or severity toward the family, with the result that harshness 
toward familial instincts remains the rule from this point onward. 
For the Romans there are two ways in particular that a woman entered 
into marriage. One way was marriage accomplished by a solemn ceremony 
(con(aTTeatio) through which she came to be a legal possession (in manum, 
mandpium), that is, she became a slave and thus materfamilias, that is, filitle 
loco: she rook up the legal status of a daughter. The husband became 
the complete owner of what is hers, of the dowry (dos) and what she 
otherwise was heiress to; in ancient times he himself was even master over 
the life and death of the wife (and could take her life on account of her 
drunkenness or adultery). This is the most ancient kind of marriage. 
The other kind was marriage by continued use (usus), by acquiring the 
woman, by taking possession or making use of her, by ownership based on 
continued possession (usucapio). If in fact a woman lived with a man for a 
year without being apart from him for three nights, she was then his wife 
without further ceremony, was under the control (in manu) of the husband. 
But then she was just called matron (matrona), and the husband was not the 
owner of the woman's goods, of her property. Her sons did not have the legal 
rights in holy matters (in sacris) that those of the mater fanrilias did. If she 
remained apart from him for three nights, then she did not become a slave 
and she was held in honor and dignity. To be independent of the husband 
involved having legal rights over against the husband in virtue of liberation 
&om his authority, the reverse from how it is in our day. For us che wife bas 
honor in being one with the husband. 
A third kind [of marriage], through purchase, later came to replace the 
first kind. I 
:m 
Sons and daughters too stood in the same relationship as that of the wives 
who were slaves or were totally dependent, as legal possessions (in manci~ 
Pio) of the lathe~ having no possessions and authoritative status of their 
o~ and they could nor even free themselves from paternal authority in 
virtue of their holding offices. Only the flamm dialis or priest of Jupiter and 
the vestal virgins were exempt from paternal authority, because they were 
the property ( mancipia) of the temple, of the priests. Lilc:ewise, later oo 
people were also extremely capricious in the making of wills. So we see 
how ethical life became wholly unnarural, and an unshakable statuS was 
given to the husband over against the family. 
This harshness on the husband's own part (activ) correlates wirh tbc.-
passive harshness that is his lot, a lot in which the Romans find themselvo 
in relation to the state for an abstract commanding brings with it an abstract 
subjection. Those wh~ on the one hand are despots arc, on rhe orher hand, 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
ruled over themselves. The fact that the Romans thus found themselves in a 
political bond that sacrifices all natural and concrete ethical life is the 
greatness of Rome. This abstract oneness with the state and this utter 
subordination to it-approximating to how in our case things are in the 
military, although we stiU keep distinct the civilian life of someone in the 
military-constitutes the greatness of Rome. For the Romans, howev~ 
civilian life too was pervaded by this harshness. 
If we want to take a closer look at this relationship, we must consider the 
Romans in their role as warriors. In this instance it seems to be magnificent 
how, without flinching or yielding, the Romans keep their focus on the state 
and its dictates. This feature appears from one angle to be the virtue of 
Rome. From another angle we must likewise consider how this characteristic 
398 
appears not only in external affairs 1 but also within Rome itself~ for Rome 
owes its strength to maintaining it. In the dissensions arising between the 
plebeians and the Senate and leading to rebellion~ dissensions in which 
public order and respect for the laws was suspended and the legal cohesive-
ness shatte~ there was almost always respect for the form [of law)~ with 
the result that reverence for order restored order among the plebeians~ 
putting a halt to their lawful and unlawful demands. Often, even though 
there was no war, someone was made dictator, someone who then con-
scripted the citizens as soldiers and led them as soldiers from the city. The 
laws of licinius are of the greatest importance for the relationships of 
the plebeians to the patricians. Ten years were indeed required for their 
implementation, and the people who were his followers were kept waiting 
for ten years and more, by the objection of a few tribun~ before these laws 
were adopted and put into operation. 7 We do not find the story of this 
dissension conceivable unless we also see this obedience to~ or respect for, 
the dictates of the state. The circumstance of Roman origins has indeed its 
seed, and thus irs inherent prerequisites, for a condition or an obedience of 
this sort to be able to come abou~ since only by strict measures can those 
with no native land be held together as one. 
A further point would be to demonstrate the more specific, inrernal, 
natural progression to the harshness of such a bond, of such hostilities, 
and its natural possibility would then be sought and found in the life of 
399 
the ancient Italian peoples from whose convergence 1 the Roman commu-
nity took its shape. But, owing to the spiritless character of the Roman 
7. 0. the l.ianian-Sextian Laws, see below. a. 20. 
430 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
historians who, unlike the Greek historians, do not describe the lives of 
enemy peoples, we know little about these ancient [Italian] peoples. 
We have remarked in general terms that we proceeded from East to West, 
setting out from that Eastern conversion of all finitude into infinitude, from 
the inability of individuals to know themselves as autonomous, and likewise 
from the conversion of the determinateness of natural objects into somea 
thing without measure. So what comes first is th.is immeasucability, and what 
is second, in Greece, is animation (Beseelung) and limitation in beautiful 
individuality. The Greek revered what is bowtded, and at the same time gave 
it life (beseelt). The third element exhibits for us the consciousness of 
finitude, the holding fast to finitude. Over against the poetry of the Greeks, 
which constantly oscillates between the indeterminate and the detenninate, 
there now emerges the [Roman] prose of life, the element of the finite, the 
abstraction of the understanding as something ultimate, in that this prose, 
this abstract element, is what is ultimate. 
The family in its inflexibility does not extend itself outward, for instead 
the harsh unity remains. 
This same principle is evident in Etruscan art. What we know of it, insofar 
as the works themselves are recognized as genuine and are not from a more 
developed form of art, exhibits completeness, a developed state of mechani-
cal technique and execution but without the idealized beauty of the Greeks; 
it lacks the ideal nature of Greek art. It consists of specific~ prosaic, arid, 
imitative portraiture. So one consistent feature is the external prose and 
internal abstraction. 1 
400 
Life•s relationships too were entered into, and situated in, this aridity, in 
this specificity of the understanding. Here we have separation, but not into 
families, for there were none, because love was not a factor; instead under 
this specific heading we have also to mention the separate existence (Aba 
scheidung) of the gens. A gens of this kind was something established on its 
own account also with reference to its political characteristics, and for 
centuries these gentes maintained their own distinctive characters in their 
outlook and means. 8 Each gens had its own lares and penates (household 
gods], its own sacra [rites], and had become something absolutely fixed; its 
6xiry took the shape of something religious, something fuced absolutely. 
With the Greeks too families had their household gods and distinctive 
rites, although this was more a matter of the worship and priesthood of a 
8. A gens is a clan or group of related families coosist:illg ol &ccbom persoos wbo claim a 
couunon ancestor and share a common oame. 
431 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
god in which the whole populace took part. In Rome, howeve~ each family 
had its own set religious rites. 
Related to this fixed character is the Roman restriction or exclusion of 
marriages between patricians and plebeians, inheritance between them, and 
the like. The limites [boundaries] of a farm field were something sacred and 
fixed too (see, for instance, Cicero's Pro domo sua9 ). just as sacred were 
certain minor matters that are equally insignificant. We should not look 
upon this as a matter of piety, but instead quite the contrary: there is nothing 
necessarily sacred in this practice of making something profane into an 
absolute, and making such disparate things to be sacred, things that are 
themselves devoid of spirit. 
The development of Roman law is related to this fixing of distinctions 
based on the understanding. 
'What becomes fumly fixed here are abstract persons on their own 
account. We owe the development of law in the juridical sense to the 
401 
constricted (unfrer1, I unfeeling understanding of the Romans, to the 
constricted, unfeeling Roman world. Although this law is a great gih, a 
law of this kind is not to be viewed as the ultimate of wisdom or reason. 
Previously we saw, for instance, that in the Oriental world ethical life and 
mocality and religion were made into law in the juridical sense, and this even 
took place with the Greeks. Because of that the political constitution therefore 
rested on ethics and then subsequently on fickle inwardness, the inner being of 
subjectivity. The Romans brought about the great separation [of these fac· 
tors]. They are famous for inventing juridical law, the unfeeling sphere of 
abstract personality, and they developed it. But they themselves were sacri-
ficed to it, thus preparing the way for their successor races to attain freedom of 
spirit and to be relieved of a thankless labor. At the same time, however, the 
Romans did not yet have spirit, bean, and religion. They have not set spirit, 
heart, and religion apart from law in a formal sense, although they have 
developed formal law independendy, and in doing so they parted ways with 
these other aspects, cutting themselves off completely from them. 
An too has itS technical aspect. Those who have the technique can allow 
free beauty to come within their purview and can freely develop fine art. But 
to be deplored are those hapless persons who suppose that the essence of art 
9. The usual name of Cicero's treatise is De domo SU4 f'"The Speech ~miDg his Housr 
Delivered before the ColJege of Pontiffs'). Cirero's spttch, given after his RWrD from exile. 
includes a leagday proust against the seizure of his house and land by aodius Pulcher, who bad 
been 11$poosible for Ciaro's exile (§§ 100-47). In the course of I:M speech Cioc:ero makes 
numerous refet-mas to ritual'consecratioo' of the sicr. Su Ciuro, xi. tr. N.H. Watts (Loeb 
Oassica.l ubruy; Cambridg.e, Mass., and ~...onc~oo, 1923), 132-311. 
432 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
lies in this technique and who believe that the sublime is to be found in it. For 
craftsmanship in an is not the starting point but is instead only what 
encompasses the external aspect. 
In recent rimes the EnJighterunent [mode of] understanding has, in the 
same fashion, seized upon the content of religion, first making it explicit and 
believing that, in doing so, it possesses the whole of religion. To the contrary, 
however., I what necessarily happened was that the higher aspect of 
.t10:2 
religion and philosophy separated itself off from that understanding, inas--
much as religion and philosophy have the understanding to thank for the 
fact that, by its intertwining [its version ot] religion with the understanding, 
the understanding itself has put an end to this intertWining of what is merely 
finite and narrow-minded with reaso~ and has left the finite to develop a 
particular domain on its own. 
So the Romans by themselves had nothing but jurists; proceeding from 
the jurists, religion here was able to malc:e its way in10 detenninate existence. 
Roman Religion, Utility, and the Aristocracy 
So now we have to pass over to Roman religion. We have seen the Romans 
placing their confidence in the understanding of finitude; we saw them bound 
to t:he determinacy of the understanding. This character also applies to their 
religion. Cicero derives religio from religare, 'to bind', and in doing so he is 
content with the truth of the majorum (multitude ).1° For the Romans there is 
in fact a 'being bound', whereas for the Greeks religion is free fantasy, the 
&eedom of beauty, and for the Christians it is the freedom of spirit. Greek 
religion and Roman religion are not the same, although there is a retention of 
names. Along with the Roman principle of discord within oneself, with 
this bifurcation, what developed and became decisive is the constraint 
(Beschriinktheit) and the particuJarity within the Roman state as such. 
This negative element, this constrained condition within spirit as such 
and more speci1ically in willing on the pan of spirit, is a finite, constrained 
purpose. For the Roman spirit the ultimate vocation is a finite purpose. For 
the Romans there is no free enjoyment of ethical life. In their case we see no 
free, ethical life, but instead the greatest seriousness on behalf of the 
10. In De domo sua, § HI (Wans, pp. 302-3), Cicero ridicules the ritual bluocler arui 
religious inefficacy of his enemy's attempt at perlormiag a coosccration rite, and says: 'Great 
is the power that resides in the dispensation of the immortal gods, yes, aod in the republic itself.' 
On Roman religion see the 1821 l..eaMres on the Philosophy of kliPm (Oxlord, 2007), 
i.i. 190-231. 
433 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
constrained interest in their purposes; whereas with the Greeks there is a 
more profound seriousness. For this reason the Romans are more thor-
oughly practical; they are people who have to accomplish goals, and they 
are not theoretical in the setting of those goals. Theory caHs for disinterested 
activity and orientation toward what is objective; it requires a free objec-
403 
riviry. I 
Hence the divinity or piety of the Romans is not something free but is 
instead something internally constrained, so that they themselves are not 
free in relation to it, and it is not free in relation to them. 
But what then begins [to exist} in them too, together with this constraint, 
is an inwardness, a restraint ( Festhalten) with respect to oneself, within one's 
inner self,. internally. This restraint is a separation, that is, a derermipacy, of 
oneself within oneself, brought about by the constrained nature of the 
purpose, and it is for that reason that. together with this constraint, inward-
ness itself as such becomes a factoL So the Romans are this seriousness of 
constrained purpose and are practical, because this constraint of theirs is the 
ultimate thing. The Orientals exist in placid indolence, in substantial unity 
with self, immersed in self, untroubled by what is particular. The Greeks are 
ceaselessly in motion, are light-hearted without purpose, are moved only in a 
rransitory way by constrained purposes. That is because, insofar as spirit 
posits a purpose for itself~ spirit still immediately exists within itself in a set 
condition (Festigkeit) of its own, over and above this purpose. The Romans, 
boweve~ are enchained in superstition, and earnesdy so. What they look 
upon as absolute is itself something in bondage, not something liberated 
from the constraint of panicular purposes. 
We do of course see in Roman religion many Greek gods and others 
adopted by tbe Greeks, although even this practice of adoption has a hollow 
ring to it. We are disheartened when the Romans speak of something 
external; it leaves us cold. The Romans do also have a few unsophisticated 
nature festivals of rural simplicity that introduce a cheerful dement, ones 
involving a more cheerful and deeper devotion. But the main characteristic is 
the set condition of a specific willing and purpose that they demand of their 
404 
gods, and for the sake of which they worship the gods. 
1 So Roman 
religion is a religion of purposiveness, utility, and constraint. 
We see a host of prosaic deities of [special) circwnstances, of common-
place skills and sentiments, deities drawn from the useful ans and similar 
specific domains (Bestimmungen), deities that the mundane fantasies of the 
Romans make authoritative and worship as something ultimate. Altars 
are erected to plague and famine, even the goddess fomax is worshiped, 
434 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
and so forth. 11 Other deities include Peace~ TranquiUitas, Sorrow, and other 
such mundane circumstances and arts. They held Juno to be the goddess 
Moneta .. the goddess of coins, 12 whereas [her Greek counterpart) Hera was 
the goddess of universal life. So they came to envisage the essence of coinage 
as something divine. The further point, then, is that we see the gods enp 
treated from a condition of need, that in their need the Romans made their 
promises and vows and thus allowed gods to be imported &om abroad, with 
the result that all their festivals ace memorials of events. Almost all their 
festivals ace based on specific occasions and almost all their temples are 
erected out of necessity, as a result of vows. What is useful or of constrained 
purpose was the foundation of their festivals and temples. There is no 
disinterested~ general thankfulness toward, or exaltation and invocation 
of, what is highe~ for what we have instead is what is specifically expedient. 
We saw that the Greeks based their temples and religious worship on love 
for the beautiful and the divine. In the Roman dramas we see the same 
[aforementioned) characteL The Romans were simply the spectators, 
whereas the performers or actors were emancipated persons, subject 
peoples, and slaves, ones held in contempt, just as later on the performers 
were the gladiators who were condemned to die. Nero got most of the blame 
for this. I because he frequented the theater himself. The performances 
405 
were an outwardly exotic spectacle targeting these people; they degenerated 
into the introduction of animals that tore human beings to pieces, and into 
people slaying one another. In one day 600 lions came into the Circus 
[Maximus}, as well as crocodiles, elephants, bears, and animaJs from all 
pans of the world. Most of the gladiators had already been condemned to 
death, so the 5~000 who approached the royal seat cried out: 'We greet you, 
emperor, as those doomed to die'. All those doomed to die had to provide the 
Romans with the spectacle of murder. So, in order to hold their interest, the 
Romans needed for there to be actual suffering, actual cruelty. 
To the Romans the suffering of these people, their pain, thus became 
theoretical, became a theoretical pwpose. This suffering inherent in the 
Romans from their very origins onwards became objective to them in this 
way. The meaning of this direction taken by the Roman spectacles lies in 
the fact that the Romans [themselves] did nor take an active pan in these 
dramas and festivals. Roman earnestness militated against the exhibiting of 
one's own personality, and it presupposes that an inner purpose, an inner value, 
a gravitas, an explicit restraint, has taken shape within oneself~ a restraint that 
11. Fornax is the goddess of ovem. 
12. In Rome. money was coined in the t£mpk of jUDO Mooeu. 
435 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
cannot develop itself in externality, one that cannot simply present itself in this 
sensibility; whereas beautiful individuality, entirely from out of itself, gives 
shape to what is within it. When people have formed an internal purposiveness 
within themselves, then this [individual expression] is no longer possible. The 
beautiful gods appear wholly as what they are; in the gravitas [of individuals), 
howe~ there is something different within them that becomes external. 
The auspices and the Sibylline books, the augwies, display superstition in 
its utter intensity, and have as their exclusive purpose-with these ceremo-
nies becoming only means to this purpose--dominance by the patricians, in 
the way that the~ for instance, Cicero too regards them expressly as means 
406 
for deceiving the people.13 I 
So the religion is a religion of utility in which particularity is made 
absolute. This sanctification of different things, this constraint and [its 
ensuing] complications, is also pertinent to the governing principle of 
the political constitution. The entire principle, the inequality of lineages, 
entails the fact that there can be no democracy of equality, no concrete vitality 
of the kind there is in Greece. The basic feature is the overwhelming domi-
nance of one sector of the gentes. In the same way too no monarchy is possible 
here, because monarchy presupposes the spirit of the free evolving of partic-
ularity. And here purpose is still something consuained within which. as the 
purpose of the state, individuals are bound. The Roman principle or the 
Roman political constitution lends itself only to aristocracy, which is, how-
eve~ also by the same token something internally hostile and constrained, and 
even in the most complete existence aristocracy cannot be the explicitly 
accomplished shape; instead it accordingly has opposition and struggle 
within it, and is a shape that can be made good only for the time being, as a 
result of unhappiness and necessity. Aristocracy is in fact something that does 
not lend itself to internal unity and that can be unified only by harsh measures. 
TilE PERIODS OF ROMAN HISTORY 
Now we have to examine things from a historical perspective. Here too there 
are three periods. We already saw the epochs as those of Rome•s origins, its 
407 
reference to the East, and its relation to the principle that ensues. 14 
I 
13. ~De domo SJIII, §§ 39-42 (Watts, pp. 180-7• for Otero's anack on the ~ 
ot 
augury and the auspias. 
14. ~ 
above, p. 3 n. fot- a similar pcriodization of the Grftk wodd; '"'Ibne periods aR 
found in the Gmk World, aDd this is die case with every people: thereafter•. See alsop. 467, 
436 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
THE FORMATION OF ROMAN POWER 
Early Kings, Patricians, and Plebeians 
We have already spoken about the first epoch, that of Rome•s origins.15 
Between it and the epoch of Roman emergence as a world-historical people 
on a world~historical stage there comes the development of the inner princi-
ple to the apex of its greatest strength. 
Rome made its beginning as a state by means of sovereign authority. 
Roman chronology puts the beginning in 754 BC. The Greek Olympiads 
originated in 776 BC. Most of the Roman kings were outsiders. Romulus, 
Numa Pompilius, Hostilius, the Tarquins, Servius, and those who followed, 
were for the most pan foreigners. 16 So the kings were mostly outsiders. 
In Roman history, then, there is no beautiful mythological antecedent as 
in Greece, no [mythological] powers eirher natural or ethical. For the Greek 
spirit these powers came to have physical and ethical definition in a myth..ical 
way. There are no echoes of this in Roman history. What is most ancient 
simply begins in a specific way that one cannot take to be poetry. This 
material is legendary, to be sure, but there is nothing of a poetic nature in 
these accounts. The accounts concerning the 'centuries•17 and the like, ones 
we must accept as historical, ace specific and so little poetic that instead the 
most specific understanding expresses itself directly in them. The Romans 
derived panty from the Etruscans and the Latins, and the (faculty of) 
Widerstanding was directly apparent in their institutions. The kings were 
soon expelled as being superfluous. The cause of this expulsion was said 
to be the violation of a woman, and this violation of the maiden subse-
quendy brought about the revolution 1 and occasioned the banishing of 
408 
below. on tbe periods of the Germanic World. Actually. Hegel's treatmeot ot the arrival of 
Clmstianity, oa:urriug in the second period of the Roman World, adds a fourth element to this 
arrangement; seep. 447, below, with n. 37. Hegel devotes more attention to Christianiry here 
than he does to Roman dominion itself. 
15. See above, pp. 427-8. 
16. According to tradition. Romulus was the first king. He was followed by six others in the 
list, most of whoro were probably Etruscans and historical6gures: Numa Pompilius (715-673), 
Tullus Hostilius (67~42), Ancus Man:ius (642-616). Tarquillius Prisrus (616--579), ServiiiS 
Tullius (578--535), Tarquinius Superbus (534--510). After the expukioo of the last of these 
kings, power passed from the EtruscanS and the Romans established a apublic based oo ao 
aristotratic society. 
17. Scrvius TuUius, the sixth king, is said to have arranged the Romao people ioto 1')3 
·cemunes·, or divisions. 1bat is likely the point to which Hegel nfersbere.l..attr oo a 'ccotury• 
was a Roman army unit of 100 soldiers, ooe·sixtiedl of a .legioo. 
437 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
the decemviri. 18 In such times we see the most profoWtdly inward violation 
as being the violation of honor and family unity, for in these times honor is 
what is innennost, just as in later ages conscience is the innermost and most 
profound aspect. In this instance, however, the interesting point is the 
deference (Piet4t) within the family. 
The kings were driven out with vicious hostility, with vicious hatred, 
precipitated by a criminal violation. At first glance the change appears to 
be an imponant one, although this transition from monarchy to republican-
ism is not so very significant because in no sense had there been a [genuine! 
monarchy. 'Republic' is an indefinite tenn too, since here in the Roman case 
what existed was simply aristocracy and not a splendid democracy. Hence 
nothing in fact changed after the kings were expelled. Kingly power was 
given to the aristocrats, and in kind (in specie) to the consuls. 
One aspect of the further development involved the administrative 
authority, the fact that particular occupations were set apart or detached 
&om the highest authority, namely, the 'personal jurisdictions'. The chief 
factor in the further progression consisted of the distinction between, and 
relationship of, patricians and plebeians. The expulsion of the kings put the 
plebeians in an unfavorable position. They gained nothing by the expulsion 
of the kings. Beforehand the kings had even been averse to, and detested by, 
the patricians--especially so, Ancus Marcius. The kings had been favorable 
toward the populace and exalted it, giving it at least a cenain place in £he 
409 
legal, civil society. I The patricians were averse to the kings, even to the 
last ones, because the kings had impeded their subjugation of the plebeians. 
This impediment was now removed. And it is a constant, perpetual circum-
stance in every state that the populace has its friend in the higher royal 
power; it has protection provided by the kings, and yet it allows itself to be 
dtceived and aligns itself with the middle class, cleaving to the middle ranks 
to its own disadvantage, since they become its oppressors. 
In the nation, then, all the offices and positions, and almost all the landed 
property~ were concentrated in few hands (vereint). The people had no lands 
of their own, and so their lot was poverty. Livy gcatefully pcaised the final 
policy of Tarquinius (SuperbusJ, which enabled the people to gain 
18: _The term deumviri means 'ten men', and was used for variom pant"ls of magisttateS-
Tradi_non holds daat the coostitution was suspended in 451 &e, and teo patricians were 
appomted to COD!Sttuct: a oew law code. Hege.l jumps from the expulsion of the kings to a 
latrr episode in which the deamvir Appius Claudius lusted after a voung woman named 
Veqp~ and ~-own father killed her to prevent bet- from being ~by 
the ck~­
This event pr«::pltated the ovmhrow of the ~ 
in a revolution in -449 BC. 1M whok 
story is lcgeod .ralb£-r than accunte histoly. 
438 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
sustenance via public works. 19 A second deficiency was that the adminisna-
tion of justice was in the hands of the patricians, there being no specific 
written laws; they also held all other authority in the state. The decemvirs 
remedied this deficiency by committing the unwritten law to writing. But 
they abused their authority, and this abuse could only be checked by revolu-
tion. The impoverisbrnent of the people was in part temporarily ended by the 
partial cancellation of their debts to the patricians. Another means was the 
assistance provided by the agrarian laws. 
One sector of the plebeians themselves, or at least the sector that later 
came to consist mostly of plebeians, found itself in a client relationship with 
the patricians, one like the later feudal relationship existing among the 
Gennanic peoples. Despite all efforts [to understand it}, this relationship 
has still not become entirely dear. This client relationship involved the 
clients having to pay a tax to their patron when the parron~s daughter 
marries, and having to ransom his captive sons when they ace prisoners of 
war, I as well as underwriting, or acting on behalf of, the patton himself 
410 
when he is in debt~ loses a court case~ and so fonh. These clients, th~ may 
have been pan of the plebeians, who were a definite social class, a class on 
the one hand in harsh subjection, and on the other hand so numerous as 
clients that the patricians were at a disadvantage if it came to armed conflict. 
Later on, then, the plebeians were allowed use of the government's land, or a 
portion of the landed estates, or were fully granted property. All this was 
gained, however, only by the most violent conflicts, and the fact that they 
gained this advantage constituted a major turning point. Only later, as a way 
to prevent indigence, came occupations and disbursements derived from the 
public treasury. With regard to rights, the popular assemblies gained civil 
and political weight by the introduction of tribunes of the people~ so that the 
people now to an extent made decisions on their own-some made by 
themselves alone, some made in conjunction with the Senate, with some 
made by the Senate alone. However, the tribunes of the people could check 
the decisions of the populace by their own veto power, and the Senate and 
the consuls could in any event likewise override the assemblies, since the 
auguries and auspices were under their control. In addition to the tribunes of 
1-J. Livy describes the temples and other sttuctuces that Tacquinius Superbus had the ple-
beians build ( 1.15.1-1.16.3; foster, pp. 190-5). He states that 'the plebeians fdr less abused at 
having to build with their own hands the remples of the gods, than they did when they ~to 
be transferred to other tasks also, whicb. while less in show, were ye-t radaet- more labonous'. Yet 
Livy has Lucius lunius Brutus, the denouocer of wicked dttds CORIIIlitkd by Tarquiru~A. 
complain: 'The men of Rome, ... the conquerors of all the natioos roood about, bad been 
trarufonnt:d from warriors into anisans and stooe-cuttus' (1.16.9; Fosta; PP· 2~71. 
439 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
the people, and the imponance of the people's decisions, a major point was 
that all positions and all state official posts ultimately were opened up to the 
plebeians, something the patricians sought to prevent almost as tenaciously 
as they did the agrarian laws. 
(Still in Cicero's day only the patricians held the priestly offices.) This was 
the practice for a thousand years after the conquest of the city. The elevation in 
status of the plebeians was accomplished within the first four hundred years. 
411 
The Licinian Laws fall approximately 1 in the year 38 9 BC; according to them 
the plebeians gained agricultural land, as they also did later under the Curulian 
Laws.20 This was the point of greatest strength for the Roman people, because 
henceforth the demands of the plebeians were satisfied. At this time the 
common interests of the state were the universaJ focus. Weary of the internal 
struggle, with their restlessness taking a different~ the people rum out-
ward, and this is the point at which they are sttongest. Internally placated, their 
energies twn outward. Despite its being so inadequate in its content, the 
satisfied state of affairs nevertheless see~ for the moment at least. to suffice. 
Later on, however, this inadequacy made itself aU the more appallingly evident. 
Upon examining this Roman political constitution, we can say that, as 
aristocracy, it is the worst constitution, even though Aristode wants the 'best 
people' ( oi apHJToa) to be aU owed to rule. 21 'The best ought to rule' is a splendid 
tenet, although if the Qp&OTol are 'best' in a merely formal [i.e. not actual] sense 
and they become bad, then this is the worst of constitutions. However, the 
Roman aristocracy was not as lifeless as perhaps was that of Venice; instead it 
even generated its own internal opposition, and so produced practical results. 
So we ser here an aristocracy but also what is opposed to i~ two extremeS that 
positioned themselvesascounterweigh~ and for the time being tha.t produced 
an equilibrium. This, however, is the worst sort of relationship, because this 
very equilibrium is a third factor, is what is essential. It is what must exist, must 
itself be present and actua~ not the two extremes that produce it. Beauty is 
likewise an equilibrium of the spiritual and the sensual, but not in such a way 
that those aspects exist on their own; instead, they occur in such a way that the 
. 20. Galus licinius Stolo and Lucius Sextius Lateranus, tribunes of the people (376-367 ec). 
m 367 enacted the licinian-Satian laws that made various reforms favorable to the plebeians, 
including allowing ooe oi the two conruls to bra plebeian, although it is perhaps doubtful that., 
ilS Hegel says, these laws granted fannlaod to the plebeians. Hegel putS tbe date of these laws a 
biE too early. A arndis is a auule or a cwu.le aedile, an official as.soaaud with the coodiJCt of the 
games in the Cirrus. Amoag tbe other duties of these aediles was oversight of the com laws. 
Various acdiles authored agricultural reform laws in the 2nd and 1st cems.. IIC. 
21. For AriStotle OQ ruk by 'the best:', see L#!ct»res on the History of Philosophy (Oxfoni. 
!006, 2009). ii. 258. 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
extremes are not distinctions existent for cheir own sake; what exists instead is 
just this third factor., the equilibrium. But that is nor the case here, where this 
equilibrium in the Roman state was for that reason only palliative and tempo-
rary; and I the breach subsequently emerged aU the more appallingly. The 
412 
equilibrium in which the antitheses positioned themselves brought forth its 
outward orientation, and in one respect this equilibrium brought good fortune, 
riches, and fame, the very things that contributed to holding together the weak 
(sc:blecbt) bond; but at the same time it introduced appalling unhappiness and 
exigency, the very things that, to be swe, unite the abstract sides, although only 
for a period of time. 
Expansion and Conquest 
Another and second situation to be examined is the outward expansion of 
Rome, [achieved] in its wars. 
The main element here is steadfast solidarity, obedience to the laws of 
the state, an obedience that is the seat of Roman virtue; the fact is that the 
Romans had their mainstay in this patriotism, in this submissiveness to, and 
absolute sacrifice for, one thing, that which the state commands. This 
solidarity often saved Rome and set it apart from the other Italian nations 
that did not have this abstract solidarity as their principle. 
The military tactics and strategy of the Romans constitute a second and 
related feature, one equally characteristic of them. Every grear general 
has introduced more or less his own mode of military strategy, has nearly 
always introduced a new kind of tactics. The usual battle arrangement of the 
Macedonians was the phalanx, one-eighth of which, equipped with iron 
pikes, stood to the fore. The Roman legions have a close array of this sort. 
The Roman battle order was indeed that sort of massed troops too, although 
they were arranged and subdivided internally. It did not have the two 
extremes, of compacmess and the fragmentation of the light troops, but 
instead was something stable and whole tbat was internally I arranged and 
413 
mobile, similar to the principle of more recent military science too. 
22 
We note that going over or analyzing the various fonns of Roman warfare 
is a tedious business. Especially tedious is Livy's arid rhetoric and his re-
marks that they always positively have right on their side. There are, 
12. The phalanx was a Maadoruan massed lt>rmation that, in the fonn anployrd by l'tUlip 
and Alexander, put a portion of its members to the fore in bank while boldiag back ~ 
£"at. 
Hegel's comment is that the Roman formation, whidJ proved superior" to the M.acedorWos JP 
batrle, was similarly massed and was organized internally inro distinct wtits, but these !IIlias 
Wtte DOt physically sq,aratcd &om one aooc:ber by gaps io the batdefidcL 
441 

414 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
however~ always two sides to the story. Tedious too is the rhetorical mode of 
the historians in their constantly stating that the Romans are just dealing 
with the abstraction of 'enemies', so that we learn only the name of a people 
but nothing about the individuality of its language, ethics, military science, 
constitution, and so on. 
In this second period of conquest there are the Roman virtues and these 
grand, virtuous characters who seek to be what they are simply for the sake 
of the state. 
1HE WORLD-DOMINION OF ROME 
Rome's Place on the World Stage 
~ it grows stronger Rome enters into a second period, since by piling up 
smaller amounts of wealth (Kapitalien) the Romans .. through their might, 
had come to be very wealthy (gropen Kapita/isten). Now they enter into 
their second period and into a world theater that is round about them like a 
panorama, putting them in contact with Gaul, Spain, Carthage, Italy, Ma-
cedonia, the vast expanses in Asia Minor, Greece, and then with Egypt and 
Epines23-in short, therefore, with the entire perimeter of the Mediterra-
nean; here things develop in an interconnected way. Polybius, an Achaean, 
grasped this era and portrayed it. He became a sacrifice to the partisanship 
and baseness of his countrymen and~ on the other side, to the Romans.
24 I 
Canhage was one of the major powers against which the Romans fought-
The greatness of Carthage lay in its relation to the sea, since it had no proper 
land forces or national army. Hannibal2S drew the large resources with 
which be beset Rome from the forceful combining of nations such as the 
23. h is not evident ro what 'Epines' refers. Perhaps it is E~ 
whir:h was a sepante 
pr-oviJKe in the Roman Empire. 
24. Polyhius (e-200-118 BC) was a Greek historian who chronicled the rise of Roman pOWU-
Tbr Achaean Confederacy, of which he was a leader. became pan of the Roman sphere of 
~in 
198 ac; but gor intO frequent OOiltlias with the Romans tberc:afttr. Polybius was 
among a large group ol Achaeans deponed to Rome aod dctaaned. there. Subsequeody be 
bl:ame associated witb prominent Romans and traveled widely in the Mediterranean world. 
25. Hannibal (247-18312 BC), Canbaginian general whose fat:brt, Hamilcar Barca, made him 
swear an oath of eternal hatred of Rome, assumed collllllaDd (in 221) of the Canhaginian fo«CS 
in Spain. Hannibal deliberately provoked tbe Secoad Punic War tZlS-201) with Rome. The 
C.arthaginians had made inroads into Sicily during the first Punic War (264--241). Tbftr 
protracted campaign lO cooqun- ~pain began iD 237 (and lasted until 219). Perhaps tbe year 
237 is what Hegel bas in mind wbeo he states (just below in our rext) that Hanoibal'bad beeo in 
Italy for thirty·six years', up to Hannibal's decisiyt defeat iD 202. 
442 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
Numidians and others. But these sources had no enduring character; they 
were he1d together simply by his subjective genius. After he had been in Italy 
for thiny-six years and when they had become exhausted, Hannibal found 
no means for besieging the Romans, either with his countrymen in his native 
land, or with the Greeks and the annies of Macedonians and Syrians which 
were long since in internal disarray. The human stock from Greece and its 
provinces had dried up and faded away. So Rome became mistress of the 
Mediterranean Sea and all the lands around it, and then only had to work 
her way from this periphery farther into the breadth of the lands. In this 
period we find the ethical, successful, and eminent individuals of the Scipios, 
who lived during an ethical and healthy condition of their fatherland; 
aJthough the great Scipio too died unhappy and in exile.26 
After this victory over Carthage, corruption broke out on a large scale 
and individual personality became diverse, but no longer can it possess 
greatness. The greatness of individuals becomes intensified in striking events, 
but it is no longer capable of being consonant with the meaning of their 
fatherland. This period of magnificent splendot; which did nor develop itself 
inwardly as something ideal, was not followed by spiritual consummation as 
happened with the Greeks; instead there was a burgeoning of private inter~ 
ests. The tension that exhibited itself as hostility toward the 'other' subsided~ 
for the Romans no longer found it necessary to be warriors. Now they were 
allowed to be more concrete, since their abstract task was completed. This 
oneness of abstraction with t the state did indeed cease; but they did not 
415 
work out beautiful concrete shapes, for what broke out on all sides instead 
was suppressed particularity with its utter bitterness. 
What transpire now (146 BC) are the plundering of Spain and the coo-
quests in Asia Minor and Greece~ while tunnoil is brewing concurrendy 
within and wimout. 27 The runnoil and restiveness of the Greeks, the 
Jugurthine War, the wars with the Cimbri and the Teutones, [and 
with] Sanorius, the federal state of Marius and Sulla, all lay bare the total 
16. There were numerous influential members of tbe Scipio family in the 3rd and 2od 
cmruries IC. The 'great Scipio' is Scipio Africaous Major. who decisively dtfeared Hannibal at 
the battle of Zama (202) to end. the Second Punic War. Although a hero, be was later involved 
with trials of members of bis family by their polilical oppooeoiS. and be died ao embittered man 
while in self-imposed exile frot:n the city of Rome. 
27. In 146 BC much of Greece wa'l incorporated into the Roman proviua of Macedonia. 
About the samt time Roman provinces aloDg tbe coast of SpaiD were eoJ.arpd inland. Conquests 
iD Asia Mioor oc:curnd over an extended period. aad were DOC compkwd until some time a.f1no 
this. 
441 

416 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
depravity of the Roman aristocracy. 28 The slave uprising under Spartacus, 
2
~ 
the wars with Mithradates30 -all sorrs of misfortune ensued for fifty to one 
hundred years. This turmoil of fifty to one hundred years duration displays 
the individuals who became the major figures, for now revolving around 
them are the concerns of the Roman state as to whether it should exist as 
such and how it ought to be. 'Ibis is once again a time of exttaordinary 
individuality like that in Greece after the death of Alexander. Interest now 
revolves around Marius, the Gracchi, and Cicero. Finally Caesar emerges. 
Caesar is the consummate image of Roman pucposi veness, an artless, simple 
human being who wishes nothing else than to be the ruJer and is undeterred 
by any constraints or passion. 
The gallery of these colossal figures very much merits closer examination. 
Great individuals grapple with misfortUne, and their own principal rnisfor-
rune is that they do not keep clearly to what is ethical and are unable to resist 
immorality. Even the most noble ones, such as the Gracchi, 31 fell victim not 
only to the injustice of the outer world but also to their own inner injustice, 
since they were compelled to trample underfoot what they had lived for. The 
great elements of life come to the fore in these individuals. When Hannibal 
returns to Carthage, I his first act is that he must cast the orator from the 
podium for finding fault with the peace that Hannibal achieved. 32 Mari~ 
28. ju~ 
of the royal family in the Roman province of Numidia in Africa, precipitated 
nrious c:on8ias but finaiJy swreodeml to forces under Marius in 104 ec. The Cimbri and the 
Teutooes were Germanic tribes who caused tlw RODWlS difficulty in Spajn and Italy until they 
were ddeated by Marius in 102-lOliiC. 'Sartorius' is likely intmded to be Serrorius. ~ 
Sertorius. praetor in ~ 
of Spain. io 80 BC led a rebellioo against Rome lamog until 72 11C. 
Gaius Marius (157---U IC) and LaQus Cornelius Sulla Felix (138-78 ac) wm: R.omaD ~ 
who llerVed m,ether but lata' fought ooe another ia prottaacd and a~mplex ~ 
avts rule 
oldie state. 
29. Spanacus. a gladiator from Thrace, led a proloopd revolt in 73-71 BC. 
30. Mitbradaus VI ( 12<U;3 BC), ruler of territories in Asia Minor., fought three wars agaiost 
the llomaos, in particular as an antagonist of Sulla. 
31. liberius SemproniiiS Gnccbus (163-133 ac) and his younger brother, Gaius Sempronius 
Gracchus {153-121 BC), enacted agrari:mlaws that redistributed land to poor ciriuns and made 
other reforms. Tiberius was killed by some who thought be would gain cyrannical power, and 
Gaius inadvertently brougbr imo being a new and oppresave sociaJ d8ll5 of knights (~) 
that, together with rhe Senare, dominated me plebriaos... 
32. After his l01g wars with Rome and his ultimate defeat by Scipio Africaous in 202 ac at the 
battle of Zama. Hannibal returned to Carthage and adVOQted peace with the R()[II3JIS. 
The Carthaginians soughr peace and SCIIt envoys to the Romans with proposed termS. Potybius. 
HistorW 15.18-19, reports rhe terms as well as the specific incident mentioned by Hcpl. 
The later version in Uvy, 30.37.7-10, sratQ: 'Gisgo came forward ro oppose lbe pea~.··· 
Hannibal. indignant rhar such thiogs should be Aid and beard at so critical a mommt. seized 
Gi• and with his own hand dragged him down from the platform.' TL by Frank Gardna' 
Moore. ia Livy, viii (Loeb Oassi.cal Libruy; Cambridge. Mass.. and l...oodoa, 194~), 506-7. 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
the victor over the Cimbri and the Teutones, has to hide out in the reeds and 
must take his seat on ruins, the remnants of Carthage. 33 Caesar, pacing up 
and down the bank of the Rubicon for long hours in the night, ponders the 
destiny of the world and suddenly becomes resolute, and in the end is 
wounded [and slain] by twenty~three wounds. History is replete with such 
moments. We find this in Plutarch,34 and the representations envisage the 
sort of conllicting states (Kontraste) the human breast is known to endure. 
The Emperors: One Will Dominates All 
Caesar bore the weight of this colossal juxtaposition (Auseinander zusam-
men). Outside [the Roman sphere], beyond the Alps, he had made inroads 
into Gaul and Germania, had pressed into the Nordic world an~ in doing 
so, discovered and opened up a new world. The other factor was that he then 
positioned himself at the apex of the Roman world, but not as Sulla did by a 
civil war in the Forum, not by struggle between factions; instead he con-
quered the Roman world in all its parts. His own struggle did not resemble a 
private struggle, for instead he went against the republic, which remained a 
republic in name only, the banner under whose aegis all the petty, humdrum 
factions operated. Caesar moved freely and openly against them; he won for 
himself the power and the banner of the republic, and set a free will of 
private interest in place of the many particular elements and over the many 
arbitrary wills. One must rule over many. All affairs had become rife with 
factions; all was passion and particularity. Caesar set himself up in place of 
these base, petty, private interests, and he then cleansed Rome of them. 
Nothing was more necessary than this dominance on the part of unallo}'e(l 
free will. However, Caesar was murdered by I twenty-three wounds, in 
417 
virtue of a striking and unusual misunderstanding on the part of aristocratic 
individuals, as soon became evident. Clearly the reining in of one individual 
personality did not succeed. Cicero himself, this father of the fatherland, was 
able to envisage the salvation of the state only in particular persons and to let 
it rest there; and then a change is always necessary. Such a great change had 
to take place twice, the fact that one person came to be the ruleL We say that 
'once does not count', in the sense that what takes place once can happen by 
33. When his rival, Sulla. usurped power (88 BC), Marius fJed to North Afria, to the 
protection oi Afritaos who had served with him in earber wars. 
34. The famous account of Caesar in Cisalpine Gaul, deliberating before decicfintt toaoss tilt-
Rubicon and advance on RC>m£ with his army ('l.el !he die be cast'), is iP Plutalt:b's P~~ralld 
Lives, vii, tr. Memadotte Perrin (Loeb Classical [jbraey; CainbricfF, Mass.. and Loodoo, 1919). 
520-3. 
445 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
chance. Thus Augustus had to follow, just as Napoleon bad to be dethroned 
nvice. Augusrus first of all, and then Tiberius, brought about the continu-
ance of the form of the state. 35 
This is how the Roman political constitution came into being, as merely 
formal and something inherendy lacking in substance. Issues of power and 
rule, of authority, were removed from it and passed into the hands of a free 
will that made itself authoritative. The mechanism of culership was very 
simple. The 'Caesars' assumed the leadership of the Senate, but they had an 
encampment or legions close to Rome and arranged for uncooperative 
senators to be murdered. Soon they found even this mechanism to be 
unnecessary. Here in the emperor we see then particular subjectivity as 
self-impelled in the most utterly unlimited way. Death is the only constraint 
or bounds tO personal particularity, and death was made into a sheer drama. 
Nero's demise can surely stand as an example of indifference in the face 
of death, where there is no fear, no future, nothing more than the desire of 
unbowtded caprice in the present. There is no restraint against willing 
otherwise, against willing something universal; the circwnstances of ruler-
ship are unconstrained. In the whole world there is no will equal to that of 
the emperor. The emperors, these Caesars, express spirit's complete coming-
out-of-itself, the utter, intentional, deliberate finitude that is without con~ 
-418 
st:raint. Under this ru.lership I everything is in order just as it is; for what is 
needed is only the harmony or agreement of all with the rulership and the 
will of this one being. The concrete features of the emperor are of no interest. 
These concrete features do not matter in their case; even the noble featureS of 
the figures of the good emperors arouse no interest. These featureS are a 
fortunate happenstance that leaves conditions just as they are, passing by 
and vanishing without a trace. The emperors have only to will, for good or 
for ill. In this case mere is no opposition, no thought, nothing that ought to 
be produced. Hence it did not occur even to the Antonines to establish any 
institutions, foe they instead stuck to private interes~ to parricu.lac will. 36 ln 
vinue of this pinnacle of utter particularity the Roman world is secwe and in 
order. 1bis extreme particuJariry is so secure that virtue and vice seem a 
matter of indifference; there is no longer any antithesis, anything valid, for 
both virtue and vice are just mattens of private concem. All is in order just as 
35. Gaius juliiiS Caesar (100--44 BC), ruled 49--44 BC.. Gaius Octavius (63 IIC-AD 14), 'Octa· 
v1an'. was a triumvir with Antony and Lepidus until be became • Augustus', aod was emperor 27 
BC:-ID 14, Tiberi~ (42BC:-AO .17) W.U emperor AD 14-37. 
36. Aatonious Pius (ruled AD 138-61) aud Mucus Aurelius Anloninus (ruled AD 161-80) are 
regarded as 'good emperors'. The Stoicism of the philosopber-anpercx M2rcus Aurelius equips 
om to face the vicissitudes of life with courage and cquanilnity. 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
it is, for sheer finitude is the goal. In this secure being, however, there is an 
externality of spirit-a profound breach is present here. 
In opposition to this order, this finitude, however, the subject made its 
appearance. Absolute subjectivity in itself, the infinity of being-within-self, 
has already broken in over against this abstract finitude, and it did so incon-
spicuously, revolutionizing everything. Spirit is utterly outside itself, and this 
spirit rules the world; it has become, and has provided, the absolute basis for 
this order. Since, therefore, one free will dominated the entire world, the great 
breach was accordingly introduced. Under Augustus himself, under this 
consummate, single ruler, to the first one who began rule by particular 
subjectivity, to the finitude that for its own sake counts as what is ultimate, 
there appears its opposite, namely infinity. However, the finitude that is 
determinate for its own sake unites internally with this [infinite] principle, 
yet in such a way that finitude is only the form of the appearance while 
the content is what is absolute, what is being-in-and-for-itself. With that, 
the Christian religion, this matter of world history, comes on the scene. I 
419 
THE ARRIVAL OF CHRISTIANI1Y37 
The Truth of the Idea 
What is to be examined here and can be demonstrated here is not what 
constitutes the true religion and idea of God~ but is instead only its appear· 
ing, or the necessity of its appearing, at this rime, when the time was fulfilled; 
for history deals with the appearing of what is ttue. The true idea is therefore 
to be presupposed. 
The absolute idea is what is universal, subsistent·in-and-for itself~ what 
exists only for thought and in thought, although not in such a way that what 
is universal would be what is abstract, what is empty, absolute essence; 
instead it is what is directly, endlessly, and internally detenninate within 
itself, is absolute negativity or what is universal as having every form of 
determinacy within itself, albeit as infinite form. This idea of God is the One, 
the urterly universal, in which everything natural or particular has perished. 
This One, however, is in its way still abstract. But the concrete determina-
tions must become established too, and these are not attributes, for 
'7. Chri.<itianiey, with it<; principle antithetical to the Roman principle. comes on the ~~Cem 
duriog the second period, that of Rome's world-<lomioion. thus planting the seeds of Rome's 
ultiDJate downfall. Hence it gets its own major beading. though as a feature of tbe secood 
p:riod. 
447 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
attributes are themselves always something particular (of course not sensible 
particulars like the Greek gods, for instead they are attributes of the One). 
These attributes themselves, however, have only panicular content: onmip~ 
otent, aU-good, and so on. But these characterizations still do not fulfill the 
subject. The Orientals designate their gods in diverse ways, and yet these 
ch..aracterizarions are not exhaustive but are only attempts at being exhaus-
tive, attempts that do not accomplish what they ought to and are only a 'bad 
infinite?. So attributes do not exhaust the essential being of the One. When-
ever the true fullness is gras~ it is the One. It is exhaustive, and this 
exhaustiveness has its basis in the fact that this determinateness does not 
420 
constitute multiple particular elements, I that this determination is not 
something particular but instead only returns into itself, therefore does 
not project itself exclusively outside itself but instead draws itself co itself 
too and returns into irsel£; it is what is being-for-self. 
This is the infinite fullness: the On~ the14 is said to be absolutely deter-
mined, to be detennined within its own self. And this determinateness is 
absolute determinateness, not empty, absolutely infinite detenninateness; it 
is so in virtue of both factors so that, in projecting outward, [it consists] in 
relating itself to an other but likewise draws itself back to itself: this retWJl-
ing [to itself), which is a limit that is no limit.lbis is the fullness of the idea. 
The idea is this One that determines itself, that panicularizes itself; it brings 
itself forth as an other to itself but does not lose itself in doing so. [It is the 
One that] in this other is irself no other, for instead it likewise negates this 
negative element to it, posits it as "not-other', and in doing so thus returnS to 
itself. God is this infinite life of separating the other from itself and being 
present to itself in this separated element. This relationship is the specula rive 
form. 
We are familiar with this relationship in many fonns, for instance in the 
sentiment in which we know it as love, when I have consciousness of myself 
in another. I look to another, am not present to myself; I am incomplete, 
having a willing and knowing in anoth~ although in this knowing and 
willing of mine in another I am myself; it is given back to me for the first time 
in another, such that the other one is no other to me but instead is utterly 
421 
I myself. Each of the two is an other, 1 reciprocally excluding and returning 
from the other to oneself. 
In higher form, this idea is spirit. The definition of spirit is the same, and 
this content is what is represented as the Christian church's docttine of the 
Trinity-except that in this religion the concept of spirit is proclaim~ and 
so God's essential being is revealed; for it is revealed what spirit is. Christians 
know what God is in that they know God as uiune. 
448 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
There are two ways to grasp this truth. One is the way of faith via 
representation, and the other is the way of chought that thinks the truth, 
the way of knowledge via reason. Between the two lies the understanding, 
which holds fast to distinctions it does not know how to lead back to unity; 
instead it sticks to what is abstract. Upon approaching truth, the under-
standing destroys what is true in it. The understanding knows nothing of 
God as triune, knows nothing of Christ other than that he is a moral, 
virruous human being, and not what is divine. Whoever does not know 
about God that God is triune knows nothing about Christianity. Even 
Muslims know about Christ's virtue, the fact that he was a moral and 
virtuous human being. A human being who has not the truth of the Christian 
religion has no truth at all; for this is the one and only truth. 
The Christian religion (:an be grasped, tben, with respect to its beginnings, 
and in this way it is a relic from the past. But Christianity is likewise living, 
contemporary spirit that has fathomed itself from that rime onward, that 
has brought itself to a more profound consciousness. So the fact that God is 
triune is not a matter of whether it says so explicitly in the Sible. lhat is 
literalism. The spirit of the community, of the church, the spirit as existent 
there, is effective spirit, is actual spirit. Christ wills to be in his community 
and to teach it; 'the spirit will lead the way into all I truth', 38 but not by 
422 
referring to the letter of the text. And so what stands in the Bible is, as known 
previously, not yet what is true. The church, the community, is what recog-
nizes truth, is what has received this consciousness, the spirit of truth that, 
from out of itself, has brought itself to detenninate consciousness. This is the 
foundation of the Christian religion, of reason and of the speculative idea. 
The understanding is not knowledgeable about either of them, about faith or 
about reason. We need to remember that we are not to be thinking of a 
Christianity of the man in the street, as whatever anyone makes it out to be. 
What we have to speak of, however, is the fact that the time had been 
fulfilled, that God sent his Son, namely, that doing so was in fact necessary. 
~ 
The self-consciousness of the spiritual world has raised itself up to the 
elements that belong to the concept of spirit. This element [of self-conscious-
ness] ha~ on the one hand, become consciousness of worldty consciousness, 
albeit as torn asunder by the world's understanding, and on the other hand 
there was nevenheless need for these elements that were split apart to be 
grasped as united in their truth. 
38. Sec jobn 16: 13: "When the Spirit of truth comes, be will guide you into aU me truth'· 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
The Appearance of the Idea 
We have to consider more closely the elements in the concept of spirit. These 
elements are now the governing categories of the world, and that they 
are such is the main point. So the first question, therefore, is: what are 
these categories? First of all, they are only categories, disiecta membra 
[disparate components], categories of the understanding; they are the con-
tent that possesses its truth only as comprised in a unity. 
One category is the being-determined on its own account of finitude, the 
category of being-for-self, the category of the point relating itself to itself, of 
the belief that finitude is something absolute. The other category, the oppo-
423 
site, is the belief I in infinity, in the universal that sets its own limits. The 
two together constitute being-in-and-for-itself. 
When the two are separated we have in one instance finitude, the absolute 
separateness that we see in the Roman world. In the harsh servitude of 
the Romans there is an inwardness that is practical, that is a purpose, a 
finitude that is not the finitude of nature but is instead an internal finitude, 
the harsh servirude that becomes adapted to sensuality and posits a con-
stricted purpose, one upholding legal force as something ultimate. Some-
thing universal is according)y posited. This is the servitude that makes the 
finite into something inward, abstract, and ultimate; it is universal, but only 
finite. This harshness of servitude exists in the Roman world; there is, 
however, no freedom apart from this harsh servitude, just as there is no 
inwardness and no love without fear. Without the sense of this negativity of 
the natural there is no inwardness; only in virtue of the submissiveness of dte 
natural can there be freedom. 
In the Roman world purpose was, first of all, specific and consuained. 
and purpose in its other aspect was established as absolute, as ultimate. We 
see Roman religion as the religion of finite purposiveness. This finite purpose 
was therefore established as absolute and was represented as the hwnan 
PI.U'pOSe in virtue of which it was binding. This inwardness is only the 
beginning of freedom, not freedom itself. That by which human beings are 
bound here is something absolute but nothing universal. 
What is one's own is thus this purpose. However, what is one's own, 
which is the predicate, also appeared as subject: spiritual personality as the 
principle of abstract personality, of positive, formal, absolute law. Under 
this law I am this one, having this abstract feature as my property, and in 
this context I exist as infinitely this point. Posited here is the category of 
42"1 
the point, this infinite I rigidity (Sprodigkeit). We then also see this finirode 
as the suffering of the this one, as object of interest and, on the other side, 
450 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
also in tum we see the this one as ultimare, as private interest in the caprice 
of the emperor. This positive and negative feature is what counts here as 
ultimate. This emperor, this one, is the god of the world. Therefore the god 
of the world has become this one. This is one of the categories. This category· 
is the absolute limit, is finitude; it is likewise the boundless self-detennining. 
although it is this self-determining still only in a sensible way; it is the 
consciousness that has arrived at this understanding or, however, only at 
this unhappy state of abstraction, at the unhappy state of looking upon the 
bounds of constraint as what is ultimate. It is still the onesided category of 
the idea, is the absolute restriction, the direct opposite of the infinite bounds. 
The other category is infinite freedom, is universality, the opposite of the 
bounds [of constraint]. This is the other aspect, and it is to be shown how it 
was the ground (Boden) in the world. This ground of abstract universality is 
to be demonstrated. It was at one time the ground for philosophical thought. 
It is principally the form of Stoicism that, just like Epicureanism and Skepti-
cism, was very widespread. As a group these philosophies departed from the 
teaching of Socrates, and they entail that human beings should only be 
inward and should be indifferent to all things, that they should not find 
their satisfaction in the world but instead should achieve it only in solitude 
with oneself, in aTa.~(a, imperturbabilitas, in the stolidity that is brought 
about only by complete indifference to all things, by holding nothing to be 
true, nothing to be 1 right, nothing to be valid.39 This is the fonn closest to 
425 
universality. 
The broader universal form is the one we have in the Orient, and thus the 
Roman world is the connection or linkage between this abstract rigidity oc 
finitude of the West and the endless breadth, this free universality, of the 
Orient. lbis other element must, however, be present not only in the mode of 
thought but also essentially in the mode of appearance, in inruition. We find 
this other element of breadth, of vastness, in Eastern intuition. Here, how-
ever, it is primarily just a predicate and is no subject on its own account. 
Limited objects or intuitions become an immeasurable expanse, but this 
expanse is not yet established as what is ultimate, is not known as existem 
for itself; instead it is known only as a characteristic that holds good 
alongside the objects. So this breadth is Easrem [in nature], and thus in 
39. In the speci~ phrases of this sentence Hcgellwnps togrtbef what an: io part distinctive_ 
~hires of Stoicism, Hpic~Heanism, and Skepticism (cspectivdy. 5« Lea-res OIJ the HIStory of 
Philosophy, ii. 261-316, where he discusses the three philosophies in drt.a.il. 1br ont feature that 
they share is the quest for imperturbability by turning within. by ~ 
to tbr unstttl~ 
features of the extema1 world. 
451 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
representations it is not established explicidy as what is ultimate; it is 
nothing but the supersensible in the characteristic of being~for-self, the 
supersensible as what is ultimate and true. As the supersensible it emerges 
only in Israelite representation as the universal God of thought that exists for 
itself; it is not Brahma or the light of the Persians, but instead is stripped of 
sensibility. The God of judaism (Judas) is this One, the universal, such that 
only the universal is what is ultimate. This is graspable sheerly in inner 
representatio~ sheerly for thought. Also, with this characterization nothing 
is left except that God is the One. In philosophy we can of course speak of 
the absolute as the One, for doing so involves the express thought that this 
One is not the predicate but instead is the subject, that the content in this 
subjectivity is what is being-for-self. Doing so is requisite for the detennina-
tion of God as the One. Here for the first time, at this point, this religion 
or this characterization of God as the One becomes a world-historical 
426 
principle. I 
These, then, are the two principles of the idea: the One, and the envisage-
ment of the rigidity of singularity, of subjectivity. These are the two cate-
gories of the self-consciousness of this age. The two principles of East and 
West coalesce here for the first time externally, in virtue of conquest, but they 
also coalesce in virtue of inner assimilation. In isolation they are one-sided, 
to be und~ood abstractly; in their truth they are posited as one. This 
uniting of East and West, and the assimilation of the two principles .. took 
place in the Roman world. The West longed for a deeper inwardness, for 
universality, a profound vastness, and found it in the East; such a uniting of 
its principle with the universal is the sort of union mat disseminated itself in 
multiple ways and gained validity in obscure ways. This unification is what 
the times needed. Spirit, dispersed and lost in a finite purposiveness, in the 
finitude of the Roman Empire, called for something infinite and found it in 
the East. 
Thus the worship of Isis and the worship of Mithn arose about this time 
throughout the Roman world. The uniting of the concreteness of the West 
with the breadth of the East came about in this way. Alexandria in particular 
was the focal point for the two principles, the place where the two principles 
were assimilated scientifically. Inasmuch as the Egyptian enigma was now 
grasped in thought, it was accordingly resolved. The very content of fantasy .. 
raised up into thought, received its resolution where whar is contradictory 
fmds its unification. Therefore Alexandria was the soil on which the unifica~ 
tion emerged in manifold forms. In Alexandria we find learned jews 
who link the Eastern representations with the thought of Plato~ Jews who 
452 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
cognized their intuitions of thought by means of Western categories, God 
grasped in God's infinity, in logical purity, wtited with the Logos. 
Studying the history of this era is a most interesting aspect of religious and 
philosophical views, especially I after Christian formulations ( Vorstellun-
427 
gen) were initiated in Asia, in Syria. In all these countries countless sects 
having one and the same impulse, one and the same longing, called for and 
produced one and the same thing-the same tendency, the same fcding that 
often with admirable ingenuity comes upon what is true, but also intermin-
gles it in rum with strange representations, with strange additions. This 
impulse is panicularly evident in the allegorical methods of interpretation, 
ro which belong in this case the allegorical representations of Greek mythol-
ogy that had their beginning here and had no other purpose than to delve 
into the thoughts in this sensible mode, in these sensible images, liberating 
what is determinate from the sensible mode and, by this inwardness and 
oneness, breathing life into what is concrete. These manifold phenomena are 
all presentations of this same impulse. But this idea was not only able to 
make its appearance in this incomplete7 nonautonomous mode; instead it 
had to present itself in its pure and complete shape; it had to reveal itself in 
such a way that this idea itself thus appears and is envisaged in a mode in 
which this determination that it contains has been consummated and 
worked out to the ultimate point, to the sensible presence of this O'U. 
Thus God had to reveal godself as human being in human shape. The 
world longed for God to reveal godself as human being to human being. To 
this end the world longed for human being that only in one aspect grasped 
itself as purpose~ and knew its own infinity within itself~ to be envisaged as 
absolute; it longed for human being as finite to be elevated and grasped 
as element of the divine essence; and, in anOther aspect, it longed for human 
being as God and~ vice versa, it longed for God as human being to come 
forth from his abstract remoteness into appearance and into human intui-
tion. This intuition is what constitutes the reconciliation of human beings 
with God and of God with human beings, the reconciliation with God that 
was thus represented as the wtity I of the human and divine natureS. 
428 
The essential determinations in this case are that the human being or the 
finite spirit-not as one is naturaJly or according to the flesh-6nds itself in 
this unity with the divine essence; alternatively put, that the human being in 
its sheerly natural state is not good but is instead unspiritual, and only by 
renouncing natural being and working free from it-therefore only by the 
negation of this natural state that for it ought o()( to be, rhat is said to be a 
non-being, hence something evil and not something g~ 
the human 
being for the first time come in this way to the security and certainty of this 
453 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
unity with God, docs it come to faith. One's well-being is in this mystical, 
essential being, in this unity with God. Faith is this certainty that the divine 
spirit dwells within oneself, that one is in mystical unity with the divine. This 
faith can come about only through liberation from one's natural state. 
through working free from one's naturalness. However, human beings who 
remain within the natural state, thinking themselves good just as they are, 
find damnation in it. So human beings have to supersede this natwal mode in 
order to come to faith. 
This intuited unity also had to be present in a natural mode, in a natural 
phenomenon, in the mode of immediate being, of the bounded state that is a 
this one. Therefore the immediate being, the this one, belongs to the con-
summation of this reconciliation. The unity, however, could appear in this 
way only one time, in a single individual. God is inherently only One. and 
God's appearing must therefore be designated utterly with the predicate of 
oneness and so it excludes all multipli.city. The many human beings existing 
as they ought not to be are what is ungodly. 
This appearing of the One emerges within the jewish people; for this 
429 
people prayed to God as the One, and looked upon God as the One. I .Sut 
at the same time characteristic of this people is this noninvolvement ( Un-
vermischtheit) with sensibility. 1bis religion remained lifeless and unnoticed 
until it became world-historical, until spirit had r.raversed the way statiom to 
which this element gave rise and had encountered the other element. 
the absolutely bounded state, the eltment that required the boundless, the 
onefold, as its extreme limit, a requirement in vinue of which this other 
element emerged in world-historical fashion. The univenal or the One can 
come intO consciousness, or arise within consciousness, in a twofold wa}·· 
One way is instinctively (unbewu.sst), as in the case of children, to whom we 
say "God is One• because this is easy ro grasp-and this way is abstraCL The 
other way is when the One is something required, a result of the multiplicity 
that is unhappy within itself, that is the longing for the One. This detenni-
nation of the One must be in this twofold mode. Thus it [this consciousness] 
arises as negation of all boundedness. 
In the world-historical setting this detennination arises as result, as 
demand for boundaries that become too narrow for it, and it retreats into 
boundlessness or into its own abstract inwardness. But there is also the way 
of immediate aS(:ellt, the way of its own immediate going-forth or ascent 
within the spirit, a way that was present in the Jewish people. And so there 
was lhis ancient religion that took its beginnings with Abraham, who arrived 
at Srahma, the onefold, the One. He arrived at this representation of the 
One by parting ways with all that i.s earthly. We do not know as historical 
454 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
fact just how he arrived at this religion by parting ways with all that is 
foreign. Because the elevation is immediate, however, it itself is thus con-
strained and bounded; for elevation to the One is only then truly uncon-
strained if every constraint and finitude is expressly negated. For the Indians 
the representation of God as the One is itself constrained. 
We even see this constrained character of immediacy directly in the jewish 
religion, where it has the feature that the One is not concrete internally and 
has no content, with the result that the content, what is concrete I or 
430 
detenninate, falls outside this One, and what we have is the sort of relation-
ship in which the One is related extemaUy to the human being as something 
determinate, who constitutes spirit in its constrained state. Spirit will then be 
grasped only as this determinate being to which the One is related. Therefore 
the One bas nothing to do with the universal concept of spirit. Instead God 
has to do with the singular, the constrained, the finite. Thus God is celated 
just to these human beings, and so he is onJy the God of the jewish people. 
In this religion, however, there is also preserved in any event the represen-
tation of the universal nature of the human being, maintained in the story of 
the creation and faU of human beings. The fact that human beings have been 
created in the image of God, and in pursuit of knowledge have forfeited their 
natural well-being, the state of paradise, in virtue of sinning, carries this 
twofold message: that human beings arrived at the consciousness and 
the knowledge of good and of evil. One aspect of this message involves 
sin; the other, however, is their creation in the image of God, and their 
having become like ~ 
in knowing good and evil. At the same time, 
however, not only the serpent but God himself says: •Adam has bcwme 
like one of us'. 40 This statement becomes true for the first time in Christ. 
So, represented in this story is the higher concept of human nature, a 
perspective of a higher order, one considering human beings not as they are 
in their natural state but instead according to their concept, in their being in 
the image of God, such that human nature is inherendy one with God. We do 
not find representations and thoughts of this sort in other Oriental repre-
sentations or in Greek narratives I and myths. These [biblica1] representa-
431 
tions are still nothing extravagant or Oriental; they are reason in the form of 
representation. In the Jewish depiction !Anschauung), boweve.r,. this narra-
tive just stands alone at the beginning, as myth, and remains without con-
sequences; and nowhere in the Old Testament do we find a backward glance 
to this concept of the hwnan being or an alJusion to this story, nowhere an 
40. Gen. 3: 22 reads: 'Then the Lord God said, •Behold, tbe man bas become like om of llS. 
bowiag good aod eriJ .•• • ' 
4S5 

432 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
investigation (lnsichgehen) of the essence of the human being, therefore 
nowhere a recalling of this concept. 
Only now, in this harsh servitude of fate, does it come to pass, only now is 
the meaning acquired, that human beings examine themselves; {this is] the 
meaning given by the Greeks: 'Human being, know thyself!~ No longer is 
dtis just a knowing, and it does not advance merely to the stage of beauty. 
Instead what is consummated and comes to universal consciousness via 
representatio~ and is grasped as the universal nature of spirit, is that God 
has become human being and thus reconciliation or liberation has come to 
pass. That is the liberation that was given in the Christian religion. 
We have ~ 
then, that what has entered into human consciousness via 
the Christian celigion is [in the first place) the objective nature, or the 
objective idea, of God. God was revealed according to God~s truth. Abstract 
echoes of Greek philosophy now revealed themselves to human beings in 
concrete representation. In the second place, human beings discover them-
selves in this idea, in this truth. Human nature is goodness, is spirit. They 
discover this nature to be their own, and they possess this nature, their 
authentic essential being, in the divine determination, more precisely envi-
saged in the Son. Therefore human being, as element of the divine essen~ 
discovers itself as this one in God. Insofar as human beings know themselves 
as finite, they still do know themselves as ends in themselves. So, just as the 
divine idea has within itself this crossover to human bein& the human being 
knows itself as infinity within itself, knows itself as, in this determination, 
being eternity widUn itself, and indeed eternity not only as a future state but 
rather as a present state. One's true existence t one thus possesses in an 
infinite inwardness in opposition to one's natucal existence and willing, and 
one acquires this characteristic of one's existence in eternity only by one's 
labor in breaking through the natural sphere. lbis breach is the pain or 
suffering of nature. Evil or wickedness comes into play bere as a process of 
the divine essence itself, is now set in motion, and for that reason the 
calamity (Unglikk) is comprehensible whereas previously it was something 
incomprehensible, was no more than what is the case (Seiendes). Today the 
calamity is called <Ute fonunate fall' (das Unglilckselige, die Seligkeit des 
Ungliicks). The negative is only negative in one aspect; conceptually it is the 
turning about of itself, of the evil and, as self-negating, it is what is affirma-
tive, or positive. Tbis turnabout to the positive is not the goodness of the 
human being based on nature but is instead goodness through its own self, 
through turning about from evil; it is the engendering of itself from out of the 
negativity; spirit-50metbing inward-atones for itself, extricates itself, and 
acts only on that basis. These are the features of the religious consciousness-
456 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
Consequences of Christianity for Life and the State 
This highest human consciousness then proves to have worldly conse-
quences and determines itself in different ways in relation to existence. So 
here we begin from thought and proceed to existence. 
The first consequence for actuality is that slavery is ruled out in Chris-
tiartity; for, as Christians, human beings are considered according to what 
they are inherently, and they are inherendy posited as something absolutely 
valuable, are taken up into the divine nature. Accordingly they are, in God, 
looked upon in a wholly universal way, and all private concerns fall to the 
wayside. They count not as Greeks, Romans, Bcahmans, or jews, as high or 
low class; instead I they have infinite worth as human beings and, in and 
433 
for themselves, they are destined for freedom. Insofar as Christianicy is 
actually practiced, it can have no slavery. One must not, however, seek the 
backing of external history, for instance by saying that slavery was not 
abolished by councils, and the like; the fact that slavery still exists today is 
no more pertinent than is the external way in which it has ceased. Slavery is 
not something that was done away with by kings; instead, Christianity has 
ended it. The abolition is worldly, but Christianity is the true humanity. For 
the external mode of the phenomenon is not the truth [about it]. 
The second consequence, furthermore, is that the forms of ethical life 
have been changed [by this consciousness]. The beautiful ethical life of the 
Greeks cannot be present in Christianity. What is now ethical can be ethics 
and custom too, insofar as it comes from within, albeit proceeding from the 
One; for subjectivity has now become &ee and justified. One mode of 
subjectivity is private interest and caprice, and the other mode is authentic, 
inner, spiritual subjectivity. With Christianity, however, the private interest 
~ 
that previously appears only as corruption now becomes free roo. In this 
way Christianity indeed rids itself of contingency; but for that reason sub-
, 
jectivity still has its inner restraint. Everything external receives its signifi-
cance through spirit, albeit as an externality, and it need not be the simple, 
compliant expression of what is internal. In any event the external featme in 
the essence of action loses its value; the worth of external existence, as 
sheerly external, becomes insignificant and takes on the form of something 
merely external. What is pertinent here is that everything is mediated by free 
will, partly by the mind (Gemiit) as such, partly by the particular will-just 
as well by what is advantageous as by general interests. Individuality no 
longer should be sacrificed; particular interest in limited purpose should be 
valid for its own sake. But there is also present the spiritual, I higher 
434 
inwardness, and genuine inwardness calls even more so for its own law. 
451 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
The third consequence is the establishment of two worlds: a supersensi-
ble, spiritual world in vinue of the truthfulness of subjectivity, one that, as 
belonging to subjective consciousness, is however at the same time temporal, 
one that has, and enters into, determinate existence, one that stands on earth 
and binds itself to that existen~ giving itself validity as the church and, in 
another aspe~ as the secular world, the state, which is in the main set under 
the regime of finitude. So there are therefore two kinds of states: one that is 
eternal within time, and another that embodies worldly purposes. 
A fourth consequence is the issue as to what is now the idea of the state, 
that is, what political constitution is its goal. We have to examine the 
political constitution of the worldly state. It is clear at the outset that this 
constitution cannot be Oriental despotism. Ethical life and right cannot e~st 
at the behest of external command or decree, any more than their link with 
nature can be the Oriental mode of that link. The human being is inwardly 
&ce; this freedom is to be gained and maintained by one's own efforts, and it 
cannot be subvemd into the mode of external command. Nor is there the 
unselfconscious unity of the ethical freedom of Greek democracy, such that 
my own will is immediately identical with the will of the state, that subjec-
tivity is simply at one with the objectivity of the state. Rather, my own 
subjective wiD is now in an inward condition that is explicidy its own. 
Nor is there the sort of servitude that exists wtder the constrained and finite 
purpose of the Roman aristocracy. Internal unity now has an infinite pur-
pose. Therefore, to this extent the worldly authority has its place in what is 
eXternal, quite apart from the churc~ and within its own domain it can no 
longer exercise conttol over morality, ethical life, and family relationships, 
and can no longer offer up sacrifices and oppress as it did in the Roman 
435 
world. I 
Obedience to the secular ocdet; to the secular dominion, must now be a 
maner of negotiation with individual, subjective purpose~ in virtue of 
the fact that the private interest of individuals, the particular inner will, 
like the higher spiritual will, maintains its own advantage and its own 
satisfaction within the secular dominion. For that reason aJso the law and 
the state must be inherently justified in their p~ 
must be independent 
of private interests and particular opinion. For the very reason that it lends 
itself to being made a vehicle for private interests, the state must be strong 
for its own sake, must be a world of external, actual necessity, strong for its 
own sake; it must be able ro accommodate this adoption of private interests 
in it, but in such a way that at the same rime lhe private interests within il ace 
satisfied. Therefore the state must be a system that does not stand directly in 
need of what is moral, of immediate ethical life, of religiosity; it must be of a 
458 

THE ROMAN WORLD 
secure nature, sufficient within itself, as is that external nature that stands 
over against self-consciousness, that abides on its own account even though 
the mind does not understand it. The subject must subordinate itself to 
the state as a power over it. In thus developing itself as this bulwark, the 
state must be rational in itself, even if subjective opinion or private interests 
do not acknowledge that. It must be inherently just, also more or less 
insightfully so, such that the concept can find its satisfaction in it. Therefore 
rationality, the concept, must now be realized in the state. 
What follows from these essential elements is that, by the state developing 
itself with this nature, and within the state as this implicitly and explicitly 
necessary world, all the elements of the idea are, in their independence, I 
438 
given binh, are emergent, and are fully developed. And this totality of 
organization is the principle of monarchy of modem times. In monarchy 
all the determinations of the idea by which freedom actualizes itself ace thus 
worked out in this way~ are present in the mode of one nature, such that each 
elemenr is posited as independent power and at the same time is an ocgan of 
the whole organism. 
The other observation concerns how such a state comes into being in 
history. This origin is necessarily 'romantic', namely, taking place in such a 
way that what occurs toward this end occurs as though unconsciously, 
seeming to constitute something happening by chance; for this origin takes 
on the shape of external necessity. None of the modern states have had the 
privilege of framing a constitution for themselves in the way that was done 
in such ancient srates as Athens [and Sparta], under Solon and Lycurgus, or 
in Rome, for instead aU of the modem states seem to have brought them· 
selves about by chance. This need [for a constitution] made itself evident and 
~ 
was satisfied by various laws. Particular passions and interests of princes, of 
. 
social groups, of cities, and the like, have given rise to these features, and the 
arrogation by various sectors of power over one another bas abated. The 
whole that came about in this way, the purpose that spirit has, the need that 
spirit feels, assembles itself out of such single components-peaceably, in 
pan by imposition of power. The opposite [ancient mode] emerges all at 
once, where the whole has become evidenL So these are the worldly con· 
sequences of the Christian religion. The development of these consequences 
constitutes history up to the most recent time, and we ourselves are situated 
within this development. We have still to recall the chief elements of the 
external mode of this development. I 
437 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
THE DOWNFALL OF ROME 
So we now have to proceed to the appearing of this development. The 
Christian religion came into being during the era of the Roman world, 
although not among the Romans themselves but instead in a different 
people, one that the world spirit determined to be the bearer of this princi· 
pie. That is because the different principles of the idea, in their existing, do 
so essentially in a different nation. lb.is principle cannot develop itself in the 
Romans themselves; instead a Nordic people is bearer of this idea. We saw 
the Roman Empire and its principle progress internally to the universal 
dominion of a blind will of this one, of something devoid of reason, some-
thing barren and abstract-to a dominion or an order that is an abstract and 
irrational order. Linked to this dominion of this one is the fact that the 
different subjects exist as abstract persons that stand only in legal relation-
ships (to one another]. The third epoch of the Roman Empire is the one in 
which the Roman world comes into contact with this world-historical 
people, and via this contact meets its downfall. The Roman Empire perishes. 
Its downfall has three characteristics. 
There is its own conu.prion that it bears within itself, and through which 
it rums back within itself and destroys itself by the dereliction of spirit on the 
pan of private individuals, in that subjectivity remains static with particular, 
private pleasures and interests, and isolates all persons. So the whole is 
something devoid of spirit, a phenomenon devoid of essential being, a 
spiridess corpse in which there is a lot of movement, but only by the 
worms. Avarice and all sorts of depravity are the drivers of private caprice; 
aU the forces of private interest are unleashed and end up with the formula of 
private rights. 
The second fearure is that spirit withdraws into itself as into something 
higher, on the one hand in the philosophies of Stoicism and so on, and oo 
438 
the other hand I in Christianity. Both undennine the status quo and are t:he 
revolutionary element over against the Roman world. But they are not 
merely what is negative vis-0-vis the corruption; instead the Christian reli-
gion is the positive element from which emerges what ensues., the new world 
The third feature is the downfall as it comes upon the Roman world 
externally, through the onrush of foreign peoples, Nordic and eastern bar-
barians of the mass migrations who, like a river, gushed forth over the 
Roman Empire, something no dam can any longer withstand. Since thesr 
Nordic and eastern barbarians were called 'Germanm', the world-historical 
people is now the ~rmanic people. 

The Germanic World 
INTRODUCTION 
The Idea and Historical Panicularity 
This topic presents a number of difficulties. Mote recent history involves the 
subjective difficulty that we are not able to approach it as impartially as we 
can the distant past. The greater difficulty is the objective one that in history 
we have here both the idea as such and the panicularity from which fultill· 
mem of the absolute final end is to emerge.1 The objective difficulty is due to 
the fact that the ends of the particula.; subjective will are satisfied here. The 
two sides cannot be united from the beginning. Rather to begin with they are 
essentially different and yet mediated by each other: the object is mediated 
by the subjectivity of the will and the satisfaction of the particularities, 
which also can only achieve theic end by confonning with the absol11te. 
The ultimate goal is the unification of the in-and-for-itself (Anund{Ursich-
sein) and the particular ends. 1 
439 
Initially, the particularity cannot yet coalesce entirely with the absolute 
final end; rather, the particular ends are still distinct, and the particular will 
does not immediately recognize its absolute end and is engaged in a strUggle. 
While the particular will desires this end, it does not recognize this drive, its 
authentic inner nature; it thrashes about in particular ends and hence is in 
conflict with itself. In this conflict it fights against that which it truly desires, 
and thus it effects the absolute itself by fighting against it. The effective agenr 
is then the particular will, which initially has finite ends. What is authentic is 
the condition of being driven toward an absolute final end. The will is driven 
l. What 1-legd writes about the unsion between the idea as such aud the particuWity of its 
means is true of history geoeratly, but it applie~~ in a special way to European histocy beaiiSe the 
subjectiv:ity of will DOW bEcomes predominant. The first subsection reOects on bow providence 
achieves irs cod v:ia tht •recalcitrant volition' of peoples, and it ~ 
some general <:har· 
aaaistics of the Germanic: world, such as the rdatiooship betwem the iodtpeodence md the 
unity of states. The next subsection describes bow Europe was forged our of a unioo of 
Rom.a.o<:e, ~. 
and Slavic peoples (although the latter play vinually no rok in Hegel's 
scenario, to say oothing of other ethnic: group$ such as Finns and Hungarians). On Hegel's use of 
the tenns 'Germanic world'~ 
Welt), 'Germank peoples' (G-), 'Germaruc 
priociple' ~es 
Prinop), ere., see the Jntrod1Ktioo to these~ n. 79 jabove, 
p. 208). 0oe of his principal SOUJ'CeS for the earlier material in this period is Tacitus, Getm41W. 
For later marerial he dra~ upon Karl Friedrich Eichhorn, Dt!JIISc:be Simas- rmd ~ecbts.­
geschi.c:bte, 4 vols. (Goa:ingt!n, 1808-23 ), and Joh.ano Stephan Potter, Teadscbe ltei&hsgescbid7tL 
iN ibre. HaMpt(IIIMrl ~ 
3rd edD. (~ 
1~31. 
461 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
by that which is true; however., this being driven, this drive, is at first obscure; 
hence we are often forced to iudge what has happened in just the opposite 
way from how it appears to be in the history of peoples. What constitutes a 
people"s misfortune~ that which was their lot, both the people and history 
rermed their greatest good fortune, while good fortune was being combated 
as the greatest misfortune. The French say, La verite, en Ia repoussant, on 
l'embrasse [in repulsing truth one embraces it). This is seen in European 
history to the extent that it arrives at its final end only by rejecting the truth. 
This is what Europe has done-it is modem humanity exhausting itself in 
the bloodiest struggles. Thus the will of the modern world is clouded; truth 
resides in the background; and the will battles against the in-and-for-itself, 
toiling and finding satisfaction at the point where often the opposite of the 
truth is to be found. 
This history shows very clearly that the idea in the mode of providence 
ruled-providence as a veiled inner power (eingebulltes lnneres) that 
achieves irs end and prevails via the recalcitrant volition of the peoples-
so that what it achieves and what the peoples desire are often at odds. With 
the Greeks and Romans the idea is not as separated [from the will of the 
440 
people]; I they are more correctly and truly aware of, and do not misunder-
stand, what tb.ey desire and ought to do. 
Associated with more recent history is the fact that conditions appear to 
be contingen~ a shifting of many-faceted events, which have and produce an 
end re8u1t that, while indeed the inner drive [of the idea), appears to be 
miraculous since the goal of these conditions was veiled. Now let us consider 
the significance of this circumstance. Events and chance ~urrences have a 
very different significance and status. Extravagant special occurrences or 
events wherein the greatest genius reveals itself can~ when seen from the 
perspective of the idea, appear to be insignificant and must be relegated to 
the status of truly unimportant because they produce no result. This is the 
case wilh what will appear here as external history. 
Should we wish to apply further the character of the Roman world to the 
[more recent) states, we discover that this character contributes to the fonna-
tion of lhe free particularity of states, but in such a way that they still have a 
unity and connection. This is the basic characteristic of modem times. 
The first aspect is that the states strive for sovereignty, for independence 
from one another., and consider this their foremost glory. Europe shares this 
tenaciousness with the Greek world. In this regard, history must consider the 
formation of the particular states with respect to the opposition of chwch 
and state, and also the aspect of the form of government. Despite their wide 
range of differences, aU of these states still exhibit a congruity in aU the 
462 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
Germanic principles. Because of this congruity~ their mdependeru:e must be 
seen as merely fonnal I in principle and in law. There is not, as is the case 
441 
with Greece and Persia, an absolute difference. The Christian states are only 
fonnally distinct from one another. Each state, even if subject to or 
incorporated into another, loses its independence only fonnally, but not its 
religion and laws, i.e. what is concrete. The extent to which this principle [of 
mdependence] is not merely formal depends on other conditions. 
The second aspect regarding this independence is the orientation of the 
states with respect to their unity. & particular, states have an orientation 
toward each other, a relationship, which results in wars, hostility, and 
dynastic alliances. This orientation is a special kind of relationship. But 
the orientation of the states toward general unity corresponds to what was 
hegemony with the Greeks. In Ewope, however, the aspect of hegemony is 
that of the spirit, which seeks a distinctive kind of unity, such as was seen 
under Charlemagne and in the Crusades, and in more recent times as the 
Holy Alliance. These two orientations, that of a particular relationship and 
that of general unity, are the two essential aspects; and the relationship 
between independence and unity tilts now in one direction, and now in the 
other. 
The third aspect of these two factors [independence and unity] is that 
once again all the states of Europe relate to the outside world as a single 
unity. The Christian states as a whole have an outward orientation. Up to 
now, the periods [of world history] involved relating to an earlier and a later 
world-historical people. But now, with the Christian religion, the principle 
of the world is complete; the day of judgment has dawned for it. 2 The chwch 
does indeed point to the beyond; it is in part t a preparation for the future. 
442 
Rut eternity is a future only for private concerns, for individuals as partiru· 
lac. The church, however, also has the Spirit of God present within it; it says 
to sinners, 'Your sins are forgiven you', and they live happily on eanh as in 
heaven. So individuals have enjoyment, satisfaction (GenuP). The only 
2. In the Philosophy of Right, § 340 (Etm-ts of the Philosophy of Right, tt H. B. Nisbet 
!Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 1991),371), Hegel funously nfen to world history 
as world judgment tdU Wellgeschicbu ist t£Js Weltgericbt). The refnma is also found in the 
Introduction co the Lectures of 1822-3 (seen. 32). Hegel is quoting from the penultimate starua 
of Friedrich Schiller's poem 'Resignation' ( 1786), but l1is meaning is cliffemlt. For Hegel, world 
judgment occurs wben tbe amiuerul spirit of the world exercises its right, which is the highest 
right of aD, through ~ 
dialectic of finite spirits ill world history. The expressi011 in the present 
pa\Sage i~ tkr jimgste T.:~g (or~ ;#411gste Gericht, hdow, p .. \03). The day of judgmem dawns 
when the universal principle of history, the concept ol freedom. is fully acmalized. Ge-ricbt 
(judgmemt) entails the aaomplisbing of Ruht (justia; right:). ~ 
'dawning' seems to 
iJpply the beginniag, not tbe completion of a process. 

THE LECTURES Of 1822-3 
relationship that th.e Christian world, as inwardly consummate, can have 
with the outside world is relative; and, regarding this relationship, it must be 
clarified that the outside world is intrinsically overcome. For the Christian 
world, this relationship to the outside is currently the world [of Islam].3 
Islam now exists as only an inessential moment. The Christian world has 
circumnavigated the globe and dominates it. For Europeans the world is 
round, and what is not yet dominated is either not worth the effo~ of no 
value to rule, or yet destined to be ruled. Outward relationships no longer 
constitute epochs, are no longer the determinative factor; the essential 
revolutions occur inwardly. These are the three aspects that generally come 
under consideration. 
The Beginning of Ewope: lbree Groups of Nations 
Before we consider the plan of the whole, we are led to consider the narure of 
the beginning, first in regard to the Roman and then to the Gennanic world. 
As for the Roman world, it is characteristic of the beginning that no 
people of a more advanced nature succeeds the previous principle, breaks 
in upon the Roman world; rather, it is wave upon wave of barbarians who 
443 
bring ruin. In the I Roman world we now find complete disintegration, an 
entirely abstract externality that is now invaded and toppled by an entirely 
abstract intensity. Cultured Greece does honor to the Asian world by sub-
jugating it, as the cultwed Roman world [in tum] honors the Greek. The 
subjugation that now follows is different in that it occurs through veiled 
intensity rather than unv-eiled externality. 
Tbe beginning of the Germanic world is also determined by r:he consider· 
arion that after Greece a cultured, world-historical people cannot emerge in 
patriarchal fashion or stan from patriarchal conditions. While the Greeks 
banded together on the basis of amity and the Romans abstractly as pre-
dators, two absolutely different principles operate with the Germanic 
peoples. The whole had to be fashioned out of a twofol~ absolutely distinc-
tive and disparate culture. This disparate dissimilarity marks the beginning. 
Three main configurations take shape in this regard: first the Western, 
[second) that of Germany, and third the Eastern, the Slavic. 
3. On Islam, see the l.ntrodoction to these iecNm, above, p. 187. incl. n. 51. In thr 1824 
l...ectures 011 the PbiJasopby of R.digion (llifonl. 2007), iii. 242-4, 1-kgd ~ 
to lslun as me 
oaly cootempomy religious rival to Christianity, the antithesis to what he regards to be the 
"coosummate religioo' fvol'-dea Religion). He seems to have been particularly roaceroed 
about Islam io tbe early 1820s because the Gn:dt War of lode:~ &om cbe ()nomall 
EmpiR was occurriug at the time. The relationwp with Islam is discussed fwther below rser 
pp. 474-7, 492-4). 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
Historically, mass migrations constitute the beginning. These will not be 
considered here in detail. They involve a surge of one people after another, 
peoples of Romance origins (romantisch), a tidal flowing and ebbing to no 
effect. The other peoples who establish something enduring are no Asians 
but are Germans, coming from north of the Danube and east of the Rhine, 
attracted in part by the cultured world that they eventually vanquished. I 
444 
.As eady as the Battle of Pharsalus, 4 Gennanic mercenaries made the decisive 
difference. They became acquainted with the good things of this [culturtd] 
world, with its amenities, its religion and laws. In part, however, rhese 
peoples were forcibly driven west and south by Asian peoples. 
We shall now mention briefly the kingdoms that arose (in Ewope ]. One 
part of these Ian~ their western and southern regions in which world 
history is well-versed, are those that Romans had long possessed and devel~ 
oped in culture, commerce, arts, and life. Among them were Spain, Portugal, 
and France, areas where the Alemanni and Suevian [Swabian] peoples had 
settled by the end of the sixth centucy. Of note latec is the kingdom of the 
Franks, who pushed into France from the lower Rhine and lower Germany 
and established themselves there. The third is Britain, to which the Angles 
and Saxons were drawn, and also in part the Normans, who ravaged all the 
coasts of Europe or settled there. Further, Italy must be mentioned; here the 
kingdom of the Ostrogoths achieved greatness and splendor under Theodo-
ric and Totila, because the greatness of the Romans and their culture seemed 
to meld with foreign elements, but had no staying power. It vanished with a 
Bicker, tom from within, and the Lombards &om Pannonia, a Gothic tribe of 
Scandinavian coasral origin, succeeded them and established themselves. 
The Goths can be traced from Scandinavia as they moved [southward], 
invading first the eastern and then the western Roman Empire. Later, the 
Lombardi an kingdom was subjugated by the Franks, and lower Italy by the 
Normans; and soon the church also gained and maintained independent 
holdings. 
1 The Franks founded a Burgundian kingdom, which later 
445 
formed a buffer zone between France and Germany. Characteristic of aU 
these countries is that they underwent an intermingling of barbarians widt 
cultured inhabitants. One of the main results of this enonnous contrast-a 
contrast that the barbarians made less striktng because they ravaged every· 
thing, destroying most elements of civilization-was that in Italy there were 
two nations, which however coalesced into one. 
4. Caesar de~ated Pompey at PharsaJus (i.o Tbessaly) ia 48 IC 'lritb the belp of balbariao 
tribes. The evans are JUOUDted iD an epic poe111 by LucaD. 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Germany, by contrast, remained apart on its own terms. Only along its 
borders, on the Neckar and the Danube, had it been Roman. Farther to the 
east and the north, Germany had remained free, an integral nation (in sich 
tine Nation), although not a state, not a [political] whole: a nation, i.e.~ 
integral, not uniform, such that one [people] was in each land-the Ale· 
manni, Thuringians, Bavarians, Saxons, etc., each being distinctive. 
Farther east, along the Elbe, Slavic nations were to be found, and between 
them, through Sax:ony, Bavaria, and from the south, came Ia tee incursions of 
Hungarians, Magyars. Farther east, to the west of Greece, are the Russians; 
to the southeast the Albanians, Alans, and Bulgarians-of Asian origin, 
Asian barbarians-who remained there. Much has been lost and little re-
tained of the thrusts and countenhrusts of these peoples. As part of the East, 
this Slavic element does not come into the realm of history; even today the 
East is an inwardly concentrated entity. 
We shall now examine more closely the distinctive features of the states. 
One group of states or nations took fonn out of Roman and Germanic 
natural elements. The entire intellectual existence of the desiring and self-
446 
conscious life is I thus at its roots bifurcated. The difference established 
here is most easily seen in the language, which exhibits an intermingling of 
early Roman and even older indigenous elements with Gennanic elementS. 
This language can be designated as Romance, and, in addition to Italy, it is 
found in France, Spain, and Portugal. 
The roots of the otber group of states are essentially unmixed: these three 
are Germany, Scandinavia, and Britain (the latter, as an island, saw Roman 
culture penetrate only along its borders). The invading Saxons engaged more 
with the indigenous people; they intermingled with the people they encoun· 
tered, whose king was Arthur of Wales-a. people with whom they were 
more homogeneous. The Romans had already withdrawn from Britain forty 
years before the Saxons arrived; the latter first conquered Kent and then 
Cornwall in the twelfth century. The Norman invasion came larer [than the 
Saxon]. Nonetheless, this was an intermingling of essentially homogeneoos 
elements. The character of these peoples, their basic characteristic, is an 
undivided, unruptured unity of culture--an unbroken inwardness or subjec~ 
tivity. This inwardness is to be seen historically especially at the beginning, 
but as a matter of necessity it is less prominent in the fermentation, in the 
development [that ensues]. However, the difference between these two 
groups of states, as seen in subsequent matters, remains undeniable. 
Such factors as religion and laws are evident earlier with the first group. 
447 
are disseminated prior to Christianity, 1 just as the political constitution is 
established earlier too, because they are an amalgam of barbarians and 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
cultured peoples. The legal statutes of the Ostcogoths were set down as early 
as the fifth century. Thus, overall, these peoples are culturally more 
advanced by several cenruries. In regard to literature, the second group is 
more distinctive; by conttast, France, lraly, and Spain all look back to 
Roman literature. In Germany it was not until later that the great writers 
emerged; bur this second group of srares remains distinctive. This difference 
is then a fundamental difference that becomes ever more striking toward the 
end because mature culture is simply the emergence of the principles in all 
their depth. In later times these differences manifest themselves the most 
decisively. 
THE PERIODS OF THE HISTORY OF THE GERMANIC WOR.LD 
AJso to be noted here are the epochs of the history that lie before us. We have 
already indicated that tbe beginning is the mass migration of proples. 
Following this, three periods are [to be distinguished]:5 
[1) [The first epoch is) the rule of Charlemagne6 over the Franks, over the 
universal kingdom, over the all-inclusive empire of the Germanic peoples, 
which then together constitute the [Holy) Roman Empire. Insofar as the 
Germanic kingdom is considered to be the kingdom of this totaliry~ we can 
recognize here the specific repetition of earlier elements, which previously 
occurred independendy of one another. So earlier epochs 0111 also be dis-
cerned here. Thus the empire of Charlemagne is comparable to the Persian 
Empire, the epitome of authori[arian rule; it is closer to the realm of 
substantial Wlity, which here no longer has the Oriental meaning but is 
rather a unity of temperament, an unselfconscious uniry of the inrellectu.al-
spiritual with the ecclesiastical-secular. I 
448 
[2] The second epoch is the second form of unity, which, in contrast to the 
first, 'real' unity, is to be defined or designated as the 'ideal' unity. It is the age 
of the great Spanish monarchy of Charles V, 7 and even more of the period 
before him when the real unity no longer existed. Here all particularity has 
become fixed-the various kingdoms, states, and their distinctive classes 
S. l'be periods (early medieval, medieval. and modem) are wounarizcd here io ftl')' compact 
and abstract form as three types of unity (m.l, ideal, and universal) and are compared wil:b 
earlier periods of world histocy: Peru an. Greek, and Roman-
6. King of the Franks from 768 to 814; Holy RODiaD emperor from 800 to 814. 
7. Charles V (1500-58) was, as Charles I, kiDg of Spaia 1516-56 aad. as Cbarles V, Hol~· 
Roman emperor 151~58. 
-%7 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
with their particular situations and privileges. Since the real uniry has disin-
tegrated, outer relationships are purely external-politic;:aJ. Thus the relation-
ship is cliplomatic; no state can exist without the others. The notion arises of 
the balance of power in Europe. This unity is purely external or ideal, in the 
subordinate significance or the sense that the higher or ideal unity is that of 
spirit, is what proceeds from spirit; spirit goes back into itself, away from the 
passion and apathy of consciousness--reverts to the point in time at which 
the world becomes transparent, in its external extent too. 
At this point the discovery of Americ;:a occurs. Religion interprets and 
transfigW"C:S itself in art, becomes transparent to itself in the sensible element. 
But, in contrast, religion also then becomes transparent to itself exclusively 
in the element of the innermost spirit, in the Refonnation. 'This period, this 
epoch, can be compared with the Greek world in the age of Pericles. Just as 
Pericles can be compared to Leo X, 8 so too can the interiority of Socrates be 
compared to Luther. Of course, there is no Pericles presiding over this age. 
Charles V had astounding material means at his disposal, but he lacked 
what made Pericles a ruler: be lacked the inner spirir., the absolute means for 
ruling freely. This period is thus the ideal unity, the process of spirit becom-
449 
ing transparent to itself. This is the epoch of real separation, and here is I 
where the already-indicated differences in the Germanic world emerge. 
[3] The third period is that of modernity~ which we could compare with 
the Roman world, for it exhibits a unity of the universal but not a hegemony 
of abstract universality; rathea; it exhibits a hegemony of self-conscious 
thought-thought that wills and knows the universal and rules the world. 
Now this universal is the intelligible end (verstiindige Zwea) that govern-
ments achieve. The intelligible end of the state is at hand Privileges disap--
pear or dissolve in the face of this end; peoples gain the consciousness of, and 
are entitled to, willing not privilege but what is right in and for itself. 
Thus it is not treaties ( TTaktate) that hold peoples together; rather creaties 
now rest on fundamental principles. Similarly, religion can pur up with 
thought, the comprehending of absolute being. Or if it does not, religion 
can manage without having achieved thought, the absolute concept, and it 
can withdraw from the externality of the reflecting understanding into the 
identity of feeling. into faith; but in doing so it can also proceed to the point 
of superstition, since dais identity occurs either because of shallowness or 
because of a higher n~ a despair in regard to thought. The very ~ 
however, has then been produced by thought. 
8. Born Giovanni de• Medici. he was pope 1513-21 UKl ba:aaJe ilwolnd iD arty COIIIIO-
versies with Luther. 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
These~ th~ are the three periods. With this continuing development of 
unity as such, the outer relationship also develops, but it no longer deter-
mines the epochs. The elements of this relationship will be elaborated upon 
later and specified briefly at the appropriate point. I 
450 
THE PREPARATION OF THE EARLY MIDDLE AGES9 
Commonality and Individuality 
First we shall review the elements of the beginning up until the first epoch. 
The ancient period, when the Germanic peoples lay outside the sphere of 
world history, will not be mentioned. We began directly by delimiting the 
epoch at the point where the Gennanic peoples lived by themselves outside 
the context of world history; and we have not treated the distinction among 
the Germanic peoples that was apparent to the peoples themselves. The 
essential aspect for the Alemanni tribes was the commonality of association 
for the sole purpose of securing the necessities of life and outward relations; 
by contrast, each group of the Saxons isolated itself and remained en-
trenched until the Franks became their intermediary. This long-standing 
distinction is due to the uncultured condition and is its natural consequence. 
The genuine distinction is based on the circumstances of their unification 
that we already indicated. 
Both commonality (Gemeinsamkeit) and individualization (Veremu-
lung) are part of the concrete situation. The abstract distinction between 
isolation (lsolienlng) and commonality must combine into one. The out-
ward circumstances already necessitate the disposition to seek commonality. 
This common bond, which previously exhibited itself more in just one aspect 
of the Gennanic peoples, must even be a common feature of every people in 
outside relations. With the Gennanic peoples, this orientation outward 
stems from an independent streak, &om a free a£6Jiation with a leader; 
this, then, is the origin of the disparity mentioned above of remaining in 
the homeland versus migrating. So the Germanic people grow in numbers: 
we see East and West Franks in France, Suevian and Alemanni tribes in Spain 
and Germany, Saxons in England and Gennany; also Normans in Denmark, 
9. This scaion COvetS the period from the fall of the Romao .Fmpjre (~) 1D ~ ~ 
oi 
<:lw-.letnagoe ( 800-14). Hegel discusses the rdationsbip betweeo common•'"Y add md!viduaJ.. 
ity (freedoiD), the lanc:r beiog the distinguishiDg mark of tbe Germanic peoples. The~~ 
is COIII:rmcd wi1b maDODS betweeD the Otci4Jan .ud 1be ()riem. the Jaaer- DOW ... cloaJi. 
aaud by Islam lsee below. o. H). 

451 
452 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
who remained where they were I and, as knights of the sea, also in turn 
ravaged the shores of all of Euro~ settling their tribes everywhere. As 
different as their fates initially were-namely, that some of the 1:ribes 
migrated while others remained where they were--common to all the Ger-
manic peoples was this goal, this advance from their initial circumstances, 
however different these might have been. The common goal of both groups 
was to evolve into a state. The three characteristics that we first saw in this 
development toward a state and toward constitutionality must here of 
necessity join together in a concrere life. 
The first, independent characteristic is the development of commonality, 
which single individuals initiate, but which does not deprive them of their 
individuality of will. The second characteristic is the development through 
and to a focal point, a sovereign, a king, downward from whom or upward 
toward whom this development proceeds, and from whom the cohesion 
emanates. The third characteristic is the speci6c way of mediating both 
aspects, the freedom of the single ones, of individuals, and the unity of the 
whole. These three elements will now be examined more closely. 
The first characteristic was the independence of individuals, and it con· 
cems Germany. Germany has always had free individuals; its peoples have 
aJways been famous for their freedo~ and have been understood to besom 
contrast to other peoples. In this regard the Romans immediately perceived 
the Germans to contrast with themselves. Freedom has always been the 
banner of the Germans. The Thirty Years War, the 1 Peace of Westphal~ 
the alliance of princes against Joseph U10-all of these elements emanated 
from the principle of freedom. This was the social condition. As the freedom 
of individuals evolves into a social element, at the infancy of statehood this 
development can only lead to assemblies of the peoples, the members of 
which were aU free, and who conferred about each and every matter. He~ 
we see with the German peoples-both with those who stayed in tbeir 
homeland and with those who streamed outwards-gatherings and commu-
nities that were allied for all needs and circum5tances in respect to meadows~ 
forests, fields, territories, even propeny and the application of the laws; the 
communities were also the judges. 
With respect to civil law, one circumstance particularly distinguishing the 
Germanic peoples merits notice, namely that homicide could be discharged 
or compensated by paying a fine. This is not punishment, nor is it based on 
blood vengeance as found in the Oriental world; rather we see here that the 
10. Thelbiny Years War(l616-48)eodcd withtbePeauofWestpbalia;josrpbD was~ 
Roman emperor 176.5-90. 
470 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
positive existence of individuals was the main feature, the overhearing 
concern-that the free person should continue in the people's assembly as 
he was before, no matter what he may have done or what he willed; he had 
only to make expiation. Today this applies to honor. No matter what 
someone has done, it does not require that he be vilified. Thus this absolutely 
concrete value of the individual is here a major characteristic. just as thest 
associations deliberated upon matters of law, so too the people's assembly 
deliberated upon general subjects. They were freely aUied as under Anninius. 11 
The individual as a panicular subjectivity is independent and I ultimate. T'be 
453 
fact that the people's assembly validated the individual as particular is a 
fundamental trait that Tacitus described, and it was still apparent in the 
March Days of the Franks and later at the Imperial German Diet.12 
The second element validating the individual is the formation of free, 
enduring focal points: sovereigns, commanders-in-chief, kings. The fonna· 
tion of such a focus, even if due to the external faetor of birth, a.rose out of a 
voluntary following on the part of individuals. It is a bond of fealty (Treue), 
for fealty is the banner second to freedom on the pan of the Gennanic 
peoples. They freely attach themselves to a person (Sub;ekt] and enter his 
service; this attachment, this characteristic fealty of the Gennanic peoples, 
lends honor to an individual and makes this relationship something wtcon-
ditional and unbreakable. This relationship was not found with either the 
Romans or the Greeks. Orestes and Pylades are only a single case, more a 
relationship of tender friendship than of service. The kings did not serve 
Agamemnon but rather joined with him for specific purposes.13 The princi-
ple of fealty is thus a principle of the modem world: from one's innermOSt 
mind and heart to be in association with another subject. The self, this 
innermost personality, is what individuals ought to be drawn to. The rela-
tionship must, then, be in the mode of subjectivity; that is, one subject must 
be placed above the other. Whenever action is required, individuals must be 
in charge. Thus this relationship of fealty is the second banner, which above 
11. Arminius (d. AD 21) led a successful revolt against the Romans as they atttmptedto push 
east of the Rhine toward the Elbe. Tacitus glorifled him as the noble bubarian-
12. On Tacitus, see Gemumia, ~ 11-15 (Gtrn14nJ', u. Herben W. BcDario (Warminsut, 
1999), 25-9). The 'March Days of the Franks' refen to the MarchDeld or amwal .-m~~~ 
when the ordinances of the king were published and gained apProval from the fiCOI*. ~­
nally the meeting was convened for the calends of March but lam was mowd bad to May or 
even early summeL See Alessandro Barbero, Charlemagrre: Father of a ~ 
tr. Allan 
Cameron (Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London, 2004). 144-5. 
. 
. 
13. lo Greek mythology, Pylades bdped hi$ dose friend Orestes kiD his ~ 
Clyte~Dne· 
tra, ahr she and her lover had slain AgamemnOP- Oa the rdatiomhip of the .kiap to Apmem-
oon at Troy, see above, pp. 379-80. 
471 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
all points outWard whenever the necessity arises. Undertakings directed 
outwardly naturally involve the relationship of fealty. I 
The purpose, then, is not that of maintaining and defending what is; 
rather, it is an orientation towar~ or an attack on~ something external. 
The authority (Spitu) that forms during a conquest becomes powerful in 
itself. This authority is in charge of its own and becomes master over the 
conquered. Upon being vanquishe~ the conquered must be held in check; 
they must yield to the authority and appeal to the conqueror. This makes the 
conqueror even more powerful. Thus an authority, a center is formed, which 
handles matters and distributes goods. Subordinates are necessarily a part of 
this arrangement. Here we see two ways of relating. The first is that the 
ln.dividual is a member of his company of associates~ where decisions are 
made by a wholly particular will. The second occurs under the authority 
of the master, namely to fight for the whole and to take action as a vassal of 
one's superirus.. Thus an individual bas two obligations: one for the com· 
pany of associates~ the other as a vassal of the ruling authority. Dukes can be 
viewed in a twofold sense. Dukes and counts are heads of free associates and 
at the same time vassals of their superiors. These are the two maior 
relationship. 
The third element is the unification of the first two modes of relationship; 
their combination turns upon the formation of the state. Service of the prince 
and obligation toward the individual must come together, must also be a 
universal duty. Here obligations and prerogatives (Rechte) arise with respect 
to two initially separate aspects; the two must join together. The preroga-
tives that the individual now bas must be partly held in common and partly 
private rights; these rights must apply in part to the private person and in 
pan to the state as universal. I The state should remain as the soul, the 
master, the self; it shouJd be the source of the determination and justification 
of rights. Authority Bows &om the universal determination. The ultimate 
goal is the unification of what we saw to be fealty with what is the particular 
will, and the formation of the state proceeds from it. The peculiar feature of 
the Germanic states is principaUy their particularity. In the initial srages the 
two sides collide; the barbarian particularity of subjectivity, which is the 
most salient feature of the Germanic sta~ constitutes the first form in 
which all prerogatives and obligations are comprehended. Thus the pre~ 
gatives do not take on the character of general legal statutes; rather all laws 
executed by the state are diminished to the fonn of private privileges, and 
what should be a universal or a whole splinters into a parti(:U]ar private 
dependency, into clusters of private obligations. Everything splits into par· 
ticular privileges and particular obligations. This is the most important form 

THE GERMANIC WOR.LD 
assumed by the life of the state-which for this very reason is no life of the 
state, since it is merely a great cluster or collection of endlessly many private 
independencies. 
The Triumph of Particularity 
It is not until later that something that is universal and rational develops out 
of this difficult, uncontested state of affairs-a situation that is essentially 
composed of a totality of private and intrinsically unstructUred circumstan-
ces. Individual constitutions have developed out of private circumstances; 
justifications of individual points are not comparable, are internally incon-
sistent~ despite the fact that a totality is present. This is the case with the 
English constitution, in which there is no internal consistency of individual 
points. The earlier history of Germany is a painstaking finitude of determi-
nations. In Gennany one has to follow a toilsome trai~ a painstaking 
scholarship pertaining to individuality and serfdom, whereas in other his-
tories the image of a I whole is present. 'The history of the Germanic 
456 
peoples is, however, a collection of individual details. It is an endless number 
of fonns of dependency in regard to service and likewise in regard to 
property; and we also 6nd a geographic splintering. The basic chacacter is 
that there is nothing slm.ple, no history as something universal; rather, aU 
claims and all property are something particular; and both of th~ the 
demand for service and the holding of property, devolve into privarc privi-
lege. Little or nothing is leh to the state. 1be occupations and offices [of tbe 
state) become particular, come to be in private hands, as do marten of 
service. The benefits enjoyed by vassalage (Dienstmtlnnst:ha) are priva-
tized, and what is to be carried out is left to the whim of the one who is to 
do it. Here we 6nd a complete individualizatio~ the loss of aU sense of the 
state, a complete lack of feeling for the state, and a preoccupation with 
private advantage and fragmentation. 
In addition to this individualization, this particularity of citcumsta.nces, 
there comes about the particularity of mind and heart, the particularity of 
passions in things great and small, which result in the worst atrocities. 
Religion with its sense of dread, with its consolation and truth, indeed 
counters self-aggrandizement; but the church, living in these times, acquires 
the most disparate of rights, just as others do. The church raises souls to 
higher ends, thereby opposing the particularity that is indifferent toward 
power and possessions, although it acts in its own int«CSt. The church's 
indifference to possessions proves advantageous to it; it takes up a position 
of power in which nothing essential changes in the relalionship, and the 
473 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
4S1 
earlier relationship persists. 
1 When the church wrests passions from 
individuals, they elevate their spirit and renounce the world that previously 
was the focus of their needs. 
As me European world assumes a new form and is reconfigured, as 
humanity becomes acquainted with necessities and culture, as peoples 
become established in their circumstances-then all relationships are defined 
as particular, dreary private relationships. What ought to become rules and 
laws here remains an endless number of independent contingencies. What 
ought to be simple becomes something exceedingly complicated, and the 
fundamental principles are correspondingly complex. As the peoples tum 
away &om the unity of the Christian religion, they take refuge in particular-
ity. As the universal becomes the particular, what must now appear is a 
direction entirely opposed to integration of the whole, one in which all 
private matters are fragmented and the subjectivity of everyone is purged 
of inner and outer limits. 
The Abstract Unity of Islam and its Challenge to Europe 
The other revolution, this [other) extreme, is the Oriental world.14 In the 
Orient the One, the onefold, became the absolute object of consciousness; it 
was made into the final end of all action, the ultimate (being) of actuality. 
The One beyond aJI relationship became what binds together all exis-
tence. Previously we saw the substantial unity of the Orient, where the unity 
of thought and the natural was undivided~ where spirit was made captive of 
nature and was unfree. Detenninate existence, representational conscious-
ness, disintegrates into countless divinities, into a great number of gods with 
natural bonds. Now, however., all restrictive particularity is consumed in the 
pure thought of the One. The pure thought of the One does not allow the 
~nee of anything determinate or of any organization in the world of 
actuality. For all particularities are, in contrast to the infinite comprehen-
siveness~ merely something accidental; in it, they are accidental, only 
14. The refercoce here and in the following paragraphs is to Islam, founded in Arabia early iD 
a:be 7th cem. by the Prophet Muhammad. Within a ~ntury, Islam bad conquered Q'IOSt of the 
Midd1c East and bad spead across Nonb Mri~:a and up the Iberian peninsula into Wesum 
&rope. As tht Jdigioa of the ooe absolwe and abstract God. it represents for Hegel the 
aotitbc:sis of the Germanic principle of individual &udom and subjectivity. Hegd speaks 
banhJy ollslamic •fanaticism•, aod his refecen« below to the absence of cause and effect, tbe 
lack of all panicula.rtty, is an a0l100o to its so-called •occasionaJism' in which Allah's will is 
reg::uded :u the sole and proximate calL~ of everything that oa:urs. Bot there are other a.~ peers of 
Islam that Hegel appreciaus, such as the mysticism of jalal-ai-Dio Rilllli (see above, p. 187. 
~ ~1). its pre&crYatioD of works of classic:aJ antiquity, and the ftourishiog of poetry aud ~ 
mrt. 
474 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
hypothetical (ideell). This is not the light of the Persians; even that is merely 
something natural. The One of the Orient t is thus much more the One of 
458 
Judaism, which, as consummated in Islam, becomes the religion of the 
Orient as such. The other mode of consummation is known in Christianity 
as this One as inwardly self-determining. This One has its truth only in 
Christianity, as fulfi.Ued and determinate within itself. 
The first mode of determining the One is to grasp it as pure thought freed 
from all natural panicularity. This One is thus negative over against aU that 
is natural and every particularity. Inasmuch as this One is known as the 
absolute, the religion of the One must be actual, truly present. This entails 
that this One be what is solely valid and what is dominant, acknowledged, 
and desired; it entails that the intuition of the One be what is solely 
acknowledged and controlling. Insofar as this One alone is valid and rea-
lized, there is abolition of all differences; there is fanaticism. The religion 
that is this pure consciousness on the part of the individual must be fanati-
cism; for fanaticism is desiring what is abstract and being negative toward 
everything particular and determinate. When this abstraction is [the focus of 
one's) sensibility, this sensibility is fanatical. The sensibility is that the One is 
set over against everything that exists objectively, for the object as such is 
essentially only something inwardly articulated. The sensibility is fanatical 
with respect to this object, but not only sensibility; fanatical too is the 
rep.resentation of the One, the abstract, which gives itself actuality. 
It is Islam, then, in its splendo~ in its freedo~ in its breadth and serene 
clarity, that stands opposed to the preoccupation of the Christian world with 
the particular. All restrictions disappear. I In this One, all the particularity 
459 
of the Orient drops away, all caste differences, aU birthrights. No positive 
right exists, no political circumscription of individuals. Property and posses-
sions, aJl particular purposes, are null and void. There is no establishment of 
cause and effect, and when this nullity is realized it becomes destruaive and 
devastating. That is why Islam devastates, converts, and couquers alL 
Islam first appeared in the first quaner of the sevenrh century, and it 
constituted something in contrast to what is seen in the West, to the principle 
of the West. Given this belief in the One, where consciousness recognjus 
only the One and nothing else-given this fanaticism-Islam in one sense 
can remain passive. Insofar, howev~ as action is called for, and insofar as 
spirit disposes itself toward acruality, Islam must be essentially negative; for 
its character is fanaticism. 
Here actual life is concrete and determinate. The concretely determined in 
the life of Islam appears to be something concrete, but it shows itself only as 
something that is accidental and disparate; it appears to be built oa sand. 
47.S 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Everything that seeks to emerge into appearance is only something fleeting, 
and changing fortune holds sway over all circumstances. This then is the 
foundation of change, of constant change regarding individuals and entire 
kingdoms. An individual can at one time be a slave and yet in turn one who 
commands-a ruler over vast kingdoms-and vice versa. Likewise, a king-
dom that has sunken into opulence can restore itself out of its own resources. 
A number of dynasties have been founded by slaves, but no sooner does a 
kingdom appear to be at peace than it is destroyed. For Islam is continually 
rejuvenating itself. That an individual is a sovereign or ministe.c. that royal 
families and dynasties exist-all of that is mere chance. The favorites of the 
sovereigns, those who are the pillars of the throne, those to whom, to ow 
way of thinking, the greatest thanks is due, ovenhrow these very sovereigns 
460 
and install l themselves on the throne. This is the soil of change par 
exceUence: what seeks to take shape dissipates just as quickly. 
The third factor that is also involved here is the particular, the determi-
nate, at which the individual arrives in what he comprehends; the individual 
is completely absorbed in it and pmneated with it. This individual, the 
Muslim, is not like Europeans, who have a number of concerns. The Euro-
pean by contrast is a bundle of the most diverse circumstances, while the 
Muslim is completely one thing and only that. If the Muslim is deceitful, 
then none are more persistent in this cunning, and he remains deceitful for 
years. If the Muslim is vengeful, then no tiger is more ferocious; similarly, if 
he is ~ 
generous., sensitive, or loving, then, especially with regard to the 
latter, nothing is more conaete, heartfelt, and intense than this love in which 
he solely dwells. The ardor, the beauty of love, is found and described to the 
fullest in the Orient. A sovereign lays all magnificence, all finery at the feet of 
his beloved; however, just as singlc-mindedly, he can sacrifice bee. So it was 
with the Turkish emperor who saw a Christian woman as he went to war: foe 
four weeks he remained obsessed by her and lay immobile. But when the 
army began ro grumble, he had the beloved one brought before them and 
dropped her veil; then he killed her and moved on to engage the enemy. This 
passion is also to be found in the poetry of the Arabs and Saracens. It is 
comp.lere dedicati~ not mere yearning. 
Just as for the Greeks and Romans the •morning' of a beautiful world lay 
in the East, so for the Christian world, whose natural father is the •evening~, 
the Western pan of Europe~ the natural aspect arose in the West. But the 
East, the Orient, is the more sublime and spiritual fatheL From rhe Orient 
the Romans received Christianity--the element of freedom, of universal-
461 
ity~er against the Nordic element, 1 the Nordic reliance on individua-
lized subjectivitics. The braYery of the Europeans ftowcrcd into kni~btbood 
476 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
in Spain from contact with the Arabs, who also disseminated the sciences 
and the works of classical antiquity that had in..ftuenced them. Similarly, free 
poetry and free fantasy, brought into play in our day by Goethe, are based on 
the Orient. Just recently Goethe turned to the Orient and created a collection 
of songs in his Divan, songs of a passion en..ftamed by the Oriental fi.re. 15 
This then is the general character of the Orient and its relationship to the 
West. Never has enthusiasm had greater practical effect than this Oriental 
[Islamic) enthusiasm. It had no specific goal; rather it is something purely 
abstract, all encompassing, needing nothing and unstoppable. Without any 
particular military strategy it irresistibly conquered al~ the Euphrates~ the 
lands extending from Tibet to the Mediterranean; Persia too and Hindustan 
and central Asia, down into central Africa, submitted, so too all of Egypt; 
and finally, via Spain, it reached the middle of southern France. Not until 
Poiriers were the Arabs halted, defeated. 16 At the same time, they rumed 
from Provence to Italy, toward Nice. In France they were vanquished in 730 
by Charles Manel, the grandfather of Charlemagne; his son was Pepin, 
whose son was Charlemagne. The Arabs achieved this powec within a 
century, and among them arose just as quickly the flowering of poetry and 
aU the sciences. Under the great caliphs in the third and fourth centuries 
[after Muhammad] Egypt and the Near East 1 were fuU of bwgeoning 
<MI2 
cities. In the eighth century [after Christ] a wealth of cities with the most 
magnificent palaces existed in Spain. There were scholars and schools every-
where. Particularly brilliant, however, was the court at Baghdad, which 
shone by its external opulence, poetry, and simplicity of customs. The low· 
liest person was equal to the caliph; the lowliest Saracen considered the 
caliph to be his equal; the naive nature of spirit made possible this expres-
sion. However, this extensive, magnificent empire soon disappeand; it was 
itself only something fleeting that subsided without a traee. Later the Turks, 
who have proven themselves incapable of any culture, occupied most of thar: 
exrensive empire. At the same time as the great Arabian empire broke up 
into many separate ones, the great kingdom of the Franks was also bRaking 
up. We shaD return to this after considering the contrasting opposites of the 
Orient and the Occident.17 
15. Johann WoU:gang voo Goethe, West·~ Divan, publ1819. Sc:e Bacb cles TIIDUI, 
pc:lebl2, 'An Suleika' fGodha Wrie (Hamburg, 1949., u. 61., quoted m l...eawa 011 tiN 
Philosophy of Re~ 
iii. lll-13, iDcl. o. U 1. 
16. At the Battle of Poitie:n (or Tours) in 732 the FraDks aJid <Aroliugiam ddeaoed tht 
Muslims. aDd tbe CaroJinsiaas bepo their ar:adaacy m .Europe. 
17. See Hegcl"s discussion below of !be Crusades (pp. 492...-4). allo PP. 4~'· 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
THE MIDDLE AGES18 
The Empire of Charlemagne 
The second period begins in the Occident. Charlemagne brought together 
the large kingdom called the Frankish kingdom. It was constituted by 
France, Spain down to the Ebro Rivec, and Germany, where Charlemagne 
personally subjugated the Saxons-bence all of Germany and the Lombar-
dian kingdom down to Naples. Further to the south the Lombardian dukes 
reigned, but they also extended to him the sign of submission. In the year 
800 Charlemagne was made the [Holy] Roman emperor. Although he was 
463 
crowned in Rome, he ruled &om Aachen. Aachen was I the imperial city 
where, for centuries aher his death, he remained enthroned at his tomb. 
Thus he is the sovereign of Christendom; for England remained isolated. 
There is nothing of a special nature to note regarding the character of the 
empire other than that the realm or the principle of particularity began at 
this rime. However, civil authority is still present in the Frankish kingdom. 
Authority still pertained to the state and had not yet become privately held. 
Everything was still in flux, and the particular powers establishing them-
selves were still in the process of emerging. 
After Charlemagne the empire was split up and fell apart. Under Charle-
magne his empire became a real empire, the supreme authority. For western 
Europe it was not to be that the empire would survive as the basis from 
which succeedin~ later developments emerged. The western empire is a 
spirirual om; here spirit should rule, and this is a retwn to itself. This return 
must thus be one that does not proceed from nature lest the result would 
then remain burdened by the natural element. Spirit too had to begin from 
what is external in order to produce itself~ for it knows only what it makes of 
itself. This exremality is, however, as we have seen, also something immedi-
ate, which is the individuality of wiU~ the intensity of soul (Gemit). It is how 
Charlemagne became the (Holy] Roman emperor, and his empire is rightly 
to be considered the continuation of the old Roman Empire. This is the case 
because the strength of the individuality of will~ which was the ultimate 
18. The period of the Middle Af.es runs for Hegel from the reigo of Cbarkmape (early !hh 
~t.) through the Reformation of the 16m ~- Luther in particular is still a medieval figure, 
but he also re~ts a critical transition to the age of modemity. At 011t point below (p. 494) 
Hegel iDdicates a tbucfold division ol this period: the dominioa oi the chwt:h (our 6nl duee 
!lllhheadid£!'). the church'!> que;~ for the empirical pm;eoce of Christ (.- 'this") and 6ndiDg Ibis 
presma outside itself (our oext two headings), aod spirit•s bannooiou.s relatiooship wilb the 
enema.l world (our last beading). Because ol the impotUDCe of the trmsitioP ro modmlity. we 
present it as a separate period. 
478 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
thing in the Roman Empire, serves the Ewopean world at its inceprion, was 
its starring point. I The Germanic world reverted to this situation of private 
464 
individualities, to the formal legality of an endless number of dependencies. 
For the Germanic world is a reaction to an immediate detenninacy, which 
here is not a force of nature but one of finite spirit. 
Medieval Christianity 
The period of the Middle Ages has this characteristic, that the real authority 
should become an ideal one, 19 that Christendom should become inculcated 
in the hearts [of people], that a truly Christian world should come into being. 
This is above all the epoch of Christianity and of the church. 
The Germanic nations became Christian quite early, but their Christianity 
was superficial and did not permeate all spiritual relationships. Charlemagne 
forced the Saxons to foreswear paganism, jusr as he had done earlier to the 
Burgundians and other tribes. Their conversio~ however., was merely for-
mal. After the teachings had been presented to them for a few days at most, 
they were baptized. Hence, this fonn of Christianity remained quite superfi-
cial, with respect to both subjective faith and actual cultural permeation. 
Christianity is now said to rule the world, but in doing so it runs counter to 
the word of Christ: 'My kingdom is not of this world'. 20 In the wake of that 
profane world, it must come about that that world is abrogated, for world-
liness is separated from spirituality.21 However, the world must then become 
spiritual in nature, i.e. become rationa~ the ecclesiastical domain must 
purify itself from worldliness. Ultimately both elements must take shape 
on their own account; for only 1 in this manner does the trUe unity of both 
o486 
come to pass. The church and worldliness cannot be in direct union; rather 
both must have funned themselves into totalities in order to constitute the 
true unity. In the Middle Ages, therefore, the church becomes worldly. This 
is neither to be underemphasized nor to be overemphasized, for this unity is 
not yet true unity. 
The other matter that must be considered is that, instead of this real 
empire, the ideal, spiritual empire is forming; spirit is deepening itself within 
itself, immersing itself or entering into the truth of the Christian religion, and 
conftating with it. In this respect, three things must be illusrrated A complete 
history would have to show bow individuals deepened rhemselves in 
19. See above, n. 5. 
20. john 18: 36. 
21. Weltlichlteit is t:raaslated yariausly ia this and followiac ~as 
'pnJiitm 90dd"~ 
'this world', "worldliness'. 
479 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
religio14 how religion now became an object of scholarly study ( wissenschaf-
tlicb), and how its study was spread-how thought apprehended religion. 
Thought is the innermost aspect of spirit in its abstract freedom. Earlier, the 
councils and church fathers finnly established this religion, the teachings of 
the church, and so completed it. What there is now. in addition, is the 
elaboration of this subject of religion by theologians of the West, who 
formulated it in thought; these theologians were essentially philosophers. 
During the Midd.Je Ages philosophy and theology are one, and every theol-
ogy has to be philosophical; for purely historical treatment does not address 
the content as truth. If theology is not philosophy, it does not know what it 
seeks. Teaching is found in the catechi~ the explication of which is 
philosophy. What is historical is not religion. In the Middle Ages it happened 
486 
that what is I objective in the teachings of Christianity was thought about,. 
especially in Scholastic philosophy. Thought has now applied itself to .reli-
gion. This theology was cognition (Erkenntnis) of the truth, not information 
(Kemmw) about historical evidence. In this respect, the science of theology 
as cognition of the truth is the [principal] mode of scholarship. Paris became 
the primary center of this study, and England too. Germany lagged in some 
areas. Italy, howeveJ; distinguished itself by its medical science in Salerno 
and its jurisprudence in Bologna. 
The S«<nd aspea is that of feeling, the deepening of religion in the hearts 
of individuals. ne diffusion of Christianity brought with it the spread of 
convents and monastic orders. The cloister establishments and the monastic 
life appeal to the hearts of individuals; what presents itself here is the 
conversion,. the suffusion, of the hearts of individuals with ideals. Thus the 
spiritual principle turns the heart around. Even if the Germanic heart is that 
firm, gnarled oaken heart pac excellence, it is nonetheless split in two by 
Christianity. Here the life of Gcrmania is pierced by the power of the ideal.lt 
is the incredible power that breaks the stubborn self-wiD of barbarism and 
wrests the strength of that nature to the ground; it buckles the inner element 
in women and men, strips away innocence and beautiful love, buries this 
vitality, and grants it calm and peace in the form of yearning, a heavenly 
yearning. Monks and nuns bad to take an oath of chastity, obedience, and 
poverty. The oath of chastity is directed against the ethos of marriage or 
family love; the oatb of obedience to superiors is against self-will; and the 
oath of renunciation or poverty is directed against private possessions. 
Gregory VD forbade the entire clergy class to marry, separating the worldly 
467 
&om the spiritual in such a way that the clergy 1 are wholly severed from 
the ethos of the family. This breaking asunder of the natural wiD, this slaying 
of natural desire, happens partly in a simple way because of cloistered life; 
480 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
partly, however, it comes after a long struggle that is linkec:f to a most 
complex process. Of interest here are the stories of individuals that reveaJ 
how people with their passions and purposes, with their courage, struggJe in 
the world but fail to find satisfaction, are distressed by the demand of a 
higher authority; and in this cleavage they either collapse or else finally find 
peace in the bosom of the church through renunciation of all their interests 
and passions. 
1bis envisaging (Einbildung) of the ideal has two aspects, one by means 
of thought as universal and the other by the heart; they take on form, as ow 
third point, in that laws as such and private laws in particular are tran&-
formed in accord with the perspea::ive of the church. The Christian religion 
therefore recasts these former perspectives, and what comes into play is an 
entirely different stance in the consideration of crime. Thus murder takes on 
an entirely different meaning than before, .namely, as a crime. What previ-
ously was only a private matter now assumes the status of a public crime. In 
particular, the law governing marriage is accorded a new status. In reshaping 
these perspectives, the clergy confronted evil directly. Now it is the spiricu.al 
power that directly confronts crime in this regard, inrervening in private 
vengeance, feuds, etc. During the Merovingian dynasty, crime is mer with 
crime as retribution, which of course punishes but becomes punishment or 
recompense in a worldly manner. During the Carolingian dynasty, this 
modification takes on quite a different fonn; for here I it is mainly the 
468 
pope who intervenes. Synods are held and assert authority. For example, 
that is what happened with Lothair and his actions regarding his lover. n 
Hence not just the perspective of the clergy, but their spiritual power too, 
becomes a judicial power. This power is seen to go beyond the merely 
external and is also internal, as seen in confession and many acts affecting 
individuals, the ultimate being excommunication, the mOSt drastic act. If we 
were to look at the Nibelungenlied23 in these terms-it takes place at the 
coun of the Bwgundians in a Christian land--then Christianity, the clergy, is 
seen to play no role in the entire story; they do not play an important role 
until Carolingian rimes. Later on, in the Carolingian era, the church takes on 
22. 1..othair II (835-69). king of Lotharingia., divorced his wik Teutberp and married his 
misttess Walclrada in 862. with the consent of a synod of Frankish bishops. However; Pope 
Nicholas I voided the decisioo and threatened ~rioa. 
When Locbair asrecd to lake 
his wife ~ 
she expressed her desire for a divoca; but be died befoR the muter could be 
resolved. 
23. The Song of the Nibelunp was a Middle High Gemwt epic by a soudt Germaa 1*1 of 
the early lltb tent. 1o Germanic uayabology, the Nibcluap wen au evil family P 
111 ·"Ca 
magic board of gold. 
.f81 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
an entirely different and far more powerful position. just as earlier the 
church intervened in private matters, now it does so in the relationships, 
the feuds, between dukes and subjects, sovereigns and states. Thus the power 
of Christianity carries weight in all circumstances during this period 
Political Developments: Relations between Church and State 
The fourth aspect that concerns us here is to consider the incorporation of 
Christianity into the secular world, into universal, political, and historical 
circumstances, the fact that politics is determined by this incorporation. To 
comprehend this entire development in detail one has to recall the earlier 
circumstances, namely, the two aspects that this incorporation presupposes 
and how they came about, what the distinction is that constitutes the 
essentially enduring factor in the political development of states. Hence we 
bave to return to the historical situation as such. 
The distinction drawn previously was that the Germanic nations were of 
469 
two kinds. One part I persisted where it was in a homogeneous (einfacb) 
principle; or else, as in England, when it came into contact with other 
[peoples], it retained its homogeneity undisturbed by this contact. The 
other part, in contrast, pressed outward and, in uniting with completely 
different peoples, took on a heterogeneous nature; and its outer governing 
structure posited, in its own inner being (lnsichsein), an outer-ilirected 
existence (Af4ersicbsein). The Germanic nation maintained a double nature 
in its innermost principle, but also found from the outset the unity within 
itself that can tolerate a duality within it. lbis explains the fact that in 
Romance countries, with Romance people~ the church discovered a preex-
isting division of spirit, hence could establish itself in a temporal fashion; the 
result was that, while the church of course stoOd over against the temporal 
order, it could do so within the previously existing arrangement without 
disrupting the tranquility of the whole-thus leaving matters undisturbed 
while the principle of the achieved compatibility (Zusammengehen) of het-
erogeneous elements could resolve itself without an ensuing struggle. How-
ever, this compatibility, this unification, could only bring about a superficial 
unicy; whereas, where the demand was for a far-reaching unity~ this compac-
ibility with the church could not conclude without a struggle. Only through 
a struggle could what was inherendy different be in later days reconciled inro 
a higher rationality. In Germany, therefore, the relationship between church 
and state had to generate a difficult and hostile struggle, from which, to be 
470 
sure, the church did at first emerge victorious; 1 but it was only a relative 
victory. This unification cannot yet be final, ultimate, and concrete. 
482 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
U we consider this in more detail historically, the following enters into 
consideration: through conquest the secular kingdoms that we termed 
•Romance' had already developed into a secular unity, a stable unitary 
state, before Christianity and the church parlayed power into secular author-
ity. The church, spreading farther into Gaul and Spain as a spiritual force, 
found Christianity already there. The sovereign lords, however, became 
overlords, and the church only expanded by means of their entrenched 
areas and achieved all manner of holdings and wealth-but only in a lessee 
authority since the sovereigns retained secular control. This entrenchment of 
secular rule was also accomplished by battles and wars; for wacs ue pan and 
parcel of a state's existence. These wars could be of three kinds: Christian 
states against Christian states, or against non-Christian states-in the latter 
case because of secular circumstances (where the spiritual power could not 
function as mediator); and, thicdly, Christian powers against Christians in 
such a way that the objective of the state is not merely secular but has within 
itself a spiritual element. 
If we briefly consider the fate of the states after Charlemagne's empire 
disintegrated, we see that Spain was faced by a Saracen enemy; this was a 
people completely without legal rights (unberechtigt), whereas the Christian 
people alone had legal rights. In this battle with the noble Arabs, a free and 
magnificent people, Spain adorned itself not only with the skills, ans, and 
sciences of the Arabs, 1 but also with the noblest and pwest knighthood-
471 
a knighthood of such purity and excellence that it could bear to be parodied, 
~en to the point of irony, while also retaining beauty and nobility in Don 
Quixote.24 
France was in an established, secure, secular condition, but not thor-
oughly formed within irself; it was merely secure as opposed to being a 
thoroughgoing state, although its secular situation was clearly entrenched. It 
feH apan into many principalities, but in the process the secular principle 
remained intact. With the weak Carolingians and after them the Capetian 
kings, the crown and its royal offi~ were insignifiant, an insignificant 
powe~ but the secular domain and secular office were established internally 
and were secure. Because the royal office was of so little impon, it entailed 
the benefit that the crown became all the easier to hand on. The seeds of 
conftict were therefore sown in France, passing from prince to prince. France 
now seldom turned outward. It had in the main to face no outward cbaJ-
lenges. In conquering England, WiUiam of Normandy was an exception. 
24. Don Quaok is a satirical romance by Cervantes (1605, l6l5t; cbe hero aies in a 
chivalrous but umea1istic way to rescue the opprc:sscd and fiPr criL 
483 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
France had the good fortune and destiny to have been concerned only 
internally, as one secular element versus another; in this way the royal office, 
aJthough an abstract foundation of the state, became secure. 
England is the third of these kingdoms, and it became a world power 
through conquest; it engaged widely with worldly elements and preserved 
thereby the foundation of the state. England had only secular enemies. 
The fate of Italy and Germany, however, is quite different. The lot of each 
was either to disintegrate or to face disintegration; and wbile there is a 
472 
whole, this feature I grows ever more hollow and 6nally disappears. 
With regard to Italy, although we see it unified by the Lombar~ this 
unification did not last for long. Following the break-up of the Frankish 
empire, Italy was tom by strife, for the prior unified rule did not last. Under 
the Italian principle, unicy could not prevail. As the land of antiquity, it 
.retained the natural element. The rigid individualization of the understand-
ing, the abstract individualization of the West, combining with Roman 
abstractness, with the rigidity of Rome in the rational sensibility of the 
church, indeed brings out on the one hand lovdy individuality, indeul 
devdops as beautiful piety and fine act, while on the other band it also 
brings out exuberant sensuality. Politically speaking, Iraly is still associated 
with the ancient Roman Empire, as it existed in the Greek world; for the 
worthiest seat of the church, which required a leader, is Rome. Regarding its 
temporal aspect, the church had to have an independence, a territory, as 
well Moreov~ Italy is on the sea, and many points of ttade are found along 
its coasts. 
Germany's fate parallels that of Italy in that both disintegrate, but on the 
other hand it is the opposite of Italy. The peculiar kature of Germany is that 
it relates to Italy but &ds its opposite there and in the church. In Spain the 
secular order does not coUide with the spiritual, or vice versa, nor do they 
collide in France. Italy fell apan in a reckless fashion, unnecessarily and 
without the need, effon, and concern to achieve unity; it rashly opposed the 
spiritual power., so for example Florence was under the ban for ten years. But 
473 
Germany's fortunes are even more distinctive. I 
The Gennan kingdom emerged on its own hom Charlemagne's empire, 
and was internally diffuse. Shortly before the rule of Charlemagne, and in 
pan during it, Germany was Christi~ and secular dominion for its own 
sake did not really take hold. Secular rule became reliant on Christianity to 
an extent in general matters, especially in regard to various aspects of 
culture, of internal affairs; but Christianity also to an exrent relied on tbe 
established temporal sphere. Thus the chW'Ch established itseU with the 
secular power and, together with the secuJar authorities and secular pri.oces, 
484 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
it came into possession (of secular dominion]. Indeed, in France and Spain 
the bishops and archbishops were even advisers to the princes and were 
independent members of the assemblies, although they did not become 
princes themselves. To the contrary, this did occur in Gennany: the arch-
bishoprics and abbeys became secular jurisdictions. In Germany the bishops 
of Cologne, Mainz, Miinster, Osnabriick, and bishoprics in Saxony, and 
among the Wends and Slavs, were simultaneously secular authorities with 
the same power for themselves as the secular princes had. Thus the clerics 
took on the same status as secular lords. 
In this way a speciaJ power of private authority was established, some-
thing we saw earlier to be characteristic. Here private property was at the 
same time ruled by a spiritual center. By the bond and oversight provided by 
spiritual rulers, by such a thing, private property became unassailable in 
Germany, a feature to which then secular rulets also I consented and in 
474 
virtue of which they could hold their own property just as securely. Owing 
therefore to the fact that secular rule bad at the same time spiritual legiti-
macy, property became secured and led to the formation of entities so 
independent that they were not amenable to unification. Unity could not 
come about here by force, by the dying out of a ruling house, or by a division 
[of holdings), by inheritance; for these centers could not be suppressed by 
force or acquired in virtue of rulers dying out. This fragmentation, boilt on 
such solid ground, is what has been tenned •German freedom'~ in fact right 
up to the present day-an independence of particular rule, a fragmenratio~ 
that has always been considered the dignity and honor of Gennany, and that 
in earlier time brought misfocrune and ignominy to this land. Thus inwardly 
fragmented, Gecmaoy persists in inwardness in its principle, in the principle 
that possession did not occur by conquest. The simple inwardmss of this 
principle endwes. This principle seeks to be and ought to be inaemaUy 
concrete and ought, by means of a foreign element, to unite itself. The 
Gennan principle must therefore have the drive, it must be its drive, to put 
itself together, to make itself concrete, through unification with something 
initially other to it, as was indeed the case with other [countries) at their 
~ 
inception. Thus Germany must have the drive to unite with something other; 
its situation is characterized by an llJlSU(XeSS{ul striving, an inability [to 
accomplish it). The result is the sad recognition of impotence, the impotmce 
of supposed power. 
The other, foreign element with which Germany is entangled and strug-
gling, and which it seeks to assimilate, I is Italy. Italy too castS its eyts 
475 
toward Germany, believing that it could have its foodwld in Germany. 
This • other Germany' is other in bodl secular and spiritual waJS. The 

476 
THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
spiritual power of the church, however, is something with which Germany 
likewise is implicitly identical, because Gennany is Christian. Thus Ger-
many is at one with the church; yet Germany is also in conflict with the 
church, hence in complete contradiction (lnkcmsequenz), in a contradictory 
. relationship with it. 
It must also be noted tha~ as Germany separared from Charlemagne's 
empire, it disintegrated into numerous provinces that in fact are linked 
together externally; yet, in their interrelations, they were politically stable 
internally. Germany had been unified into a kingdom that came largely from 
Charlemagne's empire itself and to which Germany was subjected only out 
of necessity. When this center of the Frankish empire let go of the provinces, 
this unity was of little substance and vacuous, and hence the imperial office 
was appropriate for this kingdom; it was most fitting for this vacuity. The 
office of [Holy) Roman emperor is described in more splendid terms. The 
emperor is seen as the head of the Christian church, as the euler of 
the Christian world. He is said to have the undisputed first rank above all 
secular sovereigns, to have the right to bestow the ride of king (only a few); 
all nobility and all knighthood are said to derive from him. However, 
knighthood in its natural and spiritual sense must derive from individuals 
themselves. The Christian states were dependent [on him) in name only and 
did as they pleased. The universal validity of the t imperial laws was, in 
theory, uncontested. PtirrerlS says that in theocy the emperor had supreme 
power in all domains but had the good sense not to assert it. This ultimate 
sovereignty was of so little substance because Germany was unified in name 
only. This insubstantial imperial mande was a source of much difficulty for 
Germany. And yet they [the emperors] were astute. This imperial mande 
lacked the power to swnmon anything or provide any sort of protection; in 
any case it merely inspired in others a magical belief in its potency. france 
became a kingdom on its own and had little contact with the outside worl~ 
which was iust as well because irs rulers did not become the empecoL Not 
to attain this honor was a piece of good fortune for France because it war. 
so preoccupied with itself, even though its kings certainly did strive to 
achieve iL 
Germany gained its status &om the imperial office. The German emperors 
sought &om the outset to assert their rule in Italy as [Holy] Roman emper-
o~ and to make a stand against their [Italian] 'other'. In particular me Ottos 
25. Johann Stephan Potter, Tftltsdu: Rdchsguchidne in ihrmr H~~J~Ptfrukn mtwidelt. 3rd 
eda. {Gottingen, 1793). 
486 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
of Saxony26 did this. These long-continuing relationships with Italy mosdy 
ended disgracefully and ignominiously or calamitously. The Italians frt.-
quendy called upon the emperors to participate in Roman campaigns, yet 
often barred their German liegemen from entering the cities. German princes 
did indeed accompany the emperors, yet they abandoned them ignomlni-
ously or met their death collectively due to intemperate acts; or else the 
emperors came with too few men and other resources. The wars were 
calamitous and brought dice consequences. 
This frustration of the emperors, upon coming to power in lraly. was 
matched by the frustration of the Italians who hoped for German aid against 
oppression because they depended directly on the empe~ I provided that 
477 
he chose to administer law and justice, and not be simply an instrument of 
patronage, and of pillage of those calling on his aid. Thus they sought in 
every possible way to rid themselves once more of the one called upon for 
help. Just as on the one hand the Italians disappointed the emperors, on the 
other hand they bitterly complained about them-as, for example, Oantt 
did about the devastation that crude barbarism inflicted on the Italians and 
the fact that the emperors were unable to enforce the law. 
In addition to a political tie, the German emperors had a different and 
second tie to Italy, in the efforts of the powerful Swabians, the Hohenstaufms. 
It involved the subjugation of the spirirual rulers who bad become secular 
princes. Foremost among these was the papal seat itself. The final decision of 
this at times dreadful ~e 
was, on the whole, just in a fonnal sense, in that 
the archbishops and bishops, the spiritual powers, should be installed, sdecred, 
and rewarded not by the secular power but rather by their head, the pope, while 
their temporal rewards and secular authority would come from the emperor. 
As a ~ult of struggles and intrigues, however, it turned out that those things 
that were stiU dependent on the emperor, things that be bad the right to reward, 
were no longer worth the trouble to claim and acquire. 
While the rest of the European kingdoms were by and large at peace with 
the church and the clergy, and only engaged in secular conflicts.. Gennany 
was in a struggle of an entirely different sort: the emperor against the pope-
This was a tragedy (Trauerspiel) in which the family of the German emperor 
and the power of the German state, I as well as the unity of Germany, were 
478 
undermined. The church was victorious, just as it bad prevailed peaceably in 
other states, in the rest of the kingdoms, and where this happened most 
26. T'hret Ottos in succession were kings of Gemumy a.ud Holy Roman emperol!i berwnn 
936 and 1002. A fowth Otto was Holy Roman empercc 1209-18. All~ rnpged ill Vllrioll$ 
ways with Italy. 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
thoroughly the church established its dominion. As large a role as it played in 
the Middle Ages, this struggle between Germany and the church was of 
inridental imponance overall and of little interest to the rest of Europe. The 
power of the church remained with the churc~ Wtdiminished by this strug-
gle. The result was that religion and church rose to a position of power in all 
private and state affairs. All the circwnstances of life and all of scholarship 
came under its dominion. In this way the church asserted authority over 
every emperor; and essential, hourly, daily life was in one respect in the 
hands of the church in such a way that there remained no hour of the day in 
which persons might not feel themselves engaged in spiritual service. The 
point that we have reached {in our discussion) is, therefore, the displacement 
of the real kingdom by the dominion of this ideal kingdom. 
The Quest for the Presence of Christ in the Church 
Now the question becomes one of what was lacking in this church. It can be 
accused of transgression, abuse, corruption, crimes, but these are merely 
individual shortcomings. The content is the doctrine of Christianity, the 
doctrine of the highest truth and the actualization of this doctrine; and the 
church is the unbroken transmission and dispensing of the treasures of the 
Spirit. This actualization indeed came about by worldly means but is fuDy 
consummated, and so, considered outwardly, there is evidently a need £01' 
Christendom to give itself a 6nal9 completed form. This need is based on some 
son of lack, and to discover what that is we must detennine the shape that the 
Christian religion gave to itself. So we must return to the nature of the Christian 
479 
church, I to its distinctive form and how it took shape during this time. 
The aspect that now comes into consideration is how the Christian 
religion has a footing in the presence experienced by self-consciousness.27 
The early church councils established the objective, absolute content of 
Christianity; it was completed long ago by the church fathers. This content 
was not altered by the Scholastic philosophy of the Middle Ages, and 
philosophy in our own time too can only transpose the content into the 
form of the concept. One aspect of this doctrine is that for humans the divine 
being is not a quantity (Gro/Jes) of some kind, not a content. Rather the 
fundamental quality is the unity of the divine with the human, the unity of 
the human and divine nature, such that God appeared to humanity and is 
utterly present to humanity. This aspect is requisite to the infinite form. The 
27. n.e German rtac~s: ;. • 
Gep~Wttrt t1es Selbst~. 1n this aoc1 me following 
paragraphs, variations oo the tam G.,.,., ('the preseot", 'pu:scace') oa:m; e.g..~ 
t'prescm'), ~gU;t 
t•presmce•), v~ 
("n:alization ol prltSCla!'). 
-48& 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
divine narure has therefore within itseU the quality of the this.u Christ has 
appeared, and this presence, this unity of the human and the divine, of divine 
and human nature, is what the world has ever been striving for. It is 
the specification as such of this presence that is at stake. We have seen that 
the chwch, inwardly prospering, finds its completion as dominion over the 
whole world. The ultimate point is that the divine always has the quality of 
the this, the going forth [of the divine] into the wonder of presence--that 
God is spiritual and is also present in the Spirit. Everything hinges on this 
point. In the church this could nOt be something immediately natural, such 
as light. This presence could not exist in an external or an immediate way. 
The God, the God·man Jesus Christ, as a human being in. his immediacy, 
existed as a temporal being and therefore is a past being. The presence 
necessary for the spirit could nor, for the spirit, be like that of a Dalai 
Lama, where the god is present to the human. 2' The pope, the head of 
Christendom, could not be this Dalai I Lama, for the pope is not venerated 
480 
as this [particular] human being. That is because this human being is 
sentient, external, natura~ and what is merely natural is accorded very little 
status in the Christian religion, and it is whar is sublated. One must account 
for this. The 'why' must be explained. What is past is no loogu. but the this 
should still be present. The pope as a human being Stands before God, 
together with the community, expressing humility toward God. Thus tile 
pope is the servant of servan~ and is such a servant as a single person, 
humbling himself. Much greater, however, is the this, a single human being. 
an immortal soul, an absolute atom, thus by itself, excluding other singular 
individuals, excluding aU others. In the Christian religion che singularity of 
self-consciousness is no mece form. In India, in. Hinduism, God is only 
substance that exists lJ1 singular, contingent ways-now this way, now 
that-which are only modes (Modi) or accidents of substance. 30 In the 
Christian religion, however, singularity is an absolute moment, and the 
single human being [Christ] is therefore no mere mode but rather infinite 
28. On the incarnation of God in this one single individual, <1lrist, see L«tures 011 ~ 
Philosophy of Religion, iii. 113-14 ( 1821 lectoRs), 211-lS (18241eanres). HeFJ discusses •ttr 
this' (das Dieses), which giws Christianity its coocret£ specib:ity, at some leasth iD the 
folloo,ying paragraphs. See also above, pp. 391, 3%-7. 
29. Hegtl takes the Dalai Lama to be God in au immediate, senlicPt, natural preseote; when 
ooe lama dies be is succeeded by the oext ooe in a cominuous chaiD ol diviDe ~ 
On ahe 
Dalai Lama and Lama~ see LectJwes on the Phihophy of Wgiott, U. 107, 307, 315, 563 11. 
140, 570, 576-9. See also above, pp. 250, 2"-JOO. 
_ 
30. Hegel may be alluding to Spinoza's doc:trine in 1M Ethia (pt. 1, def. 5, of modes (1P1odil 
as accidmts of substan:e. ~ 
111e ColJu;tal Woris o( Spinoz4, ed. aad ~ Edwin c..riey 
(Princetoo, 1985), i. 409. 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
on his own account, excluding another tbis. Thus the single human being 
exists utterly on his own account and in such a way that cannot be a mode of 
the appearance of God. Thus Christ as singular cannot reappear in another 
person; he cannot be present as natural, for he is past, is himself only the 
single appearance. But this divine singularity must be present. 
Thus Christ cannot be present in the church as the Dalai Lama. Rut God 
had to have been present in the Christian church by way of the this, and it is 
the this, the figure, the personality [of Christ), that is to be remembered in 
the church as it was immediately present. The main figwe by which Christ 
was known and present in the church as the this is the way he is in the Mass 
and the Last Supper. The life, suffering, and death of the actual Christ is ever-
481 
present daily in the Mass. I This, however, did not just occur once but 
happens eternally; for it is the life, suffering, and death of God; and, in 
relation to time, what has being in and for itself (das Anund{Ursichseiende) 
must be eternally, therefore at the end of days and for every time. Thus the 
sacrifice takes place daily and forever and as an actuaJ presence ( wirkliche 
Gegenwart). It is shallow and irretigious to take this life, this suffering and 
death of Christ, as merely historical (blofl historisch), as a happening; for it is 
divine history (gottliche Geschichte). God has appeared.; it is the actual God; 
this [sacrifice) must take place perperually in the community [of faith], 
which is itself the co-celebrant. Christ sacrifices himself within the man 
and rises again in him. This is not a mere representation of Christ, as in 
the Reformed Cbwch. 31 A represented Christ is a psychological Christ, who 
remains at a distance and about whom the mind can evoke all manner of 
psychological fcelinp and emotions whenever it chooses, for the mind is 
then in charge. Its panicular subjectivity is juxtaposed to this representation 
ot the Master, keeps him at a distance, if it chooses. It belongs then to fate 
whether or not this represented Christ evokes emotions in and has an 
influence on such minds. It is otherwise in the [Catholic and Lutheran] 
Church because there God is a presence (Gegenwtmiges), nor a past being 
(Gewesen.sein). Becoming other in the man Uesus] and being resurrected 
goes on forever. That is bow this presence and the this are represented in the 
church. 
31. lo tbe 1821 Ledures on lbe Philosopb-y of Reli,U.. iii. 15~. Hqd says that tb£ 
R.efortn,ed C'.hurcb ladu the 'mysrical demem" (i.e. the rea) ~of 
Otrist in the sac::rameot) 
daat is fouod in the Catholic and lutheran Cburches.lnstead, it offers 'a memorial, au ordinarY 
psyroological relatioasbip'. This aitique, which properly applies ODiy to Zwia&li, oot CalriD. is 
found in lata leawes as wdl (iii. 2.36. 339 n. 245, 373 n. ~). 
490 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
Regarding this determination, it must still be noted that Christ is known 
and recognized here as the this; so it is even essential that Christ is at the 
same time represented as something external, as the host that is consecrated 
by the priest. No objection can be raised against this consecration. It is the 
Spirit of the church that takes on this external, sensible presence and thus at 
first imparts itself as the this. A main point, however, concerns the manner 
by which God is brought to appearance, is held up, is instated as the this-
the fact that the host is supposed to be worshiped as God, I i.e., [God] as 
482 
this thing,. insofar as God still stands outside [us] as something external. In 
the church the this is thw present every day and to every individual; each one 
is intertWined with the divine life, and the passion and resurrection of God 
ace present at this place in this individual. 
The church might have been satisfied with this presence, with this 
worship. But once it is established and conceded that God's self-disclosun 
is external and lends itself to this fixity, then it is at £his point that the 
outward, sensible presence becomes an endless multiplicity, and the need 
for presence is boWldless, producing itseH in a manner that is endless and 
manifold. Christ as he appears here is apprehended or defined in such a way 
that he might make himself known in many other ways. so that, for example, 
his divine mother likewise disclosed herself as present in him; and other 
saints and blessed persons are likewise appearances, or effects, of divine 
activity. This establishes the manifold bestowals of grace as<OCiated with tbe 
present appearance [of God]. These manifestations, these effects of the divine 
in something present, the images of Mary-these are all hosts, are active, 
effective realizations of presence. A third and different kind of mirac~ the 
relics that sustain the sensible presence, arc sustenanCe for those who belong 
to beaven, in the same way as the miracles express the appearances of God not 
in a universal manner as Jaw, but rather in a particular manner. AU of this is 
related to the need for the presence of divinity. 
In such ages the church is a world full of miracle, and the devout 
community has no satisfaction in the world as s~ in merely extemaf 
existence~ in the rational and necessary connections of nature; rather saris-
faction is found in single details of natwe as converted into a particular 
manifestation of the divine, 1 as a portrayal of the divine as a this in this 
483 
place and time. The divine in sensible form is a miracle, for the sensible is 
something limited and singular. The divine as such a single thing is a miracle, 
and with that it is admitted that the divine has appeared in a particular way. 
This is the way, therefore, in which the church completes itself internally: 
that the divine appears as a this, that the church has the divine as a this, as 
something immediate. The question now is what the church it:seH lacks in 
491 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
this situation-not what we may find lacki~ and how the church must seek 
to arouse these needs within itself. The church has everything that we ask of 
the divine nature, [namely,] dominion in actuality and the honing of what we 
saw as its own features. The question concerns what the chwch still lacked 
in its own principle~ what deficiency it must have had withouc losing itself, 
without going beyond its principle. 
This deficiency is that miraculous images, miraculous words, de., in 
which grace appears in particular fo~ ace not of an absolute but of a 
limiml nature and therefore must be endlessly reproduced. It is likewise with 
the host, this higher element, as itself all of these miracles, as every this, as 
Christ reproduced in countless churches. Christ himself, however, as the Son 
of God, is unerly one. As the host, this divinity is merely substance~ although 
ttansubstantiated, conveyed into sensible presence, into singularity. But this 
singularity is at the same time a universal singularity that is present in all 
communities, so it is only a reflection of the universal, nor this one singular-
ity, spatially omnipraent (letzte in Raurn), but is only one among many and 
is not the utterly one, the singular. 'This is what the church demands; this 
utterly one on earth, here below (dieses schlechthin eine Diesseits), is what 
the church must seek. 
The final singularity intO which presence gathers itself is that which is in 
484 
space, in a locality. Even if in rime the I singularity of a person passes 
away, the spatia] singularity remains. Christendom must discover and make 
its own this ultimate point of sensible singularity, the singularity that is 
called for in space. Access to it is in the hands of unbelievers;32 the church 
is blocked from it. It is a shame and disgrace that it should be blocked from 
it. Christendom was unanimous about the fact that, in order tO casr off this 
humiliation, war served nor just any purpose but one alone, namely the 
Crusades. 33 
The Crusades 
What impelled C1lri.stians to the Orient was to make the sign of the cross 
[over this land]. We bave already seen the West drawn to the East under 
Alexander-with truly an individual at the fore. Christendom does not have 
the this at the forefront '[of the Crusades].lt is not a genuine individual who 
32. 11x tefueoce is to the Holy !..and. wbKh was in the bands of M.usliPu. 
Jl. The word 'c:rusade' w .&om tbt Middle Latin crud~JU, 'marked with a crcllii5'-ne Genna~~ 
term ~ 
litetally mc:aus 'proassioo of the cross'. Nine amades occurred betweeo 1095 
and 1291. T'hey failed iD their~ objective of holding d.: Holy Land, bul they e.spanded 
Weam I! B 11011y ia Giber rqioos.. 
492 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
leads the way to the Orient as in Alexander's day; rather Christendom is 
intent on seizing the this, winning and enjoying it. Thus the Westerners set 
forth to the Orient to conquer the this; they wanted to take possession of 
the place. They achieved their purpose in conquering, in winning back, the 
birthplace of Bethlehem, the Jordan, Jerusalem, the Holy Sepulcher., Gol-
gotha, and Gd:hsemane. This was their goal: to secure what was most holy 
for them (ihr Hochstes) as a presence; it was to see and feel, to savor this 
presence. On the one hand, Christendom was seriously engaged in going 
aftec this presence; on the other hand, it founded additional kingdoms and 
principalities, and an opportunity was provided to conquer Constantinople. 
We have not yet spoken of the Greek [Byzantine] I Empire, this distinctive 
485 
Christian empire that survived a thousand years longer than the Western 
Roman Empire. But even as they set out on lheir uiumphal processions,34 
the Crusaders were so inept that hundreds of thousands of their numbers fell 
by the wayside, met their deaths. They were similarly inept and lacking in 
understanding as they set up and governed those Oriental kingdoms. 
What they actually gained were the sacred sites, the wood of the cross; but 
of greatest interest was the capture of the tomb of the Lord. In the Holy 
Sepulcher, in any tomb as such, an idle thoughts cease and matters become 
serious. In the tomb, in this very negation35 of the temporal this, is where the 
reversal comes about. Isaiah says: 1'hou dost not allow the saints to per-
ish. '36 Here, in this grave, the [idle] thoughts of Christendom had to perish 
and the doctrine had to find its ultimate meaning in the sensible this, foe 
the response sounded a second time: "Why do you seek the living, the risen, 
among the dead? He is not here, but bas risen.'371ndeed, in the resurrection 
of Christ, in the fact of his being risen, there was the rationale for being 
able to have relics, and the impossibility of doing so. If this rationale 
bad been sufficient, the church would have been over and done with the 
matter. But if Christendom bad come to this purely common sense view 
(verstiindigen Anschauung), the Christian religion would have been idol 
worship. Christ is risen, sensible presence is removed and [that) speaks 
for itself. After Christ's 1 sensible presence, the Holy Spirit would come to 
486 
lead the people into all truth; fot; after Christ, the Holy Spirit came upon tbe 
34. Hegel appare.ody intends a conoecrion between Sieges:&Mge (triumphal~~~) aod 
I<nt¢z:iige (Crusades)-an ironic conoection bcca111e here the cross rqneseats military tnumph 
rather than suffering and death. The cross becoPJes a sword. 
. 
35. Our text reads, following Griesheim: m d#sem negalilmJ Sellnt Hotho reads: "" 
N~ 
36. lsa.. 26: 19 reads: 'Yow dead shall live, their corpses shaD rise.· 
37. CE. Luke 24: 5---'. 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
community-the living Spirit, not a sensible Spirit. 38 The extremity of subjec-
tivity is to be sought not among the dead but among the spiritually living. 
This is the result, the significance of the Crusades. The tomb expelled 
their iUusions about the meaning of the this; thus the Holy Sepulcher and 
Canaan once again had to cease being the focus for the Christians. This was 
the blessing of the Crusades. The Crusades brought much benefit and rnuch 
damage. This is the stuff of empirical history. The result of the Crusades was 
the blessing, the Spirit that simply is: the Spirit that comes to itself in 
the negation of its immediate presence, such that the Spirit is present only 
in the negation of sensibilicy, of inunediacy. Thus the spirit of Christianity 
had to reach the point of negating the sensible this, of detaching from itself 
the meaning of the this in the form of sensible immediacy and placing it 
outside itself, precisely because it is external to spirit. 
This is the situation that now discloses itself in world history. The this as 
sensible is now what is external to spirit. Spirit has yearned for the sensi hie 
this; it is what spirit wanted as its own, but as something external to it. 
Because this externality is both its own and an other, it is now the world, the 
world of nature, that has become such a this, the object of interest, for spirit. 
The other, nature, is its own; it itself is this nature, but as an other. Spirit has 
become interested in nature, and so the pursuit of this interest is a task that is 
now legitimate for it. Thus spirit now has nature as the sort of setting in 
which to work and enjoy itself. The situation is that the this is desired, but it 
is truly outside the spirit. This externality is nature; it is separated from 
spirit, its other, but at the same rime it is what spirit desired and that with 
487 
which spirit felt justified in occupying itself. 1 It follows from this that the 
sensible this is not found in the church but outside it. 
The Tum to the External World and Nature 
What transpires then in the world is that human beings turn to the world, 
freely let it be as a this, gain confidence in relation to it, deal practically with 
it, and so freely let it be free just as they themselves are free. In the church 
spirit is freed from the sensible this. Thus an entirely different ascent of spirit 
begins. llris is the third characteristic of this period. The first was the 
dominion of the church, the second that the church seeks the this and finds 
it outside itself. The third is the harmonious relationship with this external-
ity, is this tranquil relation to the world and to nature as the this, making it 
38. This is a theme of the Gospel oi jolm. The Soo must depan in order fOf the Holy Spirit ID 
come lJobn 15: U, 16: 7). 'Whaa lhe Spirit ol truth COIDI:&. be will pUde you into all abe truth' 
(John 16; 13). 
494 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
one's own, envisaging it inwardly, beyond the bounds of the ,burch. The 
external world is now outwardly set over against the church as that with 
which spirit now has to deal, discovering in the world its own features. This 
characteristic is now a factor in the world and it assumes many forms. 
The first of these forms is rhat all manner of industry, crafts, and trade 
come alive, especially along the coast of Italy and in the lralian cities. Nature 
was adapted to hwnan purposes, especially in regions of Italy, Catalonia, 
and Flanders, as well as in Gennany along the Rhine and the Danube, where 
cities were founde~ just as deeper into Germany cities were also established 
dwing the conflict with the Slavs. The struggle against pagan cultures began 
in the nonh of Germany. This is where 1 the Hanseatic League39 and or her 
488 
associations for similar purposes were found. This marks rhe flowering of 
rrade. The understanding is working its way into rhe sensible element and 
has a place here because that element is excluded &om the church. The 
expansion of the limits of external existence is connected with this process. 
lbis activity, expanded to include universal viewpoints, establishes the 
certainty of the understanding for its own sake. 
Falling within this period are many discoveries or inventions that are 
primarily instrumental in nature. For many of them the question as to where 
they were discovered is secondary. Whether that took place in the West or 
not is immaterial because the characteristic thing is that now such inventions 
come into general use, that now the legitimacy of finding satisfaction in the 
external world has dawned on people. Two inventions will be mentioned 
above all: gunpowder and the printing press. 
The most likely or best supposition is that gunpowder was invented by the 
monk Schwarz . ...o TIUs invention altered the art of warfare with the follow-
ing consequences: castles were made [both) vulnerable and secure, for good 
and evil purposes. and protection of the body by sturdy defensive equip-
ment, a suit of armor or a cuirass, became obsolete. The difference between 
lhe weapons of lords and those of serfs was now diminished, thereby 
eliminating the power differential between them. A common objection is 
that the bravest could now be vanquished by the weak, be slain by the most 
cowardly. But that had always been the case, and this means, gunpowder, 
39. A mertanrile league principally of oorth German cities, wbicb Oourishc:d in the 13th-16th 
cents. A Hansa was a company of merchants trading with foreign lands. 
. 
. 
40. The origin of gunpowder is probably Chinese, lor it seems to ba.ve been known 1n China 
a.~ earlv a~ the 9th cent. and wa.~ not introduced into Europe unnl the 14th cent. Somt C.erm.a.n 
scbo~ have attributed its invention to the a]cbcmiSl-monk 8enbold Schwarz. In the lntrodLIC· 
lion to c:hc:se lectures, Hegel says that tbe Chinese invented gunpowder (above. P· 141); but a 
later refereoce (p. 190) is aJDbiguous. 
495 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
essentially brought about a higher level of mental, rational, reflective cow· 
489 
age. I For in present-day warfare, command has for this very reason 
become the main factor. Even with the ancients, in the ancient act of war, 
the individual placed his security in the context of the whole and in the belief 
that everything depended on it. The use of gunpowder brought with it an end 
to the individual one-on~ne [of battle], the individual's animosity toward 
the enemy [combatant]; this hostility ended, and the result was fighting and 
firing upon an abstract, generalized enemy. As a consequence, wars are now 
less bloody because everyone can surely recognize the danger from afar. The 
understanding is better able to grasp the whole because the battle plays our 
at a distance. So one must appreciate the invention of gunpowder as a means 
that is essentially linked with the modem understanding. 
The printing press advanced the desire to stay interconnected with others 
through ideas; this desire gave rise to the printing press in the first place. By 
means of printing, opinions and ideas could be easily spread, inundatiog 
Gennany like a plague after its invention.'u The means for trade and 
industry, for widespread, peaceful interconnection in the world, had now 
arrived. 
Directly relakd [to this desire for connection] were the discoveries, the 
heroic sea voyages of exploration by the Portuguese, the circumnavigation 
of the Cape of Good Hope, and the discovery of America launched from 
Spain. Spanish knighthood sought a new field of action and discovered it in a 
different way, sumingly limited in the first place to the search for profit. 
GO 
However, by venturing out in this way, the knighthood expanded and I 
demonstrated its gallantry in a way that initiaHy appeared to be just the 
opposite of gallantry. 
Quite inseparably linked in pan to this industriousness was, in the second 
pl~ the rise of freedom in the cities. By people looking to their own hands 
and seeing their accomplishments, and by their subjective self~ousocss 
setting to work in exumal nature, they find it legitimate to do so and shape 
themselves accordingly, seeing themselves obligated to conduct themselves 
in a universal way, according to the nature of things and of their own needs. 
People put themselves at the service of their occupation and must comply 
with the general nature of this objective; they must conquer their sheer 
desire, their crudeness and awkwardness, by overcoming momentary, capri-
cious urges and crude behavior. They become cultu.ced, and make themselves 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
cultured, by acting in a universal rather than a merely private fashion. 
Associations are founded for this external purpose, for crafts and trades 
(lndustrien). Besides, people knew themselves to have the right to be 
engaged in a general way in these activities, in this work, and the linking 
factors become, in another respect, law and civic freedom. In this way a new 
element, a new wocld, arises in the European world, in Ewopean Christen~ 
dom. It is a world that differs from the church, whic~ as we saw, shut out 
the outside world, thus setting it free. Likewise, the outside world now 
opposes the relationship of lordship and servitude, the system of dependent 
bondsmen, the feudal system, that previously held sway. Thus a new system 
of freedom entered the feudal system, a principle that in its content 
embraced rational freedom, a freedom to be sure, although limited in extent 
and having a limited meaning-the freedom of property, of I talen~ and of 
.491 
what ensued from it. Howeve~ within this sphere the content is rational. 
In the other system, the feudal system, there is dependence as ~ 
and it 
is indeterminate, and random, whether the conrent is rarionaJ or no~ or is 
justified. In the feudal system everything is supposed robe private privilege, 
even what is by its nature not, such as droit du pucel4ge (privilege of 
virginity),42 as well as ministerial posts, and the like. Either everything 
becomes private property, at odds with ethical relations, or it is against rhe 
law of the state. So the chastity of maidens became the property of their 
overlords; and, on the other side, the office of field commander became the 
property of [their) ministers. The new system of civic freedom now contrasts 
with this system of private property, in which what was property ought nor, 
conceptually, to be property. 43 
This element of rationality and rights clashes in many ways with me 
earlier system. It can be seen in the impccssive Italian republics, which 
these days are no longer mentioned, although each of them has ia OWD 
interesting and impressive history. Republics form, some of which flourish 
and are independent, while others are correspondingly unfortunare, destroy-
ing themselves internally or being tom apart in unfortunate wan. At times, 
cities freed themselves onJy under rhe authority of princes, as happened so 
often in France. At this point three essential estates or classes (Stiinde) 
emerge: the estate of the peasants, that of the bourgeoisie, and that of the 
nobility; in addition there is the estate of the clergy. These are the essential 
classes that appeared in India as castes, and that are conditioned by basic 
physical and spiritual requirements. The differences are relaced to life. 
42. The privilege of '6nt night' was that of &:udal lords to ddlowa" ~ 
~ 
43. Adding •oacb• to the Getman so as to read: es seittt!m Berif riiiCh tricbt .,. ~ 
49'7 

THE LECTURES OF 18 22-3 
492 
circwnstances. These are I therdore the classes that must emerge every-
where. Like the castes in India, they emerge here too and become in part 
distinctions of nature and of region. More importantly, however, they have 
been legally defined and established. Such a legal arrangement can only 
come from the will, not from nature or a purely natural arrangement; rather 
it is the will that makes this determination that is universally and recipro-
cally distinguishable &om its opposite. Hence these essential estates are 
establish~ partly by nature and partly by law. It is imponanr to note 
further that these classes, while indeed classes of bourgeois society, have 
also become distinctions and detenninarions under the authority of the state, 
which likewise is divided into these estates. The two aspects are related. 
These estates, which initially represent ways of living, are also political. This 
distinction is very important. 
Today we forget that the estates have this explicitly dual character. They 
are usually understood solely in their political sense rather than as distin-
guishing particu.lar ways of life. As merely political, they are not also rooted 
in the requirements that panicular ways of-life entail. The estates, however, 
are at the same time distinctions in ways of life and in political relationships. 
The nobility was equally a political estate. Hence the nobility also possessed 
political power, as did the upper aristocracy. The same was true of the 
inhabitants of cities, the bourgeoisie, who also achieved the statuS of a 
political estate; being a member of an estate entailed a political dimension 
and was also anchored in bourgeois life. The peasantry was more or less 
excluded from politica.llife. But this was not entirely the case, as for example 
in Switzerland, where the peasantry as a whole made up the entire stare. 
493 
These estates I in their dual significance became legally established, not 
merely under constirurionallaw but in such a way that the political state of 
affairs has at the same time the shape of private ownership. This latter aspect 
partly contravenes the nature of the state: the fact that all of these relation-
ships became matters of private rights to a degree undercuts the state; on the 
other hand, however,. the relationships and determinations of rights in the 
state also became gready strengthened in this way. 
This point demonstrates where the Occidental counuies differ greatly 
from the Oriental, Islamic countries; it shows where the European srates 
contrast with the Islamic states. Such a fixity of distinctions does not exist in 
the latter; there nothing is anchored with certainty. The Holy Sepulcher is 
the place where the East bade farewell to the West. 
For that very reason, there is order in the state. This finnness of distinc-
tions, an ordered state, is found only in Europe. Unity in the East is solidi-
fied, abstract, and fanatic.al, whereas in Europe, on rhe contrary, distinctions 
498 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
were established. A lasting, enduring, and inteUigible establishment of re-
lationships exists and indeed is pervaded by private rights. The most impor· 
tant point is that the fonnarion of stares in Europe obtained stability, and 
that they were interwoven with private property. 
In this regard the stable heritability of the throne is particularly impor-
tant, as is later the indivisibility of lands. The heritability of rhe throne was a 
fruit of the system of private rights.44 By emphasizing this point we can, 
from the juxtaposition of European legality to the Oriental world, explain 
its distinction from the disorganization of the Oriental system. At this time, 
however, the detennination by private rights of what determines sratt 
authority had I not yet given way to this absolute sphere [i.e., the state]. 
494 
For in the state no private legality has validity, and no legality that is private 
and apart from the throne is allowed. However, two matters of state author-
ity must be anchored in private rights: first, the royal house and the upper 
aristocracy as pillars of the throne; second, the constitution and freedom. 
However, the system of private legality bad not yet given way to this 
sphere. The understandii% which established the laws and distinctions here, 
has previously been more closely examined.45 The states of this period were, 
as such, also reciprocally and externally in a legally stable relationship, in 
virtue of treaties determined reciprocally and legally; and through alliance 
they entered into mutual relationships that came to be known as the ba.lance 
of power in Europe. Previously, states had remained more isolated, whereas 
now alliances were formed. The League of Cambrai in 150~ was among 
the ~ 
demonstrating that a single state c:ould achieve little for itself 
without an association with others. Thenceforth the states acted in pactoet· 
ship; they pursued their interests joindy. These are the major points in this 
regard. What we have is on the one hand the ancient church, on the other 
hand the ou[Side world, with the understanding present there in iiS auton-
omy (in seinem Selbstsein). This brings us to the point of transition ioto 
modernity as the rhird period. 
44. The tenn privaJreehtlicb refers to the .faa of cmaia lepl matteiS bejpg iD thr hands oi 
particular persons or social groups, rather man under the cooaol ollhr sta~. as ~ 
We reader 
it here as •private legality' or •private rights'• although it cao also mean •avilla•· · 
45. l"be undemanding (Verstmld) has been examined -ra1 ~ 
~- ~e.g. t:ht 
distinction between Verstmad aod Vt!m161{t 011 p. 187. and the cliscu8oa of ns abstract 
individualization on p. 484. 
46. An alliaDce formed in 1508-10 by Holy Roman Emperor Manmjli':" I, IGag ~ 
XII oi 
France, Pope Julius D. King Ferdinand V of AiagbP, and smnllraliaa ~...as, ~pmsc tht 
Republic of Vmice to cbeck its territorial apansion. 

THE LECTURES OF 18 22-3 
TilE TRANSITION TO MODERNITY'7 
Three fundamental points must be addressed with respect to this period of 
transition: (1) art, (2) the corruption of the church, and (3) the Reformation. 
Art 
The last matter of which we spoke was rhat the secular world developed 
itself for its own sake, that in it spirit issued forth on its own account. 
Worldliness is the principle of the this, developing itself outside the church. 
Spirit sought the completion of the this, found the this for the chwch--but in 
.as such a way that it cut the this off from the church I and shut out the 
church. The church, however, retained within itself the extemal this or the 
sensible as such, and so there is a twofold sensible element as the this. Thus 
the sensible element exists within the church while also being excluded from 
the church. As the original (erste) church, it has in it the element of sensibil-
ity as immediacy that has not yet revened to spirituality within it. Ba:ause 
the church has this sensible element within itself, the sensible is made inward 
and is even transfigur~ and this transfigwation is brought about by art. An 
spiritual~ elevates, breathes life into the external, the sensible. It elevateS 
the external to a form that belongs to spirit; and feeling ( GemU:t) or devotion 
relates itself to art no longer as to a mere thing but instead as the soul relating 
to something involved with soul, to a spirit. It is a different matter if spirit 
aspires to devoti~ if spirit relates itself to something spiritua1 as the 
veneration of a thing such as a host or piece of wood In a relationship of 
the former kind, in relating itself to what is spiritual, spirit is free, is for itself, 
is [related] to something in its own likeness. 
Piety can act piously toward a thing. can have devout feelings toward 
something merely sensible, and divine grace can even operate by this means; 
but then the sensible is wholly superftuous. What is true must present itself in 
objective shape. The thing (das Ding) is noc:hing objective, nothing abso-
lutely true, but rather something untrue; and over against it spirit is not free., 
is not related to a truth but is utterly dependent, captive, and bound. Spirit 
turns here to something unspiritual and untrue, while it is only in trUth that 
spirit is free.48 1f such a state of bondage~ of unfree dependence on a thing, 
47. This is DOl out of tbe lime major dmsioas of me Germanic: World that Hegel ideurifics 
above I early medieval, medieval, IDOCiml). But just as the Middle Ages is prcacW &,. a period ol 
preparatioa. so also it is followed by a period of tJ:msiboo, wbida is as much early moclcm as it 
is We medieni; tbeftfoe 1ft desipate it as a .epuate sa:tioD. 
48. Cf. jobD 8: 12: "You willlmow the truda, aod lhe U1llb wiD make yoa &ee. • 
500 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
were the standpoint and need of religion, then such a need of spirit would 
not find satisfaction in relating to something beautiful. For the most trivial 
portrayals l are the most expedient in filling the need for subjugation. a 
Experience should even show that the truest (ani.n:ic] porttayals, such as 
Raphael's madonnas., 
4~ do not enjoy the admiration shown to lesser ones. 
Piety fails to recognize genuine works of an. Experience also demonstrates 
that piety venerates to a lesser degree genuine works of an, for the latter lad 
to an inner satisfaction and freedom, whereas piety seeks only to be poiled in 
a state of duJI~ insensible dependence. When the need is merely to feel a dull 
dependency, then piety fails to recognize genuine works of art hccaust it fcda 
that it is spoken to inwardly, that what is foreign to it therefore coosiats of 
counterfeit voices. 50 
The wrruption of the Church 
~ 
for the corruption of the church, it has been noted what the church had 
lacked, and how it incorporated this de&iency. Its corruption must not be 
seen as fonuitous; it is not to be taken as a chance event; rather the 
corruption is necessary. It could be said that it arose from an abuse of 
power. 'Abuse in the church' seems to say that what in itself is good is ooly 
corrupted by subjective intentions, intentions that then only need to be 
removed ro salvage the situation. This implies that the setup itself was 
faultJess and that only a person's contingent desires penened this good 
into a means of satisfying passion. Then the evil is seen as somcthq 
external to the situation. If the situation is only abused (and if chis in fact 
is only abuse)~ then it is only incidental and accidental. Thus it only happens 
in individual instances. However, the principle of conuprion resides 'lllilhin 
the chwch; it has infiltrated the chwch and lies in the fact that it amduct5 
worship as something sensible and has not truly and wholly excluded tbe 
sensible element. Art did not suffice to transfigure the sensible, fot art ineU 
h.as the form of sensibility. In art the sensible is still jusbfitd For art is not 
49. While working in Florence and Rome, Raphael (1483-1520) paned aumerous madoD-
nas, of which the roost famous is the Sistine Madonna (oow in {)radep.). 
SO. HqeJ's critique of Friedrich ScbJeiermacbefs cloarine dial rfticious pil!lr ~ 
ill * 
feeling of utter dependence ( Ge{Uhl der schledlthmrtrige AbiNin&.Piil) IDI.f echo 01 tbis pull· 
graph. The 1st edn. of Schleiermacber's Der chrisiJiche Gblbe.ICUias forda Ibis cloariDe. wu 
publisbed io 1821-2, a year priocto abe preseot lectuftS. Cooauy to wllal HetP._... 
10~ 
bctt. Sc:bleicrmacbcr's feeling of utter depcudente on God bocb prauppliCSaad II the .,.....t;c;.ua 
ot a feeling oi rdarive freedom toward the world. for Hep:l 011 sm..........,., sa:~ 
Off 
11M Philosophy of Religion. i. 136 n. 52, 263 L JJ, 279 a. 37, ",...,.. 
501 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
497 
what I satisfies the ultimate needs of spirit, and the element of art is the 
sensible. Spirit, however, requires a spiritual element. 
The world spirit has already excluded the sensible element and for that 
reason indeed parted company with the church; thus it stands above the 
church, which takes no part in this excluding division (ausgeschlossenen 
Teil) but instead retains the sensible within itself. From now on, the church 
takes a back seat to the world spirit precisely because the latter has indeed 
reached the point of dealing with the sensible as such. The world spirit has 
now accepted the external as something external, and we have a subjectivity 
that is justified in subordinating the external to itself. However, the sensible 
has remained within the church, and this situation now develops within 
itself to the point of corruption. The church no longer has opposition; it has 
achieved a ruling position, and everything finds its consummation in tb.e 
church itself. Everything, being internal to the chwch, receives {there] it5 
determinate form as fully consummate. This appears as a conrradiction 
within the church itself. Thus the corruption can be understood as existing 
within the piety itSelf, as superstition, as something that is bound to a 
sensible this-a sensible object that is supposed to be venerated as something 
absolute, as spirit. Bound in this way, spirit is unfree. Belief in miracles of the 
most absurd kind and in the most childish fashion exemplifies this lack 
of freedom. The divine is expressed as existing there in the most particular 
of forms. Lust for power, barbarity, hypocrisy, sensuality-all passions are 
unleashed in their own way, crudely and wildJy, erupting crudely in undisci-
plined fashion. Virtue in the church is, in contrast, now just abstractly 
negative tOward the sensible, taking the form of retreat, renunciation, and 
lifelessness. Vutue does not attain internal moral rectirude but only retreats 
from worldliness into renunciation. In contrast, the highest virtue is found in 
the realm of the living, in the family. 
It is these contrasts within the church that now come to prominence: on 
498 
the one hand, crude desire and vulgar depravity; on the other 1 hand, total 
renunciation by lofty, religious souls, who sacrifice everything. These con· 
trasts are heightened by the antithesis, by the understanding,. by the distinct 
states in which a person feels caught up. The ultimate llCldoing of the church 
is that it is supposed to save souls from corruption; but because the chw-ch 
itself is corrupt, it makes this salvation or this absolute purpose itself into a 
merely external means, and satisfies this purpose in a wholly external 
manner, namely the indulgences (Abla/I der Siinden). Subjectivity seeks its 
greatest satisfaction in the certainty of its oneness with God. But when 
satisfaction is bestowed on the soul irresponsibly ln. this way-and when 
the church offers this certainty e:xtemally and icrespoosibly and does so for 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
external purposes, for its own opulent life-the soul must be outrap to 
the extreme and necessarily indignant over such actions. However, tbe 
purpose for this service [the selling of indulgences] was not opulent living 
but the building of St Peter's Church, the outwardly most splendid and 
largest church of all; and things turned out here as they did in Athens. The 
Athenians used the money of their allies [in the Delian League) for art and 
for the temple of Athena, and for this reason they lost their support. 51 jusr u 
this was the misfortune of Athens, so roo this srructure, St Peter's, which 
Michelangelo adorned with the image of the Last judgment, became ~ 
last judgment on this proudest and grandest structure of the church-a last 
judgment on the church itself in its corruption. 
The Reformation 
If one wants to become acquainted with the corruption of tm church, I one 
499 
only needs to read some of Luther's writings;52 the present-day church is by no 
means in the same condition, having been inwardly cleansed by the Rdonna-
tion. The age-old, tried and true inwardness of the Gennan people is what led 
to the fall of the old order; and from this inwardness genuine unity was 
restored. This inwardness was said, by its efforts, to acrualize the principle of 
freedom. This principle of spiritual freedom was preserved in tbe inwardness of 
the German spirit. All the other peoples ventured forth to the East Indies., ro 
India, and to America, to achieve wocldly sovereignty, as foe example, did 
Spain. Whereas in Germany there emerged a simple monk who was conscious 
that the this is to be found in the deepest recesses of the heart, in the absolure 
ideality of inwardness, who was dearly aware of present cooditioos, and 
whose deepest heart was distressed by the distortion of tbe ll:Uih. He is • 
one who rec~ 
kept after, and destroyed the distortion of the church. 
Luther's simple teaching is that consciousness of the this in the pnsent 
is nothing sensible but something actual (ein Wirkliches) and spiritual; it is 
consciousness of an actual presence, not in the sensible realm but in faith and 
partaking (im Glauben und GenufJ). This is not the consciousness of a God 
51. Seeabove,p. 414. 
52. Hegel is probably thinking of early writings of Manin Lulher ( 1483-1 546), sodl as An 
Open Letter to the Christian Nobililv of the Gemr4n Nation ~ 
the Reform of tbt-
Christi4n f.slilte, and The &by~ Captivity of the Chrlrch, ~ 
publ. 1520. ~·s 
positi~ stateutents about Christian freedom. the inwardness ol &ith, che -.1 « spiritual 
presence of Christ io the sacrament, et(:., aR exeroplifird by his cmalise oa 1M ~ 
oi ~ 
Christian (also 1520). See in general tbe writillgs ("ontaioc:d iD l...ldhers Worb, KDD-lOCIII 
(~r of the Rdonnet' l, II) (Pbiladdphia, 1957-B). Oo ~ 
mel die llc:form,aOOq. • 
also Hegel's Lectures on the History of Philosophy (<htonl, 2006, 2009t. iii. 24 • .J8, 15-9 • 
.S03 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
that is said to exist sensibly as a thing, nor is it that this object is merely 
imagined and not something present. Rather, God is actually present~ 
although not sensibly so. For this reason, in his doctrine of the Last Supper~ 
Luther could make no concessions or compromises. 
In addition to this departure from the sensible nature of the this, many 
other doctrines are central, such as the nullity of works-practical works., 
taken as actions carried out not from faith but from some external motive. 
Concerning faith, one should firmly grasp that Lutheran faith is by no 
means a cenainty regarding what is merely finite, regarding merely finite 
things; it is therefore not a certainty that depends on the merely finite 
soo 
subject as such. I 
Faith here is not faith in something absent that has already taken place or 
is in the past; it is not, for example, believing that Moses crossed the Red Sea 
with dry feet., or similar kinds of spiritless externalities. These things have 
nothing to do with faith. Nor does believing that the trumpets at Jericho had 
the effect of cannons. Such things involve certainty about temporal mat-
ters. 53 Christ disparages the jews for wanting to derive their faith from signs 
and miracles. Christ himself said it was wrong to demand signs and miracles 
in order to believe,s4 that is, self-referentially to seek certainty about the 
divine in an external, isolated occurrence. Faith, on the contrary, is certainty 
about the eternal, about the truth that subsists in and for itself. 
The certainty or truth about God is something entirely different from such 
externalities. The Lutheran Chwch says that this certainty is produced and 
given only by the Holy Spirit. For it is the cenainty that attaches not simply to 
individuals according to their particularity, but instead attaches to one's own 
essential being. the certainty that comes from the Spirit. This Lutheran doctrine 
is thoroughly Catholic; but everything that relates to externality is pruned 
away. It is only to the extent that the Catholic Church retains this externality 
that it runs counter to Luther's doctrine. To the extent that Catholic teaching 
does not assen this externality, Lutheran docuine is not opposed to it. 
One aspect still needs to be emphasized: the distinction between the 
priesthood and the laity. Now [with Luther} that distinction is abolished. 
[ln the Catholic Church] the laity must still accept everything spiritual as 
something foreign to them, as a given, something commanded, including all 
53. Hegel is reiening to the accowu in tttb. 11: 29-30, which says lhaJ: it was •by him' that 
tbt Israelites passed through the Red Sea and that the walls of jericho fell; sec also Exod. 14: 
21-31 and josh. 6: 12-21. His criticism is of our belidthattbis happeoed, wbich is potdaesame 
as the faith that em~ 
tbe Israelites to accomplish ~nain things. 
54. See Mark 8: 11-13; Man. 16: 1--4. 
504 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
ethical, religious, and juridical content. The clergy, however, is in possession 
of all spiritual power. This distinction drops away in the Lutheran principle. 
In the Lutheran Church the hean, the sensitive spirituality, the innermost 
consciousness or conscience, is what is said to become aware of and to 
possess the truth- I with the stipulation that the individual subject as 
such identifies itself with this uuth. 
By this means the church gains freedom, the absolute inwardness of soul 
that is integral to religion. The this is now a spiritual matter, and conscious-
ness of it is not something sensible but instead something spiritual. The 
subjectivity of individuals, their certainty or inwardness, is genuine subjec-
tivity only in faith, that is, only when this subjectivity has transformed itself, 
having been reborn in the knowledge of the Spirit in the truth.55 This 
subjectivity is not natural subjectivity but is what is substantial. It must 
be made true: it must surrender subjective opinion and make its own 
the teaching of the church. This is without qualification, and necessarily, 
the doctrine or content of the Lutheran principle. The subject must have the 
object as something subsisting in and for itself. Subjective certainty, i.e. the 
subject's knowledge of the true, which should be for it an objective tntth, 
subsisting in and for itself, only becomes authentic when, in relation to this 
content, particular subjectivity is surrendered; and this happens only by 
making the objective truth one's own troth. What the subject makes its 
own is the truth, the Spirit, the Trinity. This Spirit is the absolute being 
(das absolute Wesen), the being of subjective spirit. The subject, the subjec-
tive spirit, becomes free in relating to it because the subject is thereby 
inwardly relating to its very being and truth and negating its own particu· 
larity. Subjective spirit comes to itself through this self-negation because it 
is absolutely at home with itself (bei sich ). This is how Christian freedom is 
actualized. If subjective freedom is based on feeling alone without this 
content, there is no movement beyond pute naturalness, the natural will. 
The feeling will is 1 the natural will. Humanity is only human when 
undergoing the process of consciousness; it is only spirit when participating 
in the true, objective content, and when appropriating it within itself. 5
6 
55.~ johnS: 32. 
· 
....__ 
56 1 .L: 
1 
. 
· hi 
--~ldw Lacher's ueame 011 '""' 
. o I.DJS paragraph Hege sum.manzes m 
s own ~....,.,~":-"•:" _ 
~s 
IT~ of a Cmistian (see above, n. 52); _and he reposes his omque _of. 
CX'IIIUIIt tser 
emphaSIS on religious feeling to ~be e:xdus_ton. of ~ge 
ol ': = 
011 God. and 
~bove, n. 50). Schleiennachcr's religious feeling~ a feeliog of uarr ~of~ 
•n Hegel's view it is an e:xpn!SSion of the natural will (see UdllnS 01'1 die 
· 
iii. 93 0. 931. 
505 
501 
502 

THE lECTURES OF 1822-3 
This is the new and ultimate banner around which peoples gather, the flag 
of freedom, of the true spirit. This is the spirit of the modern era. and it 
designates the modem period. The ages prior to our age have faced but one 
labor, have had but one task, and that has been to incorporate this principle 
into actuality, thereby achieving for this principle the fonn of freedom, of 
universality. 
Thus there are three shapes that are now present in the world. First, there 
is the realm of the ancient church, which has the same content, one and true; 
but the content is burdened with externality and therefore bas not been 
elevated to subjective freedom. Second, we have in addition the external, 
temporal world in which external nature, the necessities of life, and subjec-
tive aims are dealt with; this includes all external relationships, in 
which there exist authority and civil society but in such a way that the 
understanding establishes itself therein. And third, there is the modern 
church, the freedom of spirit in the shape of subjective knowledge, of 
subjective identity. 
What must now happen is that this reconciliation of actuality, which has 
happened implicitly, must be [explicitly] envisaged. 57 This can only occur if 
the reconciliation itself becomes actually objective in form, taking on the 
form of thought. This form belongs to cultur~ for the latter is the activity of 
the universal, of thinking as such. As far as the spheres of the finite will are 
concerned-law, state, administration-they come to be determined in a 
universal mode in accord with the concept. It is in this way that mnh now 
appears to spirit in the external, natural, and subjective will. The material of 
appearance is the particular will, and what appears is the concept of free 
will, which at the same time is the concept of authentic spirit. Thus it is 
503 
essential being that I appears in this element, and it can only appear to 
the extent that the subject matter (Stoff) is envisaged in the element of the 
universal by and through the concept; it can only appear to the extent that 
the identity of spirit takes on the form of the universality of thought. 
Thus one can say that the government of states is based on religion. So 
religion constitutes the basis of states. This does not mean that the state 
makes use of religion as a means, or alternatively, that states carry out their 
functions via their religious obedience. Instead, states are simply the appear-
ance of the true content of religion. The appearance of this new principle in 
the present is yet to be discussed. 
57. The German editors have changed tmtgebildet ('rccoosmKUd') to eingebfldn ('eovi-
~'); eingebiltUt appears again later in this paragraph. 
506 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
The Constellations of Europe After the Reformation 
~e difference between Romance [and Germanic] nations with respect to 
th1s appearance is in turn evident. In their first formation into existence as 
states, the Romance nations had an external focus as part and parcel of their 
internal being; they had a split character internally. For this speciiic reason it 
became intrinsically necessary that they adhere to the ancient church; then 
there is within them something set and positive that opposes the freedom of 
spirit. In contrast, within the other [the Gennanic] nations that we said 
retained their age-old inwardness, the modem church has the ability to 
thrive and has done so. A survey of the European kingdoms results in the 
following distinctions. 
[1.] In the first place, we have Italy as the present instance [of a nation) 
that does not succeed at defining itself through thought~ tluough the univer-
sal. All that is situated beyond the bounds of detenninate thought, all that is 
uncivilized, can fully blossom here, as well as all that is sweet and mild, just 
as on the other hand, however, deception and vileness have their place here 
too. Thus we find here images of the most sublime piety, the loveliest bloom, 
the flowering of ethicality, but also heedless sensuality in the fonn of the 
wildest immorality and lawlessness. I 
504 
Just as Italy stands for subjective individuality, the Spanish represent honor 
and earnestness; they are the people who saw knighthood reach irs fullest 
brilliance, saw it unfold in most brilliant fashion. However, this knighthood, 
this sense of chivalry, went forth into a new world, to America, htedless with 
regard to its innennost self. So there is no industry in the country; Spain lass in 
the arts; the social classes Jose their independence because the Inquisition 
stifles the emergence of the self. The Inquisition had a harsh, African
58 
character and thus did not allow any aspect of the self to emerge. 
The third people to be considered here are the French. They are a people 
of thought and spirit that, however, remain essentially abstract-a poople of 
boundless culture, but whose thought is encumbered by externality toward 
the concrete. Spirit only takes hold of the concrete abstractly, as oative 
common sense ( Witz). Abstract thought and common sense are the two 
forms of consciousness encountered here. 
[2.} The other group of nations consists of those that retain inw~ 
and here too they are three in number. The freedom of the church darived 1.11 
58. Hegel is perhaps referring to tbe stemtr AfricaD <llrisaiaaitY dut is the ~ 
ol 
Tertullian and (the anti-Pelagiau) Augusboe· 
507 

THE LECTURES Of 1822-3 
them. To the extent that each one maintained this inwardness, it is again 
divided inwardly in threefold fashion. 
& the first nation we can cite Great Britain, which is inwardly divided in 
a threefold way, within England, Scotland, and Ireland, as the Episcopalian, 
Catholic, and Presbyterian Churches. Great Britain is comparable to France. 
505 
We also see there the principle of abstract thought, of raisonnement, but I 
more concretely, for it has more concrete thought and specific rights as its 
object, and with a view to [practical] concerns. 
The second people are the Scandinavians, who are triply divided into the 
nations of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. With its chivalry and its ancient 
voyages of conquest that appeared again later in another form, and with its 
heroes such as Gustavus Adolphus and Charles Xll, 
5~ great knights who 
reinstated the path of chivalry, this people is comparable to the Spaniards. At 
home these leaders were at times supported by their proud grandees, but at 
other times they were in warring opposition to their nobility. 
The third people is Germany,60 which shares the same fate as Italy. 
The principle of singularity, of individuality, of subjectivity holds sway 
here. lbe Reformation emerged here in this focal point of inwardness. Of 
a spirirual nature, this country did not know how to achieve political unity. 
Instea~ it disintegrated to such an extent that, on the one hand, the peasant 
class in Switzerland was allowed to become independent; in Switzerland ~ 
peasants are a totality on their own account, a discrete, independent entity. 
On the other hand, cities formed a league for trade and industry; and the 
freedom of city-dwellers in the Netherlands developed into independence, 
became wholly autonomous. As such, Germany is a microcosm of Europe. 
Eastern peoples, the Sla~ attached themselves to its large, eastern states. 
The main representatives of the two European principles underlying the 
state, the principles of the modem worl~ are necessarily to be found in 
Germany. The principle of the ancient chwch is represented in Austria, that 
of the modem church in Prussia, to which the gaze of freedom directed itself 
and ever wiU do so. The other [states of Germany] remain a varied group, 
individually situated and more or less maintaining their independence 
through alliance with these two. The smaller states that have to achieYe 
independent govemmentli duster about these central points. 
59. Gustavus Ad()lpbus, king of Sweden 1611-32, expanded Swedish hegemony into me 
Baltic statcs:md Germany. Charles Xll, king 1697-1718, was a man (If a.mazmgmiliury abi!i~· 
and grandiose ambitions. wh05e final defeat cost Sweden its tank as a great powe:~:. 
60. 'Gennany• bert includes Germm-speak.ing peaplcs outside the German pri00pa}iti6. 
such as Switzerland, Austria, and the Naberlands (which uses a form of Low Germall)-
508 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
In addition ro these two large constellations in Eucope [Romance and 
Germanic], there is a third, the Slavic nature, which persists in its initial 
solidity. I This is Russia, which perhaps only recendy, in the last hundred 
506 
years, has approached closer to European life and begun to resemble F.uro· 
pean culture. It has not yer had an impact on the process of Eucopean 
culture; it is a state that has remained on the outside in art and science. 
From an external, political perspective, however, Russia is indeed a player in 
the political sphere as this massive powe~ as what is firm, compact, self· 
enclosed, and it has even established and maintained a bond of coexistence 
with the European kingdoms, albeit implicidy and in fact just a passive one. 
THE HISTORY OF MODERNI'fYi
1 
The history of this modem era presents three developments that are of 
intereSt to us: 
1. By its very nature (Existenz;), the modem church62 acquires for itself a 
worldly, determinate existence (Dasein). 
2. The principle of the modem church; in shaping itself as it initially 
exists, the subjectivity of consciousness has the fonn of sensibility, of repre-
sentation; it must therefore give itself the fonn of the universality of thought. 
3. This formal universality must obtain a concrete content and be tbt 
determinative factor in concrete actuality. 
The Worldly Existence of the Modem Church: Wars of Religion 
The first point of interest includes the religious wars. Great campaigns are 
evident even earlier, such as the Crusades, which were of widespread inter· 
est. In addition, there were panicular wars, which also continue in the more 
recent world. With the latter, however, as is generally the case I in modern 
507 
times, an element of contingency is involved. The War of the Spanish 
61. In the lectures of 1822-3, Htgel appears to have left iosufficieal time foc ~ 
fiaa.l topic, 
for the presrntati<m of the material is quite compres5£11 In his survey of the histMr ot r:ht 
Germanic world (above, p. 468), Htgel says that modernity, by cootrasl ~me 
cady medieval 
('real'l and medieval ('ideal') periods, 'exhibits a hegemony of. self-omsaoos tbougbt~l 
that wills and knows the univer:wl and 111les the world'. lDe 6rsr deYdopmtnr of modernity runs 
through the religious wars of the 17th cenL; the second cootioues mao the. 18th ant. aod .'s 
concerned especially with the nawral sciences; aJJCI the third is that of the faligbtmJtlmt aod Its 
afu:nnalh. 
62. By dU ~ 
Kirche Hegel means the Promtam (]nach. 
509 

THE LECTURES OF 1 R 22-3 
Succession63 is such a war in which a panicular interest was at stake, the 
main interest being whether Austrian or French princes should gain succes-
!lion to the Spanish throne. 
What interests us are the actions of the modern church and the fact that 
it creates a worldly existence for itself. In this regard we must call to mind 
the vast empire that we find before us, namely the vast empire and imposing 
monan::hy of Charles V, 64 although it is of little significance per se. This 
great world power is present hut reveals that, as such, its time, its intrinsic 
significance, is past. Its power is ineffectual and leaves no outcome of 
world-historical importance. Rather it proves to be intrinsically impotent, 
unable to unite within itself the interests of the era. This power coincides in 
rime with the Refonnation hut does not know what to make of it. Charles 
V imprisoned the leaders of the Protestant religion; he struggled with them 
for a long time without knowing what to do with them, and one of them 
finally had to prostrate himself in order to return to his homeland once 
again. In a war with France he went so far as to take his enemy, King 
Francis I, prisoner; but this too led to nothing. He conquered Rome and 
plundered it; he besieged the pope in San Angelo Castle, but the latter 
escaped secretly. Even though the center of the Catholic world was in his 
hands, nothing was gained; from all this activity nothing was achieved. 
A remarkable story recounted by Frundsberg65 describes how German 
soldiers staged a procession after the pope was trapped in the castle~ a 
procession in which they made themselves out to be the pope and cardinals 
and Luther, and in front of the pope they elevated 'Luther' to the office of 
pope. The Duke of Alba66 then advised Emperor Charles to shift the seat of 
508 
the empire to Rome I and to bring the pope under his power and authority, 
and then he would be the mightiest of emperors; or else he should blame 
everything on the Germans; or, alternatively, be should present himself as a 
benevolent emperor, reinstate the pope, and restore everything as before, 
bringing back the old order. Thus Alba had the idea of keeping the head of 
the church in his power. But none of these things came to pass; rather the 
&3. The War of the Spanjsb Succt$.ion (1701-14) was the last of the general Ew-opean wars 
.:aused by King louis XIV r.o enhance French power. The teeble condition of King Charles U of 
Spain, wbo was chil~ and in poor hca.ltb, precipitated an extended civa.Jry over the sucression 
in which all the major powers became involved. 
64. ~ Holy ROIIlaD emperor &om 1519 to 1558, the Spaniard Charles V engaged in 
protracted ~ggle with the Lutherans but 6n.ally lost out ro them. 
65. Georg voo Fnmdsberg (1473--1528), a German military romrnaodec in lhe servia ot 
Charles V. 
66. Fernando Alvara de Toledo, dllke of Alba (1507-82), Spanisb geacral and administratrx 
510 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
mighty empire proved itself to be entirely impotent. Maurice of Saxony67 
revealed the impotence of this empire. 
The main point, however, is that the modern church also obtained a 
worldly existence. The ancient church had retained a firm hold on the 
lands it occupied, and it was essentially in league directly with the political 
powers; this was due panly to its wealth of possessions and partly to the 
immediate political arrangement in which the state had not yet taken on a 
separate role. In Germany, where the [modem] church established a deter-
minate existence, controversies inevitably arose, and this condition could 
not evolve without dissension. Things might have evolved peacefully had 
there not been numerous clerical bishoprics, the holdings of which belonged 
to the universal [i.e., Catholic] church. Here clerical principalities were also 
the property of the church, belonged to the whole church. Moreover, numer-
ous political interests in the pre-existing church were interwoven with 
possession of the clerical properties. The ruling families designated their 
younger sons as holders of clerical principalities and thereby succeeded in 
taking control of them through their younger sons. The status of these 
holdings naturally changed when they fell into secular hands. The interests 
of the nobility were linked to the laws just as were those of the townspeople 
and the peasants; the lowliest peasant could become an abbot. The distinc-
tion between the social classes was fix~ and it was only in the chun:h that 
someone might aspire to a higher role and higher secular offices; but this was 
not so in the state. Civil offices were not yet open to the citizens. I This 
509 
change [brought about by the Refonnatioo] therefore must also have had an 
effect on the status of those at the lowest rank. 
Thus in Germany, because of the Reformation, there broke out civil wife 
that can even be called domestic warfare, although these events were not, on 
the whole, revolts or wars of rebellion. However, in other states that were 
unified countries, uprisings and veritable insurrections occurred once the 
opposition erupted. In Germany, where dominion was the privilege of 
the principalities, where the princes enjoyed considerable political indepen-
dence vis-a-vis the emperor, such circumstances were not possible, and the 
new teaching was not perceived as rebeUion, as it was in france. The Iauer 
was lhe case in France in particular. But even here there was no general 
rebellion, and the unrest did not take the focm of rebellion everywhere; for 
67 · Maurice ( H2t-S3 ), duke and elector of Saxony, initiallY fougbt on the side o~ C'..harle\ V, 
but turned against him after rhc emperor's maltteaanent ol me ProtcslaDlimckr Philip of Hesse. 
MAurice nearly captured Charles and forced bim ro flee. At me TreatY ofl'assau (15521 much ol 
Germany was acquired ior rhc l.utbeans. 
511 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
the rights of the large and separate cities were extensive, lending them 
considerable independence. In the Netherlands, however, vehement insur-
rection broke out against Spain. The revolt of the Netherlands, a battle 
waged by energetic citizens, was a veritable revolution, truly memorable 
because of the lack of available means to bring to bear against Spain, against 
the lords of the riches of Mexico. The wars of religion in the Netherlands 
were at the same rime constitutional struggles, a renunciation of the confes-
sional yoke (of religion) and also a political liberation from oppression. 
Religious freedom could not come about without a change in political 
circumstances. England had religious and political conflicts. To establish 
religious freedom, political change was also required. 
The severest struggle a bit later, involving nearly all of Ewope, was me 
infamous Thirty Years War in Germany.68 The other Ewopean powers, 
with the exception of France and England, were politically justified in 
inrervening. This is because, in Germany, the powers were not supporting 
rebels, but instead parties with valid political interests. Each people 
510 
streamed back to the place of origin from which it had emanated, I and 
the struggle for the principle of self-realized inwardness was fought out 
there. This struggle ended with both sides, bod1 parties, tolerating the 
existence of the other. But nothing was accomplished as to thought, apart 
from something gained for thought on the basis of mere externality. The 
conclusion was of a purely political na~ that there should be a rnurua.l 
tolerance of differences. No basic principle emerged or was acknowledged, 
nor did a reunification of the religions occw; with the Council of Trent, 69 
this could no longer come about. Leibniz corresponded at length with 
Bossuet70 about the reunion of the two religions, building oo the fact that 
France had not yet recognized the Council of Trent, in which the Catholic 
religion had expressed itself in a wholly exclusionary yet understandable 
manner. As a basis for reunification, Leibniz demanded of Bossuet that the 
{decisions of the) Council of Trent be suspended; Boussuet's response was 
68. The Thirty Years War (1618--48) was a struggle of the German ProtesUDt princes a.od 
allied fureip powers (France, Sweden, Denmark, England, the Netherlands) apinst the Holy 
Roman Empire as represented by the Habsbargs and Catholic ~ 
As a result the EmpiR 
was broken up and enormous ~ 
was inflicted on Germaoy. T'be war was sntlcd ;u the 
~ce of Westphalia, which ushered in a period of gream religious rokrance but oo tnK' 
relig~ous accommodatioo. 
69. The Council of Trem (1545-7, 1551-2, 1562-31 redefined Catholic doctrine and in-
itiated the Catholic Counter·Rdorm.atioo. 
70. Gottfried Wilhdm Leibniz ( 1646-1716., Siimtlicbe Schrift- wuJ Brie(e; ed. the PrussiaD 
Academy of Scieakn (l..eipz.ig. 1923 ff.), i. 8-,. Jacques Benigoe Bossuct (1627-1704) was a 
Frmch prelate, a brilliant orator, aod a powerful comrovc:rsialis 
512 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
that this annulment would depend solely on rhe clergy, not the laity; the 
matter was not at all the province of Parliament but that of the clergy alone. 
So Leibniz abandoned the dispute. 
As far as Germany was concerned, the war ended with the formation of 
the empire, i.e. of the constitutions of the individual established states. The 
peace was concluded with the formation or establishment of the private 
rights of the various princes ([Hippolytus] a Lapide).71 This best illUStrates 
the notion that Gennan freedom only involves particularization. There can 
be no talk of a common end on the pan of the state; rather the notion of 
Gennan freedom was only that of the complete particularization and estab-
lishment of private rights. The organization of Gennany could best be 
described as an organized anarchy; 
1 for it was the stabilization of an 
511 
empire where all the circumstances of those in power are defined in terms of 
private rights, in such a way that interest lay in the fact that individuals have 
safeguards only for themselves and only in their not acting on behalf of rhe 
whole. Thus the interest of the individual parts vis-a·vis the whole, and vice 
versa, was preserved in the most inviolable fashion. 
The Peace of Westphalia served as a palladium for Gennany, but it soon 
became evident what it actUally meant: it was in fact the greatest misfortune. 
This was demonstrated in particular by the ignominious wu against the 
Tuc~ who threatened VieiUia and were only repulsed with the help of the 
Poles; there was an even more ignominious war with France in which 
the prorective defenses of the Gennan empire were overrun by the French. 
This organization of Gennany, which brought about the demise of Germany 
as an empire, was the work of Richelieu. n His was the fate of many great 
statesmen: he achieved the opposite in his own state of what he wanred to do 
to his friends, the opposite of what he accomplished in the enemy states. He 
suppressed the political independence of Protestants in his own coWltry, 
provided security to the empire, and was cursed for it by his fellow citizens. 
In Gennany he brought about impotence. He destroyed Germany's indepen-
dence as an empire, and the Gennans rejoiced over the organization that was 
attained; they blessed him for it. The immediate consequence was that 
71. 'Hippolytus a Lapide' was a pseudonym of Samuel Baron von~ 
(1632-9-4), 
whose chief llistorical work, De statJI imperii Germanici (Geoeva, 1667), de5crlbed Germaoy as 
a monstrous aggregate Jacking a stroog imperial center. Pufeodod appaM!dy borrowed the 
pseudonym ftom an earlier writer, Philipp &gi.uw VOil Cbemnitz. Jn utin, la(JUJ.o means "tO 
throw stones at'-
72. Cardinal Richelieu (1585-16421 became the chief statesman~ Louis XDI of Frana. 
Uoder his in8uence royal power was coosolida~ the Hugumoa; were pasecu.ttd. and alli-
ances w~ made with the German ~t 
states. 
513 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
Germany obtained its so-called organization and freedom of religion. In 
other states, religion, the Protestant Church, was emergent as insurrectional 
and faced a different fate, either being completely suppressed or achieving 
only a troubled existence. The outcome [in Germany), therefore, was only 
politically motivated, and the highest interest was satisfied in the fact of 
religion's entrance into determinate being. Religion now had a legally 
512 
secured existence. I 
The Formal Universality of Thought: The Natural Sciences 
The second period is that of the formal development of the understanding. 
Religion is complete within itself and has legal existence, so it does not come 
into play. Now particular interests come to the fore and initiate the feuds 
during this period. Hence they are purely political feuds. Developments in 
the personal sphere differ from this activity. 
Subjectivity, valid in icself, now establishes the validity, and acquires the 
form, of universality, and enters into the external world. Culture has been 
present in an ages, but it obtains here the significance of its own distinctive 
value. For spirit on its own account, whose political existence is secured, also 
then allows the external world to be free, now even allows to the external 
world it own subsistence; spirit seeks itself and the truth in this world in the 
way it exists externally. The other, the external, is tree only for free human 
beings; they seek the appearance of the divine not as miracle~ not as some-
thing unique~ but permit the external world to stand as something external. 
They intrinsically apply themselves partly in a practical manner through 
industriousne~ and indeed in such a way that activity in the external world 
would be justified on its own account, meaning that humanity has to bring 
this understanding, the same consciousness, to bear on the external world in 
the presence of God, and is permitted to do so. 
Rectitude (Rechtschaffenheit) refers to the manner in which an individual 
behaves in particular circumstances of life. This rectitude, however, must 
extend or advance to a consciousness of the absolute, to the religious 
consciousness, and it is from the latter that rectitude truly arises. In other 
words, God, the truth, active in particular circumstances, is rectitude. is the 
realization of the true in particular circumstances; God is this spirit of truth. 
and this is no other spirit than that of religion, except that it is applied to the 
particular. Humanity is absolutely in the right (berechtigt) in coming before 
513 
God with this same spirit. The situation is not different if one I sees one's 
moral rectitude only as a negative form of existence opposed to what the 
church demands. In that case one purchases, as it were. through offermgs 
514 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
and contributions to churches and monasteries, the permission to behave in 
such a worldly manner. It is a duplicitous existence, a double life. when 
someone theoretically considers it wrong to kill people in war, and wrong to 
live in a commercial and family context. Spirit, however, is active in actual 
life, now rightly engages in such activity, and no longer needs to purchaSt' 
rectitude (das Recht) or buy its way out through such offerings. 
A further issue that comes into play can be introduced by the culture of 
the century of Louis XIV. 73 The culture of that century in France under Louis 
XN is brilliant. It is, as the French called it, a golden age of the arts 
and sciences. Evident are formal virtues, ones with the fonns of digni~· 
and grandeur, and that of the good will that seeks co respect others and be 
pleasing to others, and to conduct oneself in a friendly way. Prevalent are 
conversation and distinctions regarding conduct. The art of conversation 
becomes the fluent sophistry of passion; in part with a view to their content, 
these traditional virtUes are emphasized. m conversation. The contem of 
these conversations is of course traditional vinue, but it is passion as well. 
The main thing, however, is that no truly absolute principle holds good; 
there is no unity of the spiritual, or any recourse to freedom, and these 
virtues do not emanate from absolute ethical freedom. 
The next matter to be discussed is the form of the culture that is now 
constituted by the emerging sciences. True culture is essentiaUy that of 
science ( Wi.ssenschaft). It is 
J aligned with the state, not tbe church. The 
514 
church has taken the lead neither in religious freedom nor in the sciences--
neither in the empirical sciences of the mind (des Gedankens) nor in those of 
external nature. It is primarily the natural sciences, the experience of outer 
and inner nature, that develop in England and France. These sciences first 
emerged in France and England in particular. Reflective spirit positioned 
itself in relation to nature by letting nature be [as it is]-in this case prosai-
cally drawing upon the external reality that spirit had freely released from 
iuelf. Spirit no longer fears for itself over against this extemaliry and no 
longer despairs, for it knows how to reconcile itself with the enernal and to 
find itself therein. These sciences are constituted by information abour 
empirical existence, and, what is more, about the universal laws of narure, 
what is universal in nature and in dte understanding. What is universal seeks 
this out, the spirit that is closer to the understanding in this instance. Th~ 
understanding is partly a mode of subjective rhinking and partJy the nexus ot 
external i tr. 
73. Louis XN was king of France 1643-1715. Under him absoluu monarchy. based on thf 
theory of divine right, reacbt:d its he-ight, as did the grandeur oi Fread~ QJ}rure. 
Sl5 

515 
THE LECTURES OF 18 22-3 
These sciences of the understanding are now accepted as valid; this 
science honors both humanity and God. The Catholic Church had not 
wanted to concede that science honored God, denying this and forcing 
Galileo to recant his portrayal of the Copernican system because his system 
appeared to contradict what the Bible said (as part of the above-mentioned 
faith). 74 True faith comprises something other than this--namely, what re-
sides in the natute of God and God's inner workings. [Galileo's] demonstra-
tion plays no role in faith, and Galilee's address was not lacking in humility, 
contrary to what has recently been asserted. Just a year ago the accoWtt 
in newspapers was that he was condemned for the arrogance of his address 
and his conversation, although the latter did not factor in the decision. I 
The story in an Austrian newspaper, most likely based on Friedrich von 
SchJegel, recounted that when Galileo was seventy he was forced to abjure 
and condemn the error that the sun was said to be stationary. Thus the 
church in its earlier form was here hostile toward the sciences. Aher such 
events, all thinking people distanced themselves from the church. 
On the other hand, however, the church was correct about the scienceS7 in 
maintaining that they lead to materialism and atheism; for nature itself and 
its laws are taken to be something ultimate, something wtiversal unto itself. 
Of course one can add that God has created this natural world and these 
laws; but these sciences require insight into what is found [empirically], that 
all connections be looked into. 8ut precisely in the ascent to God this bridge 
or linkage is not evident. The connection of these laws with God is not 
expressed, and this linkage contradicts the very principle of these scienccs7 
which is to accept only what is subject to scientific investigation. Thus a 
contradiction presents itself here. This knowledge has two aspects: ~ 
these laws or cognitions have as their basis experience, sensible being; and 
second, the way in which direct perception, this manifold of perception, 
is elevated into the fonn of universality, is comprised in something universal, 
is as laws and species or kinds of things (Gattungen).ln the laws and in the 
species or kinds too, in this universal feature, spirit or the understanding is 
present to itself. Sensible material provides the matter, the content, the point 
of departure, and then [spirit J passes over into the universal; and this 
universal is the understanding. The understanding recognizes itself in the 
universal; it has conformed itself to what is fowtd or given [empirically}, has 
74. Galileo 0564-1642) was tried by the lnquisJtioo in 1633 and forced to condemn all 
writing and teacbing:s thar held rM sun to be the central body am the earth a moving body 
revolving about it- Various biblical passages state that the earth 'shall uever be moved' (Psalms 
93: 1, 96: 10, 104: S; 1 Cbroo. 16: 30). 
516 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
elevated the manifold into something universal. The understanding finds 
satisfaction in the form of the law because here 1 the understanding 
518 
has before it this identity that it itself is. This then is the activity of the 
understanding with respect to the sciences. Ow second concern has been 
with the emergence of this fonn of Wliversality. 
The Turn to Concrete Actuality: The Enlightenment 
?ur third point of interest is that this universal, this knowledge that initially 
IS theoretical, also turns to the practical, to actuality. The sequence prcxeeds 
~itially fcom concrete being (Seiende) to laws. A different aspect, however. 
IS that these principles, these laws are used as standards, as fixed perspectives 
or assumptions against which to test what is subjected to them, what lies 
before them. This application leads to the third point of interest. 
This third interest comes upon the scene when the understanding, with its 
knowledge and with its laws, turns itself as 'enlightenment' against the 
spiritually concrete, the religious sphere; it does so by talcing natural being 
as the basic principle, whether an existing being of a physical nature or one 
of a spiritual narure. The understanding holds this foundation, the speci& 
experiences, to be what is true, as the touchstone for all that is said to have 
validity. Its principles are those of logical consistency, of identity, of coher-
ence; with these it turns against religion, and thus it is enlightenment 
(Aufk/iirung) _75 
The understanding holds the laws of nature to be true~ and its metbcd 
involves consistency. What is presupposed or natural, what is given for it, 
also includes intellect, feelings, drives, a sense of immortality, sympathy, etc. 
By the understanding working in this way, it is enlightenment. Thus religion 
cannot stand up to it when the understanding sticks with this focus as wbat 
is absolutely true. For the very principle of religion I is that the narural is 
517 
precisely what is negative and needs to be sublated. Funhermore, religion 
is speculative; it has a speculative content and thus is inconsistent with the 
abstract consistency of the understanding. For reason (Vernunft) is preci.seJy 
what comprises distinctions within itself as a wlity, grasps distinctions as a 
standing ( Verstand)-an identity that is abstract and lacking distiocrions 
unity, as something concrete that is contrary to the identity of the under-
~ 
within itself. The understanding holds fast to this; it says, 'The finite is not 
75. The 18th-cent. EnliglueQlDC'1lt, acccmling to Hegd. ·~· 
~~ 'illumioates" fiii/Wtt) 
reality io terms of the laws of the uoderstandiDg (Yerstmrd). 11ws .d u opposed to specula me 
religion, although it may aUow foe forms ol pncrical or moral reJilioa, as in dlt aseol.Kaot"s 
Critiqw of Praakal IWson a.od Religiolf within d!e limits of RUIDII A/oM. 
517 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
infinite'. Everything mysterious, the speculative aspect of religion, 76 counts 
as nothing for it. This, then, is the negative attitude of the understanding 
toward religion. 
A second and different matter, however, concerns the relationship of the 
understanding as such to the state. When the state and government operate 
according to the understanding, when they comprehend their activity as a 
universal purpose, as a universal, then the notion of a universal purpose 
of the state appears-a notion of what is highest and most valid. This idea of 
the purpose of the state must initially separate what is solely a private 
prerogative from the affairs of the state, what is merely a particular entide-
ment to the use of power. As the state becomes reflective, it adopts in 
actuality a different stance. What had been privileges are now, in and of 
themselves, no longer valid in the form of private property. By definition and 
in terms of their content, all matters having the form of private rights are the 
province of the state. This content is therefore removed from the sphere of 
private rights. This form is allowed to comprise only what by its nature can 
be private rights. 
The government now comprehends the purpose and the thought of the 
state, and since this aspect has come up, we must take note of Frederick 11.77 
He is a person of world-historical import, known as a 'philosopher-king'. 
because he grasped the Wliversal thought of the state and kept steadfastly to 
its universal purpose. One can also call him a 'philosopher-king• insofar as 
518 
he was occupied with metaphysics I or was a philosopher as a private 
person. He was a philosopher-king not because he was this exclusively, bur 
because he first grasped this principle and brought it to bear in his activity as 
king. When this princip)e came to be generally accepted, philosophy was 
called sound human understanding. It was Frederick who held to the pur-
pose of the state and put it into force; he no longer gave heed to what is 
particular, to special privi)eges, insofar as they were opposed or contrary to 
76. In the Lec~res on the Philosophy of Religion, Hegel remarks rhar the Neoplatonic 
philosophers, Proclu& in particular, connected speculative thought with the idea of ·mvsre~·· 
as inherited from Greek rdigion (i. 382 n. 441. "The speculative idea i!; oppPsed not merely ro the 
sensible but also to what is understandable; for both, therefore-, it i~ a secre-t or m~·ster)--. · · 
Mysterion is what the rarional is; among the Neoplatonisrs, this express1on alread~· mean~ 
simply speculative philosophy' (iii. 280). Set> also Lectures OPI the Hi.stQr\1 of Philowp!ry:. i1. 
344-5. For the speculative way of thinking, 'finite' and 'infinite• are not fill~ categories; rather 
they are Ouid and each passes over into the other. See Lectures on the Proo(s of the E..:.mtenu ot 
God, ed. and tr. Peter C. Hodgson (Oxford, 2007), 117-26. 158-65. 
77. Frederick ll ('thr Grear') was king of Prussia 1740-86. Under his reign Prussia expanded 
greatly and became tbe ·toremost military power in Ewope. As an 'enlightened despm'. be 
instituted important civil and political reforms. 
518 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
the purpose and maintenance of the state. Instead, he gave preference to 
arrangements that were advantageous for the whole. 
Foreign political operations and the wars of this period must be renned 
constitutional, 78 whereas those of earlier periods were religious or merelr 
political. The Seven Years War was surely such a war. 79 It could be called a 
constitutional war. At first glance it appears that the outward purpose 
allying all the great states or powers against Frederick was Silesia, but the 
truly driving force was that a different spirit occupied the throne than 
previously, a spirit that introduced a new principle, a spirit of different 
activities and with different methods. While other particular or private 
matters were involved, the main driving force was that a man who was 
differently animated sat on the throne. The ensuing wars were all the more 
constitutional wars. 
The purpose and consequences of revolution and war in modem times 
have been to change governments through force from below. A revolution of 
this sort has its beginning and origin in thought; for thought develops by 
now taking hold firmly, by erecting universal representations as ultimate. 
and by comparing them to what was the case. Thought rebels when it 
finds the status quo to be in contradiction with that purpose. The most 
sublime characteristic that thought can hit upon in this setting is that of 
the I freedom of will. All other principles regarding the happiness and 
519 
well-being of the state are more or less indetenninate. Freedom of the will, 
however, is determinate in and for itself because it is nothing other than self-
determination. Thought has now grasped that the characteristic of the 
fr-eedom of the will is in actuality what is highest. The sense in which thought 
is correct here is to be explained elsewhere, and has a different science to 
establish it. 8° Freedom of the will is freedom of the spirit in actio~ in its 
orientation to what is actual. Freedom of the will emerges directly from the 
principle of the Protestant Church. However, the will as something particu-
lar is to be distinguished from the freedom of will of which the state is_ the 
actualization. What we have to Wlderstand by this is not, as one m•ghr 
suppose, a particular will. Rather the freedom of will that is in and for itself 
78. By 'constitutional', Htgel apparently means that the wars were cacrifd out ill accord with 
laws rather than for religious or political end~. 
. 
joined ln 
79. The Seven Years War (1756-63) was waged brtw«n Prussia and Ausma (F -~~....:..i~ 
R 
-
-
f SiJ · 
• L..- the .-.rP oll763. r~• 
U55Ja and France) ootensibly ovec the possess.ton o 
esla. n.tu::r 
..---
promoted an allian::e with Russia, which led to the evenmal partiti_on of Poland._ 
ed Alle 
80. Hegel is apparently refecring here to his E/emml.S of the Philosophy of~~ on tb: 
W. Wood, tr. H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge, 1991), esp. § 4 (pp. 35--7). See also 
S 
Philosophy of Spirit, 1827-8, tr. Roben R. Williams (Oxford. 2007), dJ>· 247-6 · 
519 

THE LECTURES OF 1822-3 
is the freedom of God within itself; it is the freedom of spirit, not of a 
particular spirit but of the universal spirit as such, in accord with its essential 
being. Revolutions, then, have proceeded from thought. This thought has 
had to do with actuality and bas turned forcibly against the established 
order; it has be<:ome a force against the exisring order and this force is in 
fact revolution. 
The question then is under what circumstances and in which form this 
phenomenon has emerged, and revolution appears. Thought has resorted to 
force wherever it found itself facing the positive as absolute force. Thus we 
see that revolutions have occurred in France, Italy~ Naples, the Piedmont, 
and finally Spain too--in all the states~ therefore, that we have called 
520 
Romance. I But those nations in which the freedom of the Protestant 
Church had already been established remained at peace: they h.ave under-
gone their political reformation or revolutio~ together with their religious 
one. The most important matter in the Romance countries is the overthrow 
of the monarchy, which had previously succeeded and then again been 
undone. With these revolutions it must be emphasized that they were exclu-
sively political revolutions, and no change in religion took place. However., 
religion either decreased or increased in terms of freedom of spirit. For 
without a change in religion, no genuinely political change or revolution 
can be successful. The freedom of spirit, the principles of freedom~ which 
were made principles of government in these countries, remained quite 
abstract themselves, for they emerged in opposition to the positive, existing 
order; they did not originate from the freedom of spirit as it is found in 
religion. Hence this is not the freedom of spirit that is found in religion and 
in the divine and authentic freedom. 
The countries belonging to the Protestant Church have thus already 
completed their revolution; in these countries the revolution is over. For in 
them we find that what ought to transpire, in virrue of discernment, general 
education, and peace, has taken place. This by no means conttadiCIS the idea 
of a concrete purpose of the state. But in the other countries, the Romance 
countries, elements that run counter to the characteristic purpose of the 
state are so absolutely legitimated that they are capable of mounting abso-
lute resistance to it. The evangelical, Protestant countries differ markedly in 
the outward form of their constitutions; for example, Denmark, England, 
the Netherlands, and Prussia are quite different. However, present in all of 
them is the essential principle that what ought to be valid in a state must 
521 
proceed from discernment, from the universal 1 purpose of the state, and 
must be justified thereby. This is the necessary characteristic~ abstractly put. 
520 

THE GERMANIC WORLD 
CONCLUSION 
We have now briefly portrayed world history. The intention was to show 
that its entire course is a consistent (expression} of spirit, and that the whole 
of history is nothing other than the actualization of spirit, an acrualization 
that culminates in states; and [that] the state is the worldly actUalization of 
history. On the one hand, the true (das Wahre) must be present as an 
objective, developed system in the purity of thought; on the adler hand, it 
must also be present in actuality. But this [truth) must not (remain) out-
wardly objective; rather, the same subjective spirit must be free for itself in 
this objectivity; and in the third place it must recognize the content of what 
exists, this objective content of the world spirit, as its own. Thus iris spirit 
that bears witness to spirit, and in this way iJ is present to itself and free. 
What is important to discern is that spirit can find freedom and satisfaction 
only in history and the present-and that what is happening and has hap-
pened does not just come from God but is God's work. 
81 
81. The last sentence: reads in German: W;dJiig ist die Einsicht. d4 dlr Cftst Ad!""';, dtr 
Gesdnchu rmd Gegenwart befreien, befridigm ill"" ,J J4 dtls. IINU ~ 
iM wt4 
gesdtid,t. nicht "'"von Gott kommt, sondem ~ 
'Wri ist. 
Sll 


GLOSSARY 
The glossary contains a selection of frequendy used and/or technical tetms, 
especially those posing problems in translation. It has served only as a guide, 
to which the translators have not felt obliged to adhere WMD c:oauext or 
English idiom has required different renderings. When more than one 
English word is give~ the generally preferred renns ace listed first. •ct: 
indicates related but distinguished Gennan terms, which often are translated 
by different English equivalents. Adjectives are listed without endings. 
Abend land 
absolut 
Absolute 
allgemein 
Allgemeine 
Anderssein 
anerkennen 
Anerkenntnis 
anschauen 
Amc.hauung 
ansich 
Amich 
Amichsein 
Anund{Ursichsein 
Arbeit 
auffassen 
Auffassung 
au{heben 
the Wesr, the Occident 
absolute 
the absolute 
universal, general 
the universal 
other-being, Otherness 
recognize, acknowledge (d. 'erkenDeP•) 
recognition (d. 'Erkenntnis') 
intuir, envisage 
intuition, contemplation, enrisagement 
(cf. 'Wahrnehmung') 
in itself, implicit (d. 'in sich') 
in-itself, implicit being 
being-in-self 
being-in-and-foNelf 
labor (cf. 'Werk') 
comprehend, grasp (d. •begreifeo', •fassen') 
comprehension 
sublate, s~ 
supersede, 8111lul 
Jll 

Aufhebung 
auflosen 
Auflosung 
Bedeutung 
Befriedigung 
Begebenheit 
Begierde 
begreifen 
Be griff 
behandeln 
beherrschen 
bei sich 
Beisichsein 
beobachten 
Beobachtung 
berechtigen 
Berechtigung 
Beschiiftigun.g 
besonder 
Besonderheit 
bestehen 
Beste hen 
bestimmen 
bestimmt 
Bestimmtheit 
Bestimmung 
betrachten 
Betrachtung 
BeuJU{1tsein 
beziehen 
Bez.iehung 
Bild 
bildlich 
Bildung 
blofJ 
GLOSSARY 
sublation, suspension, supersession, annulment 
resolve, dissolve 
resolution, dissolution, dissolving 
meaning, significance 
satisfaction, gratification 
event, happening, occurrence 
(sensuous) desire, appetite 
conceive 
concept 
treat, deal with 
govern 
with self, present to self, at home 
presence with (to) self, self.<:ommunion, at home 
with self 
observe 
observation (d. •Betrachtung') 
justify 
justification, rights, privilege 
occupation, concern 
particular ( cf. 'partikular') 
particularity 
subsist, endure, consist 
subsistence 
determine, define, characterize, specify 
determinate, definite, specific 
determinateness, determinacy 
determination, definition, character(istic, -izarion), 
destination, vocation, speci.fication, attribute 
consider, treat, deal with 
consideration, contemplation, reflection, inquiry 
{d. •Beobachtung') 
consciousness, awareness 
relate, connect, refer to 
relation, connection, reference (cf. 'Verhaltnis', 
'Zusammenhang') 
image 
imaginative, figurative 
culrwe, formation, cultural formation, cultivario~ 
education (cf. •Kultur') 
mere, simple, sheer 
524 

Boden 
Bose 
darstellen 
Darstellung 
Dasein 
den ken 
Denken 
denkend 
deutscb 
eigentUmlich 
Einbildung 
Eine 
einfach 
Ein.sicht( en) 
Einzelheit 
einzeln 
Eimelne 
Element 
empfjru:kn 
Empfindung 
Erukwec;k 
Entfremdung 
Entgegensetzung 
Entskhung 
Entwicklung 
er(assm 
erheben 
Erhebwng 
Erinnerung 
erkennen 
Erkenntnis 
erscheinen 
Erscheinung 
Eniehung 
tvangelisch 
GLOSSARY 
ground, soil, land 
(moral) evil (cf. 'Ubel') 
present, portray, set forth 
presentation, ponrayal, depiction, exposition 
( cf. 'Vorstellung') 
existence, determinate being, existent being 
(d. 'Existenz', 'Sein') 
think 
thinking, thought (d. 'Gedanke') 
thinking, thoughtful, reflective 
Gennan (cf. 'gennanisch') 
characteristic (adj.), proper 
imagination (d. 'Phantasie') 
the One, the one 
simple 
insight, discenunent, judgment; (pl.) views, opinion 
singularity, single (or singular) individual 
( cf. 'Individuum') 
single, singular 
single individual (cf. •Jndividuwn') 
element (cf. 'Moment') 
sense 
sensibility, sensation, feeling, emotion (d. 'Ge.fuh.l') 
final end, final purpose (cf. 'Zweck') 
estrangement, alienation 
opposition 
emergence, rise, origin, genesis 
development 
apprehend, grasp (cf. 'auffasen', 'fassen') 
elevate, raise up 
elevation, rising up 
recollection (cf. 'Gedachtnis') 
know, cognize, recognize, learn, discern 
(d. 'anerkennen', 'kennen', 'wissen'l 
cognition, knowledge, cognitive knowledge 
(cf. •Anerkenntnis', 'Kenntnis', 'Wissen') 
appear (cf. 'scheinen'l 
appearance, phenomenon 
education 
Protestant, evangelical 
525 

Existenz 
existieren 
fassen 
Form 
Fottgang 
Fortschritt 
(rei 
Freie 
Freiheit 
fUr sich 
FUrsicb 
Ganung 
Gebiet 
Gediichtnis 
Gedanke 
GefUhl 
Gegensatz 
Gegenstand 
Gegenwart 
Gebalt 
Geist 
gelten 
Geltung 
Gemeinde 
Gemi4t 
Genu/1 
geof{enbart 
Gericht 
Gemumen 
gennanisch 
Gescheheru! 
Geschichte 
geschichtlich 
Geschichtsschreiber 
Geschlecht 
Gesetz 
GesetzmiiPigkeit 
Gesinnung 
Gestalt 
Gestaltung 
GLOSSARY 
existence (cf. 'Dasein') 
exist (d. 'sein') 
grasp, apprehend 
fonn (d. 'Gestalt') 
progress, process, advance 
progress, progression 
free 
the free 
freedom 
for (by, of) itself, on its own account, explicit 
for-itself 
species, type 
field, realm, territory 
memory (cf. 'Erinnerung') 
thought, conception (cf. 'Denken') 
feeling (cf. 'Empfindung') 
antithesis, contrast, opposition 
object, topic, what-stands-over-against (cf. 'Objekt') 
presence, present (time) 
substance, content, impon 
spirit 
count, be valid, hold good 
value, worth, validity, consequence, importance 
community 
mind, heart, disposition 
enjoyment, pleasure, communion 
revealed (d. 'offenbar') 
judgment, coun of justice (d. 'Recht') 
Germanic peoples 
Germanic (d. 'deutsch') 
event, occurrence 
history, historical narrative, story (d. 'Historie') 
historical (d. 'historisch •) 
hisrorian., historiographer 
kind~ species, lineage, race 
law 
legality 
conviction, disposition 
shape, figure (d. 'Form') 
configuration, consnuction, formation 
526 

Gewalt 
Gewissen 
Gewohnheit 
Glauben 
G leic:h giJitigkeit 
GJ;edenmg 
Glikk 
glucklich 
Gliickseligkeit 
Grund 
Hand lung 
herleiten 
Herr 
Herrschaft 
heroortreten 
hinausgehen 
Historie 
Historiker 
historisch 
ideal 
ldealitiit 
Idee 
ideell 
lndividualitiit 
Individuum 
ienseitig 
}enseits 
kennen 
Kenntnis 
Konigreich 
Konigtum 
Kraft 
Kultur 
Kultus 
Land 
Leidenschaft 
Macht 
GLOSSARY 
authority, dominion, force, power, violence 
(cf. 'Macht') 
conscience 
habit, custom, practice 
faith, belief 
inctifference,unconcern 
articulation 
happiness, fortune 
happy, fortUnate 
bliss, happiness 
ground, reasons, basis 
action 
derive 
master, lord, ruler, sovereign, nobleman 
dominion, power, rule, authority, command 
emerge, come forward, step forth 
overpass, go beyond 
history, historical record (cf. 'Geschichte') 
historian (cf. 'Geschichtsschreiber') 
historica~ historical study (d. 'geschichtlich') 
ideal (speculative reference) 
ideality 
idea 
ideal (empirical reference) 
inctividuality, individualism, individual 
individual (d. 'Einulne') 
otherworldly 
the beyond, the ocher world 
know (cf. 'wissen') 
information, acquaintance (d. 'Erkenntnis', 
'Wissen') 
kingdom (d. 'Reich') 
kingship 
force, strength, energy (cf. 'Machr') 
culture, cultivation (cf. 'Bildung') 
cultus, worship 
land, country 
passion 
, 
al , 
power, authority, might, strength (d. Gew t' 
'Kraft') 
527 

Mannigfoltigkeit 
Meinung 
Mensch 
Menschheit 
mit sich 
Mittelpunkt 
Moment 
Moralische 
Moralitiit 
Mcn-genlond 
Nachdenken 
Nation 
Natur 
Natiirlichkeit 
Objekt 
offenbtJr 
Offenbarung 
partikuliir 
Pflicht 
Phantasie 
Positive 
Privateigentum 
Privatrecht 
privatrechtlich 
Riisonnement 
real 
realisieren 
Realitiit 
Recht 
Rechtscbaffenheit 
reel/ 
reflektierend 
reflektiert 
Refk:cion 
regieren 
Reich 
Religiositiit 
GLOSSARY 
manifold(ness), multiplicity, diversity 
opinion, intention 
human being (sometimes 'person' or •one') 
humanity 
with self, integral 
center, focal point, focus 
moment, element (cf. 'Element') 
moral sphere (d. 'Sitdiche') 
morality (cf. 'Sittlichkeit') 
the East, the Orient 
meditation, meditative thinking 
nation (cf. 'Staat', 'Volle') 
nature 
natural life, natural state, naturalness, simplkity, 
unaffectedness 
object, topic (cf. 'Gegenstand') 
revelatory, manifest (d. 'geoffenbart') 
revelation 
private, personal (cf. 'besonder') 
duty, obligation 
fantasy, fanciful imagination (d. 'Einbildung') 
the positive, positivity 
private property, privilege 
civil law, private right (cf. 'Staatsrecht') 
under civil law, private legality, private rights 
argumentation, reasoning 
real (speculative reference) 
realize (cf. 'verwirklichen') 
reality (cf. 'Wirklichkeit') 
right, law, justice, prerogative, privilege 
(d. "Gericht', •Gesetz') 
righteousness, rectitude 
real (empirical reference) 
reflective 
reflected 
reflection, reflective power 
rule 
realm, empire, kingdom (d. 'Konigreich •. 
'Konigrurn'l 
religiosity, religious piety 
528 

Sache 
Schauspiel 
Schein 
scheinbar 
scheinen 
Schicksal 
schlechthinnig 
Schmerz 
Schuld 
Seele 
seienJ 
Seiende(s) 
sein (verb) 
Sein (noun) 
Seite 
Selbstge(Uhl 
sinnlich 
Sinnlichkeit 
Sitte 
sittlich 
Sittlicbe 
Sittlichkeit 
Spekulative 
Staat 
Staatsrecht 
Stamm 
Stand( e) 
Stoff 
Stufe 
Subjekt 
Subjektivitiit 
Tat 
Tatigkeit 
Trieb 
Ubel 
Uberbilding 
Ubergang 
ubergehen 
iibergreifen 
GLOSSARY 
thing (that is at work, that something is about), 
(subject) matter, fact, case 
spectacle, drama 
semblance, show 
seeming 
seem 
destiny, fate 
utter, simple (d. 'absolut') 
anguish, sorrow, pain 
guilt, responsibility, culpability 
soul 
having being, subsisting, actual 
actual being, entity, subsisting being 
is, exists, occurs 
being 
side, aspect 
sense of self, self-reliance 
sensible, sentient, sensuous 
sensuousness, sensible nature 
custom, ethical practice, ethical custOm 
ethical 
ethical sphere (d. 'Moralische') 
ethics, ethical life, ethicality (d. 'Moralirat') 
the speculative, speculation 
(political) state 
constitutional law (cf. 'Privatrecht') 
clan, tribe 
class, condition, standing; (pl.) estates 
material 
stage, step, level 
subject 
subjectivity 
act, action, dee<l 
activity 
drive, impulse, instinct 
evil (cf. 'BOse'), calamity; (pl.) iUs 
over-refinement 
transition, passing over 
pass over 
overreach 
52!1 

iiberhaupt 
Uberz.eugung 
unangemessen 
unbefangen 
Ungluck 
unmittelbar 
Unmittelbarkeit 
Untergang 
unterscheiden 
Unterscheidung 
Unterschied 
unterscbieden 
Veri:inderung 
Verbildung 
Vereinigung 
Verein~lung 
Verfassung 
Verbalten 
Verbiiltnis 
Verhiiltnisse (pl.) 
Vermittlung 
Vernunft 
verntinftig 
verschieden 
Verscbiedenheit 
Vers6hnung 
Versti:lnd 
Verwaltung 
verwirklichen 
Verwirklichung 
Volk 
V6lkerschaft 
Volksgeist 
vollendet 
Vollendung 
GLOSSARY 
generally, on the whole, as such, altogether; after all, 
in fact, etc. 
conviction 
incongruous, unsuitable, inadequate, 
incommensurate 
naive, natural, unaffected, ingenuous 
misery, unhappiness 
immediate 
immediacy 
decline, downfall, destruction 
distinguish, differentiate 
differentiation, distinction (d. 'Verschiedenheit') 
distinction 
distinguished, differentiated, distinct, different 
(d. 'verse hie den') 
alteration, change (cf. 'Wechsel') 
decline, degeneration 
unification, associarion, union 
singularization, individualization 
(political) constitution, political institution, system 
of government 
attitude, comportment, behavior 
relationship, condition (cf. 'Beziehung', 
'Zusamrnenhang') 
conditions, drcumstances~ state of affairs 
mediation 
reason (cl. 'Verstand') 
rational 
different, distinct, diverse (d. 'untersch.ieden') 
difference, diversity, disparity (d. 'Unterscheidung') 
reconciliation 
understanding (cf. 'Vernunh') 
administration 
actualize (cf. 'realisieren'J 
actualization (d. 'Wirklichkeit') 
people, ttibe (d. 'Nation') 
tribe, people 
spirit of a people, folk spirit 
consummate, perfect, complete~ final 
consummation 
S30 

vorhanden 
vorhanden sein 
Vorsehung 
vorstellen 
vorstellend 
Vorstellung 
wahr 
Wahre 
wahrhaft(ig) 
Wabrhafte 
Wahrheit 
Wahmehmung 
Wechsel 
Weltgeist 
weltlich 
Weltlichkeit 
Welneil 
Werk 
Wesen 
WillkUr 
wirken 
wirklich 
Wirklichkeit 
Wirksamkeit 
wi.ssen 
Wissen 
Wissenschaft 
Zeugnis 
Zufall 
Zufalligkeit 
Zu.sammenhang 
Zustand 
Zweck 
zweckmiissig 
Zweckmiissigkeit 
GLOSSARY 
present, at hand, extant 
be present, be at hand, exist 
providence 
represent, imagine 
representational, representative 
representation, impression, indication, notion, view 
true 
the true 
true, genuine, authentic, truthful 
the true, the genuine 
truth 
(sense) perception (d. 'Anschauung') 
change ( cf. 'Veranderung') 
world spirit, spirit of the world 
secular, profane, worldly 
secularity, worldliness 
continent 
work (d. 'Arbeit') 
essence, being, essential being 
free will, caprice, arbitrariness 
effect, do, work, operate 
actual 
actuality (cf. 'Realitat') 
efficacy 
know (cf. 'kelUlen', 'erkennen') 
knowledge, knowing (cf. 'Erkennmis', 'Kennmis') 
science, discipline, scientific knowledge 
witness, testimony 
chance 
contingency 
connection, interrelationship, nexus, matrix, coher-
ence (d. • Beziehung', 'Verhii.ltnis •) 
condition, state (of affairs) 
purpose, aim, end 
purposeful, expedient, useful 
purposiveness, expediency, utility 
531 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
WORKS BY HEGEL (GERMAN) 
Berliner Schri{ten 1818-1831. ed. Johannes Hoffmeister (Hamburg: Felix 
Meiner Verlag, 1956). 
Gesammelte Werke, ed. the Academy of Sciences of North Rhine-Westpha· 
lia in association with the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, 32 vols. 
projected (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag, 1968 ff.). Vol. xxvii (in two 
or three pan-volumes) will contain the Vorlesungen ubeT die Philosophie 
der Weltgeschichte. 
Vorlesungen: Ausgewiihlte Nochschriften und Manuskripte, ed. the staff of 
the Hegel Archives,16 vols. to date (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag, 1983 
ff.). Contains critical edns. of the lectures on the history of philosophy,. the 
philosophy of religion, the philosophy of spirit, the philosophy of world 
history, ere. 
Vorlesungen uber die Philosophie der Weltgescbichte (Berlin 182211823). 
ed. Karl Heinz Ilting, Karl Brehmer, and Hoo Nam Seelmann, in Vorle-
sungen: Ausgewiihlte Nachschriften und Manuskripte, xii (Hamburg: 
Felix Meiner Verlag, 1996). Tr. in this volume. 
Vorfesungen uber die Philosophie der Weltgeschichte, ed. Georg Lasson, 4 
vols. (Leipzig: Verlag von Felix Meiner, 1917-20). Vol. i revised and 
reissued by Johannes Hoffmeister, 1955. 
Vor/esungsmanuskripte II (1816-1831), ed. Walter Jaeschke, in Gesam· 
melte Werke, xviii (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag, 1995). Contains the 
manuscripts of Hegel's Introduction to the Weltgeschichte. Tr. in this 
volume. 
Werke: Vollstiindige Ausgabe, ed. an Association of Friends of the Deceased, 
18 vols. (Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, 1832 ff.). Vol. ix contains the 
533 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Vorlesungen uber die Philosophie der Weltgeschichte, 1stedn., ed. Eduard 
Gans (1837); 2nd edn., ed. Karl Hegel (1840). The 2nd edn. is repr. in 
the Jubiliiumsausgabe, ed. Hermann Glockner {3rd edo., Stuttgan: 
Fr. Frommans Verlag, 1949). 
WORKS BY HEGEL (ENGLISH) 
Aesthetics: Lectures on Fine Art, tr. T. M. Knox, 2 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1975). 
Elements of the Philosophy of Right, ed. Allen W. Wood, tr. H. B. Nisber 
{Camb['idge: Cambridge University Press, 1991). 
Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences. part 1, The Encyclopedia Logic, 
rr. T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchring, and H. S. Harris (Indianapolis, Ind.: 
Hackett Publishing Company, 1991); part 2, Hegel'S Philosophy of 
Nature, tc. A. V Miller (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970); part 3, Hegel's 
Philosophy of Mind, tr. William Wallace and A. V. Miller (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1971 ). 
Lectures on the History of Philosophy, 1815--6, ed. Robert F. Brown, tr. R. F. 
8rown andJ. M. Stewart, 3 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2006, 2009). 
Lectures on Natural Right and Political Science: The First Philosophy of 
R.igbt, Heidelberg 1817-1818, ed. the Staff of the Hegel Archives with an 
introduction by Otto P6ggeler, tr. j. Michael Stewart and Peter C. Hodg· 
son (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1995). 
Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion, ed. Peter C. Hodgson~ tr.. R. F. 
Brown~ P. C. Hodgson, and j. M. Stewart, 3 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 2007). Originally published by the University of Cahfornia Press, 
1984-7. 
Lectures on the Philosophy of Spirit, 1827-8, ed. and rr. Robert R. Williams 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007). 
Lectures on the Philosophy of World History: Introduaion: Reason in 
History, tr. from the German edn. of Johannes Hoffmeister by H. B. 
Nisbet, with an introduction by Duncan Forbes (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1975). 
Lectures on the Proofs of the Existence of God, ed. and tr. Peter C. Hodgson 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007). 
The Philosophy of History, tr. from the Karl Hegel edn. of 1840 by john 
Sibree (1857), with a new introduction by C. j. Friedrich (New York: 
Dover Publications, 1956). 
Ruson in History: A Genera/Introduction to the Philosophy of History. tr. 
from the Karl Hegel edn. of 1840, with passages from the Gans and 
534 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Lasson edns., by Robert S. Hartman (New York: Bobbs-MerriJl Co., 
1953). 
Science of Logic, tr. A. V. Miller (london: George Allen & Unwin, 1969). 
SOURCES USED OR ALLUDED TO BY HEGEL 
(English translations referenced in the notes are included) 
Abei-Remusat, Jean Pierre, Memoires sur la vie et les opinions des Lao-Tseu 
(Paris, 1823). 
-
Notice sur le premier volume de /'edition chinoi$e et anglaise des 
Oeuvres de Confucius, publiee a Serampour au Bengale, par M. Marshman 
(Paris, 1814). 
Allgemeine Historie der Reisen zu Wasser und zu Lande; oder, &mmlung 
aller Reisebeschreibungen ... , 21 vols. (Leipzig. 1748-74). 
Aristophanes, Comoediae undecim (Basel, 1532). 
Aristotle, Metaphysica, Politica, in Opera quaecunque hactenus extiterunt 
omnia, ed. Desiderius Erasmus, 2 vols. in 1 (Basel, 1550). 
-The Basic Works of Aristotle, ed. Richard McKeon (New York, 1941). 
Arrian, Anabasis, IndiC4, in Expeditio Alexandris (Leipzig, 1818). 
Asiatic Researches; or, Transactions of the Society Instituted in Bengal for 
Inquiring into the History and Antiquiti~. the Arts, Sciences, and Litera-
ture, of Asia, i-xi (London, 1806-12; repr. of the Calcutta edn., 1788 ff.). 
Bailly, Jean Sylvain, Histoire de l'astronomie anciennt, Jepuis son origine 
iusqu'a l'etablissement de /'ecole d'Aiexandre, 2nd edn. (Paris, 17811. 
German tr.: Geschichte der Sternkunde des Altertums bis auf die Errich-
tung der Schule zu Alexandrien, i (Leipzig, 1777). 
-
Traite de l'astronomie indienne et oriental (Paris, 1787). 
Barrow, john, Voyage en Chine, formant le complement du voyage de Lord 
Macartney (Paris, 1805). 
Belzoni, Giovanni Battista, Na"ative of the Operations and Recent Dis-
coveries within the Pyramids, Temples, Tombs and Excavations in Egypt 
and Nubia (london, 1820). 
Bentley, J., 'On the Hindu Systems of Astronomy, and their Connection with 
Histocy in Ancient and Modern lime', Asiatic Researches, 8 (Calcutta, 
1805), 193-244. 
Bopp, Franz, Uber das Coniugationssystern der Sanskritsprache in Ver-
gleichung mit jenem der griechischen, lateinischen, und germanischen 
Sprache (Frankfurt, 1816). 
Buchanan, Francis, 'On the Religion and Literature of the Bunnas\ Asidtic 
Researches, 6 (london, 1801 ), 163-308. 
535 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Caesar, julius, CommentarioTUm BeUi Civilis Libri Ill, Commentdriorum 
Belli Gallica Libri VIII, in C. ]ulii Caesaris quae exstant opera (Paris, 
1755). 
-- The Civil War, with the Anonymous Alexandrian, African, and Spanish 
Wars, u. j. M. Carter (Oxford, 1997). 
Champollion~ Jean-Fran~ois, L'Egypte sous les Pharaons, ou Recherches sur 
Ia geographie, la religion, Ia langue, les ecritures et l'histoire de /'Egypt 
avant /'invasion de CAmbyse (Paris, 1814). 
Le Chou-king, un des Jivres sacres des Chinois, qui renferme les fondements 
de leur ancimne histoire, les principes de leur gouvemement & de leur 
morale; ouvrage recueilli par Confucius, tr. Antoine Gaubil, revised by 
Joseph de Guignes (Paris, 1770). 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, Libri tres de natura Devrum (Leipzig, 1818). 
-- De natura deorum and Academica, tr. H. Rackham, rev. edn. (Loeb 
Classical Library; Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1951). 
-- De domo sua. The edn. used by Hegel is uncertain. 
-- Cicero, xi, tr. N. H. Watts (Loeb Classical Library; Cambridge, Mass. 
and London, 1923), 132-311. 
The Code of Gentoo Law, ed. Nath Brassey Halhed (London, 1777). 
Colebrooke, Henry Thomas, 'Enumeration of Indian Classes'~ Asiatic Re-
searches, 5 (London, 1799), 5.3-67. 
-- ·observations on the Sects of Jains', Asiatic Researches, 9 (Calcutta, 
1807), 287-322. 
-- •On the Religious Ceremonies of the Hindus, and of the Bra'hmens 
Especially, Essay r, Asiatic Researches, 5 (London, 1799), 345-68. 
Couple~ Philippus, The Morals of Confucius, a Chinese Philosopher, 2nd 
edn. (London, 1818). 
Creuzer, Friedrich, Symbolik und Mythologie der alten W>lker, besonders 
der Griechen, 2nd edn., 4 vols. (leipzig and Darmstadt, 1819-21 ). 
Delambre, jean joseph, Hi.stoire tk l'astronomie ancienne, 2 vols. (Paris, 
1817). 
Diodorus Siculus, Bibliothecae bistoricae libri XVII (lyons, 1552). 
-- Diodorus Siculus .. tt. C. H. Oldfather, 12 vols. (Loeb Classical Library; 
Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1933). 
Dow, AJexander, The History of Hindostan, 2nd edn., 2 vols. (London, 
1770). 
Dubois, Jean Antoine, Description of the Character, Manners, and Customs 
of the People of lndid; and of their Institutions, Religious and Civil 
(London, 1817). 
536 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Duncan, Jonathan, 'An Account of Two Fakeers, with their Pomairs' 
Asiatic Researches, 5 (London, 1799), 37-52. 
' 
-
'Historical Remarks on the Coast of Malabar with Some Description of 
Manners of its Inhabitants', Asiatic Researches, 5 (Londo~ 1799), 1-36. 
d'Eckstein, Baron, 'De Ia migration des peuples, et des causes dererminantes 
de cette migration', Le Catholique, 8 (1827), 279-450. 
Eichhorn, Karl Friedrich, Deutsche Sttlats- und Rechtsgeschichte, 4 vols. 
(Gottingen, 1808-23). 
Elphinstone, Mountstuan, An Account of the Kingdom of C4ubul anJ 
Dependencies in Persia, Tartary, and IntUa (London, 1815). 
Fenelon, Fran~ois de Salignac, Les aventures de Telhnaque, fils d'Ulysu 
(London, 1742). 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, Grund/age des Natu"echts nach Principien der 
Wissenschaftslehre Uena and Leipzig, 1796). 
-
Die Grundzuge des gegenwartigen Zeitalters {Berlin, 1806). 
Frederick II, the Great, Histoire demon Temps de Frederic II, Roi de Pru.sse, 
2 vols. (Berlin, 1826). 
-
Mhnoires pour servir a l'histoire de Ia maison de Brandebowg ( 17 51). 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, TagebUcher, 'Unterredung mit Napoleon, 
September 1808'. The edn. used by Hegel is uncertain. See johann Wolf-
gang Goethe Siimtliche Werke, Div. One, vol. xvii, ed. lrmttaut Schmid 
(Frankfurt, 1994), p. 381. 
Gondi, jean Fran~ois Paul de, Cardinal de Retz, Memoires (Amsterdam, 
1717). 
-
West.Ostlicher Divan (Stuttgart, 1819). 
Gorres,. josep~ Das Heldenbuch von Iran tJUS Jem Schab Nameh des 
Firdusi, 2 vols. (Berlin, 1820). 
-
Mythengeschichte der asiatischen Welt, 2 vols. (Heidelberg, 1810). 
Grosier;. Jean-Bapriste, De Ia Chi.ne; ou Description ginbok dt en 
Empire,. 3rd edn., 7 vols. (Paris, 181~20). German tr. of 1st edn., 
2 vols. (Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1789). 
Halde, Jean Baptiste du, Description geographique, bistorUp.a, cb'I'01f(J/ogi-
que, politiq~. et physique de l'empil"e Je Ia Chme et de Ia Tartmie 
Chinoise, 4 vols. (Paris, 1735). German tr.: Aus{iihrliche Beschreibung 
des cbinesischen Reiches und der grossen Tartarey (Rosrock, 1747-56). 
Hammer, josep~ Geschichte der schOne:n Rekkiblste Persiens {V1CD113, 1818). 
Herder, Johann Gottfried, Abhandlrmg iiber den Ursprwng c/6 SprtU:he 
(Berlin, 1772 ). 
-Ideen zur Philosopbie der Geschichte der Menschbe~ -4 vols. (Riga and 
Leipzig,. 1784-91 ). 
537 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Herder~ Johann Gottfried, Siimmtliche Werke, 20 vols. (Stuttgart and Ttibin-
gen, 1827-30). 
Herodotus, Historiarum libri IX (Paris, 1592). 
--The History, tr. David Grene (Chicago and London, 1987). 
Hobbes, Thomas, Elementorum philosophiae sectio tertia: De cive 
(Amsterdam, 1696). 
Homer, Ilias, 2 vols. (Leipzig, 1819-21). 
--The Iliad, tr. E. V. Rieu, Peter Jones, and D. C. H. Rieu (London, 2003). 
-
Odyssea, 2 vols. (Leipzig and Leiden, 1820). 
--The Odyssey, tr. E. V. Rieu and D. C. H. Rieu (London, 2003). 
Hugo, Gustav, Lembuch eines civilistischen Cursus, in Die Geschicbte des 
Romischen Rechts, iii, 4th edn. (Serlin, 1810). 
Institutes of Hindu LAw; or. The Ordinances of Menu, tc. William Jones 
(Calcutta, 1794). Gennan tr. (Weimar, 1797). 
Iselin, Isaak, Philosophische Mutma/Jungen uber die Geschichte der 
Menschheit (ZUrich, 1764). 
Jasclle, Gottlob Senjami~ Der Pantheismus nach seinen verschiedenm 
Hauptfcmnen, seium Urspnmg and Fortgange, seinem speculativen und 
praktischm Werth und Gehalt, i (Berlin, 1826). 
jones, William, 'On the Gods of Greece, Italy, and India • ~ Asiatic Re-
searches~ 1 (London, 1799), 221-75. 
Josephus, Antiquitates ]udaicae, in Flavii ]osephi ... Opera Omnia, 2 vols. 
lAmsterdam, Leiden, and Utrecht, 1726). 
Kalidasa, Sakontala oder Jer entscheidende Ring: Em indisches Schauspiel von 
Kalidasa,. tr. Georg Forste.t; ed j. G. Herder (Vie~ 1800, Frankfurt, 1803). 
Kant, Immanuel .. Critik der UrtheilskTaft (Berlin and Libau, 1790). 
--The Critique of judgement, tc. james Creed Meredith (Oxford, 1952, 
rev. edn.,. 2007). 
-
Metapbysische Anfangsgriinde der RechtslehTe (Konigsberg, 1797). 
Kepler, johannes, Commentariis de matibus stellae Martis ( 1609); Harmo-
nices mwndi (1619). The edn. used by Hegel is uncertain. 
Kircher, Athanasius, Chin4 monumentis qua sacris qua fJTofanis (Amsterdam, 
1667). 
l.amenna~ Abbe, Essm SUT /'indiffbence en matiere de religion, 4 vols. 
(Paris, 1817-23). 
Laplace, Pierre Simon de, Exposition du systeme du Monde, 2 vols. (Paris, 
1796). Gennan tr., 2 vols. (Frank~ 1797). 
Lauterbach, Wilhelm (pseud. for Heinrich julius von Klaproth), Dr. Wilhelm 
Scbott,s vergebliche Vbnsetzung der Wnke des Confuzius aus der 
U1SpTache, eine literarische Betriigerei (Leipzig and Paris, 1828). 
538 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, Essais de Theodide sur Ia bonte de Dieu, Ia 
liberte de l'homme et l'origine du mal, new edn., 2 vols. (Amsterdam, 
1734). 
-- Novissima Sinica (Leipzig, 1697). 
-- Tentamina Theodicaeae, i (Frankfurt, 1719). 
-
Samtliche Schriften und Briefe, ed. Prussian Academy of Sciences 
(leipzig, 1923 ff. ). 
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim, Die Erziehung des Menschengeschlechts 
!Berlin, 1780). 
livy (Titus Livius), Historiarum libri, ed.l. F. Gronovii, i (Lyo~ 1645). 
-
Ab urbe condita libri. The edn. used by Hegel is uncertain. 
-
Livy, i, tr. B. 0. Foster (Loeb Oassical Library; Cambridge, Mass. and 
London, 1919). 
-
The Rise of Rome, Books One to Five, tc. T. J. Luce (New York and 
Oxford, 1998). 
Lucan, Marcus Annaeus, Bellum civile (Leipzig, 1726). 
Luther, Martin. The edn. used by Hegel is uncertain. See D. Mattin Luthers 
Werke: Kritische Gesamtausgabe (Weimar, 1883 ff.). 
-
Luther's Works9 esp. vols. xxxi-xxxii, Career of the Reformer I, II 
(Philadelphia, 1957-8). 
Mackenzie, Colin, A Descriptive Cat~~logue of the Oriental Manuscripts and 
Other Articles Illustrative of the Literature, History, Statistics and Anti~ 
quitus of the South of India (Calcutta, 1828). 
Mailla, joseph de, Histoire generale de Ia Chine, ou annales de cet empire, 
traduites du Tong-Kien-Kang-Mou, 13 vols. (Paris, 1 n7-85). 
Malcolm, 'Sketch of the Sikhs', Asiatic Researches, 11 (Calcutta, 1810), 
197-292. 
Marshman, Joshua, The Works of Confucius Containing the Original Text. 
with a Translation, vol. 1. To Which is Prefixed a Di.ssertiJtion on the 
Chinese Language and Character (Serampore, 1809). 
Mbnoires concernant l'histoire, les sciences, les arts, les moeurs, les usages, 
etc. des Chinois par les missionaires de Pekin, 16 vots. (Paris, tn6-t814). 
Memoires du Cardinal de Retz, contenant ce que s' est passe de remmquable 
en France pendant des premieres annees du Regne de Louis XIV, new 
edn., 3 vols. (Amsterdam, 1719). 
Mill, james, The History of British India, 2nd edn., i (London, 1820). 
Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat de, Baron, De l' esprit des lois, 2 vol~. 
(Geneva, 1748). 
S39 

BJBLJOGRAPHY 
Moor, E., ~Account of an Hereditary Living Deiry, to Whom Devotion is 
Paid by Bramins of Poona and irs Neighbourhood', Asiatic Researches, 7 
(London, 1803), 381-95. 
Muller, Johannes von, Die Geschichte der Schweiz.erischen Eidgenos-
senscbaft, 5 vols. (Leipzig, 1786-1808), in Siimmtlic.he Werke, xix-xxv 
(Tubingen, 1815-17). 
-- Versuch uber die Zeitredmung der Vorwelt (Amsterdam, 1726), in 
Siimtlicbe Werke., viii (iubingen., 1810), 195-230. 
Muller, Niklas, Wissen und Kunst der alten Hindus in urspriinglicher 
Gestalt und im Gewande der Symbolik, i (Mainz, 1822). 
Nieb~ Banhold Georg, Romische Geschichte, 3 vols. (Berlin, 1811-32). 
Paterson, J. D., •of the Origin of the Hindu Religion', Asiatic Researches, 
8 (Calcu~ 1805), 44-87. 
Pausanias, Graeciae descripto, 3 vols. (Leipzig, 1818). 
--Description of Greece. Books I and 11, tt. W. H. S. Jones (Loeb Classical 
Library; Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1918). 
Pauw, Comelius de, Recherches philosophi4ues sur les Egyptiens et les 
Cbinois, 2 vols. (Berlin, 1713; German edn., tn4). 
Plato, ApologW. Epistulae~ Phaedo, Respublica, in Opera quae exta"t 
omnia, ed. H. Stepbanus, 3 vols. (Geneva, 1578). 
--The Collected Dialogues of Plato, ed. Edith Hamilton and Huntington 
Cairns (Princeton, 1989). 
Plutarch, Moralia: De lsitk et Osiride. The edn. used by Hegel is uncertain. Set 
Quae supersunt omnia, ed.J. G. Hutten, 14 vols. (llibingen, 1791-1804). 
-- Parallel Lives, vii, tr. Bernadotte Pecrin (Loeb Classical Library; 
Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1919). 
Produs, In Platonis Timaeon commentariorum libri quint:Jue (Cologne, 
1534). 
Polybius, Hi.storiarum lilm quae superst~nt (Frank~ 1619; Leipzig, 1816). 
Ptolemy, Geographiae libri oao (Frankfurt, 1605). 
Pufendorf, Samuel Baron von (pseud. 'Hippolytus a Lapide'), De s'laU 
imperii Germanici (Geneva, 1667). 
Putter, Johann Stephan, Teutsc.he Reichsgeschichte in ibrem Hauptfaden 
entwickelt~ 3rd edn. (Gotringen, 1793). 
Ranke, Leopold von, Fursten und Volker von SUd-Europa im 16. und 17. 
jahrhundert, i (Hamburg, 1827). 
-
Geschichte der romanischen und gennanischen Vi)lker von 
149~1535, i (Berlin? 1824). 
-
Zur Kritik neuerer Geschichtsschreiber: Eine Beylage zu desselben 
romanischen und gemumischen Geschicbu (Leipzig and Berlin, t824J. 
540 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Rawlins, John, •on the Manners, Religion, and Laws of the Cu'ci's, or 
Mountaineers of Tripure', Asiatic Researches, 2 (London, 1799), 187-93. 
Ritter, Carl, Die Erdkunde im Verhaltnis zur Natur und zur Geschichte des 
Memchen, oder allgemeine, vergkichende Geographie, als sichere Grund-
lage des Studiums und Unterrichts in physikalischen und historischen 
Wissenschaften, 2 vols. (Berlin, 1817-18). 
-
Die Vorhalle europaischer Volkergeschichten vor Herodotus, um den 
K4ukasus und an den Gestaden des Pontus (Berlin, 1820). 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, Discours qui a remporte le prix a I'Aaulemk de 
Dijon (Geneva, n.d.). 
-
Du Contrat Social (Amsterdam, 1762). 
Scenes in China, Exhibiting the Manners, Customs, Diversions and Singular 
Peculiarities of the Chinese ... lnduding the Most Interesting PartiaJars 
in Lord Amherst's Recent Embassy (London, 1820). 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph, Ober die Gottheiten von Samothrace 
(Stuttgart and Tubingen, 1815). 
-
Vorlesungen uber die Methode des akademischen Studiums (Tiibingen, 
1803). 
-On University Studies, tc. E. S. Morgan (Athens, Ohio,1966). 
Schiller, Friedrich, 'Die GOtter Griechenlandes' and 'Resignation'. The edn. 
used by Hegel is uncertain. See Siimmtliche Werke, 18 vols. in 9 (Stuttgart, 
1827-8). 
Schlegel, Friedrich, Philosopbie der Geschicbu, i (Vienna, 1829). 
-tiber die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier (Heidelberg, 1808). 
Scbleiermacher, Friedrich, Der christliche Glaube nach den Gnmdsiitzen tkr 
erJQngelischen Kirche im Zusammenhange dargesteUt, 1st edn., 2 vols. 
(Berlin, 1821-2). 
Schlozer., August Ludwig, Weltgeschichte n4ch ibren Haupttheikn im Aus-
zug und Zu.sammenhange, 2nd edn. (GOttingen, 1792-1801). 
Scott, Walter., Uber das Leben unJ die Werke der beriihmten englischen 
Roman-Dichter, tc. Ludwig Rellstab, 3 vols. (Berlin, 1826). 
Shore, John, 'On Some Extraordinary Facts, Customs, and Practices of the 
Hindus', Asiatic Researches, 4 (London, 1799), 331-50. 
Sonnerat, Pierre, Reise nach Ostindien und China, auf Befehl des KOnigs 
rmtemommen vom jahre 177 4 bis 1781, 2 vols. (Ziiric~ 1783 ). 
Spinoza, Benedicrus, Opera quae supersunt omnia, new edn., ed. H. E. G. 
Paulus, 2 vols. (Jena, 1802-3). 
-
The Collected Works of Spinoza, ed. and tr. Edwin Curley, 2 vol~. 
(Princeton, 1985 ff.). 
-
Tractatus Tbeologico-Politicus (Amsterdam, 1670). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Staunton, George (lord Macartney)~ An Authentic Account of an Embassy 
from the King of Great Britain to the Emperor of China, 2 vols. (London~ 
1797; German tr., 2 vols., Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1798). 
-- Ta Tsing Leu Lee: Being the Fundamental Laws, and a Selection from 
the Supplementary Statutes, of the Penal Code of China (london, 1810). 
Strabo, Rerum geographicarum libri XVII, ed. johann Philip Siebenkees 
eta/., 7 vols. (Leipzig, 1798-1819). 
--The Geography o(Strabo, vii, tr. Horace Leonard jones (loeb Classical 
Library; Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1930). 
SiiSmilch, Johann Peter. Versuch eines Beweises, ®P die erste Sprache ihren 
Vrsprung nicht von Menschen, sondern allein vom Schopfer erhaltm babe 
(Berlin, 1766). 
Tacitus, Cennania, in OpeTa, ed. J. J. Oberlin, based on the text established 
by j. A. Emesti, 2 vols. (leipzig, 1801). 
--Germany, tL Herbert W. Benario (Warminster, England, 1999). 
Thucydides, De bello Peloponnesiaco libri VIII, ed. H. Stephanus {Frankiur4 
1594). 
--The PeloponnesUin War, tr. Steven Lattimore (Indianapolis, 1998). 
Tschudi, Aegidius, Chronicon Helveticum, 2 vols. (Basel, 1734, 1736). 
Turner, Samuel, An Account of an Embassy to the Court of the Teshoo 
LAma. in Tibet; Containing a Narrative of a Journey through Bootan, 
and Part of Tibet (London~ 1800; Gennan tr., Hamburg, 1801 ). 
Virgil, Aeneid. 
--The Aeneid, tr. H. Rushton Fairclough (Loeb Classical Library; Cam-
bridge~ Mass., and London, 1916). 
Voltaire, Essai sur les moeu's et I' esprit des nations et su' les principaux faits 
d l'histoi,e depuis Cha,lemagne iusqu a Louis Xlll, in Oeuvres completes 
tk Voltaire, xvi (Kehl, 1784). 
Wilford, Francis, 'An Essay on the Sacred Isles in the West, with Other 
Essays Connected with that Work', Asiatic Researches, 8 (Calcutta, 
1805), 245-368, and 9 (Calcutta, 1807), 32-243. 
--'On Mount Caucasus', Asiatic Researches, 6 (Lond~ 1801), 455-536. 
Winckelmann, Johann Joachim, Geschichte der Kunst des Altertums 
(Dresden, 1764). 
Wolff. Christian, Oratio de Sinarum philosophia practica (Frankfurt, 1726). 
Xenophon, Quae extant opera, ed. H. Stephan us, 2nd edn. (Geneva, 1581 ). 
-- Anabasis. De expeditione Gyri minoris: Feldv.tg tu~ch ObeTasien~ ed. 
F. H. Bothe, 2nd edn. (leipzig, 1818). 
-- Cyropmdia, tr. Walter Miller, vols. v-vi of Xenophon, 7 vo)s. (Loeb 
Classical Lbrary; Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1914-25). 
542 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
-
Memorabilia, tr. E. C. Marchant, vol. iv of Xenophon (Loeb Classical 
Library). 
-Symposium, tr. A. j. Bowen (Wanninste~; England, 1998). 
lend-Avesta, Zoroasters lebendiges Wort, worin die Lehren und Meimmgen 
dieses Gesetzgebers von Gott, Welt, Natur, Menschen; ingleichen die 
Ceremonien des heiligen Dienstes der Parsen us(. aufbehalten sind, u. 
and ed. J. F. Kleuker from the French edn. of Anquetil du Perron, 5 vols. 
(Riga, 1776-83). 
SECONDARY WORKS IN GERMAN AND FRENCH 
Aurich, Ursula, 'China im Spiegel der deutschen Lireratur des 18. Jahrhhun-
derts', Germanischen Studien, 169 (Berlin: E. Ebering, 1935). 
Bautz, Timo, Hegels Lehre von der Weltgeschichte: Zur logischen unJ 
systematischen Grund/egung der Hegelschen Geschichtsphilosophie 
(Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1988). 
Brauer, Oscar Daniel, Didlektik der Zeit: Untersuchungen zu Hegels 
Metaphysik der Weltgeschichte (Stuttgart-Bad Cannsratt: Frommann-
Holzboog, 1982). 
Cordier, Henri, Bibliotheca Sinica: Dictionnaire Bibliographique des ouv-
rages relatifs a /'empire Chinois, 5 books in 3 vols. (Paris: E. Guilmoro, 
1904-6). 
d'Hondr, Jacques, Hegel, philosophe tk l'histoire vivante (Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1966). 
Europa und die Kaiser von China, 1240-1816, ed. Berliner Festspiele 
GmbH. (Frankfun: Inset Verlag, 1985). 
Jaeschke, Walter, 'Das Geschriebene und das Gesprochene: Wilhelm und 
Karl Hegel iiber den Begriff der Philosophie der Weltgescbichte', Hegel· 
Studien, 44 (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag, 2009), 13-44. 
Schulin, Ernst, Die weltgeschichtliche Erfassung des Orients hei Hegel und 
Ranke (G<ittingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1958). 
. . 
Seelmann, Hoo Nam, Weltgeschichte als Idee der menschlich~ Frer~nt: 
flegels Geschichtsphilosophie in der Vorlesung von 1822/23 ( dissertaoon, 
University of Saarland; Saarbrucken, 1986). 
.. 
Thiele Ulrich Ver4assung Volks:geist unJ Religion: Hegels Uberlegunge11 
, 
' 
,. 
, 
. 
bl 
2008) 
ZUT Weltgeschichte des Staatsrechts (Berbn: Duncker & Hum ot, 
· 
Die Weltgeschichte-das Weltgericht? Stungatter Hegei-Kongre$ 1999• ed. 
Rudiger Bubner and Walter Mesch (S~ttgart: Klett-Cotta, 2001 l-
543 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
SECONDARY WORKS IN ENGLISH 
Fackenheim, Emil L., God's Presence in History (New York: New York 
University Press, 1970). 
Gillespie, Michael Allen, Hegel, Heidegger, and the Ground of History 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984). 
Hodgson, Peter C., God in History: Shapes of Freedom (Nashville, Tenn.: 
Abingdon Press, 1989). 
-- Hegel and Christitm Theology: A Reading of the Lectures on the 
Philosophy of Religion (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005). 
Houlgate, Stephen, Freedom, Truth and History: An Introduction to Hegel's 
Philosophy (London and New York: Routledge, 1991). 
Hyppolire, jean, Introduction to Hegel's Philosophy of History, trans. Bond 
Harris and jacqueline Bouchard Spurloc~ with a foreword by Arkady 
Plotnitsky (Gainesville, Fla.: University Press of Florida, 1996). 
Magee, Glenn Alexander, 'Hegel and Mysticism', in The Cambridge O»n· 
panion to Hegel and Nineteenth-Century Philosophy, ed. Frederick 
C. Beiser (New York: Cambridge University Pr~ 2008), ch. 10. 
TheN ew Columbia Encydopedia, ed. William H. Harris and Judith S. Levy 
(New York and London: Columbia University Press., 1975). 
O'Brien, George Dennis, Hegel on RetJson and History: A Contemporary 
Interpretation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1975). 
The Oxford Classical Dictionary, 2nd edn., ed. N. G. L. Hammon and 
H. H. Scullard (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977). 
Patten, Alan, Hegel's Icka of Freedom (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1999). 
Perkins, Roben L., cd., History and System: Hegel's Philosophy of History 
(Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1984). 
Siebert., Rudolf J., Hegers Philosophy of History: Theological, Humanistic, 
and Scientific Elements (Washington, DC: University Press of America, 
1979). 
Walker, John, History, Spirit and Experience: Hegel's Conception of the 
Historical Task of Philosophy in his Age (Frankfurt and New York: 
P. Lang, 1995). 
White, Hayden, Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth· 
Century Europe (Baltimore and London: johns Hopkins University 
Press, 1973 ). 
Wilkins, Burleigh Taylor, Hegel$ Philosophy of History (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1974). 

NAME INDEX 
Aachen 478 
Abd-Remusat, Jean Pierre 113 n. 79, 
121 n. 90,241 n. 94 
Abraham 215, 317 n. 45, 454-5 
Ac:arnama 384 
Achaemenes 309 
Achilles 43, 371, 376 n. 12, 379-82, 
386-7,403,423 
Acropolis 376 
~ 
111-12,455 
Adonis 39, 331-2 
Aegean Sea 340,373 
Aeneas 427 
Aetolia 384 
Africa 29, 191 n., 193, 1%-7, 198, 330, 
339,374 
North Africa 31, 40, 57 
Agamemnon 44, 371, 376 n. 14, 379, 
381-2,403,471 
AgisN 425 
Ak
Ahriba'mao (Angra Mainyu) 38, 311-13 
r 298 n. 113, 308 
Alba, Duke of (Ferdinand Ahram de 
Toledo) 510 
Alexander the Great 35, 37, 43, 49-50, 
176, 201,255,285, 287-8,304 n., 
AI ___ J0~322,371,382,420,492-3 
"''CtaDdria 201, 288 n. 89, 335,423, 
452-3 
ADahabad 288 
Alps Mountains 201,427,445 
Altai Mountains 198 
~asis 336-7, 341, 348 n., 364 
n~~~azon River 195 
Amenti 334, 360 
America 31, 191 n., 192-3, 468, 496 
Free States of 193 
Nonh America 1~3, 385,413 
South America 193, 195 
Amherst, William Pin 235 n. 82 
Ammon, oracle of 348 
Amscbaspands (Amesa Spenras) 313 
Amu Darya (Oms) River 199,223,305, 
306. 308, 319, 322, 323 
Amur River 223 
Anaxagoras 14, 82-4 
Ancus Marcius 437 a. 16, 438 
Anquetil du Perron 38, 307,309, 
312 n. 22 
Amenor of Troy 427 
AntODine emperors of Rome 446 
Apis 41, 331, 351 
Apollo 42, 46, 162, 347 n. 36,367-8, 
393,420 
Apries 341 
JU2bU 199,289,292 
Gulf of 196,292 
JU2bia.n Sea 330 
Aral Sea 199, 223, 306 
Aras (Araxes) River 199 
Atbatts 323 
.Alcadia 384 
Arctic Oceu 296 
Areopagus 409 
Argentina 195 
.Aigos 376, 405 
Aria, Arieoe 306,310 
Aristopbaues 162, 418 
Arisrode 22, 82, 87-S, 111,162. 241, 
423,440 
Au1D~ 294,306,309,317,422 
Anninius 471 
Arrian 285, zsa n.. '' 
Arthm; King -466 
Asia 19, 29, 35, 46, 115, t 93, 19&-200, 
203--4, 257, 292, 331, 373, 381, 
393,423 
Ceuttal.Asia 39, 331 

NAME INDEX 
Asia Minor 44, 49, 52, 57, 199, 294, 306, 
325, 339, 370 n. 68,374-8, 385,415, 
422,442-3 
Assyria 32, 38,221, 306,316-21 
Astane 39, 318. 331-2 
Astyages 324 
Athena 101, 106 n. 66, 180, 367, 376-7, 
384,401. 403,503 
Athens 25, 44 n. 52, 49, 73,100 n. 57, 
165,201,374-6,381,395,401-2, 
405-11,414-15,424,459,503 
Atlantic Ocean 330 
Atlas Mountains 19..,. 
Atreus 377 
Australia (New Holland) 192, 195 
Austria 508,519 n. 79 
Ava 296 
Ayodhya 285 
Azerbaijan 306 
Azov, Sea of 294 
Babylon, Babylonia 38, 221, 306, 
316-21,323 
Bacuia 38,294,306,308-10,319,421 
Baghdad 4'T' 
Baikal, Lake 299 
Bailly, jean Sylvain 1 13 n. 80, 154 
Balkh 306, 308--9, 319 
Baltic Sea 381 
Bamiyan 308, 319 
Bavaria 466 
Beijing (Peking) 214 n. 6, 221,227-8, 
242,249 
Bel 317-19 
Behoni, Giovanni Battista 351,358 n., 
3540 
Benaccs 297 
Bengd 223,255,265 
Bentley, j. 289 
Berlin 1-4, 10, 195 n. 62,293 n. 102 
Bethlehem 493 
Bhutan 223, 299 n. 116 
Bias of Priene 325 
Black Sea 37, 44, 200 n_ 70,294, 304 n., 
374 
Boeotia 376--7,405, 408 
Bologna 480 
Bopp, Franz 263 n. 18, 293 
Bossuet, jacques Benigne 512-13 
Brahma 37, 277-9, 300, 452, 454 
Brahman 35 n. 48, 36,277-9, 281, 
310,333 
Brazil 195 
Britain, Britannia 52, 194, 201,465, 
466,508 
see also England, Scotland, Wales 
Brittany 194 
Buddha, the 32, 34, 37, 112 n. 79, 250, 
255,278,296-9,347 
Fo 32,34,296 
Gautama 278, 296 
Cadmus 368, 376 
Caesar, Augustus 52, 341, 446 
Caesar, Gaiusjulius 4, 16, 52,70--1,95-6. 
128,135,175,201.444-5 
Cairo 221 
Ca.mbyses 40, 309 n. 18, 328, 336-7, 
339--41,351,364 
Canaan 317,494 
Canada 194 
Canova, Antonio 2n 
Canhage 52, 330, 378, 427, 442-5 
Caspian Sea 32,199,211,223,294, 
306-7,322-3 
Cato tbe Younger 175 
Caucasus Mountains 200 n. 70. 376 
Cecrops 376, 381 
Champollion, jean Fran~ois 335 n. 6 
Changjiang (Yangtte) River 199. 
220-1 
Charlemagne 57-8, 463, 467, 469 n., 
477-8,483,486 
Charles Mane) 57,477 
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor 467, 
510, 511 n. 
Charles Xll, king of Sweden 508 
Chile 195 
China 5, 9, 31-5, 37, 116, 194, 200. 204. 
211-50, 251-2, 256-8, 284, 291. 
304-5,327,344 
Christ, Jesus 32, 53, 59-60, 187,209. 
273,289,392,402,449,4S5,479, 
489-92,504 
Chronos 161, 163, 349 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius 82 n. 16,432-3. 
436,44() 
Cleisthenes of Athens 409 
Cleisthenes of Corinth 381 
Colchis 200, 294 
Comorin, Cape 256 
Constantinople 201, 493 
Cornwall 331, 466 
Coromandel Coast 262 n. 11, 290 
Crete 377, 385,405-6 
Creuzer, Friedrich 264 n . .23, 
309 n. 16, 312 n. 25, 313 n. 28. 
332 n. 89 
Croesus 325, 337, 370 n. 68 
Ctesias 319-21 
Cyrene 339, 344, 374 
Cyrus me Great 38-9, 304 n., 307, 309. 
323-9, 336-7. 370 n. 68 
Cyrus the Younger 319 
546 

NAME INDEX 
Daedalus 387 
Dalai Larm, the 59.299,302.489-90 
Daniel 323 
Dante Alighieri 487 
Danube River 201,465-6, 471 n. 11, 495 
Darius [ Hystaspes 309, 328 n. 80, 329, 
370, 405 
Darwin, Otarles 19, 24 
Deccan Peninsula 25 5-6 
Deioces 323 
Delambre, Jean Joseph 113 n. 80. 
154 n. 26, 241 
· 
Delhi 35, 255 n. 4 
Delphi 201, 382 n. 26, 396, 420 
Denmark 194, 469. 508, 520 
Deucalion 3 7 5-6 
Diodorus Siculus 40, 319-20 nn. 
53-9, 321, 335, 339, 341-3, 
352, 371 n. 1 
Dionysius (deity) 346,352 n. 44 
Dionysius the Elder 106 o. 66, 320 
Diooysius the Younger 106 n. 66 
Dodona Uaninna) 376, 393-4, 396 
Don River 200, 302 
Dschemschid 309 
Dubois, Abbe 269 n. 39,271,276 n. 62, 
297 D. 110 
East Indies 193, 307 
Ebro River 478 
Eclcstcin, Baron von 108 n., 113 o. 79 
Egypt 5, 31-3, 39-44, 46, 57, 197, 221, 
292,320,331,334-70,376,385. 
393-4,422,477 
Eichhorn, Karl Friedrich 140, 461 n. 
Elbe River 466. 4 71 n. 11 
Eleusis 395 
Elis 384 
Ellora 290 
Elohim, the 24 7 
Elphinstone, Mountstuart 305 
England 194, 201, 226, 264--5, 358, 367, 
469,483-4,508.512,515.520 
Eos 335 n. 3 
Epaminondas 382.415 
Ephesus 370 n. 68 
Epicurus 14, 82 
Epirus 384 
Estonia 194 
Ethiopia 320 
f.uphcares River 31, 38. 199,211, 305-6, 
316-17,477 
E~pe 24,29,31, 38,56-7,59-60, 
192, 194, 196-201,204, 208 n .• 
216, 295, 373-4,421. 462-9, 
478-9,498 
Western Europe 62, 157 
Fackenheim, Emil L. 17 n. 32 
Far Easr 24, 156, 200, 206, 211, 304, 329, 
373 n. 4 
Fenelon, Fran~is de Salignac 106, 230 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb 18, 78 n. 2. 
102 D. 61 
Finland 194 
Firdawsi 38, 308 n. 10, 321-2 
Florence 4, 484, 501 n. 49 
Forbes, Duncan 7 n. 13, 10 
Fornax 434 
Forster. Georg 293 
France 4, 57, 107 n. 69, 113 n. 79.101, 
374,465,467,469,477-8,483-4. 
497, 512, 515, 519 D. 79, 520 
Francis I, king of France 510 
Francis ll, Austrian (Habsburgl 
emperor 207 n. 
Frederick n 71, 136, 513-19 
Frundsberg, Georg von 510 
Fuxi (Fo-hi, Fu-bi) 32, 218,250 
Galgaleb 308 
GaJilei., Galileo 516 
Ganges River 31, 35, 199, 211, 255-7, 
272, 274-5, 280, 288, 297, 
331-2,347 
Gangmu (Kang-mu) 216 
Gans, Eduard 4, 6-7,191 n. 
Gaubil, Antoine 216 o. 11,219 o. 26 
Gaul 52, 442. 445 
Genghis Khan 214, 222,299, 303 
Germany, Germania 52, 57, 59, 61-2. 71. 
81, 183, 201, 204, 312,445, 465~. 
469-70,473-4,478-80,482,484-7. 
495-6,503-4,508,511-14 
Ghazni 288 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von 105 n., 
426,477 
Good Hope, Cape of 292, 496 
GOrres,Josepb 81 n. 10, 113 D- 79, 308 n. 
10,311 
Gracchi, the 444 
Greece 11 n. 23, 12. 3(}-1,42-52, 73. 84. 
201,205,366-425.427,436.463-4. 
466 
Gregory VII 480 
Griesheim, K. G. J. von 5, 7, 8, 147 n. 19. 
173 n., 197 o., 211 n., 214 n. 4, 220 n. 
31, 222 o. 41, 225 n. st. 233 n., 
248 o. 110, 263 n. 19, 293 n. 103. 
298 n. 113, 314 o. 34. 399 o_ 
422 D. 25, 493 D. 35 
Grosier. Abbe 212 n .• 213 o. 
Guangdong (Canton) 220-1 
Guinea, Gulf of 196 
Gusw;p 309 
547 

NAME INDEX 
Gustavus Adolphus 508 
Guttnberg, Johannes 496 n. 
Hadrian 337 
Haemus. the (the Balkans) 201 
Halde, Jean Baptiste du 212 D., 216 n. 11 
Hamburg 193 
Hammer, joseph von 365 
Hannibal 442, 444 
Harpagus 324, 370 n. 68 
Hastings. lord (Frances Rawden-Hastings) 
266, 292 
Hegel, Karl vi, 3, 6-8, 96 D., 108 n., 191 n. 
Hellos 42, 367, 392-3 
Hellen 373 n. 5, 376 
Hepbaestus 337 D. 10, 349 D. 
Hera 435 
Heracles (Hercules) 348 o., 384 
Herder, Johaon Gottfried 111 n. 76, 125 
n. 96,212 n., 224 n. 43,236 D. 83, 
239 n. 90 
Hermes 140 D. 14, 347, 355 
Hermopolis (Antinaopolis) 337 
Herodotus 11, 40, 42, 48, 67, 70, 73 n. 21, 
106, 133,134 n., 135,294,309 n. 18, 
318-19, 321, 323 n. 66,324-5, 
328-30,33~336-43,345,347-8, 
351-2, 359-61, 363-6, 370, 371 n. 1, 
375,393--5,397,405-8,421 
Hesiod 393, 417 
Himalaya Mountains 198, 274, 296, 299 
Hindu Kush 306,309 
ftiod~ 255-6,306,477 
Hobbes, Thomas 18, 102 n. 61,152 n. 23 
Hoffmeister, Johannes 7-9, 96 D., 154 n. 
26, 191 n., 212 n. 
Hobenstaufen (Swabiao) rulers 487 
Holland 183, 204, 331 
Netherlands, the 508, 512,520 
Holy Land, the 59-410, 492 n. 33 
Hom (Haoma) 38, 316 
Homer 11 n. 13, 31, 43, 70, 105 n., 
120, 124, 130, 140 n. H, 191,215, 
230 n. 71,284, 347 n. 36, 371,37.5-6, 
379-82, 386, 391, 393, 403, 
411,417 
Horus 346 n., 347 n. 47 
Hostilius 437 
Hotho, H. G. v, 5, 8, 147 D. 19,167 n., 
l73n., 197n., 211n.,215 n. 8,220 n. 
31,222 n. 41, 267 n. 28,399 o., 
422 n. 85 
Huang He (Huang Ho) River 19~. 219, 
221 
Hugo, Gustav 140 
Humboldt, Akxaoder von 191 n. 
Hungary 201, 421 D. 84 
lamblichus 355 
India 5, 9, 11 n. 23, 31-7,68 n. 5, 116, 
.!04, 211, 221, 223, 251-305, 320, 
331,341,344,489,497-8 
Indian Ocean 306 
Indus Rivet 31, 35, 37, 199, 211, 255-0, 
264, 304 n., 305, 320 
Ionia 191, 370 n. 68 
Iran 306, 310, 322 
Iraq 306 
Ireland 508 
Isaiah 493 
Isis 41,346-8, 349, 393 
Israel 39, 321 n. 61, 326 
Italy 201,373 n. 5, 374,427 n. 4, 442-3, 
465,467,477,484,486-7,495, 
507-8,520 
jaeschke, Walter v, vi, 1 D. 1, 2 n. 4, 3 n. 6, 
9,108 n. 
JagallJ)jtha 280 
jische, Gottlob Benjamin 121 n. 89 
java 299 
Jehovah 245, 247 
Jena 2 n. 3 
jericho 504 
jerusalem 201, 493 
Jones, Sir William 260 n. 8, 271, 
279 n. 71, 286 
jordan River 493 
Joseph D, Holy Roman Emperor 470 
Josephus, Flavius 215 
Judah 321 n. 61, 326 
Judea 200 
jugunha 444 n. 28 
Jwnna River 255 n. 4 
jiingel, Eberhard 17 o. 32 
juno 319 
Juno Moneta 435 
Jupiter 161-2, 319-20, 380 
Kabul 305-6, 308, 310 
Kalidasa 272 n. 51, 293 
Kangxi 230,238 n. 88, 244 n. 103,145, 
248 n.lt2 
Kant, Immanuel 18, 28, 97, 102 n. 61, 186 
n. 49,517 n. 
Karakorum Mountains 299 n. 116 
Kashmir 255, 294, 305 
Kehler, F. C. H. V. von v, 5, 7 
Kepler, Johannes 118-19 
Khafre (Chepbren) 338 
Khorasan 306, 310, 322 
Khufu (Cheops) 338 
Kleuker,J. F. 307 JUt. 6-7, 309 n. 17, 
312 nn. 23-4, 315 on. 38-40, 
316 n. 41 
548 

NAME INDEX 
Kongzi (Confucius) 125,213 n., 217, 
24G-1 
Krug, Wilhelm Traugott 250 n. 121 
Kurdistan 317 
lacedaemonia (Laconia) 382 n. 27,408, 
411-12 
Lafayette, Marquis de 107 
Lally-Tolendal, Thomas Anhur 261-2 
Lammcnais, Abbe 108 n., 112 n. 79 
laozi (Lao-Tse) 34, 213 n., 249 
Laplace, Pierre Simon 241 
Lares and Penates 1 79, 185 
Lasson, Georg 7-9, 96 n., 191 n. 
Latvia 194 n. 61 
Lebanon 330 n. 87 
Leibniz, Gottfried WilheJm 22 n. 35, 85, 
212 n., 244 n. 103, 512-13 
Leo X (Giovanni de' Medici) 468 
Leonidas 406, 425 
Lessing. Gotthold Ephraim 15 n. 31, 811 n. 31 
Lhasa 299 
Libya 344 
Licinius, Gaius and L~K:ius Sextius 430,440 
Livonia 194 
Livy (Titus Livius) 12, 72-4, 136-7,427, 
438-9,441-2 
Locris 376 
Lombardy 199, 204 
Lothair II 481 
Louis XIV 515 
Lucan, Marcus Annaeus 175, 465 n. 
Luther, Manin 61,468,478 n., 496 n., 
503-5,510 
Lycw-gus 412, 459 
Lydia 323 n. 65, 324 n. 73, 370 n. 68, 376 
Macedonia 442 
Mackenzie, Colin 265 
Maharashtra 290 n. 96 
Mahmud 321 
Mailla, joseph de 212 n., 219 n. 26 
MaJabar Coast 269 
Manchuria 214 n. 6 
Manetho 336 
Marathon 405-6 
Mardonius 73 n. 21,397 
Marius, Gaius 443-5 
Mars 348, 386 
Marshman, joshua 213 n. 2 
Maurice of Saxony 511 
Mecca 201 
Media 38, 306,317,319,321-2,324-5 
Mediterranean Sea 29, 37, 39, 44, 52, 
194-5, 197, 200..1, 205, 304 n., 306, 
330,427, 442-3 
Memnon 334, 358 n. 
Memphis 40, 337 
Menelaus 376 n. 14 
Menenius Agrippa 72, 73 n. 17, 137 
Mercury 20, 140 
Meroe, Lake 338 
Meru, Mount 275 
Mesopotamia 317 
Meton 287 
Mexico 192-3, 512 
Michelangelo 503 
Midas 375 
Middle East 31, 57,200, 206,373 n. 4 
Miletus 378 
Mill, James 277 n. 67, 280 n. 72 
Mi~a 73,162,319,386 
Minos 363, 384 
Mississippi River 194 
Mithra 313, 315 
Mithradates VI 444 
Mnemosyne 11.5-17, 130,134 
Mongolia 299 n. 116 
Montesquieu, Charles de Secoodar 139 
Morocco 197 
Moses 504 
Muhaaunad 289,474~ 
Muller, Johannes von 73, 136-9,213 n., 
215, 221 n. 35, 322 
Muller, Nikolaus 286 
Mumbai (Bombay) 299, 307 n. 6 
Muses, the 162 
Mvcenae 277 
Myceris (Mycerinus) 338 n. 14 
Mylitta 318 
Nabooasser (Nabupola.ssar) 323-4 
Nala 268, 27~1 
Nanking 220 
Naples 478, 520 
Napoleon Bonaparte n n. 28, 193, 
426,446 
Narbada (Nerbudda) River 25(,.....7 
Near East 49,200, 325-6,373 n. 4, 
421, 477 
Neckar River 466 
Neith 349 D., 367, 376 
Nepal 223 
Neptune 384 
Nero 435, 446 
Nestor 379 
New Holland (Ausualia) 192,195 
Newton, Sir Isaac 311 
Niebuhl; Barthold Geoq: 81 n. 11, 
139,290 
Niger River 196-7 
NdeRiver 4o-l, 197,221,245,337,340, 
345......6, 348, 358 
Nile Valley 40,337, .34(} 
549 

NAME INDEX 
Ninuod 319 
Nioevah 317,319, 320 
Ninus 319-20 
Nisbet, H. B. 1 n. 1, 7-9, 96 n. 
Nitocris 321 
Noah 215,289 
Norway 194,508 
Numa Pompilius 437 
Numitor 427 
O'Brien, George Dennis 1 1 n. 22 
Oceanus 46, 376, 393 
Odysseus 380 
Oedipus 368 
Olympian gods 46, 392 n. 39 
Orestes 471 
Onnazd (Ahura Mazda) 38, 
307 n. 7, 309 n.17, 310 n. 21, 
311-14, 328 
Orpheus 375 
Osuu 41,245,346-9,355,361,393 
Ottos of Saxony, four kings of 486-7 
Pacific Ocean 192 n. 56 
Padua 427 n. 4 
Palestine 200, 317 
Pandora 384 
Parapanisus Mountains 294, 309 
Paris 5, 261 
Pa.trodus 387 
Paul, the Apostle 145 n. 
Pausanias (king of Sparta) 397 n. 44 
Pausanias (Greek geographer) 73 n. 21, 
371 D.l. 3T 
Peloponnesus, tM 48. 373, 375-6, 384, 
411-1:!. 
Pclopidas 415 
Pelops 376 
Pepin 'the Shon' 477 
Pericles 69-70, 135,406,409-11, 414, 
419.468 
Pc~ 5,9,31,33,37-40,42-3,106,200, 
257,259,304-33,344,369,374, 
463,47-
Persian Gulf 306, 318 
Peru 192, 195 
Pharsalus 465 
Phasis River 200. 294 
Philip of Macedon 49, 322 n. 64, 420, 
422-3 
Pbocis 420 n. 
Phoeru~ 44,330-1,376,378 
Phry~ 331-2,375 
Phtb.iotis 376 
Piedmont, cbe 520 
Plataea 44 n. 52, 48, 73-4, 382., 
. 397 
Plato 10, 49, 82-3, 87-8, 106, 162, 241, 
258, 314, 333 n. 90, 4()3 n. 48, 
417-19,423-4,452 
Pliny the Elder 285 
Plutarch 50,367, 425, 445 
Poitien; 4 77 
Poland 194 n. 61, 201, 519 n. 79 
Polybius 12, 50, 70, 73, 137, 425. 442 
Pompey the Great 175 n. 
Pondicherry 262 n. 11 
Portugal 465 
Poseidon 46, 348, 392-3, 395 
Proclus 367,395 n. 41,519 n. 76 
Prometheus 376 n. tO, 384 
Protagoras 417 n. 76 
Provence 4 77 
Prussia 508, 518 n. n, 519 n. 79,520 
Psammcnirus 336 
Psammctichus I 338-9 
Ptah 349 
Ptolemaeus, Claudius (Ptolemy) 285,288 
Ptolemy U, Philadelphus 336 
Pufendorf, Samuel Baron von ('HippolytUs 
a l..apide') 513 
Punjab 255, 288, 298 n. 113 
PUtter, Johan Stephan 461 n., 486 
Pythagoras 344, 356-7 
Qianlong (Kicn-long) 224, 230,238 n. 88 
Quixote, Don 483 
Rama 263 n. 18, 275,285 IL 80 
Ranke. Leopold von 12-13,75 
Raphael 501 
Red Sea 330. 504 D. 53 
Retz, Cardinal de 71, 136 
Rhampsinitus 364-5 
Rhea 392 
Rhine River 465, 495 
Rhodes 376 n. 12 
Richelieu, Cardinal 513 
Rio de Ia Plata River 195 
Ritter. Karl 191 n., 195, 213 n. 3, 218 n. 
22, 220 n. 30, 221 n. 35, 222 nn. 
38-9,238 n. 88,294,297 nn. uo-n 
Rome 31, 50-5, 72, 95, 109, 173, 175. 
201,358,407,414,422.416-60. 
484. 510 
Romulus (and Remus) 427-8, 437 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 18, 102 n. 61. 
112 n. 90, 152 n. 23,413 
Roxana 421 
Rubicon River 445 
Rum, land of 322 
RUmi, Jalal-ai·Din 187 n. 51. 474 n. 
Russia 31,194 n. 61, 200-1.509 • 
519 n. 79 
sso 

NAME INDEX 
Sahaca Desen 196-7 
Saint-Martin, Antoine Jean 113 n. 79 
Sais 40, 42, 337, 339, 376 n. 15 
Salamis 44 n. 52, 48, 406 
Salerno 480 
Samarkand 288 n. 87 
Sardanapalus (AshurbanipaJ) 320, 323 
Sardinia 330. 377 
Sardis 323, 325, 370 n. 68 
Sanorius (Senorius) 443, 444 n. 28 
Saxony 466, 487 
Scandinavia 465 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph 24, 
112 n. 79, 152-3 
Schlller, Friedrich 45, 391, 463 n. 
Schlegel, Friedrich 24, 108 n., 112 nn. 
77-8, 113 n. 79, 11 +-15 n., 120 n. 88, 
125 n. 96, 153, 272 n. 51 
Schfeiermacher., Friedrich 501 o. 50 
Schwarz, Benhold 495 
Scipio, Africanus Major 443, 444 o. 32 
Scorel, Jan van 253 
Scotland 508 
Scott, Sic Walter 7 5 
Seelmann, Hoo Nam 11 n. 25 
Semiramis 319-21 
Sennacherib 341 
Servius Tullius 437 
Sesosttis 320, 337-9 
Setbos 341 
Shanxi 219 
Shen (Tschen) 34, 247-8 
Sheoyang (Mukden) 214 n. 6 
Shi Hu.angdi (Shi Huangti) 217, 229 
Shiva 278-9, 284 
Shunzhi (Chun--chi) 222 
Siam 296, 301 
Siberia 32, 198, 214 n. 6, 223 
Sibree, john 3 n. 7, 7, 9, 96 n. 
Sicily 74, 106 n. 66, 374, 405-6 
Sidon 200 
Silesia 303, 519 
Smyrna 377 
Socrates 14, 49, 82-4, 241,368 n. 63, 
395, 402-3, 417-19, 451,468 
Sogdiana 421 
Solomon 240,289, 321 n. 61 
Solon 241,408-9,459 
Sonnerat, Pietre 213 n., 216 n. 12 
Sophocles 162 
South Seas (Pacific Ocean) 192 
Spain 57, 197, 200, 330, 378,442-3, 
465,467,469,477-8.483,496. 
512,520 
Span.a 44 n. 52, 48-9, 173, 382 n. 27, 
403,405,407,411-15,420,425,459 
Spartacus 444 
Spinoza, Benedict 35, 121, 124, 15~ 254, 
489 n. 30 
Sri Lanka {Ceylon) 237, 256,2%, 299,301 
StawJton, George T. (Lord 
Macartney) 212-13 n., 130, 
249n. 116 
Strabo 285, 297 n. 110 
Suez 292 
Suleiman (Zagros) Mountains 306 
Sulla, Lucius Cornelius 443-5 
Suimilch. johann Peter 111 n. 76 
Sweden 194, 508 
Switzerland (Helvetia) 193,201, 498,508 
Syr-Darya Qaxams) River 199, 305 
Syria 38-9, 199, 292, 306, Jn, 378,453 
Tacitus, Publius 461 n. 
Tarquinius Priscus 437 
T:=nius Superbus 437-9 
T: 
·-Lama 2!19--300 
Taschi-Lumpo 299 
Tdemacbus 106 o. 66, 230 n. 71, 380 
Thebes (in Egypt) 40,334 n. 3, 337, 359 
Thebes (in Greece) 368 n. 64, 376, 
41S, 420 
Theodoric 465 
Thennopylae 406 
Thersites 380 
Theseus 408,425 
Thessaly 48, 375, 405,411,465 0. 4 
Thodl 355 
Tbrace 375 
Thucydides 11, 67, 69-70, 74, 133, 135. 
162, 371 o. 1, 375-8, 382,384,403, 
406,410,414 
Tlllll (Shangdi) 34, 147, 249 
1iberius 446 
1ibet 221, 269, 275, 296--7, 299-302, 4n 
Tigris River 31, 38, 199, 211, 305-{), 
31Cr-17,323 
Tunur Cfamerlaoe) 288, 303 
Tttans, the 46, 392-3 
Troy 41, 359, 382, 386. 427-8 
Tschudi, Aegidius 73, 137 
Turan 322, 323 o. 65, 325 
Turkev 223, 375 n. 9, 421 
ruroei-. Samuel 296 n. 108,297 n. 110. 
299 o. 116, 300, 302 IL 123 
Typboo 344i 
Ty~ 200,329--30,376.427 
Ural River 200 
Venice 204, 427 n. 4, 440, 499 n. "" 
v.kramiditya 289 
Virgil 386 n. 31, -42"' 
V'Iqio Mary 2.53, 4,1 
551 

NAME INDEX 
Vishnu 278, 279,284, 298 n. 114 
Krishna 278 
Vishvam.itra, Prince 263 n. 18 
VJStUia River 199 
Volga River 200, 223, 302 
Voltaire, Fraft\Ois Marie Arouet de 212 n., 
214n. 4 
Wales 466 
Washington, DC 194 
West Indies 193 
White, Hayden 13 n. 26, lS n. 28 
Wilford, Francis 264 n. 23, 275-6 n. 62, 
288-90,308 
Wtlkios, Burleigh Taylor 11 n. 22 
William of Normandy, 'the 
Conqueror' 483 
Winkelmann, Johann Joachim 343 
Wolff, Christian 125 n. 9S, 212 n.-, 
244 n. 103 
Xenophon 70,135,323 n. 67, 327n.,328, 
403 D. 48, 414 
Xe~ 297,329,405 
Yao (Yu) 32, 216, 219-21 
Yue (Yo) Mountains 246 
Zaire River 198 
~neAie~ 311-12 
Zeus 73, 163, 320 n. 56, 346 n. 35, 
376 D. 10, 380, 392-3, 395 
Zoroaster 38,307,309, 310 n. 21, 
312-13, 316, 327 

SUBJECT INDEX 
actions and consequences 94--6 
Africa, geographical features of 196-8 
agri~ 202-3,341,348 
America, as land of the future 193--4 
animals 148-9, 151, 153. 349-54 
anthropomorphism 391 
architecture 358-9 
aristocracy 105-7, 183,407-9, 411-12, 
436,438,44(1 
art 123-4,188,243,290,357-8,383-4, 
386-7,419,500-1 
Asia 
as childhood of world history 206 
dawning of world history in 198,201, 
211 incl. o. 1 
geographical feahftS of 198-200 
origio of civilization in 114-15 
princip~ of 156 
astronomy 113, 154,241-2 
beauty 45, 386--8, 400, 415-16 
Bible,~ 
account of origins in 111-12 
account of the flood in 215 
Gebesis 3: 22 4SS n. 40 
Genesis 10: 8-12 319 n. 51 
Exodus 14: 21-31 504 n. 53 
Joshua 6: 16-21 504 n. 53 
Isaiah 26: 19 493 n. 36 
Daniel2: 48-9 323 n. 68 
Matthew 16: 1-4 504 n. 54 
Mark 8: 11-13 504 n. 54 
Luke 24: 5~ 493 n. 37 
John 8: 32 85 o. 24, 500 n. 55 
John 15: 26 494 n. 38 
John 16: 7 494 n. 38 
John 16: 13 85 n. 25, 449 n. 38, 
494n. 38 
John 18: 36 402,479 n. 20 
553 
Acts 17:22-28 145 n. 17 
1 Corinthians 2: J 0 8S D. 2S 
1 Corinthians 8: 3, 13: 12 85 o. 24 
Philippians 2:6-7 392 D. 38 
Hebrews 11: 20-30 504 n. 53 
bibles (basic writings) of peoples 11, 
70,215 
Buddhism 250 incl. o. 121, 2SS, 
295-9 
castes 257-14 
Catholic Church 101,479-94, 501-3, 
510-12,516 
chance (conriogency) 14, 47,82-3,108, 
157,462 
chaJJge (attention) 21, 107-8, 142-3, 
155-6 
China 31-4,211-50 
its age 215 
ancient wisdom of (the Gua) 218 
art of 243 
autonomy of 214, 223 
dynasties of 216-17, ~· 
ethical customS of 237 
Hegel's treatment of 212-14 n. 2 
bi!ltorica.l records of 211-15 
history of 213-14, 219-23 
language of 239-40 
legal and moral spheres idc:ntical 
in 232-4 
mandarins (public officials) in 227-8, 
236 
mora.liey in 125-6 
original booksof(the/Pig) 215-19 
population of 213 
powers and qualities of the emperoc 
in ~. 
23o-2, 238 
principles of the Olioese sta~ 223-32 
punishment iD 23~ 

SUBJECT INDEX 
China (cont.) 
religion of 243-50 
remains unchanged 214 
sciences of 238-9, 24~3 
social conditions in 224-6, 229-30 
subjective freedom violaud in 234-6 
ttrritory of 223 
Christ, Jesus 
quest fur presence of in medieval 
church 488-92 
resurrection of 493 
spirirual and sensible presence of 
488-94 
spiritual presence of in faith and 
communion 503-4 
as the this of God 5~0, 391-2, 396, 
453-4,456,489-91 
tomb of 493 
unity of divine and human narure 
appears in 187, 489 
Christianity 
appearance of 447, 45~ 
brings changes in ethical life 457-8 
brings changes in social practices 481 
can have no slavery 457 
consequences of for life and state 457-9 
aud the Crusades 492-4 
day of judgment bas dawned for it 463 
incl. n. 2 
develops within the Nordici<Jennanic 
principle 460 
Eastern and WesterD provenance of 476 
its establishment of two worlds 
(supersensible, temporal) 458 
and freedom 88, 503, 505-6 
as inwardly con.summate vis-a-vis the 
outside world 463--4 
and Islam 464 
aud lcoowledge of God 145 
as living aud contemporary spirit 449 
~val 479-82,488-92 
medieval political involvements of 
482-8 
and the presence of Christ 488-92 
as a religion of unity 187 
as the revealed and only trUe 
religion 151 
in the RoiiWl Empire 447-59 
and the state 458-9 
truth of 447-9 
WJity of divine and human nature 
in 390-1, 453-6 
world of 157, 186-9 
church 479,481-8,501-3, 515-17 
citizens, and rulers 105 
climate 191-2 
coasdands 195-li 
commercial activities 495-6 
commonality, and individuality 469-72 
.:onstitution 18, 27-8, 104-7, 181~, 
399-404,409,44~446 
continents 194-5 
Council of Trent 512 
creation 11,24,142-3 
Crusades, the 492-4 
cui~ 24-5, 109-10, 122-4, 155-65, 
180-1,189-91,382-7 
.:unning 16-17, 96 n. 44, 128, 186 
daimon 401-3 
death 359--63 
democracy 18,47-8,105-7,183, 
399-404,408-9,419 
dependence, feeling of 500-1 
deserts 196-7 
despotism 257 
destiny 397-9 
development 19, 107-11, 118-26, 155-66 
discoveries, voyages of 496 
drives 148-9 
Early Middle Ages 57-8, 467, 469-77 
education, of the human race 1 5, 
88 n. 31 
Egypt 40-3, 334-69 
and agricultUre 341, 348 
architectwe of 358-9 
art of 357-8 
castes in 341 
character of Egyptians oriented to 
particuJar pw-pose 363-6 
cycle of Isis and Osiris in 34&-8 
death and immortality in 359-63 
embalming (muuuni6cation) in 362 
enigmatic character of 334-5, 344, 368 
flood and drought in, 340 
geographical fearures of 339--40 
and Greece 36&-70 
hieroglyphics in 335, 358 
history of 336-9 
juxtaposition of animal and human 
forms in 354 
most ancient and most rational of 
peoples 337, 339 
.u peaceable 341 
pharaohs of 338 
pyramids of 359-60 
its relation to Persian Empire 336-7 
religion of 343-9, 35~7 
reverence for animal life in 349-54 
sculpture of 358-9 
social practices of 342-3 
sphinx as symbol of 334, 368 
spirit as envisaged by 355-7 
554 

SUBJECT INDEX 
spirit struggles to liberate itself from 
na~ein 344,357,367 
status of women in 343 
use of symbols in 345, 348, 352-4 
Enlightenment 517-18 
estateS 497-8 
ethical life 97-9, 100-1, 146--7,173-4, 
177-9,205-6,457-8 
Europe 183, 208 n. 79 
balance of power in 499 
as center and endpoint of world 
history 198,201 
geographical features of 2oo-1, 204 
peoples comprising (Romance, 
Germanic, Slavic) 464-7, 507-9 
see also Germanic World 
evil 15-17 incl. n. 32,85-6,90,456 
f~th 21,61,83-4,145,449,503-4,516 
family 103-4, 179, 189,224--6 
fate, 397-9 
fealty 471-2 
feeling 148, 500-1 
feudal system 497 
6nalend 21,25,85-6,89,97,144,167-8 
actualization of 91, 93-4 
as glorification and honor of God 168 
of history 166-8 
universal and abstraCt 91 
versus particular ends 461-2 
what God has willed for the world 146 
finitude 51, 171-3,431, 433, 446-7, 
45o-2 
folk spirit (spirit of a people) 13 n. 26, 
101, 141 
development, refinemeot, over-
refinement, decline of 24-5, 158-66, 
372-3 
modes of progress of 157-66 
see also spirit 
free will (private, subjective) 27, 170, 181, 
400-2 
freedom 
actualized in the state 100--4, 177-81 
as banner of the Gennans 47o-l 
as being at home with self in the object 
or content 505 
as final end 89 
as goal of world history 506 
in the Greek World 388-90 
idea of 146-66 
as intrinsic to spirit 87-9, 146-66 
~isunderstandings of 89 
m nature as opposed to society 102-3 
and necessity 170 
progress in the consciousness of 15, 88 
in the Reformation 503, 50~ 
its relatioo to seafaring 205 
rise of in cities 496-7 
as spirit of the modem era 506, 520 
stages in the consciousness of 15, 19, 
87-8, 110, 118-19 
of tbe will (of universal, not particulary 
spirit) 519-20 
~aphy 29, 191-205 
Germanic peoples 208lnd. D. 79, 460, 
464,466-7,470-2,507-8 
Gennanic World 55-63,461-521 
begilllling of 464-7 
cannot be approached as impartially as 
tbe distant past 461 
and Christianity 479-82, 488-~ 
commonality and individuality in 
469-72 
early medieval period of 467, ~9-77 
and Europe 183, 208 n. 79 
human beings as such are free in 88 
independence and unity of stateS 
in 462-4 
and Islam 474-7 
medieval period of 467-8,478-99 
medieval polir:ical history of 482-8 
and modernity 468, 509-20 
nations after the Reformation in 507-9 
as old age or maturity of world 
history 208 
periods in the history of 467-9 
post-Refonnarion wan ol. religioo 
in 509-14 
principle of 208-10 
reconciliation accomplished in 208-10 
aJMf the Reformation 503-6 
social conditions ol in late medieftl 
period 497-9 
and subjectivity 461 
rransition to modernity iD 500-9 
triumph of ~t'J 
in 47.J-4 
tum to extemal world in • 
maJi,mal 
~riod 494-9 
. 
. 
unJ6cation of idea and historical 
particularity in 461-4 
God 
as absolute idea 167-8, 171 
as absolute spirit 151 
as absolutely defermined within 
godlle1f 448 
. 
a~ 
of in and as a this 45, 391, 
396.453-4.45,,489-91 
appearance of in tbe &sb 390-1,489 
Chinese view of 244-5 
death of 490 
as end (aim) cJ .bistotY 168 
freedom of 520 
555 

SUBJECT INDEX 
God (cont.) 
governs the world 145~ 
Greek wncept of 388-91 
Hindu view of 276-8 
for human beings their own 
essence 388, 390 
incarnation of 391,489 
is not a quantity but a quality 
(n:lation) 488 
is not hidden in the beyond 14~, 
187-8 
Jewish cancer of 332-3, 452, 454 
knowledge o 14-ts, 84--5, 145-6 
and love 448 
and natural science 516 
as tbe One 447-8, 452, 454 
Persian view of 312 
proof of 79 n. 7 
providence of 14, 21-2, 46-7, 83-5, 
1-45,396-8,462 
and reason 79 
revealed as humao being io hwnan 
shape 453 
revelation of 85,145,453 
as triune 151, 448-9 
God does not yet appear to the Greeks in 
the flesh 388, 390-1 
God is not yet worshiped by the Greeks 
in spirit and truth 388-9 
gods and goddesses of 380. 391-5 
individuality in 385-6, 388,400,405 
incl. n. 54,419, 421, 423-4 
leadership in 379-80 
maturity of 404-13 
mysteries of 394-5 
only some ue free in 87-88, 404 
origins of 373--6 
peace in 385 
and the Pdoponncsian Wu 414-5 
periods of its history 372-3 
and Persia 369-70 
and the Persian Wars 405-7 
its relation to non-Greek peoples 374-6, 
383-5,393-4 
religion of 387-99,419 
as unity of buman and divine nature 28, 
rivaJry between Athens and Spana 
in 407-13,414-15,419-20 
and slavery 404,409,411 
spiritualized sensuality of 371-2, 
388-9, 392-3 
spread of Greek. cuJture ro the East 
42()-3 
186-8,453-4,488-9 
as what bas being in and for il:sdf 170 
wiUof 146 
work of in history and the present 521 
Goths 465 
Gte~:k World 43-50, 371-425 
and the age of Alexandu the Great 
42()-5 
as age of youtb in world history 207, 
371-2 
aristocracy in 407-9, 411-12 
art of 383-4,386-7, 419 
beauty in 386-8,400, 415-16 
citadels of 377-8 
city-stateS of 422 
colonies of 374,376 
constitution of 399-404, 409 
culture of 382-7 
decline and faD d 413-25 
~OC£aCYiD 399-404,408-9,419 
depiction of in Homeric poems 371, 
379-80 
dynasties of 377-9, 381 
and Egypt 366-70 
emergence of thought (philosophy) 
in 415-20 
first social and politicaJ organization 
of 377-82 
and freedom 388-90, 400-2 
games, song. and dance of 3 87 
its srrusgle for survival against 
Persia 405-7 
subjectivity in 389, 390, 399-400, 402, 
416-17 
tribes of 374-6 
unity and div«sity of 381-2, 405 
view of fate or destiny in 397-9 
warfare in 379-80,382,411, 
414--15,421 
gunpowder 141, 190,495-6 
happ~ 26, 172, 176 
hel"oes (great figul"es of history, world-
historical individuals) 26, 96, 122, 
174-6, 422-3 
hrter~neity 374 
hieroglyphics 33S, 358 
highlands 195-6, 198-200, 203 
Hinduism 187, 255, 273-81, 297-8 
historian 67-71, 76-7, 81, 133-40 
historiography, types or varieties of 
11-12,20.67-77,133-46 
history 
· 
S56 
absolute 167 
a priori character of 13, 78, 81, 118-19 
a priori lictions in 14, 81 
as actualization of spirit culminating in 
states 521 
. 
beginning of 19, 23-4, 111-18. 152-4 
deSuuction, violence, and evil in 90-l 

SUBJECT INDEX 
empirical 14, 81 
as event and as narrative 11, 19, 67-8, 
115,133,214.286-7 
final end of 25. 166-8 
as God's work 511 
hermeneutical circle in 21, 81, 144 
inappropriate comparisons in 
12()...1,124 
and nature 191-2, 198 
objective and subjective sides of 94 
ori~n~:~eo~nalhl~ocy 
philosophical: see philosophica.l world 
history 
and prehistory 114-16 
produced by states 115-16 
as progress in the consciousness of 
freedom 15, 88 
progress of 24-5, 15~6 
reason in 21, 81, ~4, 119, 144 
re8ec:tive see rcHcctive history 
as ruled by providel:'la 83-5 
as slaughterhouse 16, 90 
spectacle of 9()...1, 127-8 
ultimate purpose of 144 
see t~lso world history 
Holy Roman Empire 467, 4 78 
Holy Spirit 49~ 
human beings, humanity 
abnormaJ specimens of 119-20 
and animals 148-~, 153, 349-54 
drawn by ideals 89-90, 97-'J, 169-76 
driven by passions 89-96, 169-76 
go out from and return to 
themselves 150 
and God 388-~1 
as infinite in cognizing, limited in 
willing 185-6 
as intrinsicaUy free 87-9, 1~6 
natural state of 152-3 
as political beings 178 
potentiality and actuality of 151 
responsibility of for good and evil 97-8 
self-knowledge of (know thyself!) 
368,456 
as thinking beings 78 
io unity with God 453--4 
see tdso spirit 
idea 
absolute idea of God as the One 447-8 
diremption of 172-3 
as divine idea 169 
as driving force in history 147 incl. n. 19 
as etrmallife of God within itself 170 
goes forth inro antithesis 170 
as guide of peoples and world 20, 
140,14i 
and historical particularity 461-4 
of human freedom 22--6, 14~6 
as labor of spirit 154 
in logic, nature, and spirit 146-i 
and passions 169-76 
as philosophical name for God's 
wiU 146 
its role in hisrory as lure 17, 97-9, 
169-76 
as unity of concept and objectivity, 
thought and sensibility 391 incl. n. 36 
and unity with subjective will 17(, 
immortality 36~3 
India 34-7,251-303 
an aod architecture of 29() 
Asian peoples related to 295-303 
austerities and sacri6ccs in 27.9-81 
Brahmi, V!Simu, and Shiva in 277-9 
Brahman in 277-8, 281 
Brahmans in 262-3, 270 
castes of 257--64, 267 
civil legislation (Laws of Manu) in 263, 
265-72 
despotism in 257, 272, 282 
dispersal of peoples from 293-S 
ethical depravity of 271-2 
fantasy (imagination, dreaming) 
in 251-3, 273-4 
freedom la.cking in 256-7,258, 271, 
276,281-2 
geographic region of 255-7 
incmporation of history of fomgo 
peoples in 287-9 
intemB.l political confticts of 283 
lack of history aud historical a<rOUDts 
in 116-17,252, 286-7 
land ownership in 265~ 
language of (Sanskrit), aud i1s rdatioo to 
other la.ng&uges 293-S 
marriage and treatment of women 
in 268-9 
myths of origin of 284 
as object of desire for all peoples 
251,291 
oneness (universality) aod divcrsicy 
(particularity) in 253-5, 260, 273, 
277-8 
J»!ltheism of 254-5, 273-4 
political condition of (the state) 281-9 
principle of 251-S, 291 
punishmenr in 263--4 
. 
related religions of (Buddhism, 
Lamaism) 295-303 
religion of(~~~ 273-81, 297--8 
religious regulaaons m po-t . 
renunciation of earthly 1nteresD Ul 
125~ 
557 

SUBJECT INDEX 
India (cOPit.) 
representation ot God in 276-8 
its role in world histor-y 251,291-5 
sensuality of 275-6 
social conditions of 257--64, 268-9 
ttade with and travel to 291 
ttansmigrarion of souls in 275 
vast numbers of 287 
individuality 388, 400, 405 incl. n. 54, 
419. 421, 423-4 
and commonality 469-72 
and state 178-81 
as a this 396 
Indo-European languages 114 iocl. n. 81, 
293--5 
indulgences 502-3 
infinitude 28, 52, 147 D. 19, 184-8, 45~2 
interests: see passions 
inventions 495 
Islam 
abstract writy of 474-5 
ardor of 476 
its challenge to Europe 474-7 
and Christianity 464 incl. n. 3 
conquests of 477 
and the Crusades 492-4 
fanaticism of 326, 475 
no fuced distinctions in 499 
as religion of separation 187 
wodd of 156 
jewish people, in the Persian Empire 326 
jewish religion 39, 332-3 
God as the One in 452, 454-5 
God conceived as pure thought in 
332-3 
as religion of separation 187 
~ 
of creation and fall of humanity 
in 455 
transition from nature to spirit in 333 
judgment 17 D. 32, s5......e, t66 incl. n. 32, 
363, 463 incl. D. 2 
Lamaism 250 incl. n. 121, 255, 299-303 
language 117, 239-4(), 293-5 
Last judgment 363, 503 
Lectures of 1812-1823 
manuscript fragment of 2, 11-12, 
(,7-77 
transcriptions of 5-6, 8-9. 2(}..63, 
133-521 
Lecnues ot 1830-1831 
loose sheets of 4, 127-30 
manuscript of 3-4, 12-20, 78-126 
transcriptions of 3-4, 6, 8 
uctmes rm the Plnlosoplry of Wor/4 
History 
editions of 6-10 
editorial summary of 11-63 
texts (manuscripts and transcriptions) 
of 1-6 
translations of 7-10 
life 21, 142-3 
light 310-13, 367 
Lutheran Church and doctrine 503-5 
marriage 189, 268-9, 428-9 
Mass 49()...1 
materialism (atheism) 516 
means and ends 8~100, 178-9 
meditative thinking 14, 81 
memoirs 71,136 
memory (recollection) 68, 115-17, 134, 
138, 145, 149 
metahistory 13 incl. n. 26 
Middle Ages 58-60, 467-8, 478-99 
Christianity io 479-82, 488-92 
compared with Greek World 468 
and the empire of Charlemagne 478-9 
political history of 482-8 
miracle 491-2 
moderni~ 62-3,468,509-20 
compared with Roman World 468 
and Enlightenment 517-18 
formal universality of thought in 
514-15 
natural sciences in 515-17 
post-Reformation wars of religion 
in 509-14 
transition to 60-2, 500-9 
tum tOCODCrf'te actuality in 517-20 
worldly existence of the Protestant 
Church in 509-14 
monarchy 18, 55, 105-7, 183, 400,459 
monastic orders and convents 48o-1 
morality 121-2, 125-6, 137-8 
mountains 195-6, 198-200,203 
mystery, mysteries 394-5 
mythologies of origin 112-13 
narural science 515-17 
nature 28, 108, 155-6 
and geography 29, 191-205 
and history 191-2, 198 
state of 102-3, 111-12, 152-3 
new world 192-4 
nomadism 203 
Nordic people 460 
I'IOftS 82 
objectivity, and subjectivity 208-10, 400. 
402,417,505 
oJd world 194-5 
oracle 396-7,402-4 
558 

SUBJECT INDEX 
o~sm 55, 182,45~ 
Oriental metaphysics 142-3 
Oriental World 211-370 
and China 211-250 
and Egypt 334-370 
and India 251-303 
only one is free in 87-8 
overturning of its principle 333 368 
and Persia 304-333 
' 
original history 11, 67-71, 133-6 
pantheism 187, 254-5. 273-4 
paradisiacal human condition 111-13 
152-4 
' 
panicularity %1-4, 473-4 
passions 
as driving force in history 16-17,25-6, 
89-96, 147, 169-76 
and the idea 26, 169-76 
as instruments of a higher end 16-17, 
93-4 
pastoral life 203 
pattUuchy 103-4,17~. 183,224 
Peace of Westphalia 513 
Peloponnesian War 414-15 
Persia 37--40, 304-33 
Achaemenid dynasty in 324, 328 
Assyrian and Babylonian regions 
of 316-21 
cultic activities in 315-16 
divisions in Hegel's treatment of 306 
incl. n. 5 
dualism of good and evil io 311-13 
featllreS of the Persian Empire 326-30 
founding of the empire by Cyrus 
324-5 
geography of 305-6 
and the Greek World 369-70 
~a~in 310,323,328 
Mcdes and Chakteans in 322-3, 324 
principle of the Persian Empire 3~5 
punishment in 3 H-15 
religion of (religjoo of light, 
Zoroastrianism) 307, 31o-16 
sources for history of 321-2 
subjugated peoples allowed relative 
autonomy in 326, 329 
Syrian region of (Phoenicia, Judea) 
330-3 
treatment of women in 318 
unification of the prec.ediog principles 
in 305 
world history proper begins with 304 
Zend-Avestaof 307,309-10 
lend people and books in 307-10, 
312-13 
Persian Wars 405-7 
philosophical world history 12-15, 20-l, 
67,78-9,133,140-6 
philosophy 123, 185, 188,415-20, 
480,488 
Philosophy of Right 1, 67, 177 incl. o. 39 
Phoenicia 33o-2 
plains 196, 199-200, 202-3 
poetry 123-4 
politics, as destiny 426 
see also constirution. state 
pope 487,489,510 
portraiture, phiiosopbical 10 
prehistory 114-16, 153 
presence 488-94 
presupposition and result 79-80 
printing 190, 496 
private rights and privileges 190,472. 
498-9,518 
progress (advance, ptogJession, 
process) 24-5, 155 n. 27, 155-66 
proof, philosophical 79-80, 83 
ProteStant Olurch 101,509-14,519-20 
providence 14, 21-2, 46-7, 83-5, 145, 
396-8,462 
punishment, corporeal 236, 163-4 
purpose (aim, end, goal) 16, 82, 144, 
166-8 
see also final end 
pyramids 359-60 
reason 
OlllDingof 16-17, 9() D. +4, 128 
governs (or rules) tbe wodd 13-14, 
79-82,85-6,94 
io history 21, 81, ~4, 119, 144 
as in6oite substance and infinite 
power 79-80 
proves itself io world history 144 
and understaDdias 28, 187, 517 
reconciliation 
accomplished through coniict 17, 209 
as explicitly envisaged 506 
ofo~ 208-10 
as tlieodicy 17 incl. n. 32, 85-6 
as unity ol human ami dMne 
natureS 453 
rectitwle 514 
refinement (courtesY, civility) 189-90, 
40~10 
rdlective history 11 incl. o. 25, 12, 71-7, 
136-40 
ascritical 139 
as plllgmatic 12, 76-7, 1_37-9 
as specialized or abstractive 139-40 
as universal (surveys or 
compilatioos) 12,72-5,136-7 
Re(ormatioo 61,503-0 
559 

SUBJECT INDEX 
religion 243-50, 273-81, 295-303, 
310-16,331-\343-9,387-99, 
433--6 
and art 500-1 
art and philosophy as forms of 
28, 185 
and Enlightenment 517 
final end of 167-8 
as ideal motive in world history 97-9 
and natural science 515-18 
of separation 28, 187 
and state 101, 180, 185-9, 506 
of unity 28, 187-8 
representation 11,67-9, 7~5,107, 119, 
1~ 13.3-4, 149, 185 
republic 10~7, 193 
retrogression 109-10 
revolutions 519-20 
rivers 194-S, 198-200, 204 
Roman World 50-5, 426-60 
as adulthood of world history 207 
aristocnq in 436, 438, 440 
and Christianity 447-59 
compared with ED.lightmmeot mode of 
understanding 433 
omstitution of 440, 446 
deities of 434-5 
downfall of 460 
East and West meet in 451-2 
emperors (the Caesars) of 4-45-7 
festivals (spectacles) of 435 
tini~ becomes dominant principle 
m 431,433,446-7,450-2 
harsh servitude of spirit in 426,450 
kinp in 437-8 
lack of frudom in 433-4, 450 
law in 430, 432, 439-40 
marriage in 428-9 
military tactics of 441 
one will dominates all in 44 5-7, 4 51 
only some are free iD 87-8 
origins of 427-8, 437 
ovenhrow of the republic in 445 
patricians in 438-40 
periods of its history 436 incl. n. 14 
plebeians in 438-40 
political conditions m 437-40 
power as its goal 426, 437---41 
prosaic character and fucitv of life 
in 431-2 
· 
religion of 433-6, 450 
social rondirions in 428-33 
spirit of 426-35 
suppression of subjectivity in 429-30, 
433 
treatment of women in 428-9 
and Troy 427-8 
undivided sovereignty of 95 
utility and constraint in 433~, 450 
its victory over Carthage 442-3 
warriors in 430 
world-dominion of 442-' 
Romance peoples 465-7. 507, 520 
ruins of ancient splendor 142 
Sac.be of history 76, 86, 167 
satisfaction 172, 190 
science, as philosophy 185 
sciences of the finite 190-1 
sea and seafaring 204-5, 330-1 
seed and fruit 150 
shape of freedom 19, 119 
shapes of history 24, 157 
ship ~5 
~a~ 88, 19~404,409,411,457 
Slav1c peoples 466, 509 
Sophists 41~17 
50rrOw at spectacle of bistory 90-1 
speculative (concept, cognition, ere..) 13, 
28,53,62,78-9,94, 151,154,164, 
395,517-18 
spirit 
560 
actualization of in history 15-18, 
8~107 
actualization of in the state 100--4 
and animal life 349-54 
basic shapes of (individual, social, 
universal) l3 n. 26 
begins &om spirit 153 
character of diffen in accord with 
geography 196, 202-5 
coocept of 23, 147-51 
devdopmenr and decline of 15~ 
divine and human 186-7 
elevation and transfiguration of 10 
as envisaged by Egyptians 355-7 
eternal destiny of 362 
finds freedom only in history and the 
present 521 
and freedom 87-9, 109, 146-66, 520 
as God (absolute spirit) 23, 151 
as humanity's own achievement 151 
its impulse of perfectibility 108 
as infinitr energy and moveiDC'IIt 154 
its knowledge of and presence to 
itself 142 
its means of actualization (passions, 
ideals) 89-100 
its movement from possibility to 
actuality 110-11 
and natuR 86, 354, 357. 367 
as opposed to itself 109 
of a people: see folk spirit 
as present to itself aod free 521 

SUBJECT INDEX 
stages of 156 
its tum to external world 494-5 
as what it makes of itself 108-9, 150 
spirituality, and worJdljness 479 
St Peter's Church 503 
stare 
as actualization ()f freedom 177-81 
and Christianity 458-9 
and church 482-8 
concept of 27-9, 1 n-205 
and constitution 18, 27-8, 1~7 
181-4 
• 
and ethical life 100-1 
as ethical whole (not a coJiection of 
individuals) tn-8o, 182-4 
evolution of in Europe 470, 472 
6nite aspectS of culture in 189-91 
forms of unity in 182-3 
as foundation of culture 180-1 
and freedom 100-4, 176 
and geography 29, 191-205 
as material of spirit's actualization 
100-4,521 
misoonceptions about 18, 102-4 
aso~csy~m 55,182,459 
as principal institution of history 
17-18 
as producer of history 115-16 
and religion 28, 101, 180, 185-9 
and religion, art, science 28, 184-9 
rests on religion 188-9, 506 
seeks unity between private and public 
interests 9 3 
as spiritual totaliry 1 07 
stability of in Europe 498-9 
and the understanding 518 
and universal purpose 518-20 
and worldly aCtualization of history 521 
subjective consciousness, and universal 
substance 9~. 179-81 
subjectivity 208-10, 389, 390,399-400, 
402, 416-17, 461, 505 
and objectivity 208-10, 400,402, 
417,505 
and truth 505 
and universal will 181-4 
suffering 279-81, 331-2 incl. n. 88 
superstition 395-6 
!i}'Uogism 172 
theodicy 15, 17 n. 32, 85-6, 521 
theology and philosophy in the Middle 
Ages 480, 488 
thinking, thought 
and actuality 162 
as contemplating (treating) world 
~ry 12-13,78-9 
5411 
as dii!SOlvent 163, 165 
formal universality of 158, 514-15 
humans as thinking beings 78, 125 
inwardness and independence of in 
Greece 41~8 
meditative 14, 81, 114 
and spirit 142, 147-9 
as undoing the destruction it briogs upon 
itself 123 
Thirty Years War 470,512 
ti.Im 155, 161, 163 
fulfillmeot of 449 
tragedy 17, 26, 42, 49,418 
T~ 
23,151,448-9,505 
Trojan War 359 
truth 
and beauty 48, 400 
of Christianity 53, 447-9 
God as 23, 168 
subsists io and for itself 23, 61 
as unity of absolute being and subjective 
spirit 94, 505 
as unity of subjective and objeccive 30, 
187,209 
as unity of thought and acruaJjty 521 
understanding 28, 76, 187, 433, 449, 514, 
516-18 
unity, abstract versus concrete 124 
llnUve~ 95-6, 151, 173-5, 179-81 
vaUeys 195-6, 198-200, 202-3 
vassalage 472,473 
votes 403-4 
war. warfare 
constitutional (rather than religious or 
political) 519 
devastation of as compand with legacy 
ofEgypt 359 
Hegel's attitude toward 42,49-50 
modem 495--6 
world spirit utilizes 421 
water (oceaos, rivers, seas) 194-5, 201, 
204-5 
weapons 190,495-6 
will 146,170,176, 181-4,185-6.~2. 
519-20 
words. as actions 69 n. 8, 135 
world 81-2, 86-7, 494-6 
world-bistorica1 individuals: see heroes 
world history 
as actualization of spirit culminating in 
stateS 521 
ages of (childhood, boyhood, youth, 
adulthood. maturity) 206-8 
bcgi1111ing of 111-18 

SUBJECT INDEX 
world history (cont.) 
concept of 13-15, 79--86, 133-210 
course of 18-20,31--63, 107-26, 
128-30,211-521 
development of 118-26 
division of 30-1,205-10 
fabric of 23, 146-7 
governed by providence 14,11-2, 83-5, 
145--6 
governed by reason 13-14, 79--80 
Hegel's typological approach to 39-40 
moves from Eastto West 31,201, 373, 
427 
moves on a higber plane than that of 
morality 121-2 
narrative climax of 61 
periods in the histories of its 
peoples 372-3 
philosophical 12-15,20-22, 67, 78-79. 
133, 14()-..6 
as rational process 13-14, 79-80 
stages of the conscioumess of freedom 
in 15. 19, 87-8, 110, 118-19 
and thought 12-13, 78-9 
as unfolding of God's nature 145 
what is better in it lies ahead, not 
behind 413 
world judgment 17 n. 31, 166 incl. n. 32 
world spirit 13 n. 26, 80, 99-100, 502 
Zend-Avesta 307,309-10 
Zoroastrianism 307, 31().....16 

