The First Philosophy of Right 
Translated by J. MICHAEL STEWART and PETER C HODGSON 

,L\1 
GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH HEGEL 
LECTURES ON NATURAL RIGHT 
AND POLITICAL SCIENCE 
THE FIRST PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT 
Heidelberg 1817-1818 
with Additions from the Lectures of 1818-1819 
. ··""-,_ 
Transcribed by 
PETER WANNENMANN 
Edited by the 
STAFF OF THE HEGEL ARCHIVES 
with an Introduction by 
OTTo POGGELER 
Translated by 
]. MICHAEL STEWART and PETER C. HODGSON 
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS 
Berkeley Los Angeles London 

University of California Press 
Berkeley and Los Angeles, California 
University of California Press 
London, England 
This volume is a translation of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Vorlesun-
gen iiber Naturrecht und Staatswissenschaft, Heidelberg 1817/18 (vol. 1 
of G. W. E Hegel: Vorlesungen: Ausgewiihlte Nachschriften und Manu-
skripte), edited by C. Becker, W. Bonsiepen, A. Gethmann-Siefert, 
F. Hogemann, W. jaeschke, Ch. jamme, H.-Ch. Lucas, K. R. Meist, and 
H. Schneider, with an introduction by 0. Poggeler, copyright C 1983 by 
Felix Meiner Verlag GmbH, Hamburg. 
Copyright 0 199 S by 
The Regents of the University of California 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770-1831. 
[Vorlesungen iiber Naturrecht und Staatswissenschaft. English] 
Lectures on natural right and political science: the first philosophy of 
right: Heidelberg, 1817-1818, with additions from the lectures of 1818-
1819/ Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel; transcribed by Peter Wannenmann; 
edited by the staff of the Hegel Archives; with an introduction by Otto 
Poggeler; translated by j. Michael Stewan and Peter C. Hodgson. 
p. 
em. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-520-20104-3 (alk. paper) 
1. Natural law. 
2. Political science. 
3. State, The. 
I. Wannen-
mann, P. (Peter) 
II. Ruhr-Universitat Bochum. Hegel-Archiv. 
III. Title. 
JC233.H44613 
1996 
323'.01-dc20 
Printed in the United States of America 
1 2 
3 4 s 6 7 
8 9 
95-31238 
CIP 
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of 
American National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence of 
Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984@ 

CONTENTS 
TRANSLATORS' PREFACE 
ABBREVIATIONS 
EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION BY OTTO P0GGELER 
DESCRIPTION OF ~~ANUSCRIPT BY THE EDITORS 
NATURAL RIGHT AND PO UTI CAL SCIENCE 
(Heidelberg, 1817-1818) 
Introduction §§ 1-10 
I. ABSTRACT RIGHT§§ 11-49 
1. Possession and Ownership§§ 15-32 
2. Contract§§ 33-37 
3. Wrong§§ 38-49 
II. MORALITY§§ 50-68 
1. Actions and Dispositions§§ 52-56 
2. Particular Purposes; Welfare and 
Intention§§ 57-64 
3. The Good and Conscience§§ 65-68 
III. ETHICAL LIFE§§ 69-170 
1. The Family§§ 73-88 
A. The Family as Relationship in 
Its Concept § § 7 5-80 
B. Family Property and Capital§§ 81-84 
v 

CONTENTS 
C. The Education of ChiJdren and the 
Dissolution of the Family SS 85-88 
155 
2. CiviJ Society SS 89-121 
161 
A. The System of Needs: Political 
Economy SS 93-108 
167 
B. The Administration of Justice SS 109-116 
189 
C. The Police or Public Authority SS 117-121 
207 
3. The State SS 122-170 
220 
A. Constitutional Law SS 127-158 
227 
a. The Power of the Sovereign SS 138-140 
250 
b. The Executive Power SS 141-145 
260 
c. The Legislative Power SS 146-158 
269 
B. International Law SS 159-163 
297 
C. World History SS 164-170 
306 
APPENDIXES 
INTRODUCTION: BERLIN, WINTER SEMESTEil1818-1819 
(SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES) 
319 
BIBLIOGRAPHY ON HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT 
333 
GLOSSARY 
339 
INDEX 
349 

TRANSLATORS' 
PREFACE 
We are pleased to offer this translation of the earliest version of 
Hegel's Philosophy of Right, ntmely the lectures on "Natural Right 
and Political Science" delivere~ Heidelberg in 1817-18. The 
manuscript containing law student Peter Wannenmann's transcrip· 
tion of the lectures was discovered in 1982 and published a year 
later by the editorial staff of the Hegel Archives at the Ruhr Uni-
versity in Bochum. Plans for an English translation have been under 
way for a decade but have been delayed by various circumstances. 
The annotations to the text provided by the German editors are 
limited to indications of sources for quotations and references to 
other works occurring in the text as well as to cross-references to 
other passages in the text. They are not a commentary and also do 
not seek to comment on parallel passages in Hegel's writings. As 
far as possible, references are to those editions that it is certain 
Hegel used; in other cases first editions are cited wherever pos· 
sible. References are also given to modem standard editions in the 
original languages, but not to English translations except in the 
case of works by Hegel. The translators have added a few notes 
that call attention to significant differences between these lectures 
and the published version of 1821, Elements of the Philosophy of 
Right. For an excellent commentary see the editorial notes to the 
recent translation of the latter, edited by Allen W. Wood and trans· 
lated by H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge University Press, 1991). 
The textual apparatus of the German edition identifies all varia· 
tions between Wannenmann's manuscript and the edited text. We 
retain only those variations that have a bearing on meaning. We 

PREFACE 
have reproduced the emphasized words in the dictated paragraphs; 
presumably the emphasis is attributable to Hegel. The expository 
passages following the dictation are printed in the German with-
out breaks; we have added paragraph breaks at appropriate points. 
The translation principles guiding our work are similar to those 
established for other volumes in this series of Hegel Lectures; sec 
the Editorial Introduction to Lectures on the Philosophy of Reli-
gion, vol. 1 (University of California Press, 1984), pp. 52-58. In 
particular it should be noted that we have avoided gender-specific 
language as much as possible. The glossary prepared for this work 
draws upon the one used for the philosophy of religion and has 
been greatly assisted by the glossary provided in the Wood and 
Nisbet edition of the philosophy of right. The translation of a few 
specific terms is discussed in the translators' notes, and the Ger-
man of key terms or of difficult-to-translate terms is often given in 
brackets in the text. We have slightly modified and updated the 
bibliography; and we have added a few references to the editorial 
introduction by Otto Poggeler. 
Note: J. Michael Stewart died in December 1994 before this 
book could be published. The translation is largely his work, oc-
cupying much of his attention during his last two years. It is a fit-
ting culmination to his contribution to Hegel studies through the 
new translations published by the University of California Press. 
PETER C. HODGSON 
viii 

ABBREVIATIONS 
FREQUENTLY CITED WORKS 
Fichte, Beitrag 
Fichte, Gesamtausgabe 
Hegel, Gesamme/te 
Werke 
Hegel, Werke 
Kant, Rechtslehre 
Johann Gottlieb Fichte. Beitrag zur Be· 
richtigung der l!_!;kdle des Publikums 
uber die franztisische Revolution. Part 1, 
Zur Beurtheilung ihrer Rechtmiissigkeit. 
N.p., 1793. 
Johann Gottlieb Fichte. Gesamtausgabe. 
Published by the Bavarian Academy of 
Sciences. Edited by R. Lauth, H. Jacob, 
and H. Gliwitzky. Division I. Stuttgart-
Bad Cannstatt, 1964 ff. 
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. Gesam-
melte Werke. Edited by the Academy of 
Sciences of Rhineland-Westphalia in as-
sociation with the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft. 40 vols. projected. Ham-
burg, 1968 ff. 
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. Werke. 
Complete edition edited by an Associa-
tion of Friends. 18 vols. Berlin, 1832 ff. 
Some volumes issued in second editions. 
Immanuel Kant. Metaphysische Anfangs-
gmnde der Rechtslehre. Konigsberg, 
1797. (Part 1 of the Metaphysik der 
Sitten.) 
ix 

Kant, Schriften 
Montesquieu, 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Immanuel Kant. Gesammelte Schriften. 
Edited by the Royal Prussian Academy 
of Sciences. Berlin, 1900 ff. 
De /'esprit des lois 
(Charles Louis de Secondat, Baron de) 
Montesquieu. CEuvres. New edition, re-
vised and supplemented by the author. 
Vol. 1 contains Les XXI premiers livres 
de /'esprit des lois. Vol. 2 contains Les X 
derniers livres de /'esprit des lois. Lon-
don, 1757. 
Montesquieu, 
CEuvres completes 
[ ... ) 
341 
[Ed.] 
[Tr.) 
Ms. reads: 
Non-indented 
passages 
Indented 
passages 
Montesquieu. CEuvres completes. Vol. 2 
contains De /'esprit des lois, pp. 225-
995. N.p., 1951. 
SIGNS AND SYMBOLS 
= Insertions in the text by the editors and 
translators. 
= Page numbers of the German edition, on the 
outer margin with page breaks marked by 
vertical slash in rext. Vorlesungen iiber Na-
turrecht und Staatswissenschaft (Hamburg: 
Felix Meiner Verlag, 1983). 
= Editorial annotations. 
= Translators' nores. 
= Readings of the manuscript that have been 
altered in the edited text for purposes of 
meaning. 
= Hegel's dictated paragraphs. 
= Hegel's expositions as recorded by 
Wannenmann. 

EDITORIAL 
INTRODUCTION 
Otto Poggeler 
When Karl Marx publishe4 in 1844 an article in the Deutsch-
Franzdsische ]ahrbucher in~ded as the introduction to his forth-
coming Critique of Hegel's Pmlosophy of Right, he claimed that 
"German philosophy of right and of the state" was "the only form 
of German history standing on a par with the official present." 
Marx acknowledged that through Hegel (whose Philosophy of 
Right it was indeed his intention to criticize) "German philosophy 
of right and of the state" had received its "most consistent, rich-
est. and final version." The actual political conditions in Germany 
were, in Marx's view, an anachronism; even those who rejected 
them had barely, by French chronology, reached the level of 1789. 
In Germany Luther had thrown off external religious authority in 
order to establish an inner religious authority-and make theology 
a contributing factor in the failure of the Peasant Wars. But phi-
losophy had already taken the further steps needed to revolution-
ize the legacy of the past, with the Hegelian Left's critique of reli-
gion providing the final push in this direction. 
Forming the counterpart to the dim view Marx took of German 
conditions by comparison with those in France were the equally 
bright prospects he sensed to be resulting from the contrast be-
tween political backwardness and the advances made by philos-
ophy. Could discontent with existing conditions not combine 
with thought in such a way that prevailing conditions would be 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
revolutionized once and for all? In thus looking for a final, con-
clusive revolution and the emancipation of "the• human being as 
such, the young Marx-before he turned to the analysis of English 
economic conditions and economic theories, and before the more 
strongly marked empiricism of his German Ideology--can be said 
to have been, in a bad sense, "more monkish• than Luther and 
"more philosophical" than Hegel. In any event by 1843, when he 
began to develop his critique of Hegel's political thought during 
his stay in Kreuznach, Marx had come to reject the idea of a rep-
resentative constitution with which Hegel had sought to bind civil 
society (even as it was in process of emancipating itself) to the 
state once again and thus reconcile old European and revolution-
ary tendencies. Opposing historical forces must, in Marx's view, 
fight it out, and there was no logical artifice that could mediate be-
tween them. But this was to reject the basic idea that had underlain 
Hegel's concern with the questions posed by a "practical philoso-
phy• from the time he had first begun writing political pamphlets. 
After Oriental despotism and classical republicanism, the system 
of representation, so we are told in his critique of the German 
constitution,t is a "third universal form" to which "world spirit" 
has attained in the political field. 
The young Hegel had initially accepted the view that classical 
republicanism could be recovered for his own time through the 
French Revolution and by guiding the German spirit in the light of 
the shining example afforded by Greece. He had then seen, how-
ever, that in the political domain (as also in the religious) Euro-
pean history was being led by new motifs. The attachment of the 
Germanic peoples to the freedom of the individual, and the bond 
of loyalty of individuals, had continued to operate under feudal-
ism. When in the fourteenth century new economic conditions gave 
rise to the emergence of strong guilds among the corporations set 
up by the estates, and the new municipalities developed auton-
1. [Tr.} The so-called Ver{assungsschri{t, composed between 1799 and 1803 
(see Hegel, Gesammelte Werke S:t-219); translated as "The German Constitu· 
tion" in Hegel's Political Writings, trans. T. M. Knox with an introductory essay by 
Z. A. Pelczynski (Oxford, 1964), pp. 143-242. 
2 

EDITORIAL INTROI>UCTION 
omous focms of administration, the resulting territorial state had 
used the representation of these corporations and councils to place 
its authority on a stable basis. The French Revolution, it now 
seemed to Hegel, had swept away a system in which the rights of 
the estates no longer made possible the assumption of duties but 
had become mere privileges. Even where, instead of outmoded 
forms being swept away by revolutionary action, a reform sought 
to reintroduce reason to the legacy of tradition, the historically new 
was in Hegel's view at work, a process beginning with the rise of 
the middle classes during medieval times. 
In opposition to Sieyes, Hegel insisted that representation and 
consequently the parliamentary system, under which in the large 
and complex states of the modern age the few speak for the many, 
had their roots in the Middle Ages. What had to be do~ _W.is...t9--
reanchoube representatiY.e~JQ.thcic p[.oper sph~r:"·~~q.!b~ . .m~e 
of the estates o~~s__(~ng that term [Standel in a new sense). 
Thre problem that no~-~to~e'-~~!to~.to .comhine._a parliamentaq' 
~~tern of this kipd, d~!ng~c:_e_o_lit_i._c~Ls;.onseqnences frem.-the 
C:_!ll~I!£!Eation 8f_ ~~vi!~c!~ty ... wkh-tbe st~te's t!:l\.ditiona.l rc;gyJ!ton. 
!.u!l~t!Q!!...J~ was not only Karl Marx who saw in this the central 
problem of Hegel's philosophy of right but also Lassalle, who main-
tained in stronger terms the significance of the state, and also Lo-
renz von Stein, who carried the discussion over into the field of so-
cial science. Conversely, Hegel's view that civil society has emerged 
as a relatively independent form of the ethical in relation to the 
house or family and the polis or state was the point that proved 
unacceptable to a historian like Dahlmann or a Hegelian such as 
Johann Eduard Erdmann. 
To begill with, Hegel was discussed primarily on the basis of his 
political options. It was left out of account that the young Hegel 
had been an enthusiastic supporter of the French Revolution, but 
that after bitter disappointment his hopes had then turned to Aus-
tria as trustee for a renewal of the German Empire. The question 
was whether Hegel, who since the battle of Jena had had an abid-
ing enthusiasm for Napoleon, carried on the heritage of the Rev-
olution or rather was to be claimed as the philosopher of the 
3 

EDITORIAL INTilODUCTION 
reestablished Prussian state. Was he not thus in fact the German 
national philosopher in the same way that Schiller and Goethe were 
regarded as the great national poets? Could he be claimed even for 
Bismarck's Germany? 
When the wars and civil wars of the twentieth century had de-
stroyed the old Europe and removed it from the center of the 
world, the question remained as to what contribution Hegel had 
made to consideration of the new direction taken by history since 
1800. Was Hegel the philosopher who had recognized the eman-
cipatory tendencies of civil society but, faced with the contradic-
tions of development, had sought refuge in once more affirming 
the positive role of the state? Or had he appealed to the regulatory 
function of the state in a conservative or rather pro-governmental 
frame of mind? With his recourse to metaphysical solutions had 
he helped to pave the way for the most diverse varieties of totali-
tarianism? Or could not on the contrary the young Hegel at least 
be ranged on the side of those protesting against the senselessness 
of the present-day world, or at all events calling for a new expe-
rience of history and historicity? The main question in regard to 
Hegel now concerned less the changing options to which he sub-
scribed than the guiding conception underlying his entire political 
philosophy. 
When in the autumn of 1820 Hegel submitted his compendium 
Natu"echt una Staatswissenschaft im Grundrisse for publication, 
he attached to the book a prefacel which adopted a harshly and 
one-sidedly polemical attitude toward current political affaits. How-
ever, in this preface Hegel does not deal only with contemporary 
events; instead he is mainly concerned to give vent to his aware-
ness that there has been a break in world history. The traditions of 
practical philosophy or of political science extending from Aris-
2. [Tr.) See G. W. F. Hegel, £km11nts of th11 Philosophy of Right, cd. Allen W. 
Wood, uans. H. B. Nisbet (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), pp. 
9-23. The complete German title is Naturrecbt Jmd StlllltSwissllnscbaft im GrHnd· 
riss11: GrJmdli,ien dR PhilosopbU des Rlcbtl (Natural right and political sclenc:c in 
outline: Elements of the philosophy of right). The work has come to be known by 
its subtitle. 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
tode to Christian Wolff have been given up along with the former 
pattern of Europe. This type of philosophizing, "which like an ex-
ercise in Scholasticism might have continued to spin its web in 
seclusion," has now, so he affirms, been brought into a clc:>ser re-
lationship with actuality, "in which the principles of rights and 
duties are a serious matter." In this way it had come to an "open 
break." Hegel sees the danger of the time in the fact that the 
attempt to understand rights and duties on the basis of the self-
determining activity of freedom turns into doubt as to whether 
this task is not in fact beyond the powers of reason. An "atheism 
of the ethical world" in his view sees the spiritual universe deserted 
by reason and merely repeats the confused protests of youth. When 
Hegel rebukes Fries on the occasion of his Wartburg oration for 
making the articulated fabric of ethical life into a mishmash of 
"heart," "friendship," and "enthusiasm," he is to be sure retract-
ing key words that had been vaJi4 for him in his own youth, above 
all during the time of his association with Holderlin in Frankfurt. 
However, these motifs from Hegel's youth come to the surface 
again in 1844 when Ruge, Marx, Bakunin, and Feuerbach open 
their Deutsch-Franzosische jahrbiicher with an exchange of corre-
spondence. Writing on the "Rousseau Island" in the Lake of Biel, 
Bakunin speaks of the silver tones of freedom and in this way al-
ludes to lines in Klopstock's "Ode to the Revolution," which in the 
days of enthusiasm for the French Revolution were on everyone's 
lips (and so also occur in Hegel's student scrapbook). In a letter to 
Marx, Ruge quotes Holderlin's lament for "this disjointed age• in 
his Hyperion, the work on which he was engaged when he and 
Hegel began to see each other again in Frankfurt. As Hegel's early 
writings were at that time still unknown, Marx hoped to find at 
least a pointer to Schelling's first published works. What was in· 
volved here, however, was not a question of reference to texts but 
the resurfacing of motifs that operated from within history itself as 
an actuating force on thought. 
Today Hegel's 1820 Philosophy of R.igbt stands beside Plato's 
R.epublic and Aristode's Politics, beside Hobbes's Leviathan and 
Rousseau's Contrat social. Admittedly some are of the opinion that 
s 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
Hegel's compendium lacks the literary merit and representative 
function of these other works. Was Hegel at all successful in giv-
ing full weight, in a mature and valid presentation, to the motifs 
that shaped his thought? Did he achieve for what was presented 
the demonstrative value he does after all claim for it? The work 
is seen as molded by a spirit of servility and accommodation, and 
it is feared that the tightened £_ens.Q~hlP _r~sulting_fro~ 5J:C:. Carls-
~rees (1819) may __ h~~-~~s_ed Hegel_~~ pa~s over certain 
~_silence. Heinrich Heine had already at an early stage 
characterized German philosophy (even if not that of Hegel in par-
ticular) as the "dream" of the French Revolution. After meeting 
Hegel's distant disciple Karl Marx he also attributed this role spe-
cifically to Hegelian philosophy. Heine spoke too of the fear of 
censorship, which in the form of self-censorship becomes "fear of 
one's own words." To be sure, imputations of this kind fail to take 
into account the way in which Hegel contrasted constitutional de-
velopment in France and Germany in an all-embracing European 
comparison. They disregard what historical knowledge we may 
possess regarding censorship practice at that time and Hegel's re-
laxed reaction to it. 
Hegel's Philosophy of Right cannot be discredited with this type 
of criticism; and it therefore remains incumbent on us to study the 
decisively new approaches made to the problem in the work of 
1820-such as the redefinition of the role of society or the appli· 
cation of concepts of Aristotelian theology to the idea of the good 
as an end in itself. As a compendium, however, the Philosophy 
of Right was intended to be expounded in lectures and revision 
courses; moreover, it grew out of the actual business of lectur· 
ing. It may therefore be useful to make available in a study edition 
Hegel's first attempt at this subject-the dictated paragraphs and 
the transcript of his expositions from the lectures given at Heidel-
berg in the winter of 1817-18. The aim of this edition must not 
only be to add to the continuous stream of new variants and re· 
constructions of variants for the formulation of Hegel's thought, to 
which authentic texts afford us better access; it must also serve to 
orient us toward the study of his authorized publications, not away 
from them. The transcript published here indeed embodies Hegel's 
6 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
"original philosophy of right" and so makes it possible to identify 
with more certainty the starting point for that pan of the defini-
tive Hegelian system which presents the philosophy of objective 
spirit as a philosophy of right. 
Hegel's lectures on "Natural Right and Political Science" were l 
delivered in Heidelberg during the winter of 1817-18 six times a 
' 
week from 10:00 to 11:00 A.M. "on the basis of dictated passages." 
They were given at a rime when the restored Bourbon regime in 
France had acquired a constitutional basis in the Charter. and whg.t. 
the German Liinder-..§p_ecj.@llx_ t~~ soutluYestem..G~.r~ state$ of 
Back.n and Wiirttem~_whose boundaries..had been -r~ed­
were seeking tC?_&i'-:e _themselves a cQnsjtption_ in accord with the 
directiv~s_ ~( _the__ ~n~~~ c_>_f Ytenna. [!tus convecsati~ evecy-
where were marked by discussions on constitutional matt~t was 
at this point that Hegel first emerged as a political author with 
a review of the constitutional negotiat~s in his native srate of 
Wiirttemberg.3 So it is not surprising that the-formulation of part 
of his system for delivery as lectures lays stress, in a manner not 
encountered again, on questions of constitutional development as 
well as on institutions such as trial by jury, and that it harshly crit· 
icizes possible cases of arbitrary action by officials (not without 
reference to the clique of bureaucrats in Wiirttemberg). 
The transcript was compiled by the law student Peter Wannen-
mann. Wannenmann followed Hegel to Berlin and tried to supple-
ment his Heidelberg transcript with notes from the lectures Hegel 
gave on the philosophy of right in the winter of 1818-19. But in 
doing so he ran into difficulties because Hegel inserted a large num-
ber of paragraphs into the first pan of his lectures, and thus the 
new presentation no longer fitted into the framework of the Hei-
delberg lectures. Consequently Wannenmann broke off the Berlin 
notes on 10 November 1818, at the end of the introduction. He 
returned to Heidelberg for the following term, as can be seen from 
the Heidelberg matriculation register. 
Hegel lectured on the basis of dictated passages; that is, he dic· 
tated the individual paragraphs and then expounded them. Another 
3. [Tr.) "Pr~ings of the EstateS Assembly in the Kingdom of Wlirttemberg, 
1815-16," translated in Hegel's Political Writings, pp. 246-294. 
7 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
of his pupils, Friedrich WJ!helm Carove, writing anonymously as 
"Rheinpreusse" in the Hallische ]ahrbiicher of March 1841, quoted 
(in a review of a work by Ogienski entitled Hegel, Schubarth und 
die Idee der Person/ichkeit in ihrem Verhiiltnis VlT preussischen 
:1 Monarchie) two short extracts from his transcript of the same lec-
ture series as evidence for the fact that in Heidelberg Hegel es· 
poused the cause of "constitutional monarchy" even more deci· 
sively. These passages from SS 137 and 170 agree word for word 
with Wannenmann's text, thus confirming that the latter's record 
of the dictated passages is reliable. As for Hegel's expositions of 
the dictated paragraphs, what we have is naturally only a selective 
record, as can be seen by comparing the expositions recorded by 
Wannenmann in 1818-19 (to be sure as a supplement to his Hei-
delberg transcript) with the transcript of these expositions com-
piled by Homeyer from the same lectures. 
The subsequent fate of Wannenmann's transcript is unknown. 
In the 1950s it was unearthed by the Mannheim geographer Plewe 
in an antiquarian bookstore in Heidelberg in a pile of old papers 
and unsalable books that were awaiting removal. Plewe got per-
mission to take the worthless manuscript away with him and gave 
it to his colleague Brecht, who taught philosophy in Mannhcim and 
Heidelberg. Brecht in turn passed on the manuscript (annexed to 
transcripts of lectures given by Heidegger) to the Deutsches Liter-
aturarchiv, Marbach am Neckar. Sincere thanks are due to the 
Literaturarchiv and its Director, Prof. Dr. Bernhard Zeller, for per-
mission to make available this valuable transcript of one of Hegel's 
lecture series in this study edition. 
In what follows we shall endeavor first to place these lectures in 
the history of the development of practical philosophy as Hegel 
saw it, and then to outline the newly elaborated system. 
By March 1818, when Hegel completed his lectures on the 
philosophy of right at Heidelberg, he had long since decided to ac-
cept the post of professor in Berlin. This restless movement, from 
8 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
Bavaria to Baden and then directly on to Berlin, was Hegel's re-
sponse to a restless time. Only a few years had elapsed !Iince the 
wars of liberation, the fall of Napoleon, and the reorganization 
of Europe by the Congress of Vienna; and the new states were 
now endeavoring to place themselves on a stable footing. When 
Hegel dealt with world history in the seven closing sections of his 
lectures, he also invoked, in the exposition to S 164, the sadness 
aroused by the ruins of Palmyra, Persepolis, and Egypt; memories 
going back to his youth obviously merged here with present-day 
experiences. Returning from travels in the East, the Comte de Vol-
ney had in 1791 published his book Les ruines; ou, Meditations 
sur les revolutions des empires, in which he laid bare the secrets of 
mythologies and international conflicts from the standpoint of the 
Enlightenment. Georg Forster had brought out a German transla-
tion one year later, but Hegel had in his library the French origi-
nal. In his Heidelberg lectures (and also later in his Berlin lectures 
on the philosophy of history} Hegel urges tlieneed to go beyond 
mourning: "But what is laid low, has been laid low and had to be 
laid low. World spirit is unsparing and pitiless" (S 164). It is not 
only the empires of the East that had necessarily to be laid low; 
Hegel's own times had eliminated something great, the old Europe, 
in favor of what was new. For Hegel, taking leave of the old gave 
heart for welcoming the new. Like a leitmotiv running through 
these lectures is the proposition "What is rational must happen" 
(cf. SS 122, 134). This formula is even more dynamic and histori-
cally affirmative than the later, hotly debated passage on the actu-
ality of the rational and the rationality of the actual.4 But the Hei-
delberg version was later passed on by Gans when he lectured on 
Hegel's Philosophy of Right (Heinrich Heine characteristically re-
counted the Heidelberg version as if he had heard it from Hegel 
himself). 
In his Heidelberg lectures (as also in supplementary notes to the 
relevant paragraphs of the Heidelberg Encyclopaedia) Hegel, Jiv-
ing at a time of great historical upheaval, adduces the doctrine of 
history as a succession of empires, the best-known expression of 
4. [Tr.] See below, S 122, n. 53. 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
which is in the Book of Daniel. When the feared Assyrian Empire 
suddenly collapsed in 612 B.C.E., and the victors, the kingdom of 
the Medes and the new Babylonian Empire, were ousted by the 
Persians a few decades later, people discovered this doctrine in a 
moment of trauma they never forgot. Later apocalyptic writers also 
made use of the doctrine when they sought a vision of history as a 
whole. To be sure, the successive empires pointed here to the com-
ing of God's kingdom, and the four beasts to the Son of Man. 
When in the turmoil of his own period of upheaval Hegel di-
vided history as a whole into the four world-historical empires-
the Oriental, the Greek, the Roman, and the Germanic-he altered 
the ancient model fundamentally. Above all he did not make the 
four empires subject to the coming judgment of the kingdom of 
God, but saw the judgment itself in the history of these empires. 
Thus he quotes, as the most profound thing that can be said about 
the tise and fall of peoples, Schiller's saying that world history is 
the court of world judgment {S 164). It is true that in his poem 
"Resignation" Schiller had not said that world history is the court 
of world judgment; rather he had seen in world history (and not 
in some transcendent, postulated event) the locus in which world 
judgment is accomplished. But Hegel also stresses that this judg-
ment is not the mere "might,. of spirit or naked being as destiny. 
"To be sure, one must harden one's heart when contemplating 
the destinies of peoples, but they are not [what they are) merely 
because they are"-such are the terms in which Hegel expounds 
S 164. What are actualized in the destinies of peoples are the 
principles of reason, and these can ultimately be grasped by free 
thought in their necessary connectedness. So the stress on reason 
in actuality is emphatically not an affirmation of the merely fac-
tual, and above all not a simple acceptance of the status quo. 
·-
There can, however, be no doubt that Hegel believes himself ca-
pable of enduring his own age of turmoil only if he understands 
the path leading up to it as a necessary one, which essentially could 
not have been different from what it was. So those peoples who 
were defeated and did not become world-historical are given to 
understand even in their graves that they were not bearers of 
10 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
a justified principle either. The concluding § 170 views the con· 
temporary constitutional form, namely constitutional moniarchy, 
as "6oth Image ancCactu~licy of aeveioP"ed -reason~:-- the idea_ be-
iJ!g that through its ~~!jgio.lls..te.p.re~q!itiQD~.!I-ttd.c.oncepts self-
®.nitio.uspess _attai!l~l~~d~~- i~-~~is l}ctualjty. Hegel takes up the 
tradition of classical philosophy, which as early as Plato's Timaeus 
had seen time as the image of eternity, and which then brought to-
gether in ordered coherence, in eternity as aeternitas, what in time 
appeared in random order. With Hegel, howeveJ; eternity is the 
accomplishment of time as history-in-movement. 
Hegel sees his own age in the light of the French Revolution. 
With the Napoleonic Wars, the Revolution had spread over aU Eu-
rope, had borne fruit in the reforms carried out in the Rhenish 
Confederation of Bavaria (where Hegel had held the post of Gym-
nasium director) and also in Prussia, and now following the fall of 
Napoleon had to be brought to an end in the countries of Europe. 
Hegel reverts to this guiding theme in his lectures in a wide variety 
of contexts. For example as early as § 26 ~~position stresses 
the importance of studying the "history of how ownership became 
free." When states first arose, property had not belonged to indi-
viduals; rather a field, for example, had been owned by the family. 
Roman law had been defective because of its many limitations; 
Christianity had viewed human beings as free, but feudalism had 
made ownership unfree (thus helping to bring about the French 
Revolution!). The exposition to § 33 attributes to the belief that 
the state is a social contract a "great influence" on the French Rev-
olution. The purpo~k!.Q_Sh~~~l!!~ the principle of contract can-
1\.0! _rjghth__~ f!l~r!~~L fJ:Qffl _the .spher-e of privat~Jaw to that 
of constitutional law. When Hegel takes up the question of consti-
tutional law and speaks in more detail of the founding of states, 
he adduces arguments in § 125 that are directly related to his cur· 
rent disagreement with the constitutional battle being waged in 
Wiirttemberg, but at the same time hark back to his earliest views 
on questions of constitutional policy. "Our day," so he maintains, 
"has seen a step taken toward the rational existence of the state 
that has not been taken for a thousand years past: the right of 
11 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
reason has been asserted over against the form of private right." 
The founders of states not only impose their will but intervene on 
behalf of the still-hidden universal will. 
Another feature in the evolution of the state is that in the Mid-
dle Ages corporations of bursh_ers were established by analogy with 
the corporations of feudalism. Along~~ide the self-administration of 
~ 
... 
the towns, these associations sought to provide a system of legal 
protection for the various types of labor and economic activity that 
were emerging from political tutelage. Privileges that could have 
been guaranteed only by the state as a whole were upheld against 
the state, even if the state was one that in manifold ways~he 
rig~t of the state tO-..P.~inc:e~ or corpor~tions. as t,!t~ pri~ate righJS of 
individuals, Hegel refers to Johann Jakob Moser (§ 125}, the Wurt-
temberg estates member and scholar who wrote a compendium 
setting out the rights of the state and private rights in the former 
German Empire. The Revolution had been an assault on privileges, 
but the emigres in France and the gentrified members of estates 
(Standesherren) in Germany were wrongfully demandi!!g thei.~..P.r.iv­
ileges f>Jc!. If compensation were to be claimed for the fact that 
the nobility had Jost the right of appointment to officers' posts, 
then it was conversely more appropriate for the state to "present 
this class with a bill for its enjoyment" of these privileges in earlier 
days. After surveying the countries of Europe with regard to the 
fight against privileges, Hegel says: "Here belong the revolutions 
of modern times." To .. ~is ~!~d the revolut~on~ proc~-~~~!!_~S 
-~he _e~!!~~-~lvi~~-~orl4_.c;>f lii"s day l!!ld -~!C~~-s back in varying 
d~rees ~~__i_~~~-the_ hist~Q' .C?f the ind~vidual countries. While in 
France and England the state had at an early stage gained sway 
over the forces of particularism, things w~rt; _!i~ff~r:ent. in __ q~r~~ 
and Italy. 
· But the dismantling of privileges is only one side of the great 
upheaval; the other side consists in the legal protection conferred 
on the new developments by the state as a whole, so that the state 
is built up from below. It was the religious conviction of Chris-
tendom that what manered was the salvation of each and every 
individual. When a thousand years ago this encountered the sense 
12 

EDITOiliAL INTilODUCTION 
of freedom of the newly emerging European peoples, the result 
was a lengthy process in which freedom was also gained for the 
capacity of individuals to earn their living by labor and their own 
achievement, and through education to carve out for themselves a 
place in a society based on the division of labor. The aim is to pro- : 
vide a legal system guaranteeing the mode of life of the "middle , 
class," and above all to draw it into the administration of state ; 
power by means of the representational system or constitutional . 
monarchy. 
·.! 
In the thirty years since Hegel had begun his studies in Tii-
bingen the face of Europe had been radically changed; and those 
engaged in formulating new constitutions were seeking to take into 
account the effects of the inner changes that had transformed the 
different states. The smaller states whose boundaries had been re-
defined fitted in between the five major powers of Britain, France, 
Russia, Austria, and Prussia. And it was in southwest Germany, 
where Hegel came from and to which he had r~ned, that the 
map had been transformed in particularly radical tasliion. The 
patchwork of secular and ecclesiastical princedoms, knightly do-
mains, free imperial cities, and imperial abbacies had been essen-
tialJy reduced to the two states of Baden and Wiirttemberg. At the 
time Hegel was being educated in the spirit of the late Enlight-
enment at the Stuttgart Gymnasium, it still seemed as if the old 
Duchy of Wiirttemberg was capable of renewing itself and achiev-
ing stability at the last hour by drawing on the efforts marking the 
Enlightenment. In the last decades of his long reign Duke Karl Eu-
gen sought to let his absolutism work for the benefit of the realm 
(e.g., by founding the Karlsschule). But the young Hegel had only 
just begun to attend the University of Tiibingen as a student when 
the French Revolution broke out; this showed unmistakably that 
the old Europe could no longer be saved by reformist compro-
mises. Even if some reports of student agitation in the Ev~ngelical 
Seminary are overgrown with legends, there is no doubt that Hegel 
like his friends came out decidedly in favor of the Revolution. When 
as a professor in Berlin he traveled to Paris in 1827 and on the way 
passed through Valmy, where artillery fire had sealed the fate of 
13 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
the coalition army, he wrote to his wife of the "immense interest" 
that places like Valmy and the events associated with it had once 
had for him in his youth. 
After completing his studies Hegel went as a private tutor first 
south to Switzerland, then north to Frankfurt. The years in Swit-
zerland were marked by the attempt to justify the republicanism 
of the Revolution in philosophical terms too, as a renewal of clas· 
sical republicanism. However, as Hegel was very concretely con-
cerned, as a pamphleteer, with Bern's wrongful domination of the 
canton of Vaud, as well as with the constitutional reform in his 
homeland Wiirttemberg, he inevitably came to inquire more and 
more into the conditions characterizing European history and con· 
sequently the contemporary era. In his renewed association with 
Holderlin in Frankfurt, Hegel eventually came to take up a posi-
tion against French plans for conquest and to opt for Austria as 
trustee of the old empire. This option was open to him because, 
as he saw it, aU France had done. was to replace. the ce~tr~Iislll 
o( royal a~thor~~ _ _!>y ~n a~.ftci~l and no lc;_ss cent_raliz~d national 
representation, while countries like Austria had r~tained the par· 
ticipaCIOii oflhe estates in the administration of power in the form 
or a corporate represent~tfo~. and were building up the state from-
below. 
When Hegel was a student in Tiibingen we are told that he was 
a keen reader of Rousseau's writings, in order to have done with 
the rules and fetters of the understanding. As far as political sci-
ence is concerned, however, Hegel is influenced less by the con-
structions of rational law than by the historically exemplified in· 
tuitions of a Montesquieu, for whom the spirit of a people results 
from the interplay of many spheres. The time he spent in Bern gave 
Hegel a passionate concern for human rights. A sharp line must 
be drawn between legality and morality, so that the state may no 
longer, as in Hegel's homeland Wiirttemberg, interfere in matters 
of faith and link civil rights with religion. Religion and politics 
seem to go hand in glove insofar as theology denies sinful human· 
ity the capacity for freedom and self-determination and so paves the 
way for despotism. But can one at the same time take the rights 
14 

EDITOR.IAL JNTllODUCTION 
of the individual as one's starting point and follow the Greeks, in 
whose city-states the individual was encompassed by the whole 
fabric of ethical life? Is it possible strictly to separate church and 
state if one seeks the whole human being in the entirety of politi-
cal, religious, and ethical life? 
Renewing his association with Holderlin in Frankfurt, Hegel 
comes to see the divine itself as the union brought about by love 
or the "friendship of souls.,. What is experienced in love is to be 
depicted in a new mythology in such a way that this mode of reli-
gion underpins relationships based on freedom. The so-called "Ear-
liest Systematic Program of German Idealism'" (1796).1 opposes to 
the "pitiful human work" of the state, which seeks to prevent 
need by protecting "libeny" and "property,'"' the work of human-
ity wherein a new religion makes possible the freedom and equal-
ity of all. In a commentary on Kant's Metaphysics of Morals, He-
gel not only lays stress on the relationship of church a~d state; 
he also makes use of the concept of life-a life that raise)-..lt!elf 
within the finite to the eternal and feels a unity in love with all 
that lives, yet continually differentiates itself into new configura-
tions and thus comes under the sway of destiny. What was sepa-
rated as legality and morality is now understood from the stand-
point of the unity of life. Another feature of the differentiations 
into which life enters is that it seeks to prevent need by labor and 
provides a system of legal protection for the effective division of 
labor. It was in the great commercial city of Frankfun that Hegel 
first began to study the British economic system, writing a com-
mentary on Steuart's Principles. The fact that direct democracy is 
no longer possible in large modern states makes a representative 
constitution appear inevitable. 
Having studied theology in Wiirttemberg and been subsequently 
S. [Tr.l Published in DIIS a/teste Systemprogram: Studien V4r FriihgeschU:hte des 
deutschen Idetllismus, cd. Rudiger Bubner, Hegel-Studien, Beihe& 9 (Bonn, 1973), 
pp. 261-265; uanslatcd in H. S. Harris, Hegel's Development: Toward the Sun-
light, 1770-1801 (Oxford, 1972), pp. Sl0-512. 
6. [Tr.] The words "liberty" and "property" arc in English in the original, and 
the reference is to Hegel's studies in Adam Smith, James Steuart (see below), and 
other classical British economists. 
IS 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
engaged as a private tutor in Frankfurt, Hegel in May 1800 re-
ceived permission from the Stuttgart Consistory Court "to visit a 
few universities outside Wiirttemberg." After a few days in Mainz 
he left the city for good and moved to Jena. The separate peace 
concluded at Basel, whereby Prussia left the first coalition against 
France, had brought northern Germany several years of quiet, fos-
tering the development of German classicism in Weimar and ro-
manticism and the idealist philosophy in Jena. Hegel attached him-
self to Schelling, his former friend from student days, and found 
himself plunged into the thick of the dispute about the right way 
to arrive at an adequate philosophical system. Rudolf Abeken, a 
student in Jena who attended lectures by Schelling and also Hegel, 
wrote in his memoirs that compared with Schelling's new philoso-
phy of the absolute, even Napoleon's great deeds and victories had 
become as nothing. Admittedly it was not Hegel's way to turn 
aside from politics in this manner. However, his article on the re-
organization of the German Empire under Austrian leadership was 
overtaken by political events before publication. The Reichsdepu-
tationshauptsch/uss1 helped to restructure the German Lander in 
its own fashion; Austria was increasingly forced to turn its back on 
the policy associated with joseph II and Leopold II, moving closer 
to Russia, where freedom was an unfamiliar idea; and the empire 
passed away. In Hegel's eyes Prussia was a parvenu, compelled to 
move toward centralized control of all political life, though not in 
the same way as postrevolutionary France. On seeing the Prussian 
troops, Hegel (whose brother served as a Wiirttemberg officer in 
Napoleon's army and was at the time in Jena) had predicted their 
defeat and the consequent collapse of Frederick the Great's Prus-
sia. At all events he finally o.e.~~4. f9.r~..ap,pleon's policy ba~.9._ on 
~Rh~!!isi).CQn.fe.derW,gp; w!!!£h stimulated middle-class activity 
by means of a new legal sy~t.e!_ll_ a~d·g~y~_ the.ne:w.sta.tis~repi:~se_~­
tat!.'{L~i~gtJc:>~s. As editor of a Bamberg newspaper Hegel re-
ported faithfully how the historian Johannes von Muller, as minis-
7. (Tr.) The final decisions of the spedal commission set up by the Great 
Powers in 1801 to compensate the German princes for loss of territory on the west 
bank of the Rhine by apponioning among them the majority of ecclesiastical states 
and imperial cities still in existence. 
16 

EDITOIUAL INTRODUCTION 
ter and director of educational establishments in the kingdom of 
Westphalia, was preparing a modd constitution. 
· 
In his first formulations of a system, Hegel initially seeks to 
show how the absolute is to be grasped and how it actualizes itself 
under the conditions of the first, or physical, and the second, or 
ethical, nature. Ethical life too is "nature," i.e., the ethics of a peo-
ple in their substantive entirety. So natural law cannot be based in 
atomistic fashion on the individual; rather it must show how in 
various ways nature attains to its right (and so alone makes pos-
sible the rights of the individuals). By dint of activity this second 
nature must make itself what it is, and so it is a "work." In the 
same way as Aristotle in book 1 of his Politics, Hegel in these pre-
liminary drafts indicates what is necessary before a people can ex-
ist as an "ethical work, • namely that people must communicate 
through language, ward off material need through labor, and re-
produce themselves within the family. These "potentialit~::.__ 
tenzen) make possible the systems of life to which the management 
of communal concerns by the state then relates: industry and com-
merce as a system of needs, private law as the means of regulating 
this system, and finally the education of children and cultivation of 
ethics--or, to order them differently, family, the economy, and right 
as modes in which "coercive law" mediates the universal and the 
individual will. 
In order to be able to define more precisely the separate spheres 
that make up a ~le, ~I 
draws on the old doctrine of~~._ 
9r •. ~!asse! (Stilnde). )Classical Greek philosophy seems to raise its 
head again when tlegel assigns to the class made up of the (rul-
ing and war-waging) nobility the function of engaging in politics 
and the necessary leisure for philosophizing, while he attributes 
to the other classes, engaged as they are in agriculture, industry, 
and commerce, only a "relative" ethicality. However, Hegel does 
seek to do justice to the insight that contemporary human beings 
are "citoyens" as well as "bourgeois." The absolute, so it is ar-
gued in the essay on "Natural Law, "8 sacrifices part of itself in the 
8. [Tr.) Published in the Kritisches Journal tkr Philosoph", 1802-3 (see Ge-
stmllt..Jte Wuke 4:415-485); tranSlated as Nt#urtd Law by T. M. Knox (Philadel-
phia, 1975). 
17 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
classes of relative ethicality in order to set itself free for its highest 
actualization. 
During the latter part of his Jena period, Hegel poses the ques-
tion as to the uniform basis from which it might be possible to de-
velop the "potentialities" that enable a people to become an ethi-
cal work. The Realphilosophie of 1805-6' gives as this basis the 
ego, which is intelligence and will; this makes it possible to think 
of ethical spirit no longer as mere nature but as the other of na-
ture, which takes shape in the reciprocal recognition of one self by 
another. This confers a new meaning on motifs of modern natural-
law theory and the philosophy of Kant and Fichte. In the doctrine 
of estates or classes the basic features of the classical ethic of the 
citY-State 11-re lost. C~;f~onti~g the Jowe;-classes (those eng;ged 
in agriculture, industry, and commerce) is the universal class, in 
which the man of affairs (i.e., primarily the administrative official) 
stands alongside the scholar and the officer. The classcs.._lU!L4~fi.n~d 
fnnqjonalk, according to the tasks that have to be performed in 
the people as a whole. Hegel shows how history is carried forward 
by creative labor rather than by relations of authority. With these 
well-known reflections Hegel disposes of the classical writers' dis-
paragement of honest toil, which denied labor any properly hu-
man worth and made the productive activity of poiesis part of the 
business of social interaction. In the complex modern state we 
cannot rest content with the beautiful ethical life of ancient times, 
in which the citizens sustained the polis in a system of direct 
democracy and all individuals displayed in their virtues the sub-
stantive concerns of the whole. The new forms of differentiation 
call for their own "node" wherein they are brought together again, 
and this I:.J_e_g~J -s.ees..ii:LB!.nMitu.tiw!al mpnarchy. Here he formu-
lates an idea that will characterize his philosophy from then on: 
society based on the division of labor is accepted, but the transfer-
ence of the notion of contract to the state is rejected because it is 
9. ITr.) The third of the Jena system-outlines, treating the philosophies of na-
ture and spirit (see GeSIImmelte Werke 8:1-287). Realpbilosophie designates the 
philosophy of rhe Kreal• (the se1:0nd and third pans of Hegel's philosophical sys-
tem) as opposed to the philosophy of the •idea),• or logic: and metaphysics (rhe 
first pan). 
18 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
only by means of a detour through history that an emergent state 
attains legality. In their inmost moral and religious life human be-
ings are referred beyond the nation to which they belong to the 
whole of history and what is eternal in it. 
To this corresponds a new view of religion in which the ethical 
spirit acquires knowledge of itself. Religion no longer unfolds his-
torically from the religion of the Greeks, which comprehends the 
powers of nature in the immediacy of art, through the Christian 
religion of anguish and division, to a people's intuition of itself in 
its deity. Alongside the religion of nature, which is now assigned 
to the East, is set instead the Greek religion of art and a rationally 
interpreted Christianity as the ultimate religion integrating all that 
has gone before. In this way Hegel opposes to the conviction that 
antiquity can be restored by the Revolution a view of the inner-_/ 
articulation of history with which he had already, in his article 
on the German constitution, distinguished Oriental despotism from 
ancient republicanism and the modern representative system. The 
Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) shows how the basic political and 
religious forms themselves grow out of the historical process. 
As director of the Nuremberg Gymnasium, Hegel worked for 
eight years in a Rhenish Confederation state in which his friend 
Niethammer had the task of introducing a new educational policy, 
principally for the newly acquired Protestant territories. During 
these years Hegel's views on education took shape, but the period 
was marked by something of a pause in the further development 
of the philosophy of right. Under his contract Hegel had to give 
instruction in law, morals, and religion, following on, we may say, 
from Kant's Metaphysics of Morals and his philosophy of religion. 
Hegel followed the prescribed path, alien as it was, distinguishing 
between practical and theoretical consciousness and introducing 
the state as the actuality of right after dealing with civil law and 
criminal law. In discussing morality Hegel also spoke of c:onsti-1 
tutional duties and of the state as the unity binding together eth-
ics, education, and modes of thinking and acting-since the in-
troduction of legality must not result in the state's becoming a 
"machine." 
I 
Undoubtedly the reconfiguration of speculative philosophy 
19 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
played a part in the way this component of the system was ulti-
mately incorporated into the system as a whole. According to the 
closing sections of the Realphilosophie of 1805-6, logic or specu-
lative philosophy was designed to include six chapters: being, re-
lationship, life and cognition, knowing knowledge, spirit, spirit's 
knowledge of itself. It was therefore the intention that one of these 
chapters should elaborate the structural elements of (ethical) spirit 
(in line with this the Phenomenology also contains a lengthy chap-
ter on spirit). In the Science of Logic, the last part of which was 
published in 1816, all that remains of this treatment is a brief indi-
cation of the idea of the good, in which the good is not even inter-
preted in the manner of the subsequent Philosophy of Right as an 
end in itself. In contrast, the idea of life is developed at dispropor-
tionate length, and so the danger arises that in terms of its struc-
ture the idea of the good is not sufficiently distinguished from the 
teleology of life, and the actuality of the ethical in history is under-
stood to an undue extent from the standpoint of the process of 
life, as a self-contained process. This inevitably results in the trans-
formation of practical philosophy, for which the normative prob-
lem is of prime concern, into a philosophy of objective spirit, by 
which spirit is led through history to its consummation in model 
institutions. 
Hegel's last years in Nuremberg saw the fall of Napoleon and 
reestablishment of the community of European states by the Con-
gress of Vienna. Hegel's letters to his friend Niethammer show that 
Napoleon's defeat was a bitter pill for him to swallow. He sees in 
it the epitome of the tragic: as the executor of world spirit, the 
hero is dragged down by the masses, who play the role of the clas· 
sical chorus. But Hegel also points out that he had already pre-
dicted in the Phenomenology that spirit would migrate from the 
land of revolution to the land of self-consciousness. Napoleon had 
reintroduced the old structures on the foundations laid by the Rev-
olution without providing an intellectual justification for what had 
been introduced anew and differently. He had disregarded the tra-
ditions of individual peoples and set insufficient' store by the work 
of free universities. 
20 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
Once Hegel was able to return to university life in Heidelberg./ 
he ~~ted-tG pro:vidc ph~los~_ph!~~ suppQrt. fo_.r flu: .ne.w.. political I 
al}4_~l~Q..I!SJifej_n..mS<-EUJ:~states. Thus he adopwta..v.cry ... 
~~-~ttjtgge..to .tb&..ne~)y J~.!f!l~<L!ltud~n~_b:aternities ,wbQs~ .. j 
ho~- i!~~s ~o-~~~~~...e!9~J!e~_<?(!~-~ ~~ 
2..~~be!.ation re~~m~ 
in a constitutional monarchy and a more united Germany. And it 
isspecifi~ally iiiesnieidelberg lectures on the philosophy of right 
that show the extent to which political and educational considera-
tions were involved in Hegel's work. At the same time, Hegel came 
into public view as a political writer with his review of the docu-
ments recording the constitutional struggle in Wiirttemberg. That 
his lectures influenced the political debates of the students is evi-----
dent from the fact that F. W. Carove went over them with "some" 
of his fellow students in the winter of 1818-19. This law student 
and romantic author from the Rhineland received his degree under 
Hegel with a dissertation devoted to the statutes of the student 
fraternities, and Hegel also saw to it that he did not have to sub-
mit the compulsory piece in Latin. In this way Hegel supported 
the political aspirations of Carove, who opposed the exaggerated 
and anachronistic concept of dueling honor and sought the admis-
sion of Jewish students to the student fraternities. In his memoirs 
Theodor von Kobbe, who played a leading part in these fraterni-
ties, maintained that the effect of Hegel's lectures had been that he 
won over few students but that these were the best ones, and that 
these then persuaded the others "that one must learn a great deal 
before one can improve the world." 
A good half-year after his arrival in Heidelberg, Hegel pub-
lished an Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences (1817) as a 
basis for his teaching activity. This outline of his system places what 
had formerly been "natural right" between the parts dealing with 
subjective and absolute spirit, as the doctrine of "objective spirit." 
and distinguishes the theories of right. of morality, and of ethical 
life. When, in the theory of right, before defining ownership and 
contract, and before showing how right is infringed by legal dis-
putes and crime, Hegel introduces the self-knowledge of spirit in 
the freedom of the individual as "person," he could draw on 
21 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
material he had used for dictation when he was teaching at the 
Nuremberg Gymnasium, and also on the Realphilosophie of the 
Jena period. In the chapter on morality the theory of manifold du-
ties is formalized into a theory of action for which the good is duty; 
but the theory of the various stages of action does not yet figure 
prominently. Ethical life is understood within the context of the 
people, which produces its actuality through activity and so makes 
itself, as universal work, what it is. The various spheres of this ac-
tuality are the universal class or estate (prl~;rily made up of rulers 
and-civil servants), the p@_.rjicula_!_esta_te (those engaged in agricul-
ture, industry, and commerce), and the esta,te of individuality or 
the fall!iJ.X. AI the. natural ethical substantiality ch.~ f~miJycan -also 
be_plaa:d__before the estates, in which case the constitutional char-
acter &f rhe people <k_rjv_c;_~_f!C?.~ the uniyersal estate As work the 
people expresses its universality in laws, whose actuality is the liv-
ing ethos. In contrast with the aggregate of the many, which it is a 
misnomer to call a "people," universality properly subsists in the 
government, at whose head stands the prince or sovereign. The fact 
that the individual ethical spirit of one people comes up against 
other peoples means that consideration must be given to the state 
and its external right. Then, thirdly, the spirits of the different peo-
ples have to be given their place in history as a whole. The extent 
to which Hegel now grasps history and the works accomplished in 
it by the different peoples as a self-enclosed process is clear from a 
marginal comment on § 465, dealing with the revealed or revela-
tory (Christian) religion: "Everything must be brought out of the 
enclosed God [Alles heraus aus dem verschlossenen Gotte]." The 
philosophy of subjective spirit in itself replaces the uncertainty at-
taching to action and belief by a final transparency, which gives 
preponderance to the theoretical aspect. 
Hegel had the option of coupling lectures on the encyclopaedia 
as a whole-on logic and metaphysics as well as anthropology and 
psychology-with the preparation of his textbook, or taking the 
textbook itself as a basis once it was ready. He had to lecture on 
history of philosophy and (in his last semester at Heidelberg) on 
aesthetics "following his own outline" or "on the basis of dictated 
22 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
passages"-for absolute spirit was presented only in schematic 
fashion in the textbook. It is surprising that immediately after the 
textbook appeared, Hegel also lectured on "Natural Right and Po-
litical Science" on the basis of dictated passages; but this series of 
lectures in the winter of 1817-18 marked a further modification 
of approach as a result of which the philosophy of right attained 
its definitive structure. "Right" was grasped in more consistent 
fashion as "abstract right"; the theory of morality was finally for-
malized as a doctrine of the stages of action; and ethical life was 
from now on articulated in the three exemplary forms of family, 
civil society, and the state. 
Thereafter Hegel continued to work uninterruptedly on the fi-
nal elaboration of the philosophy of right. The following winter-
1818-19 in Berlin-he expanded the first part of the lectures 
by inserting further sections, so that for reasons of time the last 
part had to remain more schematic. The ensuing winter (1819-20) 
brought simultaneously another reading of the lectures and the fi-
nal revision of the compendium. Here too Hegel further modi-
fied his system; for example, both this winter's lectures and the 
compendium reflect a new understanding of the state on the ba-
sis of inner and outer "sovereignty." A surviving fragment on the 
power of the sovereign, written on a degree certificate dated 30 De· 
cember 1819, shows Hegel working intensively on § 286 of the 
compendium. On 30 October 1819 he had informed his friend 
Creuzer that he had wanted to reciprocate the latter's gift of a 
book, albeit "inadequately," by sending him "a few folio sections 
dealing with philosophy of right," in other words the first printed 
installment of his compendium; but had been unable to do so, for 
not everyone could be "as diligent and quick in their work" as 
Creuzer. "I was just going to have a start made on printing when 
I learned of the decrees of the Diet [at Carlsbad]. Now that we 
[know] where we stand in regard to freedom from censorship, I 
will very shortly be submitting the text for printing." So, as was 
the case with his other publications, Hegel made only slow prog-
ress with the preparation of his manuscript, and was thus also able 
to take the new censorship provisions into account for the printing 
23 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
process. In June 1820 he submitted the first half of the manuscript 
to the censor, but the remainder followed swiftly, and by October 
1820 he was able to present his book to the minister von Alten-
stein as evidence of his activity. 
While stiU halfway through his lectures, at the beginning of Jan-
uary 1818, Hegel was again invited to move to Berlin. He was 
to be sure in Stuttgart in the spring for negotiations about a post 
in Tubingen (evidently to succeed von Wangenheim as curator 
or chancellor of the University of Tiibingen); but Hegel had long 
since decided in favor of Berlin. The idea of combining the German 
states of the South and Southwest in a_ttiadi~suw:tP.re forming an 
independent force alongside..A1.1#ria and Prussia--an i~~-d\at von 
Wangenheim continued to promote after he entered~litics-was 
one that Hegel probably now viewed as an illusion t was Prussia 
that claimed his attention because Prussia, now su stantially en-
larged, was seeking to attain inner unity not merely by building up 
the government but also by educational reform. At the dose of the 
Heidelberg lectures on philosophy of right (S 170), Hegel affirms 
that rationality is to be found in the "middle class," whose task it 
is as the "intellectual estate" to present the wishes of the people as 
the "material extreme" to the sovereign. At some point Hegel jot-
ted down in connection with hi~augural lecture in Heidelberg: 
"Prussia founded on intellectuals .. ~ 
The minister von Altenstein had thought of offering Hegel in 
addition a post at the Academy of Sciences, and in this way Hegel 
hoped to be relieved in Berlin of the "precarious function of teach-
ing philosophy at a university," and to play an active role, possibly 
as president of the academy, in educational and academic policy. 
But the murder of Kotzebue by Karl Sand, member of a student 
fraternity, provoked the Restauration establishment into the reac-
tionary Carlsbad Decrees; and Hegel had been little more than a 
year in Berlin when the constitutional struggle in Prussia ended in 
failure. His services were not required for the function he desired. 
When he saw that educational reform too was becoming a matter 
for the government, he delegated most of the work to his disciple 
Johannes Schulze; and he himself abandoned the plan to write a 
24 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
work on national education policy {a Staatspiidagogik) as a sequel 
to the publication of the Philosophy of Right (as he informed 
Niethammer on 9 June 1821). It was, however, possible for Hegel 
to continue to elaborate his philosophy and spread its influence 
through a school. Unfortunately we do not as yet have any tran-
scripts of the lectures on philosophy of right in the winter of 1821-
22. The lectures rec:orded in the winter semesters of 1822-23 and 
1824-25 show that the philosophy of history had already been re-
moved and made the subject of a separate series of lectures. There-
after Hegel left the lecrures on philosophy of right to his pupils 
and further elaborated the philosophy of history. 
Hegel's lectures show the extent to which he reacted to cur-l 
rent changes in the political siruation. Thus he warned his students \ 
against impatience when Prussia as an integral state had not ac-
quired a constitution, or n~t 
representative one. In the winter \ 
of 1824-25 he expounde § 272 · the following terms: "Every I 
state has a constitution; even t it has no estates it has a constitu-
1 
tion, which may be more explicit or more implicit." The revolu-
tions of 1830 profoundly disturbed Hegel; he was horrified to see 
the United Provinces fall apart again, and on confessional grounds. 
He had regarded the confessional problem as solved; and now in 
his last years in Berlin, when religious renewal was being overlaid 
with political overtones, he declared emphatically that only the 
Protestant religion could be reconciled with a rational political 
order, while in Catholic states, which had not had the benefit of 
the Reformation, revolutions must continue to occur. Shortly be-
fore his death Hegel was again at work as a political writer, pen-
ning an article on the constitutional reform in Eng!ar:_~.9_ •. 10 Despite 
much clear-sightedness he Shows here-the- ~ncertainty of an old 
man, regarding the reforms as necessary and yet fearing them. 
When Hegel's former pupil Gans took an unduly liberal line in his 
lecrures, Hegel's intervention was again enlisted, probably by the 
crown prince himself. But after giving two lectures of a new course 
10. [Tr.] "The English Reform Bill" (1831), translated in Hegel's Political Writ-
ings, pp. 295-330. 
25 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
on philosophy of right-and an unedifying dispute with Gans-
Hegel died in November 1831. In these two lectures Hegel pro-
tested against the notion that right, which was created from rea· 
son, was opposed as mere "human handiwork" to a "divine right." 
The last words of these lectures, as recorded by David Friedrich 
Strauss, are as follows: "Freedom is the innermost element, and it 
is from it that the whole edifice of the spiritual world arises." 
II 
If we may trust Wannenmann's transcript on this point, in his 
winter course of 1817-18 Hegel plunged without further prefa· 
tory remarks directly into the subject matter, namely the definition 
of the concept of right and exposition of the different aspects of 
natural right and political science. This subject matter embraces 
both jurisprudence and economics and also history. Hegel had been 
trained as a theologian, even if as a student he had occasionally 
wanted to switch over to law. As the son of a Wiirttemberg civil 
servant he had, however, taken an interest in problems of consti· 
tutional history and from then on had constantly extended his 
knowledge of legal science. While employed as private tutor he had 
taken an interest in social development in Britain, where in 1795 
Whitbread had proposed a minimum wage and in 1796 Pitt had 
introduced a Poor Law in Parliament. Hegel began his study of 
British economists in Frankfurt and continued it later. While still 
at the Gymnasium he had become interested in the Enlighten-
ment's attempts to construct a scientifically based picture of his· 
tory. As Hegel became ever more strongly conscious of the fact that 
he was living in a time of upheaval, he inevitably came to see his 
own age too in a historical light. Whereas nowadays in a faculty 
of law a student of criminal law will hardly venture to express an 
opinion to a student of constitutional law concerning the latter's 
specialty, Hegel in his compendium spoke for the disciplines of 
three faculties. 
In S 69 of his lectures, after considering abstract right and 
26 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
morality, Hegel goes on to discuss ethical life. In so doing he casts 
a glance backward and forward over his whole system: right as the 
"unmediated concrete existence" of freedom and morality as the 
"reflection of the free subject into itself" are merely "ideal mo-
ments"; whereas ethical life is idea and consequently, as rational 
actuality, both being and reflection, both reality and concept. Ab-
stract right and morality are only enabling moments that sublate 
themselves, while ethical life is something whole and actual, which 
exists in the forms made possible by these moments. This whole 
consists in family, civil society, and state, the last-named being one 
of the succession of states in history. If this whole represents itself 
according to its substantive inner content, it comprises religion. 
And in the Christian era religion takes cognizance not merely of 
the "spirit of the panicular people" but of the spirit of the histori-
cal whole in which the peoples are "limited spirits" (as we are told 
in the exp.osition to S 71). 
In giving the chapter on "law" (Recht) (Part I) the title "ab-
stract right" (das abstrakte Recht), Hegel shows that it is not a 
question of the sphere of legality nor even solely a question of pri-
vate right (which we first encounter, as actually practiced, in the 
administration of justice on the part of civil society). All we are 
here concerned with are "ideal moments," namely the way in 
which ethical life is "person" in the abstract culmination of its un-
mediated being. In ethical life the individual person opens up in 
three directions: vis-a-vis the thing, which can be owned: vis-a-vis 
other persons, with whom contracts can be concluded and anicles 
exchanged; and vis-a-vis oneself, inasmuch as right must defend 
itself against wrong. Morality too is treated solely as "ideal mo-
ment": as subject, the person gains the possibility of reflection and 
develops differing forms of action (from the ethicality of condi-
tions prior to the emergence of right to a morally reflected system 
of right). In this way duty can relate to the good and so to institu-
tions as forms of the living good. This means that the traditional 
doctrine of concrete duties and virtues falls away since duties are 
now understood on the basis of institutions. By means of this doc-
trine of abstract right and of (equally abstract) morality as action, 
27 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
it becomes possible for Hegel to elaborate the doctrine of ethical 
life in a form strictly governed by right. Naturally Hegel knows 
that human beings live in many forms of community; but in his 
philosophy of right he confines himself to the essential by distin· 
guishing the natural ethical life of the family (which is subject to 
right primarily in its dissolution) first from civil society and then 
from the state as the locus, properly speaking, of right. 
In jena, Hegel had spoken of ius naturae civitatis et gentium 
or simply of "natural right"; but from now on he couples natu· 
rat right (Natu"echt) and political science (Staatswissenschaft). In 
speaking of political science he is taking up the old title of the 
"Politics." When the state was in process of breaking free from 
traditional forms, it was possible to oppose to political science a 
new natural right as a binding force. Hegel on the contrary sees 
natural right as the ordering element in all positive and historical 
happenings, and so can combine the opposing natural right and 
political science in a philosophy of right. It is true that in so doing 
he stretches the concept of right to include also the right of world 
spirit to transcend the limited spirits of the individual peoples. In 
any event the exposition to S 2 of his lectures constitutes Hegel's 
justification for the new tide he employs, that of a "philosophical 
doctrine of right." 
Since Hegel incorporates his philosophical doctrine of right into 
the system as a whole and takes over from the system presupposi-
tions of crucial importance, the introduction to the lectures devel-
ops the concept of right from that of the self-realizing free will, 
at least in a summary and schematic manner. Abstract right is no 
longer divided (as was still the case with Kant's Metaphysics of 
Morals) on the basis of the distinction between the right of things 
and of persons. That to which one can have a right under the right 
of persons (e.g., the labor of an employee) is according to Hegel 
also only a limited "thing." As persons, human beings have the 
right to appropriate things in accord with the principle of "prop-
erty." It is true that the Phenomenology of Spirit still uses the dis· 
tinction between the system of personal and material right, but 
in an analysis of the unmediated or beautiful ethical life of the 
28 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
Greeks. Since his Jena days it was clear to Hegel that it was in 
Roman law that the categorization of everything as persons was 
worked out. However. Hegel views Roman law in the light of its 
later accommodation to natural law; in this way he fails to see 
that Roman law is primarily public law (not, as he stresses, private 
law). When Hegel portrays and criticizes Roman family law on ac-
count of the unethical privileges and rights of possession devolving 
on the man, he c:lisregards the fact that this system stemmed from 
kinship structures. 
During his lectures in Heidelberg, Hegel returned to the book-
seller Winter on 1 February 1818 those volumes of Savigny's Ge-
schichte des romischen Rechts im Mittelalter he had previously 
asked for, explaining that "I had been mistaken regarding the pur-
pose of this work and had had something quite different in mind . ., 
Instead of Savigny's work Hegel asked for Ritter von Hugo's text-
book on Roman law, which he then went on to use in his com-
pendium, with the result that he came into dispute with the famous 
jurist. He does not seem to have paid attention to the disagree-
ment between Thibaut and Savigny concerning the possibility of a 
national codification of law until he reached Berlin; in Heidelberg 
he did, however, attack Savigny's seminal work Das Recht des Be-
situs in the exposition to S 27. 
Hegel assigns to the person a sphere of ownership as it were in 
terms of natural right. But he gives the existence of property a 
temporal connotation: property can be acquired by occupancy and 
lost by prescription. Hegel also assigns value to mere possession, 
while in his view something owned and not used is not fully owned. 
Savigny on the contrary had shown that possession was not origi-
nally protected in Roman law but only as the latter was further 
elaborated in the Pandects. His work Das Recht des Besitzes says 
specifically in regard to possession that it is a fact but not a right. 
If in contrast possession is infringed, forcible infringement can be 
rescinded. Possession can thus involve legal consequences, so that 
it is indirectly a right, or fact and right simultaneously. Where pos-
session has been infringed, remedial action admittedly does not 
fall under the law of things but under the law of obligations, as 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
one of the obligationes ex maleficiis. While Hegel too now stresses 
there can be no ownership without possession, he criticizes Savigny 
for being one-sided: in his view the more important aspect is the 
relationship of possession to property, the fact that possession can 
give rise to property because it confers a right to property. 
At this time, when reforms were in the air, these "abstract" 
questions of right had great political significance. Since a dual sys-
tem of ownership--dominium directum et utile-had been inher-
ited from feudalism, it was possible in given cases to claim a right 
of ownership for peasants who were "in possession" and were 
now to be emancipated. Savigny with his stress on possession as a 
fact takes the side of the nobility, Hegel that of the middle classes, 
for whom everything that could be possessed became capable of 
becoming private property. Above all, this dispute bore on the ques-
tion of what constitutes the foundation of legal science. Is it to be 
based on a search for the rational in history? We see here the germ 
of a disagreement that persisted over the years. The Berlin law fac-
ulty was shaken to the core when Hegel's pupil Gans was admit-
ted to it against Savigny's wishes. Gans then carried on the dispute 
with Savigny over the right of possession in such a way that public 
opinion throughout Germany followed the argument. It was one 
of Hegel's pupils from the Nuremberg Gymnasium, Georg Fried-
rich Puchta, staning from Savigny's standpoint, who sought to 
bring about a settlement that even today influences debates on the 
subject. 
Instead of speaking of right vis-a-vis a person, which can never 
be acquired by my own power from my side alone, Hegel develops 
the principle of contract (and in so doing, though he is here pre-
senting "abstract" rights in principle, classifies the different types 
of contract). When Hegel later treats of the family, he at once em-
phasizes that in the immediate, natural unity of the family neither 
is the principle of individual ownership valid nor can the family 
itself be comprehended solely as a contract. When Kant speaks of 
personal rights to things (e.g., to the use of the sexual organs of 
one's spouse), Hegel rejects this way of viewing the matter as un-
ethical. In drawing up the list of abstract rights, the right of inheri-
30 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
tance is left out of account, to be dealt with later in relation to the 
dissolution of families. Constitutional law or public righ~ is also 
disregarded for the structure of abstract right. 
The state, maintains Hegel in opposition to modern natural-law 
theory, is not a contract. Since contract consists for him in the 
exchange of goods between individuals, he is bound to criticize 
Rousseau's "social contract." This criticism may be determined by 
a shih in the meaning of contract and so be unjust to Rousseau's 
contention. In the case in point Hegel righdy points out that it is 
necessary to determine who is to be included among the citizens 
regarded as entering into a free association. The question who is 
accounted a citizen is also considered for example by Kant on the 
basis of historical origin (since not only women but also the itiner-
ant barber who travels around with his shaving bowl are denied 
citizen status). But also in Hegel's philosophy of right, is it not de-
termined in advance, namely from the system as a whole, that the 
principles of ownership and contract take full effect in civil soci-
ety, yet for various reasons are subject to limitations in family and 
state? 
In a third section Hegel deals with the infringement of abstract 
right and the ensuing remedial action under the principles of "own-
ership" and "contract," taking into account disputes in civil law 
and criminal law or crime and punishment. When in this con-
nection in his theory of punishment he vehemently attacks Feuer-
bach's theory of deterrence, it is clear what a contentious issue 
in the debates of his own time and the present day Hegel here 
tackles. 
Under the heading "morality" (Part U) Hegel analyzes differing 
forms of action-from deeds of the heroes of antiquity, which still 
do not presuppose any developed ethic or condition of right, to 
the actualization of the good by means of a decision of conscience. 
This unusual approach is based on a firmly held position. In ex-
plaining what will be included in the "sphere of morality," Hegel 
notes in § 10 that "we here leave aside the doctrine of virtue." In 
his youth Hegel had been at one with Rousseau, Schiller, and Hol-
derlin in complaining that one no longer saw human beings (i.e., 
31 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
"whole" human beings with the "totality" of their character) but 
only a people, tom apart into a multitude of specialists---crafts-
men, thinkers, priests, etc. The Jena essay on natural law seeks to 
reflect this contemporary criticism.u Natural law, so it is argued 
there, shows how nature (as second or ethical nature) attains its 
right, while morals shows how right is mirrored in the virtues of 
the individual. Aristotle had taken ethics as the fundamental disci-
pline of practical philosophy and so developed it as the theory of 
sound moral conduct or the theory of virtue. In his essay Hegel re-
serves virtue as such to a particular political estate, which in brav-
ery possesses the virtue of virtues; as for the second estate, that of 
industry and commerce, it is only in the complex relationships of 
the emancipated economic sphere that it exhibits the reflected im-
age of the process wherein nature attains its right. This reflected 
image belongs for Hegel not to ethics but to the science of moral-
ity, viewed in a narrower, more strongly privatistic sense. 
In his Heidelberg lectures Hegel draws the consequences of the 
position he had reached at the end of his time in Jena, namely that 
all estates or classes are to be understood on the basis of the 
way in which a people's "labor" is divided; life in the modern state 
has become so complex that the ethical whole no longer ever ap-
pears in its proper shape in the virtue of an individual. The models 
of antiquity can indeed be used to awaken political consciousness 
among the young; but when as adults they enter a society based 
on the division of labor, they all-including the officers, officials, 
and scholars of the "universal" class-become to a certain degree 
"bourgeois." Only in the partial form peculiar to the sphere to 
which they belong can they participate in the administration of the 
political whole. "Uprightness" is no longer seen as the distinctive 
ethical life of the bourgeois as against the virtue of the citizen; in 
the multilayered fabric of a constitutional monarchy it is "virtue," 
or what remains of the virtue of former times (as Hegel explains 
with a major historical retrospect in the exposition to § 135). 
If one considers how action seeks to realize the rational in the 
actual, one can follow Kant in making morality purely a matter of 
11. [Tr.] See above, n. 8. 
32 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
the disposition and leaving aside everything natural-what is given 
and what ensues. Hegel opposes this position, without falling into 
an ethics of results; action is viewed in its various configurations, 
such as the one in which the intention is not yet directed to the or-
ganically good but to welfare, which remains tied to the particu-
larity of individuals. Hegd directly attacks Kant, Fichte, and the 
Romantics, who separate the "ought" or the inner disposition of a 
beautiful soul from what happens in actuality and make it the af-
fair of an infinite striving or longing. For Hegel it is not only that 
the conscience that actualizes the good is the culmination of suc-
cessive stages of ethical consciousness; this good that is to be actu-
alized also progressively takes shape in history in differing modes 
of concreteness. If Hegel after considering abstract right and mo-
rality as "ideal moments" presents as ethical life the organically 
good that is apprehended by the conscience, can he be sure that he 
is not merely contemplating a transitional stage in history? In the 
very last year of his life, in his essay on the constitutional conflict 
in England, Hegel will revert to his former call for justice as the 
criterion for judging existing or desirable institutions. But where is 
this justice to be found in Hegel's system? He assumes that history 
has led to rational institutions, which are also to be understood 
systematically as a necessarily coherent mode of concreteness of 
the good. But is this not to combine metaphysics and history in a 
way that undervalues the openness of history and the risk of hu-
man action? 
In Part III of his philosophical doctrine of right, Hegel identifies 
as the paradigmatic forms of existing ethical actuality the family, 
civil society, and the state. In so doing he finds the definitive sys-
tematic expression for the break he had already made in Jena with 
traditional practical philosophy. Classical tradition opposes the 
household to the polis; this household, the oikos, is not only the 
family in the narrower sense but the family also as an economic 
unit with servants and dependent laborers. Only the head of a 
household can be a member of societas civilis. (While still a Gym-
nasium student Hegel copied down an excerpt from Sulzer's 'Ober-
sicht uber die Praktische Philosophie that similarly contrasts the 
state as civil society with the household.) In recent historical times, 
33 

EDITOJI.IAL INTRODUCTION 
under the protection of monarchy, the sphere of industry and trade 
had broken away from the household and achieved a degree of 
emancipation making it largely independent of the state. Hegel 
pays due regard to this process by henceforth giving this sphere 
the name of civil society and so distinguishing it from the state. 
The structure of civil society is sketched, in a spirit of economic 
liberalism, on the basis of the economy and the protection it en· 
joys under private law. The nobility, which was previously the de-
termining factor, is drawn into the orbit of this sphere and charac· 
terized negatively in contrast with it. The particular function of 
the nobility whose landed property is held together by primogeni-
ture is to provide a class of office bearers for a first house [of par· 
liament]. On the one hand this new form of n9Jillicy proyjdcs an 
iQtermedia!J: .. ~twe.e.o .pl:DP.lJ:..ADd.lPQO.accb.y.~ on the other hand it 
ensures an incorruptible, balanced policy thanks to its economic 
independence. Even if the land-tenure system of the nobility and 
peasants still favors living and working in the family, at least in 
negative terms these dasses too are understood in the light of the 
differentiation of civil society, i.e., on the basis of the division of 
labor. In the French Revolution the third estate seized power for 
itself by an uprising, but in Hegel's view those states that were not 
directly affected by the Revolution are also affected, through its 
repercussions and the ensuing reforms, by the principle that indi-
viduals achieve their status in society through the occupation they 
freely choose and the way they are trained for it. 
In calling for district courts, publicity in legal proceedings, and 
even jury courts (as in the Rhenish legal system, which was im· 
posed by the French), Hegel seeks to make the citizen aware of an 
independence that can only be judged by other no less indepen· 
dent "associates." Hegel speaks explicitly of "associations,. and 
so calls to mind the origins of the Germanic legal tradition. He 
is thus unable to accept the view of the jurists (as epitomized by 
Savigny) that Roman law alone provides the formal training re· 
quired for the future development of a system of German law. In 
his view the link between the constitutional monarchy he advo· 
cates and the Roman and Byzantine Empire and its administration 
of justice is not unbroken. The further development of Roman 
34 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
law had presupposed despotism, and ever since its adoption by the 
School of Bologna recent history has been alienated from its own 
traditions. (Such are the terms in which Hegel expresses his views 
in the expositions to S § 109-116 as a supplement to the arguments 
he had developed earlier.) 
Hegel links civil society to the state by means of the "police," 
using that word in its former sense, referring to the state's supervi-
sion of industry and commerce. t!$~ts Heidelberg lec:_t~~s do not 
yet couple the word "police" with the word "corJlorations."·m-tlie -· 
title; bu~-the.tmitseif,-i~-po~~~l~ti~g.the -~elf-organization of 
civil ~~iety in the autonomous administration of the municipali-
ties and the organization of the workers in corporations, he is call-
ing for a second source of the ethical alongside the family. (The 
latter can now be only the organizational form of agricultural la-
bor as well as the mere natural base for the office-bearing and ed-
ucated nobility, who are now coupled with the scholars, civil ser-
vants, and officers.) The preference Hegel accorded for a while to 
Austria and then to Napoleon's Rhenish Confederation had been 
motivated by the fact that he still thought he could find in Austria 
this organization of the state from below and saw Napoleon as the 
teacher of constitutional law who combined representative consti-
tutions with the Code civil. The so-called System of Ethical Life 
of the first jena years (1802-3)12 saw ethical life as the Briareus 
of Greek legend, who with "myriads of eyes, arms, and other 
limbs, each of which is an absolute individual," represents the 
people, who in the state constitution are composed of many self-
administering units. So Hegel was already urging at that time that 
the system of needs should organize itself inwardly through the 
"constitution" of the estate in question and should not merely 
submit to direction by the state. But it is only some fifteen years 
later that Hegel in his Heidelberg lectures fixes on the title "corpo-
ration" for this kind of self-organization (the parallel essay on the 
dispute concerning the Wiirttemberg constitution speaks of "as-
sociations and corporations"). Hegel is evidently thinking of the 
12. [Tr.l Published by Georg Lasson as System tier Sittlichkeit, 2d ed. (Leipzig, 
1923); translated into English by H. S. Harris and T. M. Knox, System of Ethical 
Life and First Philosophy of Spirit (Albany, 1979). 
3S 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
advanced stage the division of labor had reached in England and 
the attempts being made to combat the problems to which it gave 
rise. hJ the same time he seem~ de~irous_ qf.. h~~ing back to th~ old 
~~ti~!~~~~; .. ~.owever, by virtue of the principle of freedom of 
c~. '!_r c:!~'!P~tion, t~!= corp~-!!~ dif(ei from the pr~rey_olu­
tlonary guilds, which rested on privilege. 
'"¥or the state Hegei dem~nds a system of government that as 
a constitutional monarchy does not stand opposed to democracy 
and aristocracy but incorporates their motifs. Thus the emanci-
pated sphere of civil society should be integrated anew and the 
nobility united with the office-bearing middle classes through edu-
cation and office. In th~ 
~titutiWlal~m_fQI(Qw.iDg.sbe fall 
of Napoleon, He~Lrc.v~~~~f!'=!l ~Y~tl in .~he '!_ery FOrds he uses, 
to assessments and conceptions he had formulated in earlier years 
and diffe7c;t"1i~r~icafcirc~m~t~nces. His article on the German 
coilStiiimonh;d examili"ed.the differing course of French and Ger-
man history from the point of view of comparative constitutional 
history, and so set the problems of the development of the repre-
sentative system within the European framework. Now Hegel in 
turn contrasts England and France, where the state was quickly 
able to impose its will on the forces of particularism, with the par-
ticularism prevalent in Italy and Germany. Whereas England shows 
continuous development, for differing reasons both France and the 
Ge.rman Uinder must.~ave new co~~~.!!Ption~ Hegel n~s_!~t in 
June._!!!!J,,gujs X~II gave France a Constitutional Charter com-
prising a C~mber of Peers and a Chamber-of Deputies (even if the 
latter is eleeted on a high property qualification and can take no 
legislative initiative). Th~.!l~t:ess of Vie~~,!_h~.4 .. ~.!!~-for con-
stitutions for the-German Lander. On the basis of the debates in 
his own state of Wiirttemberg Hegel comes out in favor of state 
officials also being eligible for election. He takes issue with Kant 
by envisaging a division of powers in which each power includes 
the others within itself. 
In accord with the main thrust of his philosophical doctrine of 
right, Hegel begins with the immediate being that the communal 
resolve acquires through the signature of the monarch. The execu-
36 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
tive power, which applies the laws to particular cases, is then cou-
pled with the legislative power, which formulates the laws them-
selves in their universality. Hegel also regards two chambers or 
houses as particularly effective and balanced. He opposes the idea 
of a national assembly in the manner of Sieyes since he makes the 
self-administering machinery of the communities and corporations 
responsible for nominating the deputies of the one chamber. The 
aim is to avoid the danger of a central authority, ele~ted in _ab-
_stract)a.~bjQo..stancii!ig_iii oppoSition~-~ ~ti~~~~~-amo~­
phous mass of the people.\iiegel de~~1!1!!~~ ~CQru'!~e-i\tat in _ 
ffieGerman _t;!Cni!~f"iJie n;yp-Atli~.rp~n_t~ry assemblies s_h,ould j~i~. 
~the o~~.!~:.!R~_!ie~ of_ ~e- esJ_~~ this way he believes it 
possible also to couple the self-orgamzation of the workers with 
parliamentary representation (in France the measures taken against 
guilds and privileges in fact delayed the development of trade 
unions by decades). With this conception of constitutional policy 
Hegel seeks to build on the ideas of the French Revolution, but in 
a way tha~~~-~-£2!!"~~~ the_~!.s!~...cowlition~- 9n.e:.... 
sidedness of the French solution (in the same way that de Tocque-
ville triedt~--do l~t~r): Hege"f thus propounds a view of political 
science that as far as constitutional policy is concerned involves 
a concrete conception opposed to the guiding conception of the 
French Revolution. 
In history, according to Hegel. the mutual relationship of the 
individual states is such that there is in the last resort no praetor 
set over them. The court of judgment is history itself, visualized in 
its entirety (at this time Hegel also procured a copy of Johannes 
von Muller's posthumous Allgemeine Geschichte). This hard, real-
istic view is tempered by its starting point, namely that in all civi-
lized states people pursue their particular occupations, but that 
religion represents what is eternal for history as a whole and no 
longer for one limited people. In Hegel's eyes, "public spirit• and 
"patriotism" do not mean embracing the cause of the state in an 
exceptional situation, but fulfilling the limited duties deriving from 
one's occupation; thus it is that the "egoism" of the individual can 
be presented in the expository passage to § 132 as the obverse of 
37 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
"patriotism." The Swabian Reichsfreiherr and Prussian Colonel 
von Massenbach, who as officer was implicated in the military 
catastrophe at Jena, is cited as an example for the way in which 
people who have failed in one specific field come forward as "pa· 
triots"-in the case in point by writing on general political subjects 
in a Bonapartist, Machiavellian vein (the exposition to § 154 jux-
taposes the pronouncements of von Massenbach as one of those 
who "shout the loudest" with his insipid, ill-conceived judgments 
regarding the extent to which the English were interested in parlia-
mentary proceedings). When individuals find their place in a soci-
ety based on division of labor through the free choice of their oc-
cupation, then they ought also to become politically active, as their 
partisan interests dictate, through the representative system, and 
they should play their part in the administration of communal af-
fairs. This partisan participation in the universal is the only form 
of participation Hegel now recognizes. 
If individuals as citizens define their particular place in society 
and the state as a whole by means of their work, then they must 
be educated and trained for the occupation they freely choose. So 
it is that the former Nuremberg Gymnasium director and educa-
tional counselor prescribes in § S 85 and 86 a right of children to 
education. But Hegel does not ask for education to be made a sep-
arate province; it is a mistake, he says, "to do as Pestalozzi and 
others have done and withdraw children from the world and edu-
cate them in such a way as to give them [only] their own inter· 
ests." He is at one with Montesquieu in maintaining that instruc· 
tion is purveyed before, alongside, and after schooling by one's 
parents and also by the world. Hegel-who in Nuremberg was 
also responsible for extending schooling to the children of the 
poor-gives as horrible examples the forcible treatment of chil-
dren by their fathers in ancient Rome and child labor in England 
in the first years of the Industrial Revolution. The state should en-
sure that each child receives a definite education in accord with 
universal criteria; it is in this sense that the text later goes on to 
say (in S 158) that children become "children of the state." 
Participation in the service of the state must not be restricted by 
38 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
birth and class privileges but must essentially be open to every citi-
zen who is qualified: "Herein lies the genesis of present-day higher 
education." Instead of the nepotism of the provincial universities, 
Hegel accordingly urges that "all universities in Germany should 
form a whole," that academic freedom should be restored, and 
that every university teacher should be appointed on the basis of 
objective criteria, although also as an official enjoying security of 
tenure (§ 144). In § 158 Hegel advocates what was later called 
"cultural policy": art, religion, and science are to be through and 
through the "life of the state," in other words portray the living 
principle of the state; but they are also to be regarded as an "end 
in and for themselves" and so have an autonomy that must be 
guaranteed by the state itself. If previously the fear of God had 
provided for religion and the prince for science and art, "the needs 
of these spheres are not necessarily provided for in this way." 
Hegel points out that the church had opposed science and ne-
glected to raise religious truths "to the sphere of science." "Con-
temporary states are still a far cry from establishing universal 
institutions for these spheres; the universities and academies of sci-
ences have taken the place of the monasteries." 
It was during this period that the brothers Boisseree exhibited 
in Heidelberg their collection of Old Masters from the Lower 
Rhine and the Netherlands, so reminding the citizens of the new 
constitutional monarchies of the early links between prince and 
townspeople in the Flemish and Rhenish cities. The logical sequel 
to the activity of such private collectors was obviously the estab-
lishment of a public museum enjoying state protection. Here there 
were new tasks for the state to assume; how these tasks were to be 
performed had still to be determined. But it was inevitable that 
with the views he held Hegel would clash in Berlin not only with 
the conservatism of Savigny. It is true that in Berlin he tried to 
maintain friendly relations with Wilhelm von Humboldt; but edu-
cational policy as determined in its broad lines by Johannes Schulze 
had diverged from the basic conviction of Goethe's day that in a 
society based on the division of labor individuals could overcome 
the bias inherent in their activity by the all-around development of 
39 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
their energies. Already in the first works of his jena period Hegel 
had attacked Schleiermacher's view of religion and the state, a view 
made up partly of Romanticism, partly of Enlightenment liberal· 
ism. Schleiermacher maintained in a more emphatic way than Hegel 
the need for a process of emancipation converting the "house· 
hold" of former days into a free confraternity such as would pre-
serve spiritual plurality in the face of aU speculative claims to 
universal validity. To be sure, the uniy~~~!n~_p,~4.!l<:a~e~ies were 
-abQ_f9.r Hegel corporations tb.MJn.free collegial un~~n_p!!t$ued 
an intrin.~~c £1lsl. But Hegel, evidently in harmony with the vanish· 
ing hopes entertained by the minister von Altcnstein, looked to 
the academies also as a means of implementing the state's cultural 
policy. Schleiermacher was bound to oppose any efforts in this 
direction. 
At the very beginning of the nineteenth century, in his article on 
the German constitution, Hegel made fun of the fact that "during 
the thousand years that had elapsed since Charlemagne" the con· 
stitution of the empire did not seem to have changed one bit if it 
is the case that "at his coronation the newly elected emperor still 
wears Charlemagne's crown, scepter, orb, even his shoes, cloak, and 
jewels." In truth the new "giant" states and the "pygmies" be-
tween them had, in Hegel's view, diverged in a way that changed 
the entire picture. At that time he still wanted to reestablish the 
former empire in the sense that, taking the military establishment 
as a starting point, he envisaged alongside the college of princes a 
bench of municipal delegates and with it a chamber of civil depu-
ties as a representative system. After the Congress of Vienna, in his 
Heidelberg lectures, Hegel assigns this system of representation as 
a constitutional monarchy to the constellation of states led by the 
Pentarchy. He points out that in the thousand years since Charle-
magne the communal life of human beings has radically altered. 
Bearing in mind that Christianity attaches value to the salvation of 
each individual, and that the ethical sensibility of the Germanic 
peoples emphasizes freedom and the association of the free based 
on loyalty and solidarity, now all individuals are expected to at· 
tain their position in society through their labor and achievement 
40 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
and no longer to inherit it from systems of authority forged in an-
cient battles and disputes. The "civil society" that comes jnto be-
ing in this manner is given a share in the administration of power 
within the constitutional molllU'chy through a system of represen-
tation. The traditional nobility and princes too are given a func-
tion to perform in the body politic as a whole, a function deter-
mined at least in a negative sense by its being contrasted with the 
spirit of the middle classes. But those who determine their place in 
society by their work and achievement must be qualified for their 
work by education and must be able to visualize the meaning of 
their life expressly through art, religion, and science. The new state 
also assumes responsibility for the educational and cultural facili-
ties that in their autonomy make possible the spiritual life of the 
state. 
Once Hegd has elaborated his conception in this shape, the 
philosophical doctrine of right automatically comes within the or-
bit of his system as a whole. His differentiation of nature and spirit 
and his formulation of a distinct philosophy of subjective spirit had 
laid down in advance that human beings exist not only in the 
natural ethical life of the family but also in the state, and that the 
ethical whole gains a sense of its own significance through art, 
religion, and science. Indeed it is no longer practical philosophy 
but the philosophy of subjective spirit that recognizes that all indi-
viduals are persons worthy of right. In the compendium of 1820 
Hegel even attempts (although he does not pursue the attempt con-
sistently to the end) to furnish the detailed argumentation of the 
Philosophy of Right with a secure basis by drawing parallels with 
arguments in the Science of Logic. Hegel draws our attention to 
the fact that the ethical sphere has the form of right by prefacing 
his analysis of ethical life with an exposition of the ideal moments 
of abstract right and morality. However, the impression is unavoid-
able that, starting from the guiding principles of his thought, Hegel 
could just as well have arrived at a different structure for his phi-
losophy of right. Whereas the philosophy of right tacks the analy-
sis of the institutions of ethical life onto its exposition of the ideal 
moments and concludes with a portrayal of the course of history, 
41 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
the aesthetics for example begins by exploring the idea of the 
beautiful and only then goes on to show the configurations it as-
sumes in history and finally the individual arts. However much of 
a closed circle Hegel's system may seem, it is in truth open to un-
resolved questions. We must also bear in mind that Hegel had to 
take account of a changing environment. In Heidelberg the atten-
tion he pays to the Wiirttemberg bureaucracy is dictated by his 
fight against the arbitrariness of officials; in Prussia he has to take 
into account that this st~te has still tQ gain i~~~~kr-~~ myg do 
so by the adininistrative path. In presenting the hereditary monar-
di"y-andlt aione as the institution by means of which the executive 
and legislature become fully effective, Hegel faces a difficult task 
and becomes entangled in curiosities that one must not today pur-
sue too far if one is not to obscure the actual relevance of his phi-
losophy of right. 
In the final analysis Hegel's approach bears at every turn the 
imprint of wrestling with experience, and this experience forms a 
continuing chain. There can be no doubt that in important re-
spects Hegel did not foresee the future course of events . .fiis con-
Ce_ftion of the system of representation does not yet take into..ac-
count that it was not only interest groups (Fraktionen) that fcwncd 
i;-a na_!!o~al assemb1y but partie~, w~_ 
s~!lj~~-!!'. ~r~n~~-in 
concrete terms the emergent will in the people as a whole. Hegel's 
soie"aTm Is to seek rationality in what is actual, and ·he has no de-
sire to stray beyond what is actual or is becoming actual. But when 
he calls for "corporations" he describes an institution tha.t ne!er 
became actual in· tins manner, and that on the contrary was made 
iffi'possible as labor relations_ became progressive!y more en~;;~fve 
a!!d _l)lO~e. dif.ferentiated. For all his attentiveness to the develoP. 
ment of ~;conomics, Hegel evidently remained geared to an all too 
traditional view of productive labor within a readily comprehen-
sible framework. Although he saw that industrialization must give 
rise to a "rabble" or proletariat, he did not perceive the explosive 
force contained in this process. The menacing power nationalism 
was to attain in the nineteenth century also remained hidden from 
him. The Heidelberg lectures declare in § 160 that though Ger-
42 

EDITORIAL INTRODUCTION 
many has many central points, the people's wish is directed to a 
"federal union of the individual central points.,. He hardly took 
the German Confederation seriously, howevet; and it is only in 
ironic terms that S 322 of the Berlin compendium can refer to this 
"wish.,. So Hegel's philosophy of right stands despite itself in a 
historical context of which it is not possible to form a complete 
picture. In endeavoring to conceptualize the upheaval that marked 
the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth cen-
turies, Hegel hands down to us a task that, following two world 
wars and in the light of the catastrophes that threaten us, has be-
come almost inconceivably more difficult. 
43 

DESCRIPTION OF 
THE MANUSCRIPT 
The Editors1 
The manuscript of the text here published is a transcript or note-
book (Nachschrift) compiled by the law student Peter Wannen-
mannl from Hegel's lecture series on philosophy of right delivered 
in 1817-18 in Heidelberg and from the start of the lectures deliv-
ered in Berlin in 1818-19. It is the property of the Dcutsches Lit-
eraturarchiv/Schiller-Nationalmuseum in Marbach am Neckar and 
bears the accession number 81.1021. The manuscript originates 
from the posthumous papers of the late Franz-Joseph Brecht and 
only became known at the beginning of 1982. 
It comprises 213 thick yellowish-white quarto manuscript sheets, 
in part slightly tom at the edges, and now showing some foxing. 
The script is in black ink, which is sometimes visible on the other 
side of the sheet in a slightly brownish color. Some pages are spat-
tered with inkblots although this docs not affect the intelligibility 
of the text. The manuscript is bound in a thick black cardboard 
cover, in the usual manner for lecture transcripts at that time. A 
brown ride plate on the spine bears the slightly damaged inscription 
1. [Tr.) The editon were the entire staff of the Hegel Ardlives (Ruhr Uni· 
venity, Bochum) at the time of pub6cation (1983): C. lleclcer, W. Bonsiepen, 
A. Gethmann-Siefert, F. Hagemann, W. Jaesc:hke, C. jamme, H.-C. Lucas, K. R. 
Meist, and H. Schneid~ 
2. [Ed.) Apart from the enaies in the Heidelberg University Register recording 
Wannenmann's maaiculation and aansler to Betlin, the Univenity ardtives appar· 
endy contain no further information regarding his studies in Heidelberg. 
45 

DESCRIPTION OF THE MANUSCRIPT 
Natu"echt und Staatswissenschaft von Hegel. The front cover is 
followed by a blank flyleaf and the unpaginated title page with the 
stamp SCIPIO RINECK and the verso blank. The text of the Hei-
delberg lectures follows with two further unpaginated pages con-
taining the table of contents, the next unpaginated page contain-
ing the beginning of the introduction, and pages 2-401 comaining 
the remainder of the text. On page 401 below the name Wannen-
mann there is an undecipherable sign and a flourish. Page 402 is 
blank. The introduction to the Berlin lectures follows on pages 403-
422. On page 422 below the words, "End of the Introduction. 
Berlin, 10 November 1818," there is a flourish. The volume closes 
with a blank flyleaf. 
Before being written on, the sheets were prepared in such a way 
as to leave a frame within which to write. It can be assumed that 
paper was obtainable in this form from the retailers since other 
transcripts also show this sheeting. The text is very neatly written 
in small German script; some shortened forms and abbreviations 
are used, but their sense is unambiguous and the expanded forms 
have been supplied by this edition without comment. There are 
relatively few deletions, interlinear additions, or marginal addi· 
tions keyed to the body of the text. The dictated passages of text 
are occasionally indented (e.g., in S 121); such instances are not 
specifically indicated. One peculiarity of the writer is that he runs 
words together; here they have been separated out, again without 
comment. The manuscript is undoubtedly a fair copy, that is, a 
version compiled at home on the basis of notes taken down while 
the lecturer was speaking. Texts written down during actual lec-
tures are completely different in character. The main paragraphs in 
each section were dictated by Hegel, and this is corroborated by 
comparison with a fragment relating to the philosophy of right of 
which F. W. Carove has preserved a record.l However, the trans· 
mission even of these dictated passages occasionally shows certain 
deficiencies due to mistakes in copying the original notes into the 
3. [Ed.] See Friedheim Nic:olin, MHegel iiber konsritutionelle Monarchie: Ein 
Splitter aus der ersten Reclusphiiosophie·Vorlesung, w Hegei-Studien 10 (1975): 
79-86. 
46 

DESCRIPTION OF TH£ MANUSCRIPT 
fair copy. By contrast, the formulation of the expositions (the in-
dented paragraphs following the dictated passages) is in all proba-
bility largely the work of Wannenmann. They contain numerous 
significant weaknesses and awkwardnesses in the formulation of 
Hegel's ideas, which Wannenmann•s original notes presumably re-
produced only in a very compressed form. 
Some variations in the script and in the color of the ink can be 
easily explained by the fact that such fair copies were not all writ-
ten down at once. This does not mean that Wannenmann•s text 
could not have been compiled very soon after the lectures ended. 
But this cannot be proved from the dates given at the end of the 
Heidelberg lectures and the Berlin introduction since in accord 
with the practice at that time these dates probably mark the end of 
the whole series or (in the second case) of the specific lectures Wan-
nenmann attended. As far as can be said at present in the absence 
of comparable sources, the Heidelberg lectures seem to be trans-
mitted in full, while all we have of the Berlin series is the introduc-
tion, and not even that in full. 
47 

NATURAL RIGHT 
AND POLITICAL SCIENCE 
Heidelberg, 1817-1818 

INTRODUCTION 
p 
Natural right [Naturrecht] has as its object the rational deter-
minations of right and the actualization of this its idea. Its source-
constituting its divine, eternal origin-is thought, which grasps the 
will in its free self-determination. 
(a) Positive right [positive Recht] is in general that right 
which has validity in a particular state and must therefore be 
respected as an authority that is maintained by coercion or fear 
or by confidence and faith, but that can also be upheld through 
rational insight. As far as its general content is concerned, posi-
tive right may be either rational or, as is customarily the case, a 
blend of rational and of contingent, arbitrary provisions; some 
of these derive from violence and repression or from the inepti-
tude of the legislators, while some have been carried over from 
a more imperfect state of society into a more perfect, founded 
on a higher consciousness of freedom, the changes that have oc-
curred having been decreed singly and according to the needs of 
the moment, regardless of the coherence of the whole. 
(b) In addition to rational right, howevet; a positive sphere 
of right arises automatically as soon as right acquires validity 
and external actuality. On the one hand the particular existence 
of a people is marked by distinctive conditions that influence the 
determinations of right; on the other, the empirical cases and 
51 
5 

INTRODUCTION 
distinctions to which rational right must be applied are not ac-
tually expressed in it even though they are contained in it. The 
more developed and elaborated the state of society, the more 
comprehensive become the particular determinations of right 
(such extensions being, incidentally, merely a matter for the un-
derstanding). Furthermore, the real existence [Existenz] of right 
6 
brings about I a comparison of wholly heterogeneous objects, 
one of which has to represent the value of the other, e.g., in the 
case of punishments, obligatory service, etc., where an absolute 
equivalence cannot be established. 
{c) Lastly, because as actual it occurs in utterly determinate 
individuality, actual right requires a final decision-a decision 
wholly determined as individuality-[yet] a decision that, by vir-
tue of the universality of reason, is not confined within these nar-
row limits. 
§2 
The sphere of right is not the soil of nature-certainly not of 
external nature, but also not of subjective human nature, insofar 
as human will, determined by human nature, is in the sphere of 
natural needs and instincts. On the contrary, the sphere of right is 
the spiritual sphere, the sphere of freedom [Sphare der Freiheit]. It 
is true that nature also has a place in the realm of freedom, to the 
extent that the idea of freedom expresses itself and gives itself ex-
istence [Existenz), but freedom remains the foundation, and na-
ture only enters in as something dependent. 
The term "natural right" or "natural law" [Naturrecht] ought 
to be abandoned and replaced by the term "philosophical doc-
trine of right" (pbilosophische Rechtslehre), or (as will also 
emerge) "doctrine of objective spirit." The expression "nature, 
[Natur] contains the ambiguity that by it we understand [(1)) 
the essence [Wesen} and concept [Begriffl of something, (2) un· 
conscious, immediate nature as such. So by "natural law" has 
been understood the supposed legal order valid by virtue of im-
mediate nature; with this is connected the fiction of a "state of 
nature" [Naturzustand], in which authentic right or law sup· 
posedly exists. This state of nature is opposed to the state of so· 
52 

INTRODUCTION 
ciety, and in particular to the [political] state [Staat]. There has 
also been a prevalent misconception in this regard, as if society 
were not something implicitly and explicitly in conformity with 
the essence of spirit, and necessary for it, but a kind of artificial 
evil and misfonune, and as if genuine freedom were limited in 
it. I Rather is it the case that a state [Zustand] that could be de-
7 
scribed as a state of nature would be one wherein there were no 
such things as right and wrong because spirit had not yet at-
tained to the thought of its freedom (and it is only with this 
thought that right and wrong begin); or rather, since the human 
being exists essentially as self-consciousness and with the con-
cept of good and evil, the state of nature is a state of unfreedom 
and wrong, which must be sublated before freedom and its ac-
tuality can be attained. 
§3 
The science of right has the free will as its principle and starting 
point. As far as its coming to be is concerned, this concept accord-
ingly falls outside the science of right and is thus to be accepted 
here as given from the sphere of philosophy. The will contains (1) 
the element as absolute negativity-the pure indeterminacy [Unbe-
stimmtheit] of the ego consisting in its pure reflection into itself, 
having within itself no limitation, no immediately present content 
determined by nature, needs, desires and instincts, or in any other 
way. This is the boundless infinity of the absolute abstraction of 
pure thinking, of universality [Allgemeinheit]. 
§4 
(2) As absolute negativity the ego is at the same time the pass-
ing over to determinacy and the positing of a determinacy or of a 
distinction as an inner content, a content that may be given fur-
ther by nature or may be pure concept of the ego itself. Here 
either the ego decides to close itself off [Beschliessen], to posit 
one determinacy as its essence and exclude everything else, or else 
it decides to open itself up [Entschliessen], insofar as all determi· 
nacy [is] contained in the ego as universal; and it is only through 
positing itself I as something determinate that the ego enters into 
a 
53 

INTRODUCTION 
determinate existence [Dasein)t-rhe absolute finitude or infinitude 
of its individuality [Einzelbeit]. 
ss 
(3) The will is the unity of these two moments. It is only through 
its infinite self-determination that the ego is pure universality or 
simple identity, and it is only absolutely self-enclosed solitude when 
it relates itself in infinite fashion to itself or is simply identity and 
universality with itself. By the decision to open up, in other words 
the actual will, the ego also excludes from itself an other, and re-
flects itself into this other at the same time that it reflects itself into 
itself. But here in the will as such, all that can initially be concluded 
is that the ego in determining itself at the same time remains indif-
ferent to this determinacy, remains universal, knowing the deter-
minacy in which it is actual as its own and merely ideal [ideell],1 
as a mere possibility by which it is likewise not constrained but 
which it can immediately sublate. 
§6 
(4) This unity is the will in itself (the will as implicit) or for us. 
But the will is free insofar as it makes itself its object and content, 
therefore wills itself, i.e., insofar as it wills to be free. In this way it 
is for itself (explicitly) what it is in itself (implicitly). 
1. [Tr.] Hegel uses two terms for "existence," Dasein and &istenz. Dasein is 
for Hegel a logical term, denoting a transition from immediacy to determinacy, ex· 
ternality, opposition, whereas &istenz refers to concrete, empirical, immediate ex· 
istence. Depending on context, we translare Dasein as either "existence" or "deter· 
minate existence" in order to bring out the element of determinacy, of being-there 
(da), that is in it. E:cistenz, which occurs less frequently, is translated as "existence" 
with the German following in brackets. Despire the tec:hnic:al and etymological dis-
tinctions between the terms, they often appear to be used synonymously in this 
work. See also S 69, n. 1. 
2. [Tr.] In this work Hegel frequently uses the expressions ideell and reell. They 
refer obviously to the distinction berween the ideal and the real, or the subjective 
and the objeaive, or the logical and the empirical; but they designate the respec:tive 
terms of this distinc:rion in absuac:t, undialec:ric:al form, cut off from eacla CKbel; 
Hence we frequently translate as •merely ideal• and •merely real." What is truly 
ideal (ideal in German) overreaches the distinction betWeen the merely ideal and 
the merely real; it is the ideal-real or what Hegel calls the Idee, the unity of concept 
and objectivity. 
54 

INTRODUCTION 
§7 
The will that has being for itself, explicitly, as well as in itself, 
implicitly, is true and absolute because it determines itself to be in 
its existence [Dasein]-i.e., as standing over against itself-what 
its concept is, in other words because the pure concept has the in-
tuition of itself as its reality. It is free because it relates itself to 
nothing else, but. as infinite negativity, only to itself. It is utterly 
universal because in it all limitation and particularization of indi-
viduality is sublated, such limitation or particularization residing 
solely in the I antithesis between the concept or subjective side and 
9 
its object or content. 
3The will that only has being implicitly is the natural will in 
general. As self-determining individuality it posits a difference 
within itself. What is thus differentiated (1) is a content in gen-
eral and (2) bas the form of being mine. But in the natural will 
this form and this content are still distinct, and what is mine is 
something other than the ego. This natural will is the arbitrary 
will [Willkur], the will in the sphere of desires, drives, and incli-
nations, which has for its content anything given (externally or 
inwardly) and therefore finite, and can renounce this finite con-
tent because it is only its own through its self-determination. But 
the new content that it substitutes for what it has renounced is 
likewise a determinate content of this kind, so that the arbitrary 
will can go on sublating this content infinitely [without] thereby 
escaping from finitude. 
Because the will that subsists as arbitrary will has a given 
content to which it is opposed as something particular for itself, 
it is subjective. By contrast, the will that bas itself as its deter-
mination is the will that is utterly identical with itself, the ob-
jective will, spirit in its objectivity. 
The will in general is essentially intelligence, knowledge of 
self. Only as pure knowledge is it free will; as theoretical, how-
ever, free intelligence is, to be sure, self-active and its thoughts 
3. [Tr.) The three paragraphs of the exposition to S 7 are headed by the words 
•Remark 1," "Remark 2," "Remark 3" in Wannenmann's transcript. This rogether 
with the considerable amount of emphasis found in these paragraphs suggests that 
they were dictated by Hegel. 
ss 

INTRODUCTION 
are its own productions, but in the shape of subsistent and nec-
essary determinations. But the will has purpose, i.e., (1} its con-
tent consists in its own determinations; (2) the latter are defined 
as merely possible, as the will"s determinations or as sub;ective, 
thus contradicting its absolute objectivity or the fact that the 
determinations do not also e:cist. The will's drive is to realize it-
10 
self I in such a way that the will and the intelligence are identical. 
S8 
Right expresses in general a relationship constituted by the free-
dom of the will and its realization. One such relationship is duty 
[Pflicht}, insofar as I regard it as essential and have to recognize 
this relationship, respect it, or bring it about. The merely formal 
character of right, as opposed to genuine right, derives from the 
fact that the realization of freedom has stages or that the spirit of 
freedom can be more abstract or more concrete. 
In positive right, right is what is in the laws; in philosophical 
right, what is right is law and no law affords the criterion of 
right. The function of laws is to express the rational will and the 
way in which it enters into existence {Existenz). Strictly speak-
ing, right demands primarily only a negative comportment, al-
though positive actions, arising for example through contracts, 
may also be required in it. Right is sacrosanct because it rests 
on the freedom of the will; and this also follows from the basic 
determination of the essence of God. What is free-pure spirit-
is the basic concept of God. 
Right has manifold stages; sometimes it is more abstract, 
sometimes more concrete; so it can be unjust, wrong (unrecht]. 
For instance, slavery may be lawful although it is absolutely 
wrong, and positive right may contain something unholy. The 
fact that something is a positive, long-established right does not 
make it right in and for itself. As circumstances change, the 
right that derives from them automatically ceases. The guaran-
tee and confirmation of right, its formal character, is opposed 
to genuine right; this contradiction does indeed occur. The real-
ization of freedom has necessary stages. And to study this pro-
cess is the aim of our science. 
56 

INTRODUCTION 
Morality and right are often mutually opposed. There are, 
however, also moral points of view that limit abstract right; for 
example, if a debtor would be ruined by paying his debts, I the 
11 
right that strictly accrues to the creditors is limited by this point 
of view. The artisan must be allowed to keep his tools; and so 
right in the strict sense recognizes morality, and stricdy, formally 
conceived right is not deemed sacrosanct. To this extent moral 
right is more concrete than abstract, strict right; still more con-
crete is the formation of an entire state, and this concrete spirit 
is possessed of a much higher right than abstract right, so that 
private right is limited by the right of the state. The spirit of the 
state and its realization is something higher than the spirit of 
the individual; and still higher than the spirit or the right of one 
people is the right of the universal state, the spirit of the world, 
which strikes down the inferior spirits when they oppose it or 
stand in its way. Then we see these great ethical collisions. For 
example, there was no greater right than that Rome should be a 
republic; but for the sake of the spirit of the world, whose tool 
he was, Caesar had the right to overturn the republic, yet Bru-
tus meted out justice, his right deserts, to Caesar as an individ-
ual. The single individual who sets himself up as the embodi-
ment of the will of the world ends by being destroyed. In order 
that right should not be merely formal in character, there are 
more concrete spirits that surpass the more abstract ones. 
What is therefore essential in right is philosophical insight 
into the different standpoints. But the general feeling of right 
one has from a lower standpoint can make one believe one is 
suffering wrong. In this matter insight is one thing, general 
opinion another. 
S9 
As the concept [Begriff] of the freedom that is for itself and so 
has no particular content and purpose, the will is, to begin with, 
merely formal [formell], insofar as, in the process of distinguish-
ing itself from itself, it is nonetheless not yet distinct, and so has 
not yet any determinate existence [Dasein]. But since freedom is 
essentially only absolute identity through its absolute negativity, 
57 

INTRODUCTION 
12 
its determining must essentially I acquire the element of being other 
and of being in general, but in such a way that this being occurs in 
it only as a seeming [Scheinen], as something immediately sublated 
or merely ideal [idee//], while freedom itself remains within itself. 
The will as concept is merely formal because the free will is 
its own purpose, and we have here the unity of subjective and 
objective; no differentiation has yet taken place between them, 
and the free will is wholly abstract form. It can likewise be said 
that the free will is devoid of form because form is not yet pos-
ited in a distinction. The content is what is identical with itself, 
with the quality of being indifferent vis-a-vis the form as dis-
tinct. Thus God is the absolute content, and the idea is the unity 
of subjective and objective (which are something distinct). Free-
dom is absolute negativity since it is living, and it must include 
the moment of being, of abstract identity. Seeming [Scheinen] is 
the unification of positive being and nonbeing. The will must 
will something, it must have a content, but this content is not 
an other. If we have formed a concept of something, it is no 
longer something alien for us because it is permeated by us. In 
love another is object, each is an ego, an unyielding atom on its 
own account, and in this absolute independence the object of 
my love is my other self, and one self is the other self. The ne-
cessity is that the concept, freedom, realizes itself; the will is ab-
solute idealism, and what is for the will is distinct from what 
wills, but insofar as it is the object of my will, it is only ideal, 
and has no independence. 
SlO 
The free will is initially abstract and immediate, as is its de-
terminate existence or realization; this constitutes the sphere of 
abstract right [abstraktes Recht] [Part 1]. The second [sphere) is 
where these two moments, the will in its concept and its determi-
nate existence, break apart into independent extremes, the will in 
its concept becoming the particular inner will of a subject and its 
existence becoming the subject's well-being; and [where] the unity 
of these moments, the good as idea, on the one hand is their abso-
13 
lute I content and determination but on the other hand is at the 
58 

INTRODUCTION 
same time contingent in relation to them: this is the sphere of 
morality [Moralitat] [Part ll]. The third sphere is the unity of both 
these moments, in which the idea of the good is realized in subjec-
tive freedom and [in] determinate existence, in such a way that 
freedom exists equally as necessity and actuality. The universal will 
comes about: ethical life [Sittlicbkeit] and the state [Part Ill]. 
That these three stages exist derives from the idea: first we 
always have what is abstract, the free will in its concept, ab-
stract right, the realization of which is only abstract realization. 
To this pertains personality, i.e., abstract freedom. The second 
sphere is the sphere of morality in general, although we here 
leave aside the doctrine of virtue. It is here that the concept of 
the action of dolus [fraud] and culpa [fault] comes into play, as 
do human attitudes and human well-being-all questions that 
do not arise with abstract right. This is the sphere of reflection, 
of difference, of distinction, of mutual exclusion. Abstract right 
becomes external to itself, and in this second sphere the first 
two moments are independent and mutually exclusive; the dif-
ferentiation must be accentuated to the utmost. We take the sub-
ject in its will over against the object, the subject that in its 
arbitrariness posits itself utterly for itself; the externality of the 
subject becomes human well-being and happiness. (Above the 
two moments stands their identity, their absolute unity, the good 
as idea as distinct from reality.) Good is supposedly accomplished 
by the conscience, while well-being is regarded as subordinate 
to good; at the same time, good ought to be actualized. The con-
science may be good or evil, individuals may enjoy happiness or 
they may not. In the third place we have the resolution of this 
contradiction, ethical life or the state; here it is not only ab-
stract right that is realized, but the idea of the good. Here the 
idea of the good, whose soul is the concept of freedom, is ac-
tualized. Here the free will no longer stands over against ne-
cessity, but the absolute and the necessary are equated, and the 
universal will is the good. 
59 

I. ABSTRACT RIGHT 
Sll 
The free will, at the stage when its concept is still abstract, oc-
curs as an immediate existence [unmittelbares Dasein]; for while 
the concept is found utterly and solely as idea, its immediate real-
ity is abstract being, and as the reality of absolute negativity its 
reality is here the being of the individual [das Sein des Einzelnen]. 
The pure free will is divinity, while the individual free will is 
that of a human being. It is plain to us that the human being is 
a free being [ein freies Wesen]. The free will has being, and this 
being is determined as the being of the individual. Now because 
the free will is absolute negativity, absolute being-for-self, the 
starting point must be the being of the individual free will. Ab-
solute spirit appears within itself, is a distinction that in itself is 
not a distinction. Absolute being [Wesen] is the intuition, or dif-
ferentiation of itself. The concept of the absolute free will is the 
finite free being. We begin with the individual free being, and 
then consider how it frees itself from this finitude. 
s 12 
The free individual is the person. Personality implies that-
determined as I am on all sides in this absolute finitude, this pure 
and utter self-relation-! am within myself infinite and universal. 
The individual has immediate being. I am this particular 
61 
15 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
being, [one) determined on all sides, something completely fi-
nite: this is my status, my character. This complete finitude 
constitutes the immediate being of the individual, but in this fin-
itude I am myself, I am utterly self-contained, I am pure self-
16 
relation, I can reject all these other elements that I impinge on 
me. I am dependent on all sides, yet I am also my own, I am 
therefore infinite and universal in that I comprehend myself as 
"I." This is the concept of personality: I am the force that can 
hold these contradictory elements apart; I am this absolute bond. 
All human value consists in knowing oneself as person. Con-
tained within myself, I am absolute negativity, the absolute ac-
tivity of my self-relating; what the immediacy of being corre· 
sponds to is that my being becomes freedom, that my reality is 
freedom itself. 
§13 
The general imperative of right is therefore to respect human 
beings (yourself and others) as persons. But because the prin-
ciple of abstract right is only pure personality and the individual's 
own will, imperatives of right and duties, as well as actions in the 
sphere of right, are ultimately and properly speaking only nega· 
tive; in other words [it is) merely forbidden to impair the freedom 
of others. Since abstract freedom does not contain any particu-
lar content, actions with such a content are, in regard to abstract 
right, only possible actions (as neither contrary to abstract right 
nor necessary actions); in other words they are permitted. 
"Respect human beings as persons" is the imperative of ab-
stract right; thus all imperatives of right (other than the com· 
mand, "Be a person") are merely prohibitions. Right does not 
yet contain duties; actions in the sphere of right are always 
merely negative. For example, "Abide by contracts" embraces 
positive actions, but the ultimate purpose is only negative: I 
place others in possession of something that they already own; 
the aim is that what they own, their freedom, their personality, 
should not be impaired. An action affects something outside it· 
self; but I cannot affect the personality, which has no external 
aspect. For something to be "permitted" means what is possible 
62 

POSSESSION AND OWNERSHIP 
from the standpoint of right, since in right there are o~y prohi~ 
bitions; thus I positive action is only permitted. Right still con-
t7 
tains no particular purposes, as do morality and human atti-
tudes. To the extent that something is necessary (as in the case 
of morality), we have [positive] commands. What is permitted 
is not determined by right; in right, particular purposes are only 
possible, not necessary. Permission refers to abstract right; in 
the case of immediate rights we have duties as well. 
s 14 
The sphere of abstract right is concerned only with the im-
mediate personality and its equally immediate realization, not yet 
with more concrete relationships. It contains three relationships: 
(1) that of immediate possession [Besitz], which is defined as prop-
erty or ownership [Eigentum]; (2) that of a change of ownership 
as legal transference into the ownership of another, i.e., contract 
[Vertr'ag]; (3) the infringement of my ownership in general. 
Here we are considering only abstract personality, not the 
right of persons. My relation to something external to myself is 
possession. A contract is a change that occurs by free will, not 
by nature. This change can have two forms: either my will re-
mains in it, regardless of the change, which is merely external; 
or my ownership is changed by virtue of an infringement that 
restricts my freedom, and so injures me in what is my own. 
1. Possession and Ownership 
s 15 
In their immediate being, persons have a natural existence [Ex-
istenz]: partly [they have] in themselves an external mode of being 
[Dasein]; partly they stand in relation to things outside them. But 
they are, I in the first place, absolutely free in relation to these 
18 
things; and in the second place these external things are not ab-
solute ends in themselves and are consequently something unfree 
and impersonal. However real they may be for feeling [Empfin-
dung], for need, and for consciousness, they are something merely 
ideal for the freedom of the person, something devoid of rights. 
63 

ABSTilACT lliCHT 
In their immediacy persons are individuals; the form of im-
mediacy applying to them is the externality of nature. A person 
who exists at the level of immediacy is in fact natural; and at 
this level we first have the sphere of consciousness, for which 
external things have positive being. But philosophically speak-
ing, this is no longer valid, it is subordinate. The natural human 
being is quite content with this, without recognizing that it is 
sublated. As free persons, persons have in the lirst place gone 
back into themselves out of externality; as free beings humans 
have knowledge of themselves, knowing that as egos their inde-
pendence is not merely that of their bodies. In the second place, 
externality is, for the free person, something sublated, some-
thing merely ideal. What is free has freedom as its end, that is 
an absolute end. As a living being the external exists in individ-
uality, is an organic whole, an end in itself, the concept itself as 
an individual. The species as such does not exist in nature, only 
the individual. A living being lives in its body, in its natural 
needs. The members of a living being are not parts but an or-
ganic whole. 
For feeling, externality has reality, we can love it. Natural 
existence [.Existsm) is a limited, relative existence since it has 
needs, and something other [than itself] is necessary for it. It is 
only when we reach the standpoint of consciousness that there 
is perception. For the standpoints of finitude external things 
have reality, but not for freedom. What is free knows itself as 
absolute end. What we call things are not persons, and regard-
less of the fact that they exist they are not ends for themselves. 
Things are devoid of rights; to be sure, they have the right to 
19 
exist, but I right, properly speaking, is a relationship in which 
the will is free. By "thing" we understand what is not personal, 
what is subordinate. 
s 16 
Persons can therefore imbue this impersonal externality with 
their free will, and they must thereby endow themselves with a 
sphere in which their freedom exists, namely possession [Besitz]. 
Through possession, on the one hand, l become extem~~l; and, on 

POSSESSION AND OWNERSHIP 
the other hand (which amounts to the same thing), an external 
thing becomes mine and has my will as its determination and sub-
stantial end. I possess my own body, like other things, only insofar 
as it is my will to do so. 
Human beings can take possession of whatever is impersonal 
and claim that it is mine; things have within themselves no 
higher end, no more substantial end. Because they do not be-
long to themselves, I can imbue them with my will and by this 
means give my freedom an external sphere, a form of immedi-
acy. I become external, and what is external becomes mine, it 
acquires inwardness, my will, an absolute determination that 
it does not have on its own account. I only possess my organic 
body insofar as I will to have it; an animal cannot separate it-
self wholly or in part from its body. Things have being in imme-
diate fashion, and I in immediate fashion am an individual; the 
higher unification occurs in the state, in ethical life. Possession 
is the immediate relation of my will to a thing; I need no other 
mediation than that I will or want the thing. By this means the 
thing becomes mine, it cannot offer any resistance to me. Medi-
ation occurs when two are independent in relation to each otha; 
and a third sublates this independence. I 
20 
§17 
Persons have their bodies by virtue of nature. As far as all other 
external things are concerned, as far as the earth is concerned, it is 
only in the abstract sense that human beings have an equal right 
to them. The essential externalization [Ausserung] of free will in 
possession involves from the outset the element of contingency, of 
empirical singularity, of mere need and arbitrariness. For this very 
reason the natural will of others can be limited; and through the 
accident of time the thing belongs to the first to take possession 
of it. 
It is only in a universal sense that each individual has a right 
to what is external; but once individuals take possession of 
something, they enter the sphere of the external. Insofar as they 
are personal they have [a right] to external things in general, 
but nonetheless by taking possession of something they enter 
65 

ABSTRACT !liGHT 
the sphere of singularity. Each person has a right to the whole 
earth because it is something devoid of rights, but the right must 
be externalized or uttered,t and as a result it has to do with in-
dividual things. When I take possession of something, contin-
gency and need come into play, and I enter the sphere of singu-
larity; and in so doing limit my will. Res nullius cedit primo 
occupanti [a thing belonging to no one is ceded to the first oc-
cupant]1 means that someone is the first, which is a matter of 
contingency. As soon as one takes possession of something, one 
imbues it with one's will and excludes others. Although it is a 
matter of contingency that one is the first, one has the absolute 
right to imbue something external with one's will. Each of us 
has, so we are told, equality of right, properly speaking, in re-
gard to the whole earth; such a distribution is immensely diffi-
cult, and with each newborn child the division should really be 
undertaken again. Equality is an attribute which expresses an 
external relation. All have equal rights since each has equal ab-
stract right in regard to the world; but abstract right must be 
realized, and in the process of realization right enters the sphere 
of contingency, e.g., of whim and need, and thus the sphere of 
21 
inequality. I 
§18 
In order that a thing should become my possession, my inner 
will is not sufficient; it is also necessary that I take possession of it 
{Besitzergreifung]. By this means the determination of it as mine 
attains external existence [Dasein] and becomes recognizable for 
others. The negative condition [for my taking possession], namely 
that the thing should be ownerless (res nullius), is here self-evident, 
or rather relates to the anticipated relationship to others. 
1. [Tr.] The everyday sense of the German words Auuerung and iJussern is 
"utterance• and "to utter: and in many cases Hegel seems to have this as well as 
the philosophical sense of "externalization•-and, from S 29 on, the legal sense of 
"alienation" (.EniiJusserung, Veriiusserung)-in mind. 
2. [Tr.] Throughout "Abstract Right• Hegel draws on many concepu from 
Roman law. His sou~es include Justinian, Institutes; Justinian, Digest; Gaius, In· 
stitules; and among modem authors, J. G. Heineccius, Elementa Juris Ci11ilis (Am· 
sterdam, 1726). 
66 

POSSESSION AND OWNERSHIP 
Possession is essentially the externality of the will: through 
the sphere of determinate existence [Dasein] I bring my person-
ality into externality, so that what is inward may become ex-
ternal. Through the determinate existence, the external being of 
the will, there arises a being for others; in this way my will 
becomes recognizable for others (determinate being is being for 
another [das Dasein ist das Sein fUr ein Anderes]). The thing 
must be either res nullius or a res abjecta, relinquished by its 
owner with the thought that he ceases to own it. So the relation 
to others is here anticipated. 
§ 19 
Taking possession makes the material of the thing my property. 
I take possession either by directly seizing the thing physically, or 
by imposing a form [Formierung] on it (specificatio), or by merely 
marking [Bezeichnung] it. 
Matter is devoid of rights, it does not belong to itself, so 
when I seize it, it is mine. (Fichte is of the view that matter be-
longs to God and that human beings only have a right of appro-
priation in regard to it, but this amounts to the same thing.)3 
Within God, matter is something merely ideal; if God causes 
matter to exist, God has himself surrendered it. For the philo-
sophical consideration of spirit, matter possesses no indepen-
dence, while its independence for consciousness is only subordi-
nate. Marking is the merely objective representation of taking 
possession. To take possession is to appropriate through exter-
nality and the will. I 
22 
§20 
It is, to be sure, in seizing something physically that my will 
most perfectly achieves determinate existence and becomes rec-
ognizable; but in scope this mode of taking possession is in the 
highest degree limited and temporary. It can, however, acquire a 
3. [Ed.l Fichte, Beitrag, pp. 135-136. However, io Fichte's view this expression 
should be understood figuratively. Seep. 136: •Jt can righdy be said, in figurative 
even if not in strictly philosophical fashion, that God is the owner of the raw mate-
rial.• Cf. Fichte, Gesamtausgalnl:268-269. 
67 

ABSTRACT R.IGHT 
further extension in scope in a mediated fashion as a result of the 
connection between a thing that is already in my possession and 
other things; property can also accrue to me as a result of such 
natural, chance connection. In addition, physical seizure is limited 
by the qualitative nature of the objects seized. By virtue of their 
quality of intrinsic externality, i.e., their inner dividedness [in re· 
spect] of their different aspects, things can be taken in possession 
by more than one [claimant); this is where disputes arise, and the 
understanding [decides) how essential one or the other pan or as-
pect is, and so [determines] the right to the thing itself. 
Herein lies the imperfection of laws, because physical seizure 
is highly insignificant in terms of its scope (i.e., what I can 
grasp with my body), and I cannot go on holding things in de-
tention, in bodily possession, indefinitely. If I have a stick in my 
hand, it is not only the pan that I am grasping that is mine, but 
the whole stick, by virtue of the external connection, the exter-
nal physical relation, to the part of which I have taken posses· 
sion-from this [stems] the accessio [accession]. Under this head 
belongs hunting, in that wild animals are res nullius. I must kill 
them; in other words, taking possession of them, the means 
whereby I take them in my possession, is to kill them-an ex· 
ternal action, one that is external to itself in that, like the exter· 
nal thing, it [has] on its own account a multiplicity of parts. 
But if, for example, the animal is wounded by several [hunts· 
men) and then falls, a legal dispute ensues; the dispute arises 
because of the animal's sensuous manifoldness, its various levels 
of life. In this way others can take possession, with me or after 
me, of part of the very thing of which I have possession of an· 
23 
other part. And here philosophical right does not suffice, for I 
the thing becomes a multiple possession and is in itself a mul· 
tiple thing, so that more than one person can each have a pan. 
Positive right must therefore seek to settle these conflicts and 
make application to different cases, and this is no longer a mat· 
ter of reason [Vernunft] but of the understanding [VerstandJ. 
Moreover, it is always better that a decision should be reached 
than that the case should be unresolved. In such conflicts each 
68 

POSSESSION AND OWNERSHIP 
has a right, but where there is no absolute determination, the 
question becomes one of degree. The concept involves only the 
decision that all parties have a right in regard to the matter in 
dispute. 
What causes these conflicts is the nature of the things seized 
and the nature of the action whereby they are taken into pos-
session. Occupatio bellica [military seizure] does not belong 
under this head, but to international law. A thing I have relin-
quished ceases to be mine insofar as I no longer have the ani-
mus tenendi [resolve to hold]. The situation in regard to jetsam 
is that the .. right" to collect jetsam is obviously a denial of 
right. By accessio is meant that a thing is conjoined with what 
is mine; thus the fruit from my tree is mine. I must, however, 
give effect to the animus. Accessio is [defined] by what is mine. 
Alluvio [alluvial accession] is a chance conjunction with what is 
mine; it is another matter if this does not come about gradually 
but suddenly, in very marked manner, to the extent that the pre-
vious owner's mark, or the form he gave the thing, is still visible 
on or in it. Still more complex is accessio when anothe~; by his 
action, has produced something on what belongs to me with 
the intention that his product should belong to him. Here it is a 
matter of good and bad faith, where for instance someone writes 
or paints on my paper, or cultivates my field. Where there is 
good faith, right must determine in such a way that no party 
incurs serious damage (the Sabinian and Proculian Schools4). 
I can never take possession of something universal; it is mine 
only so long as I have it. So [it is] with breathing in the air. The 
sea is also a universal possession and is for the use of all be-
cause no one else is excluded from it by my using it. I Yet the 
24 
Danes levy a duty on the sea. It may be a different matter if this 
levy is imposed as an indirect levy, not as arising from some-
thing owned; the basic factor here is the power relationship. All 
nations lay claim to right over the sea to the furthest limit at 
4. [Tr.J Two opposing schools of Roman jurisprudence, named after Sabinus 
and Proculus, jurists of the first century c.E. 
69 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
which their guns can protect them. This is an important mat-
ter for fishing. Rivers, harbors, and the like can more readily 
be laid claim to by reason of possession of the banks or shores, 
despite the fact that rivers are something universal. 
s 21 
To impose a form [Formierung) on a thing is the most essential 
mode of taking possession; by it possession is made durable, and 
taking possession becomes acquisition [Erwerb]. Under this head 
belongs tilling the fields, sowing and cultivating crops, and domes-
ticating and feeding animals. The form given to something organic 
does not, it is true, remain precisely external in regard to it, but 
[is] assimilated by it. The mere use of land for hunting or pasture 
or of the seashore for fishing, etc., does not, properly speaking, 
impose a form on it, but it does involve the will to employ it for 
one's use, and genuine use involves the declaration of this will. 
By imposing a form on a thing I predicate of it that it is 
mine. Others cannot take possession of it because the imposi-
tion of form, the predicate, is my will, and if another took the 
thing from me, he or she would be encroaching on my freedom. 
In the case of giving form to an inorganic body there is the am-
biguity as to whether in so doing I had the animus tenendi. But 
usually I form things for my use, and by making them appro· 
priate for my use I express my will that they should be mine. 
When I feed an animal, I enable it to live for as long as I do so, 
and in this way I come to own it. One does not acquire owner· 
ship over human beings by feeding them or even by educating 
them. A wild animal is something independent, and loses its in-
25 
dependence by being tamed. But what education I gives rise to 
in the human being is the sense of freedom; and what princi-
pally matters for human beings is not just that they are kept 
alive by the food they eat. 
To use something means, by and large, to ruin it because one 
uses it up, makes it a means. In land use too conflicts occur, in 
that the land is something concrete, can be used in many differ· 
em ways: peoples who live by hunting use the land on which 
70 

POSSESSION AND OWNERSHIP 
they hunt, the nomad uses it for pasture, and the farmer makes 
even fuller use of it. Moreover, one farmer may have the right 
to do so and may cultivate the land, and then in autumn an-
other has the right to pasture his cattle on the same land. Civ-
ilized peoples may [take] possession of land that is merely used 
for grazing or hunting [and] use it for agriculture, saying that 
the nomad and the huntsman do not wholly possess the land 
and that it is only the imposition of form, i.e., the cultivation of 
the soil, that yields possession properly speaking. However, the 
nomad does have the abstract right to make whatever use he 
wills of his ownership in the land. It is only jus gentium [law of 
nations] that makes the imposition of form the most complete 
mode of use and gives the most advanced, more civilized peo-
ples, who use the land better, a right to it-a right that does not, 
however, derive from personality. 
§ 22 
The imposition of form also includes the human development 
of one's own body and spirit, the acquisition of capabilities and 
aptitudes. It is only through education or formation [Bildung] that 
I make the universal within me, my potentialities or capacities, 
something determinate and distinct from me; and it is by practice 
that I make the determinate mode of activity [l have learned] ha-
bitual. By this means I enter into possession of this mode of ac-
tivity and gain mastery of it for the unhampered execution of my 
purposes. I 
26 
The acquisition of aptitudes also is one way of taking posses-
sion by the imposition of form. My inner capacities are poten-
tialities, universal, but in developing them, I particularize them, 
I have to set the activity involved in imposing form apart from 
me as universal. I only have mastery of my habits to the extent 
that I distinguish them from myself, for if they are merely within 
me, they have mastery of me. The essence of spirit is not to be, 
but to posit itself by means of activity [Tiitigkeit]. It is only by 
education or formation that I gain mastery over my activities 
and can perform them in a manner suited to the object I wish to 
71 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
work on. By imposing form I determine myself, I separate the 
determinate activities from me. These particularizations, these 
capabilities belong to me, and they only occur because I have 
no longer remained in identity [with myself]. 
s 23 
The act of marking [Bezeichnung] an object externally to show 
that it is purportedly mine is on the one hand not genuinely taking 
possession but only a representation thereof; on the other hand 
it is indeterminate in regard to its objective scope [and] thus its 
meaning. 
A mark merely furnishes an indication of my will; it is only 
through imposing form that I make the thing my own. Another 
is at liberty to disregard the mark because it is not determinate, 
since the sign may be arbitrary or more or less natural. So mark-
ing is the most imperfect way of taking possession. For a gen-
uine act of taking possession the will must be involved as well 
as the external aspect of seizing. 
s 24 
Possession entails the external aspect of my relation to the thing. 
When at the same time the thing is essentially taken up into my 
will, possession be<:omes ownership [Eigentum]: ownership is the 
timeless, substantive relation of freedom. To the extent that pos-
27 
session and ownership are distinguished, I possession in general is 
defined solely in terms of my external appropriation and exter-
nal relation to the thing. 
Possession and ownership are essentially one; ownership is 
where the possessive relation is governed by right, and if the 
two are separated, possession covers only the aspect of the exter-
nal relation. Ownership is the aspect governed by right, where 
there must be the will as well as external retention, while pos-
session is mere retention. In the case of a contract, when I hire 
something out, I continue to own it; the other has possession of 
it. But the contract can only be temporary, for if the other is 
always in possession, his possession is no longer limited, and 
he is the owner. "For all time" is the universal, the concept, of 
72 

POSSESSION AND OWNERSHIP 
time: eternity. The will introduces the nonsensible, timeless as-
pect. Human beings can hire themselves out, temporarily, for la-
bor, possibly not even for specific types of labor; but it must be 
for a certain time, for if it were for all time, they would make 
those who hire their labor their owners. Possession can be sep-
arated from ownership, but not possession in general, only a 
specific possession or property; for rightful possession as such is 
ownership, which is the aspect of right. 
s 25 
Possession is not an abstract externality of my will, for exter-
nality is of itself nothing abstract; on the contrary, possession is 
concrete possession, partly in that I actually have the thing in my 
grasp, partly in that I may employ, use, and enjoy it. If this con-
crete possession is mine-including also its matter-then I own it. 
But if it is only this concrete possession that is deemed to be mine, 
and ownership-as what is ideal, essential-is deemed to accrue 
to another, then this is an empty distinction, and the other has a 
merely abstract mastery, not over the things in question but over 
me, a mastery that can only consist in an indebtedness on my part 
to him as a condition of my ownership. If there is such indebted-
ness, it ought not to be insuperable, and my ownership should be 
capable of becoming full ownership. I 
28 
The lecturer here speaks of dominium directum [absolute 
ownership] and dominium utile [ownership based on use]. Pos-
session is something external to itself, constituting something 
inwardly multiple, something concrete or manifold; it is accord-
ingly also in manifold fashion that it appears in it. What is 
evinced in the thing possessed is not something at rest, but an 
activity; will shows itself as manifold. Depending on the quality 
of the objects and of my needs, concrete possession has differ-
ent aspects, so a thing can be pos~essed in ownership by several 
persons, according to the different aspects of its possible use. 
One person may use a field for agriculture and another for graz-
ing, and in this case agriculture is the principal use. The crite-
rion here is whether a thing is universal or particula; for partic-
ular things are consumed by use, whereas universal things, such 
73 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
as rhe sea, air, ere., are nor consumed. A field's operation is or-
ganic, and it is therefore not consumed provided I maintain and 
manure it. The use of pictures by looking at them is merely a 
theoretical kind of use, and the object is for me an organic, uni-
versal object. One mode of use may be more important than 
another, so that the accessorium sequitur suum principale [ac-
cessory use follows upon principal use]; and what has then to 
be established is what precisely in the individual case the prin-
cipale is. But the accessorium may also require compensation. 
However, where I am in rightful concrete possession, I own the 
whole thing. 
Dominium directum and utile give rise to ground rents, lau-
demium, fiefs. Here the dominus [possessor] has no use of the 
thing, but the person who uses it has an obligation to the domi-
nus directus [absolute owner]. Whoever possesses an estate or 
receives rents for it, be it the ruler or the state, must therefore 
[be] regarded solely as private owner. Possession here rests in-
variably on a contract. Hereditary tenure is also something of 
this kind. This division into dominium directum and utile is an 
empty distinction inasmuch as I the dominus directus only has a 
right vis-a-vis the occupier but not the thing itself. A liability of 
this kind ought to be terminable, but as long as it subsists one 
must respect it, and one cannot approve of its simply being an-
nulled as in France. The whole thing, in this case, is a contract 
of ownership in a form it ought not to have, for the dominus 
directus has only an empty right and must therefore also be held 
willing to abandon this empty right. With servitudes the princi-
pale, i.e., the more complete use, must take precedence over the 
accessorium, and the possessor of the former must be able to 
require the possessor of the latter to abandon his accessorium, 
against payment of compensation. 
s 26 
The aspect of ownership as the rightful, i.e., universal ideal re-
lation of will is the aspect of absolute personality; however, this 
equally includes the moment of individuality [Einzelheit]. This mo-
74 

POSSESSION AND OWNERSHIP 
ment is therefore no less essential in real ownership. Ownership 
is thus to be complete and free, excluding any other [owner); and 
private ownership as such should be the complete embodiment of 
the personality in possession, although this does not exclude ser-
vitudes, which are essential for the purpose of safeguarding and 
using what is privately owned by another, and which stem from 
the empirical nature of possession or property as such. 
As person I am a free being; in the sphere of universality I 
am wholly an individual; in the thing [I own) I must be for my-
self in all my individuality, and so I must own it fully, freely; 
and [it follows] that there must be private ownership. It was 
Christianity that first made human beings free, but with the 
feudal constitution ownership became unfree, and this was one 
of the causes of the French Revolution. The principle that feu-
dalism should be overcome was wholly good, but it had to be 
accompanied by compensation. lt is therefore necessary I that 
30 
every servitude should be terminable, and the price must be de· 
termined by law. From this it follows that there must be private 
ownership. With the rise of states no regard was had to the sin-
gle individual. The field was owned by the family, and the indi-
vidual had to take in fief from the head of the family what he 
wanted to cultivate. It was Christianity that first introduced the 
principle of personality, of private ownership. People who pos-
sess something they own freely, privately, have a quite different 
feeling ftom those who still have over them a master with do-
minium. Servitudes are jura in re [rights in a thing], but they 
must have a rational external determination. The many limita· 
tions on ownership in Roman law make it defective, and a his-
tory of how ownership became free would be a very important 
matter [for study}. 
s 27 
For there to be ownership another necessary factor is time, 
and in this manifestation [of the will], the will, as the universal, 
receives the characteristic of an utterance that has duration in 
time. Otherwise the thing becomes res nullius; I lose ownership by 
75 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
prescription [Ver;ahrung] and can acquire [it] through usucapion 
[Ersitzung]. 
That I own a thing is something that happens in time, and 
my will-what is timeless-must become manifest; consequently 
it manifests itself as an utterance that has duration in time. The 
form of universality in time derives from my will. I must use 
what I own in order that my will may become manifest in that 
it wills; and it must manifest itself in a universal manner. With· 
out this continuing utterance, without the reality of my will in 
regard to it, the thing becomes res nullius. In having the thing 
within the ambit of what I own and use, however, I express my 
will to have it. As this falls within time, prescription together 
with its determinations comes within positive right. But pre· 
scription and usucapion also rightly arise in the philosophical 
doctrine of right, for my will only exists as external. 
31 
It is true that prescription also has a political aspect I owing 
to the consequences we would have without it, namely the inse-
curity of ownership; but these are not necessary consequences, 
only contingent, for they do not develop of themselves, they do 
not pertain to the action itself, as is the case with necessary 
consequences. But as one inherent aspect of ownership is utter· 
ance [Ausserung], ownership lapses as soon as I stop giving ut· 
terance to it. Prescription is known [in Latin] as praescriptio, 
usucapion as usucapio. Usucapion was accordingly more gen· 
era! among the Romans than prescription. 
Possession is an essential moment of ownership, and Savigny 
is therefore one-sided in his [view of] possession, for he regards 
it as merely a way of preventing prescription.s The more im· 
portant aspect is undoubtedly the relationship of possession to 
ownership. The time needed for prescription, together with its 
determinations, belongs to positive right. Owing to the general 
constraints of the empirical world, the necessity of having fixed 
S. [Ed.] The reference is to Friedrich Karl von Savigny, Abhandlung der Lehre 
vom Besitz (Giessen, 1803). The second edition also appeared under the title Das 
Recht des Besit::es ( Giessen, 1806 ). 
76 

POSSESSION AND OWNERSHIP 
norms means that the period of prescription is too long for one 
case, too short for another. 
' 
§ 28 
A thing placed completely beyond all further use as being 
owned by a non-actual person contradicts the element of owner-
ship, namely that the will should be actualized in it and possession 
should be something actual. 
Here belong, for example, res sacrae [consecrated things]. 
The purpose may be highly worthy of respect. But prescription 
may occur here if the purpose and the remembrance of it are no 
longer known, for instance if someone intends a grave merely 
for him- or herself. It runs counter to ownership that a non-
actual person, who consequently has no will, as is necessary for 
the externality of possession, should withdraw things perma-
nently from the use of which they are capable. 
§ 29 
I can alienate or divest [entaussern] what I own to the extent 
that the thing in question is a thing external [ausserlich] by nature. 
I Those goods that are not so much my possession as rather consti· 
tute my very own person-my personality as such, freedom of the 
will, ethical life, religion-are accordingly inalienable [unveraus-
serlich] and imprescriptible [unverjahrbar]. 
Thus there are inalienable and imprescriptible things, things 
of which, to the extent that I possess them, I cannot divest my-
self and of which, even to the extent that they are possessed by 
another, I am not prevented thereby from regaining possession 
should I so will. To this category belong all goods that pertain 
to my personality, to the universal freedom of my will. Thus I 
cannot freely make myself a slave, for this possession vouch-
safed by me to another ceases as soon as I so will. Even if I am 
hom a slave and am fed and brought up by my master, and my 
parents and ancestors were all slaves, I am free the moment I so 
will it, the moment I come to the consciousness of my freedom. 
For my personality and the freedom of my will are essential 
77 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
parts of myself, of my personality. All I am, I am only as in my 
personality. All these goods [constitutive] of my personality are 
equally imprescriptible and not subject to restriction; and the 
justus titulus [lawful title] and good faith of a slaveowner is of 
no avail to him. I can and should, however, divest myself of 
arbitrariness, and the aim must be to restrict it. The ability to 
own things belongs to the concept of freedom, for it is this that 
first gives freedom determinate existence [DaseinJ. The capabil-
ity of owning is part and parcel of personality. Rehberg sought 
to attack these basic concepts of natural right, and Fichte wrote 
against him in his "Spirit of the French Revolution."' Rehberg 
maintained that freedom as pure freedom could not be assailed 
by external actions, and that if I had someone beaten, this did 
not impair his freedom. But there is freedom only when it re-
ceives determinate existence, actuality, when it externalizes it-
self. Ethical life too is something inalienable, for I cannot hand 
over to others my conscience, which is after all the judge of the 
ethical life. No less inalienable is religion; the laity cannot there-
33 
fore renounce religion and leave it to the priests, as I it were on 
trust, in order that the priests should say what religion involves 
and what someone must do in order to be religious. But even if 
the people did hand their religious rights over to the priests, 
they could at any time take them back. 
Admittedly the stipulation that all rights which rest on per-
sonality should be inalienable and imprescriptible is a demand-
ing one, yet freedom is only freedom [when it is known]. In 
other words all these rights enter on the scene only with the 
6. [Ed.) Hegel is referring to the criticism which Fichte directed in his Beitrag, 
pp. 132 ££.,against August Wilhelm Rehberg's Untersuchungen uber die Fra~o­
sis&he Rwolution, part 1 (Hannover and Osnabriick, 1793). Cf. Fiehte, Gesarnt· 
ausgabe 1:267 ff. According to Fichte, Rehberg argues that on the basis of natural 
right human beings can prove no rightful claim to the material to which in the 
course of production they impart their form. Since according to this no one, for ex· 
ample, can be the owner of land or landed estates, one must derive this right from 
the state. Against this Fkhte argues "that it is not the state but rational human na· 
ture that is in itself the source of ownership. • However, Rehberg did not maintain 
that an arrack on my body leaves my freedom unimpaired, nor did Fichte impure 
this view to him. 
78 

POSSESSION AND OWNERSHIP 
consciousness of them, and as soon as the people gain this con· 
sciousness of their rights, they necessarily accrue to them. 
s 30 
I can hand over to another for a limited time the use of my par· 
ticular physical and mental powers and aptitudes because, as de-
terminate, they have the aspect of an external relationship to my 
personality. This relationship is characterized and exists as exter· 
nal, however, only insofar as the handing over or alienation [Ver-
iiusserung] is restricted to single products or to a definite time. If 
the handing over were to be for an unrestricted period, my powers 
would be alienated [entausserl] as a totality, and this totality is the 
manifestation of my universal being. In the same way too I can 
only hand over what I own in general, and what I produce, as in· 
dividual [goods and services]. 
My aptitudes and powers are grounded in my intelligence, 
my reason; they are my own and something inward. But they 
have the relationship of something external to the extent that 
they have a distinctive content and belong to the particular, not 
the universal side. And to the extent that they are something 
external I can hand them over; I can bind myself to do some· 
thing for another or can enter the service of another, but even if 
I undertake to perform all kinds of service for someone, there is 
the limitation that I retain my personality, as indicated in the 
previous section. However, I can only hand over my services for 
a definite time, and I cannot assign to another rights over all my 
labors. This I restriction in time and restriction in terms of num· 
34 
ber and degree constitute the aspect of externality. But if I were 
to hand over to someone the generality of my services, my abil-
ity to produce something that is a universal or contains all par· 
ticularizations, everything external, I would in so doing divest 
myself of what is universal, what lies within. In the totality of 
my production for an unrestricted period, a universal [element] 
is present. So I cannot give away this externalization of my ca· 
pability in its entirety. I cannot hand over my inner [element] 
to anyone, but only my services as limited in time and confined 
79 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
to particular functions. Similarly I cannot hand over to anyone, 
along with what I own, my capability of ownership. A crim-
inal who is imprisoned can only lose his freedom for a defi-
nite time, a limited time. In this way it does become possible 
for me to hand over or alienate my inner [element] to another, 
and this alienation [Veriiusserung] has the shape of externality 
[Ausserlichkeit]. 
s 31 
Through the sphere of my freedom that I have in ownership I 
come into relationship with other persons. The immediate unit of 
personality is a repulsion into infinitely many units. The essential 
being [wesentlicbe Dasein] of ownership is the determinate exis-
tence [Dasein] of its right-governed absolute aspect, namely that 
in ownership persons recognize [anerkennen] one another as per-
sons. lltis means that in the consciousness of their self-identity 
they know themselves to be identical with others through the me-
diation of external existence, and they accept one another as mu-
tually free and independent. 
By virtue of the fact that I give reality to my will through 
ownership, there arise relationships between me and others, be-
tween what I own and what others own. The unit is the rela-
tion of the negative to itself, repulsion from itself. But the con-
cept of the unit is being-for-self, i.e., the negativity of positedness 
by something else. The existence of many persons is what con-
stitutes necessity as such, but this is no immediate plurality but 
35 
a necessary plurality. I My existing determinately [Dasein) in 
my ownership is a relationship to other persons, and from this 
stems reciprocal recognition: the free is for the free. Since I know 
myself to be free, I know myself to be universal and know oth-
ers to be free; and since I know others to be free, I know my-
self to be free. The principle of right accordingly [runs): Respect 
yourself and others in their ownership as persons. 
s 32 
Ownership involves the free will as such, with no distinction as 
yet between universal and particular will. In the mutual relation-
80 

CONTRACT 
ship between persons. however, each person's own will becomes 
determinate since it appears as other in relation to another, as par-
ticular will [besonderer Wille] or as arbitrary will [Wil/kur].7 But 
since the free will is in and for itself universal will, arbitrary will 
must sublate its particularity and posit itself as a universal will, a 
will identical with another; this constitutes the inner necessity and 
essence of contract. 
It is an optional matter whether to conclude a contract with 
another, but although it depends on me whether to conclude 
this or that contract, necessity is the [essential] aspect of con-
tract. As indicated in the preceding paragraph, ownership gives 
rise to a mutual relationship between persons; as others for one 
another, each person has a particular will, an arbitrary will. But 
the will is free and something universal, and the freedom of the 
will is not annulled through particularization. The single indi-
vidual must, however, sublate his particular will and acknowl-
edge, give reality to, a common will shared with another; and 
this is what gives rise to contracts. 
2. Contract 
s 33 
Contract [Vertrag] is the acquisition of a thing that is no longer 
devoid of rights and independence over against me, but involves 
the will of another and is consequendy impenetrable for me. This I 
acquisition is accordingly mediated, mediated by the fact that the 
will inherent in it withdraws from it with the specification that 
the thing should pass over into my ownership and that I should 
be willing to accept it. This mutual agreement constitutes the man-
ifestation [Erscheinung] of the common, universal will; for the 
7. [Tr.) Wil/kiir is one of the most fluid of Hegel's co~pts. It refers to a will 
that chooses in an arbitrary, capricious, or spontaneous fashion, as opposed to a 
will whose decisions are based on necessary and universal princ:iples. It is free in the 
sense of being unconstrained, but not in the sense of the idea of freedom, namely 
self-relatedness (~ 
to self) achieved in and through relatedness to others. Au· 
thentic free will is communa~ while Willkiir is individual and particular. We trans· 
late Willkiir variously as "arbitrariness,- "caprice," "arbitrary will," "free will,-
"choice," or "free choice," depending on context. 
81 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
latter is posited by the positive choice [Willkiir) from which the 
contract stems and the negative choice involved in sublating the 
particularity of my possession, and it concerns a particular object. 
With contracts we are no longer concerned, as in the case of 
possession, with abstract things but with things whose matter 
involves the will of another. Here I cannot acquire something 
by merely laying hold of it but only through mediation, in that 
the will of the other withdraws from it. What the mediation in-
volves is that the other side too has a part to play, not solely my 
external action: the will inherent in the thing must withdraw 
from it. But the thing's surrender also implies that the celation-
ship to me is determined positively, i.e., the thing passes into my 
ownership, and I am willing to accept it. On the one side there 
must be surrender, and on the other acceptance; such a contract 
is gift. If, however, there is surrender and acceptance on both 
sides, then we have exchange. The surrender and acceptance 
willed on each side gives rise to a common, universal will be-
cause the particular will was surrendered; but the manifestation 
of the universal will is due solely to the fact that it is a posited 
will and that the conclusion of a contract depends on the deci-
sion of the contracting parties. 
By contract we move from individuality to universality, al-
though this universality is still only a seeming universality. For 
a contract proceeds from my desire, my need. The object in 
regard to which I conclude a contract is likewise a particular 
[thing]. It is often said that the state rests on a contract of all 
with one and one with all. Here the starting point is individual 
persons, and the contract becomes one with the government or 
the sovereign. If one party does not keep the contract, so it is 
said, then the other too, if one believes this, is no longer bound 
37 
to the contract. However, this view I stems from the fact that 
constitutional law is derived from private law, as has occurred 
with us too. The view that the constitutional relationship as such 
is contractual is mistaken in that it takes for its starting point 
individual persons and the possible way in which one or an-
other state may have been formed. But the state does not start, 
82 

CONTRACT 
is not founded, on individual persons but their universal will, 
the substance of their being; it is founded on no arbitrary object 
but the power within them and over them. A contract, on the 
other hand, can derive only from choice [Willkiir]. 
So it is not the choice of the individual person whether he or 
she wishes to have a government or not, nor the choice of the 
government whether it wants to have citizens or not. But might 
there not be a contract between the people and its government 
against a sovereign dynasty? But with every monarchy it is a ne· 
cessity that the highest point, the ruler, should not depend on 
the choice of the people. In the state everything must be neces-
sary, so no choice, no contract of the individual citizens with 
the sovereign [Furst], is acceptable. The former German princi-
palities had over them emperor and empire, and it was a feudal 
relationship in which the princes [Fiirsten] held private status 
within the universal state. This was wholly contrary to reason 
[because) the rights of the states were determined by contract. 
The view that the state is a social contract between individual 
persons also had a great influence on the French Revolution, the 
idea being that the decision to constitute a people depended on 
the whim of the individual citizens. 
§ 34 
Since in contract what is intellectual enters into relation with 
what is intellectual, and the will of the two parties becomes iden-
tical, this intellectual identification, which is an explicit feature of 
contract as such as opposed to possessions and the transfer of pos-
sessions, must give itself determinate existence [Dasein] in a real 
[reellen)8 element, as a declaration, I either through signs and ges-
tures or, most commonly, through speech, as the stipulation of the 
contract. 
Of itself contract is the positing of a universal will, but the 
will in the form of the particular decision [Willkur] that I own 
this is sublated. Possession is in fact universal existence, while 
8. Ms. reads: ideal [ideellen] 
83 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
of itself contract exists as what is intellectual, which is a merely 
ideal mode of existence [ein ideelles Dasein]. The body is a rep-
resentation of the mind [Geist], expresses the will of the mind, 
and in this way the universal will becomes theoretically exis-
tent, while the practical existence of contract derives from perfor-
mance or execution. The mind expresses itself through speech, 
through sound, which is merely a vibration, and it is in this way 
that the theoretical will expresses itself in contract. The mode 
of expression conveyed in a handshake is a sign of agreement. 
The stipulation of the contract is expressed in more determinate 
fashion through speech. With many things the stipulation and 
the execution of the contract are simultaneous (e.g., in the case 
of buns for sale in a shop). 
§ 35 
The stipulation of the contract is also distinct from the real 
passing of ownership from one to the other, distinct, that is, from 
performance or execution [Leistung]. The contract itself binds me 
immediately to performance as a pure matter of right, for it has 
made what previously belonged to me already something owned 
by another. In the agreement as [the expression of a] universal will 
I have sublated my arbitrary will. This agreement contains what is 
essential in the determination of ownership; and, in the mutual 
recognition [of the contract], it also involves essential, authentic 
existence, whereas continued possession is only something inessen-
tial. If I did not perform what is stipulated, I would therefore be 
injuring what the other owns. 
That I should keep my promise is a matter of morality, but in 
contract l pledge myself. The things governed by contract are 
also called real personal rights because I only come by them 
through another person. The contention that, as Fichte says,' 
9. (&/.) The uansaipt does nor aecurately rq>eodw:e the statement by Fidue 
to which it refers. See Fichte, Beitrag, pp. 123-12$ (cf. F'ac:hte, Gnamtausgabe 
I :263-264): "So even by performance on my part I acquire no right to the per{or· 
mance of the other, unless his free will, whose direction I do not know, has given 
me this right, and continues to give it.• This statement by Pic:hte occurs in the 
context of his theory of the distinction between morality and legality. Only the 
84 

CONTR.ACT 
each is bound I to perform [a contract] only when and to the 
39 
extent that the other party has performed [it], is not valid, for 
then no one could begin; the contract binds me to performance 
as a pure matter of right, and the contract is concluded by vir-
tue of the stipulation itself. With a contract and its performance 
moral aspects do not yet arise. Performance is necessary for 
the simple reason that [otherwise] what the other owns would 
incur injury, since as a result of the stipulation the thing has 
passed completely into the other's ownership. In the [mutual] 
recognition I am confronted by another will, and the other is 
confronted by my will, and through recognition the common 
will has existence. For I have sublated my arbitrary will to pos-
sess the thing, and the performance is the external reality of the 
universal will, i.e., something inessential. Performance is there-
fore not a moral consequence; nor is it a consequence depen-
dent on an external manifestation, but a consequence as a pure 
matter of right, that I should not injure what I have recognized 
as owned by the other. The classification of contracts is an af-
fair of the understanding. 
s 36 
The classification of contracts must be based on the main dis-
tinction deriving from the subject matte~; namely ownership: this 
may be either full ownership or merely possession. Howeve.~; pos-
session differs from ownership only insofar as it is in general some-
thing temporary and, in contrast with ownership, something re-
stricted. Furthermore, contracts may involve only a willingness of 
one side to hand the thing over to the other side and the agree-
ment of the other side to accept it; or they may involve both kinds 
of willingness on both sides. On this basis they are either contracts 
of gift or contracts of exchange. 
Supreme judge of morality knows the Other>s true intentions; I cannot have suc:h 
insight. It is only when the other's intentions bec:ome manifest in the world of phe-
nomena that they bec:ome knowable for everyone. If the other withholds his perfor-
mance, my performance does not become mine again, but remains unaffected, since 
the c:ontract as such has nor c:ome into being. Only by his performanc;e c;an the other 
make my performance pan of what he owns. 
85 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
Substance does not occur in isolation from its accidents; 
since they are a totality, they have returned into their inner be-
ing. But possession cannot contain the totality of the accidents, 
for otherwise ownership passes over along with it. So if I am 
not to lose ownership itself, it is only individual accidents of my 
40 
ownership that can pass over. I 
§37 
Contracts are therefore: 
I. Contracts of gift [Schenkung], comprising: 
(1) Gift of a thing as such; 
(2) The performance of a service [Dienst], e.g., the safekeeping 
of something deposited; 
(3} The Joan [Ver/eihen] of a thing, i.e., the bestowal of a por-
tion of it or in general of a restricted use or enjoyment of it. 
The thing deposited or depositum is, properly speaking, given 
away. In point of form it also seems a depositum if I deposit 
money in a bank, but in return the bank gives me a voucher, 
which is my property, so the contract is a contract of exchange. 
The bank has the use of my money, and I have the use of the 
bank's voucher. If I lend something to anyone, I give them the 
employment or use of it (commodatum). 
(4) The capacity to make a will or testament [Testament] rests 
on the fact that I have in general the right to dispose of what I 
own in favor of another and also to determine the point of time at 
which that other person is to enter into enjoyment of it. But as in 
this case this point of time is the time of death, there is a contra-
diction in the fact that I give for an eventuality when I am in any 
case no longer owner or possessor. Testamentary capacity can there· 
fore derive only from social right in general, that is, only from 
reciprocal recognition. 
The contradictory element in wills or testaments is that tes· 
tators give away something at a time when they no longer own 
it. Inheritance ab intestato [without a will] falls within the law 
governing family relationships. Testamentary dispositions are 
therefore valid and governed by right only to the extent that 
86 

CONTRACT 
they are deemed rightfully possible in the state in question and 
to the extent that the others are prepared to honor, and ac-
knowledge the will of the deceased; for otherwise, following 
the possessor's death, the property becomes res nullius [a thing 
belonging to no one]. According to their own will expressed in 
the testament, testators retain full ownership until they I are 
41 
dead. The Romans accordingly regarded testation as part of jus 
publicum [public law], and testaments had to be executed be-
fore the people in comitiis [in assemblies], thus indicating the 
people's assent to the testament. 
II. Contracts of exchange [Tausch]. Since these are not con-
tracts of gift, they imply that, whatever their qualitative diversity, 
the things exchanged ought to be equal. This abstract or universal 
way of regarding them, which makes it impossible to measure them 
against one another and set them as equal or unequal in a solely 
quantitative determination, is their value. 
With contracts of exchange one has to envisage comparing 
things in their diversity; they may be dissimila~; but what makes 
them similar, their value, is an abstraction. I merely posit an 
identity between the two things according to their externality. It 
is I who, in comparing them, bring them into relation. This like-
ness between them is their value, an abstract way of viewing 
them, according to which they can be assimilated to one an-
other despite being qualitativdy diverse. Now the value depends 
on the labor needed to produce the thing, value being deter-
mined by the art and effort involved, the rarity of the object, 
etc. The comparison is made on the basis of this value, which is 
a quantitative determination, a measure. Price is the value in an 
empirical case. Value may also reside in a subjective, particular 
opinion. 
(1) Exchange of a thing as such, of a commodity, i.e., of one 
specific thing for another, which is likewise of a specific nature. 
A commodity is in fact a thing with determinate qualities. 
(2) Purchase [Kauf] and sale [Verkauf) (emptio, venditio). Ex-
change of a commodity for money [Geld], i.e., a thing that is not 
87 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
specific but universal, or a commodity that only has value, with no 
other specific determination as to use. 
The definition of money is only that it is mere value; but 
money also becomes a commodity in relationship to a bank 
voucher. Money is a commodity existing according to the ab-
straction that it is used for no other use than as value. The 
42 
monetary standard makes money I reciprocally a commodity by 
virtue of the fact that our coins are of different metals. To the 
extent that money is regarded as money, all that matters is that 
the value should be present. But since money abstracts from 
the [specific] commodity to pure value, a primitive people does 
not yet have money, and makes do with inconvenient baner-
inc:onvenient because I have to look a long time before I find 
someone whose need is precisely the converse of mine. 
(3) Rental [Vermietung] of what is mine-house, garden, etc.-
to ano~her (locatio, conductio [rental, lease]) is handing over its 
temporary use in return for rent, while I remain the owner. That 
my specific propeny passes into the possession of another to use 
and I at the same time as actual owner remain in possession can 
be mediated by the fact that I remain in possession of the value; 
this comes about through pledge or surety. Pledge and surety may 
also be found in the case of contracts of gift (numbers 2 and 3) as 
well as in the case of the other contracts of exchange when it is 
possible to separate in time the delivery [Tradition] or performance 
of the contract by the one party from its performance by the 
other pany, or in general to separate the performance from the 
stipulation. 
The use must be temporary since otherwise I hand over what 
belongs to me to the other and there would then be no reason 
for the other, as owner, to pay me, the former owner, rent for 
the use of his property. After use I reenter into possession. The 
pledge relationship arises by virtue of the fact that, in entrust-
ing another with what belongs to me, I wish to be safeguarded 
for so doing since I cannot then momentarily remain in posses-
sion with the other. He gives me in return pan of what belongs 
to him as a pledge in substitution, and so I remain in possession 
88 

CONTRACT 
of the value of my property, but have too a particular thing in 
my hand. A pledge differs from ownership and purchase in that 
each remains in possession of what he owns and the specific 
thing is not handed ove& Pledging may also figure in the other 
kinds of exchange contract, in that the two parties may per-
form the contract at different times, and I remain in specific I 
43 
ownership as long as I have not received performance from the 
other. It is the same with surety in that there a third party, by 
whom I set greater credit. intervenes on behalf of the second 
party. 
(4) Lending on interest [Anleihen] (mutuum) is the same as rent-
ing, except that lenders remain owners solely of the value but have 
divested themselves of the specific thing. 
The difference between lending on interest and renting is that 
lenders remain solely owners of the value and hand over the 
specific thing to the othe& The value remains in the owner-
ship of the lender, so lending is not divestment or alienation. If 
lenders are given a pledge, they keep the value of the capital in 
their hands. 
(5} In a wages contract [Lohnvertrag] (locatio operarum) I di-
vest myself of or alienate to another [veraussern] my productive 
capacity or what it produces, to the extent that it is alienable and 
for a definite time. Related to this is the mandatum [a counsel's 
acceptance of a brief] and other service contracts, which rest on 
trust, good will, particular talent and aptitude, and to that extent 
possess an infinite value. 
The object of the contract must here be a [form of] labor 
that is honesta [honorable], and so is alienable, provided more-
over it is only a part of the manifestation of my capability, 
for the entire manifestation is inalienable. Acceptance of a brief 
[Mandat] and the ensuing contracts are unassessable, for here 
the good will, aptitude, genius, and trust belong to the infinite 
personality and are consequently incommensurable, however 
limited the products may be. This category also includes state 
offices, which are neither wage contracts nor contracts at all, 
although I enter into an agreement with the state by serving it 
89 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
for my remuneration. For every citizen is in general under an 
obligation to serve the state. The citizen who is a soldier is un-
der an obligation to be a soldier because of his duty, as citizen, 
to defend the state, not because of the pay he receives. State of-
fices involve this aspect of the duty of service to the state, and 
this prevents them from becoming wholly contracts, for duty to 
the state comes first. For this reason it was previously the case, 
44 
especially in republics, and still [is] so [today], that I officials re-
ceive no salaries but only emoluments to defray their expenses. 
For this reason too everyone is equally under an obligation to 
serve the state, [one] no more than another. But because I wish 
to be appointed, I insist that I can do more; I wish to do more, 
according to my particular aptitude. The relationship of partic-
ularity here comes into play, and the state can use me as it wills, 
for it is not bounden to me but can choose among several; I on 
the other hand am bounden to the state. So a civil servant who 
seeks to be appointed according to his particular aptitude can 
also demand payment for this particular aptitude, and in this 
way the aspect of contract comes into play. But to the extent 
that my services are mental rather than physical, approximating 
to the acceptance of a brief and similar contracts, to that extent 
the relationship differs from what constitutes a wage contract, 
properly speaking. 
The main distinction in regard to contracts may be said to be 
that in some cases what is owned is handed over in its entirety, 
in other cases only a use of what is owned. 
3. Wrong 
s 38 
Contract is in principle a finite agreement and leaves the re-
maining, wholly universal particularity of individuals still in mu-
tual opposition, including all of their contingency and arbitrari-
ness [Wi//kur]. Ownership is the subsumption of a particular thing 
under my personal will; in this respect the subsumption is in itself 
infinite and universal, but by virtue of its particularity it contains 
contingency and arbitrariness. It is therefore a matter of chance 
90 

WRONG 
whether others do not regard it as wrong [unrecht], in that they 
may recognize in it the universal, namely my personality and ca· 
padty for rights, but not the particular. 
In right my ownership is posited in differentiated fashion, as 
a relationship that has to be recognized by the other. In con-
tract the arbitrary will [Willkur] of individuals, the particular 
will, has, to be sure, been sublated into the universal will, but 
this universal will is only posited, because the contract is only 
posited by the I independent choice [Willkur] of the individuals; 
one of them cannot sublate it, but both can by mutual agree-
ment. The rest of the arbitrary will is not sublated by such 
agreement, and contract is only an exception to personal, natu-
ral free choice, to contingency in general. My ownership of a 
thing implies that the infinite [element] of my wm in and for it-
self, which is involved in it, is recognized, but the arbitrary will 
may oppose this. Insofar as ownership as personal will is ab-
stract and universal, however, it must particularize itself, it must 
embody its universality in something external. In taking posses-
sion I subsume a particular thing under the universal [element] 
of my will. In the same way others may subsume it under their 
will and believe that they have already acquired it and that 
my claim to it is wrong. Collisions of this kind are unavoidable 
where particularity stands opposed to particularity, and these 
clashes concern only the particularity [of ownership), not uni-
versality. Each recognizes the personality and the capacity for 
rights of the other, but the thing in question is not, so each be-
lieves, owned by the other. This is where civil lawsuits arise. 
§ 39 
In this case there arises what pertains to the sphere of civil law-
suits: a straightforwardly negative judgment-that is, (the negat-
ing] of only the particular, not the universal, element in the predi-
cate "mine" that I bestow on something; this happens in such a 
way that the thing in dispute is laid claim to solely on grounds 
of right, and it is conceded that it should belong to the party who 
has the right to it. 
When I say "This is not yours," only the particular aspect is 
91 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
here negated, not the other's capacity for rights or his personal-
ity. A negative judgment still involves a relation to the univer-
sal. In a civil lawsuit each party should be accorded its rights, 
but only one party can have right on its side; however, the other 
party is not denied what pertains to its capacity for rights, but 
46 
only what pertains to possession, to subsumption. I It is on the 
contrary affirmed that if that party were rightly entitled to the 
thing in question, then it ought to have it. 
§40 
Since in both parties the recognized status [Anerkanntsein) of 
the universal will or of right is bound up with the particular inter-
est and the particular viewpoint in regard to subsumption of the 
thing in question, it is necessary to have, for the universal will of 
right, another actuality than that of the parties, namely a ;udge 
[Richter] who, as a particular will, has only the universal [will], 
and who has the power [to ensure] that the parties will waive their 
viewpoint over against his and acknowledge it. 
Each party has the natural will to possess the thing, but they 
demand to possess it on the ground that it is right; they recog-
nize the universal will. But each has a viewpoint that is subjec-
tive since it is opposed to the viewpoint of the other; the one 
that is in the wrong also wills right. The particular will must 
here come on the scene as universal will, and the subjectivity of 
this will must be solely a universal will; it must have the view-
point of the universal will. This judge must have insight in re-
gard to the univetsal will, must have familiarity with it; and he 
must be impartial. In addition the judge must be recognized; he 
must be recognized as willing (and being familiar with) the uni-
versal will, and he must have the power to decide. Here the 
moral aspect comes into play, since the subjective arbitrariness 
of the individual must accept the universal will, and this is a 
higher aspect. What is required here is the universal will in and 
for itself, free from all arbitrariness and bound up with power 
(i.e., a power that has necessary force}. Thus it is only in the 
state that there can be a judge, for if the parries do not like the 

WRONG 
decision of an arbitrator, they can mutually disregard his deci-
sion; whereas the judge, who has power, renders ·a firm deci-
sion, which must be put into effect. I 
s 41 
In addition, the arbitrary will is no less contingent in regard to 
recognition in general. Initially recognition has only determinate 
existence, for in order for the universal [will], [the will] that has 
being in and for itself, to achieve actuality, the subjective will 
would have to sublate itself over against the universal will, and it 
has not yet done so. The will does now contain an objective ele-
ment, and the arbitrary will can therefore tum against it. As my 
will is positively related to a thing, the thing can in general [be] 
seized by the external force of another and placed under necessity. 
I can be prevented from using what belongs to me, from exercising 
my right; the exercise of my right can be made conditional on my 
doing or giving up something: coercion [Zwang]. 
At our [present] standpoint not only the subjective but the 
universal will is injured. The recognized status of the personal-
ity is only immediate; for it to be actual, mediation must be ac-
complished, the arbitrary will must have sublated itself, there 
must be present the particular objective will of each individual, 
and the subjective will in its particularity must be sublated. This 
mediation first occurs in the moral standpoint. Since I own 
something-an external thing, or even my body, which also be-
longs to what I own-and my will has externality, it is capable 
of being treated in an external manner. The violent external ac-
tion of another is possible, and my will, which inheres in the 
thing, can in this way be laid hold of, in that it is present in 
autonomous manner, as substance in the accident. Substance 
or will can therefore be laid hold of in what is owned, and can 
be placed under necessity. Of itself my will is autonomous, but 
since it has determinate existence in a thing, it inheres in it; at 
the same time, however, something else inheres in it, since the 
thing is something external. So I can be prevented from using 
what belongs to me, from exercising my rights; and if I want to 
93 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
recover them, I can be compelled to do or to abandon some-
thing else: "If you want to keep this, you must do something 
else." By reason of my will's having determinate, external exis-
48 
tence, coercion can therefore enter into play and affect it. I 
s 42 
Because, however, the will is free and can withdraw from every 
[form of] externality, human beings can be coerced, i.e., their 
physical side can be brought under the power of another; but the 
will cannot be coerced in and for itself, and whoever is coerced is 
to that extent coerced in accordance with his own will. 
The will can therefore be coerced in regard to its various ex-
ternal aspects, because its physical existence can be opposed by 
a greater, stronger physical existence. Here power lies with the 
greater, the more intensive element. In and for themselves hu-
man beings cannot be coerced, for there is no superior power 
to which a free will would have to yield. In the same way a peo-
ple may be conquered, compelled [to submit], but it cannot 
be coerced, for it can sacrifice itself in order not to be coerced. 
[Even] when the will deems itself compelled [to submit], one 
still seeks to keep something external for oneself; and [a people] 
loses its autonomy or independence if it does not regard this as 
something infinite and inalienable. Accordingly no conquered 
people can rightly complain, since its will was always involved 
in the conquest. 
s 43 
Since, however, the will ought not only to be free in and for 
itself or in its concept but also to have determinate existence, and 
to be free in its existence, it ought not in principle to be coerced 
at all. Coercion is, generally speaking, wrongful. It is [also] self-
destructive in its concept; and the way this is portrayed is that co-
ercion is annulled by coercion, or it is conditionally rightful to the 
extent that it is an annulment of [previous] coercion. 
The person who is coerced gives up one mode of existence, 
preferring to it a mode of existence he is still vouchsafed. What 
94 

WRONG 
has to be examined here is whether the existence that is pre-
ferred to what is given up is worth the sacrifice, and what exis-
tence has to be given up. Cato, for example, preferred freedom 
to a servile life in a nonrepublican state; he was I unwilling 
to see his great individuality brought into subjection. In this 
respect much depends on the particularity of the individual, 
whether to yield to necessity or not. In Greek dramas the cho-
rus is usually in favor of yielding to necessity, but the heroes 
make their individual viewpoint prevail. The one who coerces 
always does wrong, even if the one who is coerced [also] does 
wrong in allowing himself to be coerced. As free will the will 
ought to be respected in its existence by the other, insofar as it 
exists for the other. In the state there must be recourse to coer-
cion, and this coercion is here rightful, since by it [another] co-
ercion is annulled. But the coercion imposed by nature cannot 
be regarded as coercion, for I can liberate myself from the coer-
cion of nature. I can only will to be free for something free, so 
it is only from something free that coercion too can stem. In its 
concept the will cannot be coerced. Only something that is free 
can coerce, but in coercing it annuls freedom. This is a contra-
diction, and it is consequently possible in society for coercion 
to be annulled by coercion; only to this extent is coercion right-
ful. We shall see here to what extent a people that is not yet at 
the level of the state, a people in the state of nature, a condition 
of [subjection to] the coercion of nature, can be obliged to en-
ter into the state and give itself a constitution, since this latter 
[form of] coercion annuls the former coercion, that of nature. 
§44 
Strict right is called coercive right insofar as it concerns the will 
in its immediate identity with a thing or according to its abstract 
being. This right therefore is and must be. In other words the rea-
son why coercion is permissible here as a counter to coercion is 
that it can take place according to the concept, and this is because 
the will-which as subjective stands in infinite relation to itself as 
the inner certainty of its freedom-is not yet object. 
95 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
In natural right strict right is usually called coercive right, 
and it is permissible here in that it occurs here in its concept, 
so 
but only as a counter to coercion. The possibility of coercing I 
makes coercion possible. The moral will is the will in infinite 
relation to itself, the will that not only is but also has inward 
knowledge of itself. The existence that the free will has in itself 
has no externality; its self-knowledge is the existence of the free 
will. This existence is a purely intellectual existence, and accord-
ing to the concept there can be no coercion here. So there ought 
also to be no coercion here, even if empirically it can occur, 
since arbitrariness here comes into play. The moral will is the 
mediated will, which is for itself as a result of the negation of 
its arbitrariness. Right is and must be (as abstract right), for it 
is the being of the will; and what is, and is in conformity with 
its concept, must be. In this sphere coercion is possible, but it is 
only rightful insofar as it destroys coercion; for coercion must 
be anni.dled by coercion, not by morality, since whether one 
wishes to be moral or not is a matter for one's own free choice, 
whereas right must be, and the being of right must here be 
present. 
s 45 
Crime [Verbrechen] is any form of coercion whereby the prin-
ciple of the will is attacked and right is infringed as right. The 
sphere of crimina/law [peinliches Recht], the infringement of per· 
sonal freedom in an individual case or in general, [the practice of) 
slavery, injury to life and limb and what belongs to me generally-
[ all this is) an infinite judgment through which is negated not only 
the particularity but also the universality inherent in the predicate 
"mine." Since it is only the existent will that can be injured, this 
gives rise to a distinction based on the objective aspect of crimes; 
this aspect involves consideration not only of the abstract injury 
done to the infinite [element] but just as importantly of the quali-
tative and quantitative manner of its existence. 
Crime is the infinite judgment whereby right is infringed as 
right and what is mine is assailed, negated in such a way that if 
96 

WRONG 
I were to allow it to happen, I should lose not only what be-
longs to me but in general the capacity for ownership,' the uni-
versal [element] of my being, I which in such a case is not rec-
51 
ognized. Here right as right is infringed, the universal [element] 
of the free will. The one who commits a crime against me sim-
ply does not admit, or denies, that I have a right. To make and 
keep a human being as slave is the absolute crime, since the 
personality of the slave is negated in all its expressions. Murder 
does not, properly speaking, affect freedom in all its expres-
sions; instead it is the infinitude of the personality that is an-
nulled, and what is negated is only the possibility of all expres-
sions of my personality, not, as by slavery, their actuality. Since 
I possess my body, since my will is in it, the one who causes in-
jury to my body infringes my right as right. This extends also to 
the honor of the injured party, which is another mode of exter-
nal existence consisting in the ways [other] individuals and I 
view myself; and the injury to me occurs because I am the con-
tent of these views. 
In crimes right is infringed as right, and to this extent all 
crimes are equal. What is absolutely qualitative, the freedom of 
the will, is infringed. Consequently the Stoics maintained that 
there is only one virtue and one crime in the sense that crime 
infringes the law, infringes right. to It is the same with honor, be-
cause I can attach this feeling to everything. Yet one can also 
receive infinite injury in this fashion through a purely civil dis-
pute, because the inward element, honor, is thereby infringed, 
and because one accuses the other of wrongdoing. 
10. [Ed.) See Plutarch, De stoicorum repugnantiis, in Plutarchi Cbaeronensis 
omnium, qUJJe "stant, operum Tomus Secundus continens Moralia Gulielmo 
Xylandro interprete (Frankfurt, 1599), p. 1034 (Plutarch's Moralia, vol. 13, part 2, 
with an English translation by Harold Chemiss [Cambridge, Mass., and London, 
1976], p. 425); Johannes Stobaios, Ec:logae etbicae, book 2, chap. 7, in Johannes 
Stobaios, Eclogarum physicarum et etbicarum libri duo, ed. A. H. L. Heeren (Got· 
tingen, 1792-1801), 2:36, 110; Diogenes Laenius, De vitis, dogmatibus et apoph· 
tbegmatibus clarorum philosophorum libri decem (Leipzig, 1759), book 7, chap. 1 
IS 125), pp. 472-473. For a modem conspectUS see Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta, 
ed. J, von Arnim, 3 vols. (Leipzig, 1903-5), 1:49-SO (frags. 199-204), 8S-86 (frags. 
373-375); 3:48-51, 62 (frags. 258-259). 
97 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
Only the will that has determinate existence can be infringed 
or coerced because only in this way is it for others, only in this 
way is it qualitative-but not the will in [its] concept. In being 
infringed, the will is thus infringed as a determinate will, not in 
its infinitude. This is to posit qualitative and quantitative re-
lationships; for instance, murder is qualitatively distinct from 
theft, and theft, according to its scale, quantitatively distinct from 
greater or lesser theft. In the absolute crime too, when someone 
is made a slave, a temporal distinction comes into play: the 
slave can secure release today, tomorrow, or sometime during 
his life. In determining the qualitative and quantitative distinc-
tion (an affair of the understanding, for here we are not speak-
52 
ing of the concept of crime), a positive aspect comes into play, I 
and the judge's decision has to embrace a great deal in this re-
spect, not solely the law. 
§ 46 
Not only must the coercion that [has] been posited by such an 
action be annulled as product, to the extent that this can happen, 
but the inner nullity [innere Nichtigkeit] of the action must be 
brought out in and for itself or in its totality. Since criminals are 
rational agents, it is implicit that their actions are something uni-
versal and establish a law that they have recognized in them [as 
valid] for themselves. They may therefore be subsumed under the 
mode of action they have established, indeed they must [be] sub-
sumed under it; and the action, which resides not merely in the 
product but-as particular action opposed to the universal will-
essentially in the subject, and which has positive existence in the 
subject too, [must] be annulled. The way in which this comes 
about is for the law established by criminals, whose content is a 
transgression, to be applied to them. In this way both the positive 
validity of their action and its negative validity, the injury they 
have also done to themselves in causing injury to others (all oth-
ers), are done away with and wrong is turned into right. 
Since our theory is based on the concept, the crux of the 
matter, crime, is an action that is essentially a nullity. This nul-
98 

WRONG 
lity must come into existence, and this must be the basis of 
punishment-the realization of an action that is in and for itself 
null. Crime is in and for itself a null form of action, an infringe-
ment of right as right, of the free will as free will; but the free 
will cannot be infringed in its concept; so crime contradicts the 
concept of the free will, and this is the nullity of crime. The will 
must have its determinate being [Dasein] in its concrete exis-
tence [Existenz], and this existence [Existenz] is infringed. The 
action of criminals is universal because they are rational beings; 
so they have established something universal, a law proclaiming 
that it is right to infringe freedom; and by their action they 
have recognized this law. Beccaria11 repudiated capital punish-
ment because, following Rousseau,11 he regarded the state as a 
contract between individuals, I and he then assumed that no one 
could allow one's fellow citizens to put one to death in certain 
circumstances because this was contrary to human nature. 
However, crime is in and for itself (without regard to the state) 
a law that criminals establish through their action. In killing, 
they establish as universal that it is permissible to kill-they 
have acknowledged as much. Since it is a negative action, crimi-
nals have injured individual [victims], all [others] and them-
selves; they have infringed the universal, negatively that is, while 
positively they have acknowledged it because theirs is the ac-
tion of rational beings. They may therefore be subsumed under 
the same way [of viewing things]; they have granted the right 
for evil to strike themselves. Crime is an action, i.e., a change 
in an external mode of existence; crime brings something forth. 
There are actions or crimes for which one can make restitu-
tion, such as robbery and theft, but life cannot be restored. A 
person who has been killed is no more, and consequently has 
also lost nothing, for whoever is dead no longer has anything. 
11. {Ed.) Cesare Beccaria, Dei dlliui e dille pene (Leghorn, 1764), cltap. 16: 
"Chi e mai c:olui che abbia voluto lasciare ad altri uomini l'arbitrio di ucc:ickrlo?-
12. (Ed.) Rousseau, Principes Ju droit politique (Amsterdam, 1762), csp. book 
1, chap. 6, pp. 26 ff. Cf. Rousseau, Du contrat social; ou, Principes du droit pol;. 
tiqw, in Rousseau, CEu11r111 completes, vol. 3 (Paris, 1964), pp. 360 Ef. 
99 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
But the dead person's friends have lost, and they can demand 
reparation. 
This means that the mere outcome of crime is annulled, and 
this annulling is civil punishment. However, criminal punish-
ment also has a role to play, for the action is not yet annulled. 
The crime has gone scot-free, is not yet annulled, and this is the 
intellectual aspect of the action, for the crime has still a positive 
validity, which lies in the subject. Crime is, however, a particu-
lar will, the infringement of the universal, of right in itself; this 
is an affair of the particular will, and crime remains something 
subjective. (A good action, a beautiful work of art, is something 
objective, and they do not involve subjectivity, for what is good 
or beautiful is a universal work. What is peculiar to the doer 
of an evi(U action, what is his or hers, is something subjective, 
basely motivated.) The reason why crime is a bad action is that 
it is something particular, opposed to the universal will. As long 
as the negativity has not yet been made actual in regard to 
54 
criminals themselves, the crime still goes scot-free, it is still I 
something subjective. The law that criminals have established 
through the crime must therefore be accomplished in regard to 
them; it must recoil on them. The action of criminals is against 
others but also against themselves. The law established by crim-
inals is a universal law, but only they have recognized it. By 
means of punishment their action, in its positive validity, is 
brought to naught; but the negative side too, the injury, the 
coercion they have brought about, is annulled by the coercion 
[exerted by punishment]. Since crime is a positive, inwardly null 
mode of action, a mode of action having an existence it ought 
not to have, the second negation must come into play; the uni-
versal injury is annulled by the punishment criminals undergo. 
Restoration is the negation of negation. The evil conscience of 
criminals, their unrest in their self-consciousness, must be an-
nulled by means of punishment; for nullity is brought to naught 
in them by punishment, and so wrong is turned into right. 
Coercion in abstrac:to is wrong, but to the extent that it is 
13. Ms. ruds: good 
100 

WRONG 
coercion exercised against coercion, it is right; the negation of 
negation is affirmation. Punishment follows crime as' absolute 
law; Jaw and punishment directed against the transgressor of the 
law are the opposing sides, which are absolutely necessary. All 
other theories of penal law are only a particular aspect in re· 
gard to crime and punishment, a further and more concrete as· 
pect, but not the concept, the abstract element. For the state 
may do nothing that is not right in and for itself, so the deter· 
renee theory is of no avail, unless the wiU is here assumed to 
be necessarily weak, which is after all only a matter of contin· 
gency. It is therefore false to assume that human free will is es· 
sentiaJJy determinable-and this is after all only a second aspect. 
In deterrence the criminal is regarded as a means for others. The 
fact of deterring is a matter of chance; it an depends whether 
the others will allow themselves to be deterred or not. Where 
punishment is most severe, dispositions become savage, and the 
effect of the deterrence theory is to make crimes more numer· 
ous. According to Feuerbach deterrence is achieved by threat, 
and punishment ensues because [criminals] I have not let them· 
55 
selves be deterred by the threat.14 The psychology of spirit of 
those who rely on deterrence is flawed in that they regard spirit 
as dependent. Feuerbach's way around the difficulty is a vain 
contrivance, even though it found such wide acceptance. Where 
there is no state, there is revenge, and revenge may be just; pun· 
ishment and revenge differ only in form. Moreover the state 
can only threaten with what is right. Threatening involves an 
effeminate element such as deterring, because this runs counter 
to the elasticity of freedom; for the will there is no cause, it is 
absolute inner self-determination. With threat, criminals are sup· 
posed to be deterred by the specter of punishment. The state may 
not threaten with anything that is not right in and for itself; 
moreover, threats are in principle unsuited to the state. 
The reform of criminals has also been made the principle of 
14. [Ed.) Paul johann Anselm Riner von Fcuerbac:h's theory of general prcvcn· 
tioo was presented in bis lW!Iision tier Grurulsiitz• und Grundbflgri(fc des positw.n 
pflitrlidlcn Rcdlts, part 1 (Erlutt, 1800}, Clip. pp. xix-xxx, 49-108. 
101 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
punishment; but this is an intention that relates to the criminal 
as subject. Reform is indeed a positive mode of existence [.Exis-
tenz], but only for the inward core of the crime, not for what 
is external; and since there is no possibility of knowing whether 
criminals can be reformed or not, nor whether they are reformed 
or not, reform is nothing external, whereas an external punish-
ment must impinge on the external crime. The right of pardon 
makes what has happened as if it had not; the deed is made in-
dividual, it is made naught. Reform is at all events an essential 
moment; if therefore criminals make good their crime, they have 
annulled the product or outcome of the crime and recognized 
the rights of others. So in most cases private citizens will be con-
tent with restitution; that [criminals] mend their ways from a 
pure impulse is, however, a matter of contingency, for it may 
also be the result of fear of punishment, so reform is something 
ambiguous. But a judge will always have regard to the fact that 
a criminal sought to make good his crime. Yet the truth is that 
crime is only genuinely brought to naught through punishment, 
both for others and for criminals themselves, for whom punish-
ment makes the crime as though it had not happened. Crime is 
something in and for itself null, and this nullity must be itself 
annulled, sublated into actuality: such is the idea on which pun-
56 
ishment rests. I 
s 47 
The annulment of crime is in principle retribution [Wiederver-
geltung]-the bringing to naught of the nullity brought about by 
the crime insofar as the crime, as existent, has a definite quali-
tative and quantitative scope, so that its negation is itself condi-
tioned and determinate. Because of this external side, however, the 
annulment of crime is not tied to specific equality but to equal-
ity of value [Wert], which also can depend on manifold circum-
stances, irrespective of the moral side, namely the subjectivity of 
the will. 
The moral point of view extends no higher than that right 
should be done. The annulment of crime is retribution, because 
102 

WRONG 
retribution is the negation of the negative, of the crime. As ac-
tual crime, crime enters the sphere where qualitative and quan-
titative differences arise; e.g., murder ranks higher than theft, 
or petty theft is of less account than major theft. Crime is some-
thing determinate, and the negation of crime is the negation of 
just this crime, not of crime in general. So the negation is deter-
mined by quality and quantity, no more ought to happen and no 
less. But the retribution ought not to be a talio.ts On the con-
trary, here in actuality, many qualitative and quantitative deter-
minations come together comparatively; they are only equal to 
one another on the universal plane, according to their abstract, 
universal being, wherein they are equal in terms of value. It is 
therefore a false view to think, in matters of retribution, of the 
talio; on the contrary, retribution must rest on the equality of 
value. 
Difficulties do indeed arise in ascertaining this value, and 
here, as with exchange, the empirical enters in. But if this diffi-
culty were to be adduced against retribution, then it would have 
to be said too that all exchange and all compensation for dam-
ages are quite impossible. If for example imprisonment is de-
creed for theft, I [it) is difficult to define imprisonment in terms 
57 
of its length. But the two things have this in common, that they 
both involve an infringement, and so they are equal to one an-
other in concept. As regards the quantitative aspect, with how 
long a prison term theft should be punished, it is very difficult 
[to determine), but this difficulty resides on the levd of determi-
nate existence as such because such existence constitutes an ex-
ternal level, the level of otherness for the concept; and this lies 
in the nature of the case. Now this quantitative determination 
depends on many circumstances: crimes must be compared with 
one another and the punishment accordingly increased or re· 
duced. But this comparison is once again an external aspect, 
which does not, properly speaking, impinge on the individual 
crime. The determining factor here is ethical concepts, the state 
15. [Ed.J The rel'erenc:e is to the lex talionis, the law of retaliation. 
103 

ABSTllACT !liGHT 
of the nation. But this pertains to the positive treatment of crim-
inal law. 
S48 
The annulment of crime is in the first place revenge [Rache], 
and just revenge insofar as it is retributive. But as revenge this an-
nulment is carried out by the injured individual or relatives or by 
other individuals, and it is the action not of the universal but of 
a subjective will, and hence a new transgression. Thus the revenge 
falls immediately into infinite progression because it is a contradic-
tion that the universal will should have actuality through an im· 
mediately particular [will]. What is then required is a will that has 
being for itself, a universal will, a judge. 
With the ancients revenge and punishment are not yet dis· 
tinguished: Dike is revenge and punishment, the Eumenides are 
goddesses of revenge and of punishment. Punishment is the 
annuliing of crime insofar as it occurs through a court, in the 
state, through a will that is only the will of the universal, not 
the subjective will of the injured individual or of the family, of 
the injured parties themselves. In point of form, therefore, re-
sa 
venge and punishment are distinct. In revenge I justice is min· 
gled with contingent subjective feelings; contingency of insight, 
of will, and of feeling is here mingled with the universal will. 
Revenge is in the first place the implementation of right, insofar 
as right is the annulment of crime, but a subjective implementa-
tion. In several countries a number of crimes are punished only 
if they are brought before the courts by the injured party and 
form the subject of an accusation made to the judge; and no 
one, not even the judge himself, can do anything in the absence 
of such a denunciation. So here revenge is viewed as something 
governed by right, as for example in England, where, if the evi-
dence against a criminal is insufficient, he can be invited to en· 
gage in a duel and forced to do so. [It is] the same in other coun· 
tries with theh, where only the person who has been robbed can 
be the accuser. 
To the extent that revenge derives from a subjective will, it is 
104 

WRONG 
only a subjective, and not a pure, annulment of the transgres-
sion, and is therefore in turn a new transgression; and so re-
venge falls into an infinite progression, as in Arabia and North 
America it passes down from generation to generation. For here 
the contradiction remains present, and they (the two revenge-
seeking parties) stand over against each other in reciprocal ne-
gation. The contradiction is that the crime is to be annulled 
whereas the will occurs only as particular will. The judge has 
only the universal will, for he is not injured, and in his being-
for-self he wills only the universal will. Among uncivilized 
peoples anyone not satisfied with the judge's decision would 
challenge the judge to a duel. Only in a civilized people is a 
judge of the kind portrayed conceivable and possible. 
§ 49 
What constitutes right in the first, immediate relationship of 
persons to persons is the fact of being recognized [Anerkanntsein], 
the fact that the free will exists for the intellect [das intellektuelle 
Dasein], that the particular will of the individual knows itself to 
be identical with the other [wills] in immediate fashion and ac-
cepts their validity on a reciprocal basis. I For right to exist in this 
59 
way is accordingly a matter of contingency, but at the same time 
right attains actuality only through the subjective will. Likewise 
the external existence [iiusserliche Dasein] of a thing, its subsump-
tion under a subjective will (in accordance with a felt need, etc.) is 
contingent and at the same time an essential moment in the exis-
tence [Existenz] of right. As the substantive [element], however, 
the universal will is still distinct in this relationship from its essen-
tial moments; it is an ought whereby their contingency is to be 
sublated and they [the will and its moments] are made identical. 
The sphere of this mediation is morality. 
The aspect that concerns right as right is that individuals 
are identical in immediate fashion, that they know themselves 
immediately as identical, recognize each other as persons. This 
recognized status of personality is what raises the intellectual 
level to determinate existence in the sphere of right. Persons are 
lOS 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
for persons, and they have immediate actuality, a contingent, 
not a necessary actuality, for the necessary is the sublating of 
immediacy.1' The effect is mediated by the cause, but it is only 
in the effect that the cause is cause, and the product or outcome 
is pure mediation. Mediation is an utterly necessary moment. 
This first recognized status of personality is contingent, for the 
subjective will has not yet posited itself as identical with the 
universal will and does not yet recognize the particular will as a 
differentiated will. Only through the subjective will does right 
attain actuality, and in this way right is contingent. The essen-
tial moment is the contradiction; the subjective will is essential 
in the universal will, yet it occurs here as a contingent will. The 
subjective will subsumes things in contingent manner, according 
to felt need, caprice, etc. The sphere of mediation, the sublat-
ing of this contradiction, is the standpoint of morality, of what 
"ought" to be. But as long as the accidents are not identical 
with the universal will, it is merely an "ought• and still some-
thing subjective. As expressing what ought to be, the universal 
will is only the infinite concept, but the universal will must re-
alize itself in the subjective will. The universal will has as its 
material the subjective will, in which it must bring itself forth. 
16. Ms. reads: mediarion 
106 

II. MORALITY 
s so 
Morality does not concern the person as such, the will as imme-
diate singularity [Einzelheit], but as individual [individuelles] sub-
ject, the will that is for itself and whose singularity is determined 
in such a way as to become particularity, i.e., the relation of the 
will that is for itself to the will that is in and for itself. 
Morality no longer concerns immediate singularity but what 
we call the subject. The universal will is the will that is in and 
for itself, free from determinacy. This relation of the universal 
will to the singular will is the particular will. The will exists as 
recognized will to the extent that it has validity in another wilL 
The particular is not the singular but has universality within it-
self in immediate fashion; the particular color "red" always in-
cludes the universal characteristic of being a color: 
§51 
From a general standpoint morality involves three aspects: 
(1) Formal action [formelle HandlungJ and disposition [GesinnungJ. 
(2) Subjective putposes, [my) welfare [Wohl] and intention [Absicht]. 
(3) Good [Cute] and conscience [Gewissen]. 
The first aspect [to be considered) is action, the particular way 
in which the subject realizes [itself], the fact that it gives itself 
determinate existence-disposition is the universal. Secondly 
107 
60 

MORALITY 
there is intention, the particular purpose accompanying some-
thing; it is here that contradiction arises between subjective wel-
fare and the right constituted by objective welfare. And thirdly 
there is the standpoint where the objective purpose is made 
one with the subjective purpose; this is the standpoint of ethical 
61 
life.l 
1. Actions and Dispositions 
s 52 
In the will that is for itself, the particular [mode of] self-
determination has, in terms of form, the determinateness of sub-
jectivity; it is lacking something by comparison with the will that 
is in and for itself, and is contradictory to it. Thus it is the sublat-
ing of this negation, the transposition of the will that is only for it-
self into determinate existence, that is, an objective universal such 
as the will gives to itself as will, namely as relating to the will of 
other subjects: an action [Handlung]. 
The will that is for itself is1 for itself and within itself, or 
self-contained, but the will is the totality, the subjective will, 
and as subjective will it is the will that is [only] in and for it-
self; this concerns the form of the action. The will is not yet de-
termined here in its content, but only in terms of form. In its 
being-for-self, however, in its singularity, it is infinite. Freedom 
consists in having a limitation but transcending it. The infini-
tude of self-consciousness consists in the fact that its barrier is 
something negative for it and that, in this negation, it neverthe-
less is. As what is free, the ego can endure the contradiction 
and is itself its positive resolution; but finite nature is only neg-
ative. For itself the subject is something subjective, and for the 
subject itself this subjectivity is a lack; but the subject is itself 
the sublating of this contradiction. This sublating is action. Ac-
tion consists in the subject's sublating its subjectivity and mak-
ing its inner element external. Action is a transposing or trans-
lating of the will, [a mode of being] that the will gives to itself 
1. Ms. adds: (1) 
108 

ACTIONS AND DISPOSITIONS 
as existent being (Dasein]. Taking possession is O\)ly·,an action 
insofar as it relates to the will of other subjects, to the fact of 
being recognized. Contract is an action because in it I give my-
self a determinate existence for the will of another. Action de-
rives from the subject, and realizes itself in immediate fashion 
in the case of contract, and still more in the case of wrong and 
crime, but we have not yet considered this subjective aspect. I 
e: 
s 53 
Particular self-determination, as the inward self-determination 
of the will that is for itself, and as a mode of self-determination 
that is intended to be realized, is known by the subject and is its 
purpose [Zweck]; [it is] a judgment that in its determinacy com-
prises universal thought. The disposition [Gesinnung] is this uni-
versality as belonging to the subject; and, as singled out and set 
apart on its own account, it is the maxim of the subjective will. 
Once right is enacted, the disposition is of no essential significance 
for it. 
Action is the transposing or translating of inwardness into 
externality, but externality is the form in which the will posits 
itself. The subject wills something; this is its purpose, but pur-
pose is still something inward. Purpose is self-determination of 
the will in a way that is not intended to remain subjective, to 
keep this defect of non-externality. The subject has knowledge 
of the purpose insofar as it is still in the subject's inner being. In 
the purpose a universal thought is present, [for] the will consists 
in being in and for itself universal as well as in and for itself de-
terminate. What I posit inwardly is mine; my purpose is a uni-
versal, which is, however, also determinate. In the will I do not 
remain at the stage of universality, but determine my will. The 
purpose is my image, but it is as yet only subjective and has to 
become objective. 
The purpose is the concept. In what is living the concept 
(purpose) has immediate being in external existence [Existenz]; 
only in spirit does the concept have being as something inward. 
The will has the concept that is in the element of thinking; it 
109 

MORALITY 
has knowledge of it. To the extent that it belongs to the subject, 
this universal is the disposition; but if we express the disposi-
tion in abstract terms, we say it is the maxim of a will. 
If maxims are considered wholly [on their own account], then 
they are principles; if the principle belongs to a subjective will, 
it is "my" maxim. Principles have to be made into maxims. It 
is the endeavor of moral education that these principles should 
always be present to the imagination, but they must be appro-
63 
priated, I awakened within the subject itself, not merely repre-
sented to pupils as external, for in that case what impinges on 
the pupils is always in the form of something external. Pupils 
must view the good as their own will. The principle must be-
come the subject's own. Once right comes about, the disposi-
tion is immaterial, for right is a genuine mode of acting, an in-
wardly substantive mode of existence [Dasein] that has been 
brought forth. Here the subjectivity of the will does not enter 
into consideration; all that is required of the subject is to do the 
right on the basis of moral principles. 
s 54 
The subjective will is more precisely a finite will insofar as its 
standpoint is that of consciousness. It has a presupposed object for 
its action, and also has in its purpose the representation of this ob-
ject and the application of its maxims to the conditioning circum-
stances. The deed [Tat] is the alteration brought about in the exis-
tent situation, and the will is responsible for such alteration and 
its consequences. 
Here we consider a further aspect of action. The will is sub-
jective, not objective; it is at the standpoint of consciousness, of 
the finitude of consciousness, [which means] that spirit is not in 
and for self, but its reality subsists for it as an object on which 
it acts. External circumstances are the conditions within which 
it acts, and its purpose involves representing these external cir-
cumstances in general and subsuming the determining circum-
stances under the purpose. Action bears on the concrete situa-
tion; as activity, the will effects the alteration and is responsible 
110 

ACTIONS AND DISPOSITIONS 
(not "chargeable")2 for the alteration and its consequences. This 
is the concept of "being responsible" as such. "Being charge-
able" or imputation is something else. A deed is as such a trans-
formation into objective existence. That a human being is re-
sponsible I for something expresses immediacy, the emerging 
& 
from the subjective into objectivity, and the deed is the wholly 
immediate mediation. The consequences are at least dependent 
on the deed. Liability in the civil sense [means that] if I owe 
someone something, I am the possessor under civil law and the 
other is the owneL 
s 55 
But since this will, as consciousness, is finite, the world of ob-
jects as it appears [die gegenstandliche Erscbeinung] is contingent 
for it and may of itself be something quite different from what it is 
in the will's representation. In the same way the deed, as the pur-
pose transposed into externality, is the prey of external forces, can 
attach to externality in quite different fashion, and can give rise to 
a chain of remote consequences alien [to the purpose]. In its deed, 
however, the will recognizes as its action and is chargeable for only 
those elements of the deed of which it has knowledge in its pur-
pose, and it repudiates the imputation to it of anything else. 
An animal does not, properly speaking, do anything, but still 
less can it aa. Prior to actualization the will has its purpose 
within itself, and it is a matter of contingency how the world 
of objects as it appears exists for it as consciousness. However, 
the representation of consciousness may be very different from 
actuality. Human beings, who do act, operate on the circum-
stances as they conceive them. If someone out hunting shoots 
someone, in the belief he is killing a wild animal, he is not 
chargeable for this and will not let it be imputed to him. An 
action is mine only insofar as my purpose includes the cir-
cumstances. Something quite different may also attach to the 
2. [Tr.] The text distinguishes between schuld sein and schuld haben, rendered 
here by "to be responsible" and "to be chargeable" respectively. 
111 

MORALITY 
externality; consequences may ensue that were not inherent in 
the deed, and persons will not let such consequences be imputed 
to them either. For only what inheres in the purpose of the ac-
tion can in fact be imputed. The heroic consciousness saw itself 
as infinite intelligence and regarded its deeds as in all circum-
55 
stances its own. Oedipus slew a man I who met him on the way, 
but it was part of the action that this man was his father. How-
ever, the ensuing anguish he experienced was as great as if this 
circumstance too had been in his awareness. Human beings here 
credit themselves with knowing everything; they impute to them-
selves that they should know everything, and experience the 
anguish as of one who has a'ted. 
s 56 
Because crimes are actions that are in and for themselves null, 
the subj~ctive knowing and willing of such an action forms the 
disposition in regard to the universal implicit in it. Apart from 
awareness with regard to the objective circumstances, [this means] 
that as action it formed part of the purpose, i.e., that it was pre-
meditated; this constitutes an essential moment in the imputation 
and punishment of crime. 
For a crime to be judged as such depends on the disposition. 
Crime is properly speaking an empty phenomenon, for it is an 
action that is in and for itself null, whose positive aspect con-
tinues to belong to the subject; to this extent revenge or punish-
ment must be directed toward the subject. 
Whether an action is a crime depends on whether (1) the cir-
cumstances were present in [the subject's] consciousness, and 
(2) the universal element in the action, the maxim, formed part 
of the subject's purpose, or both together; the action must have 
been premeditated. The subject must have known that the crime 
or action is something contrary to right; this brings in the pos-
itive, empirical aspect. (In Germany children cannot be sum-
moned to appear at court and convicted, but there are frequent 
conflicts on this point in England, in London; children are fre-
quently given penal sentences, admittedly to a lesser extent [than 
112 

ACTIONS AND DISPOSITIONS 
adults].) The child's actions are still imbued with singularity; the 
child cannot yet have the aspect of universality, Of"rationality. 
Here the law must determine in firm manner, so as not to leave 
too much to the judge's arbitrary decision. For different kinds of 
personal right may be pronounced in the space of a day. I Other 
conditions such as anger. drunkenness, or madness are condi-
tions that weaken a human being's awareness.3 It has been said 
that every crime is insanity, but even the insane have to be 
penalized on account of evil actions, though without severity. 
Madmen who commit crimes in a moment of pure rage are to 
be regarded as animals, and like animals they can be deterred; 
we can try to protect ourselves from them, we can make them 
harmless. But we must always assume, we must pay humans the 
honor of assuming, that they were aware of the universal aspect 
of their crime. The punishment may be mitigated on the ground 
that the criminal was not aware of the true value of the action. 
But the whole gamut of mitigating circumstances should not lie 
within the competence of the courts; the main responsibility in 
this regard must belong to a higher power. the ruler. Milder cus-
toms also result in milder penalties. 
An action comprises two aspects, [the deed and] the univer· 
sal aspect, the maxim, which essentially concerns the disposi-
tion. It is assumed of the criminal that he knows the law. How-
ever, lack of mental development can justify lesser degrees of 
punishment, but only if the criminal is a child or insane. Other-
wise human beings are always paid the honor of assuming that 
3. (£d.l C(. Paul Johann Anselm Ritter von Feuerbach, Lehrbuch des gemein-
en in Detltschland geltenden Peinliche" Rechts (Giessen, 1801), pp. 75-76: "S 96: 
The individual states that pm:lude impurability include ••• 1: any nonaccolllltable 
state of mind such as makes impossible any awareness of the punishable nature of 
the deed. ••• Immunity from punishment is also conferred by (1) the natural srate 
of childhood; (2) the unnatural state of childhood (usually) in deaf-mutes from 
birth and wholly childlike old people; (3) menral illness, specifically mania and de-
lusion ••• ; (4) extreme drllllkenness incurred through no (auk of the person con-
a:rned; (S) uncontrolled righteous emotion; (6) innoa:nt sleep; (7) error or igno-
rana: for which one c:annoc be held aca~unrable in regard to the existena: of the 
penal law as such or in regard to whether the deed in question is subsumed under it." 
113 

MORALITY 
they have this universal rationality within them. So to the ex-
tent that their actions are contrary to universal human rational-
ity, they are punishable. But the state prescribes very severe 
and heavy punishments for wholly positive crimes, whose only 
universal aspect is that the state proclaimed them but which in 
other respects do not accord with what is rational. Howevet; 
the subject [of the state] must make it his concern to familiarize 
himself with these laws. Thus stealing in general is prohibited, 
but awareness that a particular theft is regarded as so serious is 
something contingent; the criminal could be wholly unaware 
of this particular aspect or be aware of it to a greater or lesser 
degree. However; these penalties are subject to mitigation and 
pardon. 
67 
Where the universal I aspect of crime is present, there is dolus 
[evil intent], but [only] to the extent that the single individual in 
question was aware of this universal aspect. Milder customs re-
sult in less serious crimes. In this respect a sharper distinction is 
drawn in regard to the determinations of [the criminal's} aware-
ness; abstractions figure in it to a greater extent on their own 
account, and the crime becomes greater. On the other hand, the 
good too is more certain. An uncultured people undergoes total 
injury in everything, feels infinitely injured in each and every 
external injury. People at a higher cultural level feel themselves 
to be less injured when an external object they have imbued 
with their will suffers injury [than in the event of an injury suf-
fered] in their inner feelings, in the feeling of inner freedom; 
their anger and desire for revenge are not so great. In a highly 
cultivated state each citizen enjoys better proteCtion against 
crimes, and the milder practice of the courts of justice is war· 
ranted by the fact that very severe, deterrent punishments are 
seen to be no longer so necessary. People at a high cultural level, 
who set their honor within themselves, are not so deeply injured 
in regard to something external, because their inner indepen· 
dence abstracts to a greater extent from its external presentation. 
Such are the chief points that arise in regard to the form of 
action. 
114 

PARTICULAR PURPOSES 
2. Particular Purposes; Welfare and Intention 
' 
s 57 
' 
The subjective will is not only formally determined and finite 
vis-a-vis reality in general; since its determinacy is at the same time 
infinite inward self-determination of the subjective individual, its 
determinacy is indifferent to the difference of form and turns [into] 
the content which, as the reflection of the particular subject into 
itself, is initially a particular content; and in its whole extension is 
the subject's welfare. 
The content is the form reflected into self, the inwardly de-
termined form. This relation to self is a determinate reference; 
its distinction has become simple. The content is determined in 
opposition to the I form, yet it is indifferent to it. What we have 
sa 
to consider here is that it is the form itself that turns into the 
content. As subject, the subject is the ego, absolute infinitude 
reflected within itself, and this reflection within self-self as this 
difference-constitutes its content. This content is infinite re-
flection within self, determined over against form, but by virtue 
of the fact that the content is opposed to form, it is a determi-
nate, finite, particular content. This particular content consti-
tutes the distinctive purposes of the individual, the individual's 
welfare. 
s 58 
Welfare includes the individual's natural requirement. In the 
first place this comprises what pertains to particularity in taking 
possession of and acquiring property, but also what pertains to 
spiritual requirements-to educate oneself and in general to bring 
one's own sense of one's particular actuality into conformity with 
the universal concept of one's life and its diverse aspects and with 
the idea of one's intellectual and volitional being. 
Here the subject gives itself a particular sphere of its exis-
tence; here there arises the conflict between the individual's wel-
fare and purposes and right, the clash of particularity and the 
universal. Properly speaking, all one acquires is acquired in 
us 

MORALITY 
arbitrary fashion, according to a particular requirement; in other 
words, one wills this particular [thing or event]. Human life is 
organic, and this organic life wills to subject inorganic life to 
itself. Immediate concordance [between the organic and the in-
organic] consists in having a feeling of oneself, of one's wel-
fare, one's enjoyment; it consists in the individual's returning 
into self. Spiritual requirements include whatever pertains to the 
development of spirit. The various requirements of spirit con-
stitute the spirit's self-realization. The forces of spirit are drives 
or requirements to the extent that human beings are implicitly 
spirit in their concept, but are not something explicitly existent 
69 
for the spirit; and this I contradiction actuates the impulses, so 
that the forces may be existent for the spirit, so that it may en-
counter no impediment in them but have completely permeated 
them. This is in general what pertains to welfare. 
s 59 
Welfare has, to be sure, as its principle the particularity of the 
subject, but it is an essential moment for acting and for realizing 
the universal will because the activity of acting in general is the 
negative relation of the wiU to itself, and so lies in the sphere of 
individuality. Welfare is consequently an essential purpose of the 
will or a [form of] right; and, insofar as it must be brought about 
by positive action, it is duty. In general terms, what duty involves 
is that all action must comprise an interest, because in such inter-
est the subject has self-awareness; and in its deed, whatever else it 
may contain, it must recognize itself as this single individual. 
Welfare is an essential moment of the will; it is a [form of] 
right, and a duty insofar as it must be brought about through 
positive action. What constitutes the limited character of the 
will is naturalness. This primary division into universal will and 
particular will is a necessary moment. Welfare has, to be sure, 
as its principle the particularity of the subject, but acting con-
tains the mediation between subjectivity and objectivity. It is 
only through action that the absolute final purpose of the world 
is brought about. But only the subject is active, acts, for activ-
ity is the negative relation of the will to itself. But the self-
116 

PARTICULAR PURPOSES 
mediating will is individuality; a will inwardly mediafed with it-
self has being-for-self. In the East the moment of particularity 
does not occur; it is not posited on its own account as~ essen-
tial moment. It was only through Christianity that there arose 
individuality, having existence as singular, as particular. Welfare 
is a [form of] right, and it is a duty, for it must be brought 
about. The subject that acts recognizes itself in its action; this is 
its interest [in acting]. In its complete universality the interest 
is not yet distinct from the purpose of the action itself. All that 
is involved in interest is that it arises through the individual, 
which I in its action enjoys itself. In what human beings do they 
have awareness of their deeds, and this is nothing evil. 
s 60 
For the natural will as such, welfare is only purpose as (the wel-
fare] of this individual subject. With the person, however, we al-
ready have, to be sure, the single individual, but free from mere 
naturalness of will. And happiness enters the moral sphere as duty 
to the extent that the particularity of the subject does not exist ab-
stractly on its own account, but is determined by, and subsumed 
under, the will that has being in and for itself. Moreover, it is in 
consequence determined as universal in such a way that the pur-
pose extends to the welfare of others and, in so doing, is equally 
moral purpose and duty. 
Happiness is enjoyment, the satisfaction of impulses, pre-
sented in the reflection of universality, but it is not yet univer-
sality in and for itself. Happiness does enter the moral sphere, 
however, not as particular purpose but as subsumed under the 
universal will. The wiJI of the individual is an essential moment, 
but only insofar as it is subsumed under the universal will. The 
purposes of morality are essential purposes, but not in accor-
dance with their particularity. There is always an antithesis 
between form or universality and content or particularity. Of 
itself, duty is what is universal, absolute, but it must have a 
content, and so it enters the sphere of particularity. The partic-
ularity of the will must be subsumed under the universal will; 
and to this extent it is also a duty to make one's purpose the 
117 

MOII.ALITY 
welfare of others-the welfare of one's neighbor but not the 
welfare of all, for it is not possible for individuals, as particular, 
to relate to all; their sphere of effective action is confined to 
those with whom they come in contact. 
s 61 
Since their content is particular. these moral purposes are in 
principle contingent in relation to right, and may therefore be in 
11 
concordance with it, I but they also may not be. So in the action 
too its particular aspect may [be] the essential purpose or end 
for the subject, the objective action may be reduced to being a 
means to the end, and this particular aspect [may] be the inten-
tion (Absicht). 
This paragraph touches on the collision between moral du-
ties and right. Moral purposes or ends concern the particular-
ity of the subject, whereas right is the determinate existence of 
the free will in general. The universal and the particular may be 
congruent with each other, but they may also not be in con-
cordance. In a [given) action, which, as action, includes the uni-
versal and the particular aspect, the particularity may therefore 
constitute the purpose-the moral purpose consisting in the wel-
fare of others. This particular aspect of welfare as such may be 
the subject's intention in its action, in which case the objective 
action, the rightfulness of this action, the universal element, is 
only a means to the particular intention. The particular that 
is the consequence of the action may be the intention of the 
action, and this intention may in turn be intention for another 
intention, and so on. As particular. the intention may always be 
mediated in this way ad infinitum. 
The disposition refers to the moral element, to welfare, but 
the content is always a particular content. Intention is often 
equated with premeditation. In the case of a crime the differ-
ences between intention and premeditation or disposition relate 
to dolus [evil intention]. An action that is of itself a crime may 
be a means to another intention, which may be a moral one. 
For the presumption of dolus the following distinction must be 
118 

PARTICULAR PURPOSES 
made: if agents arc merely responsible for the crime, it is not a 
crime for them; but insofar as, for example, the death of an-
other formed part of their intention, so that they are~charge­
able, it is a crime, and there can be no question here but that 
the dolus resulted from evil premeditation. With dolus indirec-
tus [indirect evil intention] what is meant is that if, for ex-
ample, someone starts a conflagration, the intention is to burn 
[whatever it may be], but the people who perish in the flames 
are an indirect4 consequence of the action; the action is a crime, 
but the consequence did not directly form part of one's inten-
tion. H people are injured, it depends on their constitution, I on 
12 
the skill of the doctors, etc., whether the injury will result in 
death. If someone poisons a well in order to kill his neighbor's 
cattle, it is an indirect consequence that people who drink from 
it die [too). But the action here entails involvement with an ele-
ment over which one subsequendy no longer has mastery, so 
there is no question here of dolus indirectus; instead it inheres 
in the action itself that it may extend to immeasurable conse-
quences. If by chance the arson causes little damage, so much 
the better for the agent. By such actions, agents deliver them-
selves up to external circumstances, and the ill that ensues from 
them serves them ill too. 
If an action is a crime, dolus is automatically proven, and the 
judge no longer needs proof of dolus. 
§ 62 
Moral purposes differ in kind, and which is higher in compari-
son with others belongs to the discussion of morals. With regard 
to right, however, I can admittedly renounce my right for the sake 
of a moral intention, but the moral intention does not justify a 
wrong action; still less does it make it a duty. In merely moral in-
tentions only a subjective particularity should be recognized, but 
the wrongful action would infringe the universal principle, the 
freedom of the will. The genuine moral disposition consists rather 
4. Ms. reads: direa 
119 

MORALITY 
in doing first what is right; it is moral to the extent that right 
exists as the subjec:t"s own self-determination. An evil disposition 
in the merely moral sense is one directed against the welfare of 
others. 
H I fulfill one duty, this may exclude other duties; which duty 
is the higher is for morality to decide. Moral duty involves the 
73 
incongruity that duty is a universal, yet belongs to a particular. I 
The conflict of duties must be decided in the last resort by con-
science, but its decision lacks a rational basis. The duty that in-
volves more universality is the higher. While I can renounce my 
particular right for the sake of a moral intention, I cannot for 
that reason infringe the rights of others. I also cannot renounce 
my capacity for rights from a moral intention, for I cannot re-
nounce my freedom. People would rather be governed by mo-
rality than by right; but the content of right is universality, 
whereas the content of moral intention is particularity. 
Righi: can therefore never be infringed for a moral purpose, 
whatever it may be. For a wrongful action infringes freedom. 
The prime moral duty is rather, in the first place, to be rightful, 
governed by right; only then c:an moral purposes enter in. Right· 
ful action as such, the truth of rightful action, is where right is 
done for its own sake. The moral disposition contains the dan-
ger that, since my maxim is to do right but I at the same time 
have this maxim and know that I have this disposition, moral 
self-conceit arises. In determining itself to right, the subject also 
reflects on the fact that it itself so determines itself. The truth is 
that one does the right because it is right, not the reflection that 
the maxim is one's own maxim. Certainly those who wish to be 
moral must make the moral maxims their own, but what they 
must be concerned about is that the maxim has come into be-
ing, not that they have enacted it. What is morally evil is the 
disposition that is opposed to the welfare of others. So someone 
who is very much governed by right may nonetheless be evil; in 
the state, however, people must set less store by their welfare 
and the welfare of others than by rightful duties, the welfare of 
the state. Here we can see the meaning of the expression, "He 
120 

PARTICULAR PURPOSES 
is a good man who sets less store by universal right than by the 
welfare of others." Evil in the disposition is when someone exe• 
cutes his egoistical plans at the expense of the welfare af others. 
The civil servant as such must set less store by the wdfare of 
single individuals than by right. I 
7· 
s 63 
The particular determinations that initially constitute the con-
tent of moral purposes, taken in their entirety as a single whole, 
are themsdves a universal and, to that extent, infinite. In life there 
inheres at the same time the possibility of the determinate existence 
of freedom as such, of right; and if life is in extreme danger, it 
may appeal to a right of distress, since in relation to the infinite 
infringement of this possibility, or in relation to the [complete) 
absence of right, the right of another or the property of another 
acquires the status of a merdy particular existence of freedom. In 
other words, if one life that is at risk is set against another life, 
both are reduced to this latter abstraction. 
All particularity taken together is a whole, something infi-
nite, the particular returned from its particularity. This whole 
particularity is life, the possibility not only of particular pur-
poses but also of right; life forms an essential sphere of right. 
So where life is endangered, it claims a right of distress. The 
danger of infinite injury is the danger of complete loss of right. 
In the face of this loss of right, right as such disappears-the 
wdfare of others, their particular moral purposes and their 
right-because my determinate existence, which is my freedom, 
is in dange.: Equality in this case means that the other should 
not take precedence over it [i.e., my existence], and the other's 
right disappears in face of it. The wish that no one should have 
a prior claim to anything in the sphere of the particular, of in-
equality, is envy. Equality of external goods is something false 
because this belongs to the sphere of the particular, the contin-
gent, the unequal. But in relation to the absolute claim to free-
dom of each human being, of life itself, the particularity of the 
other's rights disappears. If both are in mortal danger and there 
121 

MORALITY 
is only room for one on the plank, we have here the condition 
in which right is absent, and the decision is left to subjective 
feeling; it is no longer a question here of right and wrong, but 
only of nobility of mind. 
75 
Because all human existence in its externality I is a matter of 
contingency, such a case can arise. For instance, a woman who 
was traveling with her husband and children, when surrounded 
by a large pack of wolves and in danger of their all being lost, 
threw one child to the wolves and so saved herself and her 
husband and her other children. It cannot be said that she did 
wrong, but her peace of mind never returned. The state, how-
ever, has laws governing the right of distress. If an artisan owes 
all he possesses, the creditors not only cannot oblige him to 
work for them till the end of his days, but may not even take 
from him the tools he needs for his work, so that this extremity 
of need may be averted from him. 
s 64 
Need exhibits not only the nullity of welfare as such, as the re-
alization of particular subjectivity, but also the nullity of the exis-
tence of freedom, namely right; and the particularity of purposes, 
regarded on its own account, dissolves in the universality of thought 
so far as its content is concerned. In the ideality of this particular 
content and of external existence, the universality of the will-
pure right and abstract duty-has returned within itself. In this 
way, as ideal, particularity, which from the moral standpoint is 
supposedly determined by the universal will, is equivalent to and 
identical with the latter; and, in this universal ideality of the par-
ticular, subiectivity has an ideal mode of existence and is therein 
likewise returned within itself-as the good and as conscience. 
Here we have the transition to the good and to conscience. 
The good is what is utterly universal, the universal final pur-
pose of the world; conscience is singularity as such. In need the 
particularity of the subject exhibits itself in immediate fashion 
as null. The particularity of the subject also includes the exis-
tence of freedom and right, and need exhibits the limitedness of 
this aspect in general. But it is not only this immediate need 
122 

THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE 
that exhibits this nullity; for universal thought there are no ab-
solute duties. Such duties arise only in the ethical sta'te. Every 
absolute duty is a limitation. The free will, as conscio~ of it-
self, the pure will, comprises no aspect in which it still has to 
realize itself. I The freedom of the will that is for itself now ex-
7E 
ists solely in self-consciousness, the universal will has only itself 
as its object and purpose, and the subject exists solely in its 
pure ideality. This freedom is therefore the negative of the par-
ticular, and this negativity indicates need. Heart and mind cut 
themselves off completely from the external world and shut 
themselves within themselves; all particularity is here evapo-
rated. Here all reality has disappeared, and self-consciousness 
resides in the pure certainty of itself. This is the transition to 
the state. 
The transition to conscience and to the good is a dialectic. 
Need sets a dialectical moment in motion. The universal will, 
the will that is in and for itself, the will defined as all that is en-
compassed by welfare, and the will that is in and for itself, hav-
ing passed through the mediation of subjectivity and possessing 
an unlimited [mode of] existence, [is] an existence [Dasein] that 
is in and for itself universal; it is the will that has being in and 
for itself in its existence [Existent). 
[3.] The Good and Conscience 
s 65 
The good [das Gute] is the universal will as absolute final pur-
pose and object. It is the idea wherein [are] sublated for spirit the 
particular purposes involved in its welfare as well as the determi-
nate existence of right as something self-sufficient, and the abso-
lute final purpose of the world is in consequence accomplished. 
The universal will is the absolute final purpose and object, 
what is and ought to be. In contrast with freedom, nature is 
something lacking self-sufficiency. From the moral standpoint, 
there is as a result of the dialectic no longer anything self-
sufficient over against the universal will. The concept has passed 
through its mediation by its antithesis and has the antithesis 
123 

MORALITY 
something governed by right, and so justifies it for its particular 
view. This can be termed the absolute hypochondria of spirit, 
seeing only itself and annulling all ties and friendly relation· 
ships and duty because it is afraid of losing itself in them. What 
is good depends on how the subject defines it; the subject de-
ceives its conscience itself when it regards everything it does [as} 
in accord with conscience, whether it is actually so or not. 
It is said in praise of human nature that human beings will 
nothing evil for the sake of evil. Evil is what is null, infringe-
ment, the positing of a negative; but as action it is also always 
something positive, even if it were only revenge, which can even 
claim life. If, for example, no one seeks an advantage from the 
action, then we may well have here something negative as re· 
gards the advantage, but it is a positive action because the sub-
ject carries out its revenge. It restOres to itself consciousness of 
its impaired validity, the reestablishment of which is something 
positive. It is not because it is something negative, nor because 
the agent derives no positive advantage from it, that the evil is 
regarded as having occurred for evil's sake; rather it is positive 
evil because the agent's purpose is envy and revenge. A man who 
flees from the field of battle may appease his conscience, for he 
has preserved his life; and this is an essential moment, which 
should, however, have been subordinated to duty. Evil consists 
in infringing a duty; it is hypocrisy to raise evil above duty and 
so deprive duty of the essential aspect. What is congruent with 
the conscience is what can be acknowledged by all as in con· 
gruity with conscience. 
§ 68 
The inner cenainty of oneself in which particularity is purified 
to abstract subjectivity is, howevet; only abstract activity, devoid 
of deed and action, because it is the immediate taking back of a11 
determination within itself, and because its determination is only 
the universal good. This undifferentiated fading away into itself is 
eo 
a reduction I to simple immediacy, which, however, has as its es-
sence the absolute unity of freedom with itself. The good and ab-
solute subjectivity are in themselves identical, and one is only the 
126 

THE GOOD AND CONSCIENCE 
determinate existence of the other. In the good, subjectivity aceord-
ingly has the element that subsists in and for itself, in which its 
differentiation attains the level of subsistence and becomes objec-
tive, in the same way as this its particularization is merely ideal and 
exists only in the unity over against which it preserves nothing pe-
culiarly its own: free substantiality or ethical life. 
The point we are now at is pure inner certainty. It is the con-
cept of freedom in its negative relation to self, it is abstract ac-
tivity, in which no action ensues. The universal element in sub-
jectivity is the good. The Fichtean philosophy,6 which makes 
the ego the absolute principle, has in subjective form remained 
on one side; the objective side has always been given the side of 
negativity, but the identity [between the two sides] remained in-
complete. Objectivity ought to be congruent with pure certainty 
of oneself, but has remained [self-)perpetuating. The highest 
standpoint of Fichte's philosophy is striving, yearning; the inner 
good has remained merely what ought to be, and what this phi-
losophy amounts to is merely a yearning for what is supposedly 
good. Beautiful souls, who have within themselves this infinite 
self-consciousness, this clarity, have held fast to this standpoint. 
If, however, they go over to action, they enter the sphere of lim-
itedness. They foresee this and therefore fear every contact, re-
main enclosed within themselves, and revere their inner infini-
tude, all of which led them to make themselves, their ego, God; 
they are only inwardly subjective, inwardly intuitive. They re-
gard the good only as what ought to be, not as actual. In this 
way they border on hypocrisy; their essence is inner vanity. In 
their relation to others they acknowledge only their subjective 
concepts but not duty toward others. This is true for instance 
of Novalis and Spinoza, who died of consumption because they 
regarded pure objectivity only as something vanishing or con-
suming away/ as an "ought," not as something actual. They 
6. [Ed.] See johann Gottlieb Fichte, Gruntllage der gesammten Wissenschafts· 
lebre (Leipzig, 1794). Cf. FK:hte, Gesamtausgabe 2:173 ff. 
7. [Tr.]ln German "consumption" is Schwindsucht and "vanishing" is Ver· 
schwinden. Hegel is thus making a play on words that can be only partially ren· 
dered into English. 
127 

MORALITY 
11 
lack the confidence to posit themselves objectively, I to let them-
selves go, i.e., in such a way as to remain completely sure of 
themselves. With them the concept is not differentiated; it re-
mains pure intuition. The con"pt must break in two and posit 
itself as universality, in which all differences cease, because its 
elements form an inseparable totality. 
As the will that is in and for itself universal, into which 
subjectivity has passed over, good is the substantive unity that 
determines itself inwardly. For example the classes or estates 
[Stiinde) making up a people are single organs that have their 
own life, that subsist on their own account, but that do not have 
their life in isolation from the body politic as a whole, but only 
as organic ~ponents. Being, in relation to what is free, means 
that its distinct phases achieve being. 
128 

III. ETHICAL LIFE 
§69 
Ethical life [Sittlichkeit] comprises as its merely ideal [idee/len) 
moments right as the unmediated existence [Dasein) of freedom 
and morality [Moralitiit] as the reflection of the free subject into 
itself. It is itself its truth, the idea as the free will purified to uni-
versality, which has its actuality in the disposition of the subjective 
will, in the same way that the subjective will has its foundation 
and substance-freedom become nature-in the will that has been 
purified to universality. We are thus faced with two kinds of right, 
the absolute right of substance and the right of individuals-the 
latter as both substantial right (as opposed to individuality or sub-
jectivity as such) and the right of individuals for themselves (this 
being, however, essentially subordinate to substantial right). 
A distinction is made here between morality and ethical life. 
Morality is what is reflected, whereas ethical life is the interpen-
etration of the subjective and the objective. (Desirable though it 
is that we should be able to denote everything in our own lan-
guage, in philosophy the situation has arisen that we use a for-
eign term for what is more remote, for what is reflected, e.g., 
"being" [Sein] and "existence" [Existem:].l) Right and morality 
1. [Tr .) The •foreign terms, • i.e., me terms foreign to German, are in this in· 
stance Morlllirilt (morality) aod E.:dstem: (existence), while me indigenous terms 
12.9 
82 

ETHICAL LIFE 
are only ideal [nur ideelle] moments; it is only in ethical life that 
they come to existence [Existenz]. Actual morality is only the 
morality of the whole, in ethical life. So what must first be shown 
here is that the two earlier moments-right and morality-are 
only ideal. What comes first is the ethical substance, the sub-
stantive life of a people, of a family; and it is only later, when 
custom is no longer good, that the subject returns within itself 
and seeks its point of support in morality; it seeks in itself what 
is good, no longer in custom, in actuality. Once spirit no longer 
recognized itself among us in its old mode of life, there occurred 
83 
the periods during which I right and morality were developed. 
The subject no longer knows itself as infinite, as perfect; it knows 
what is good, and knows that the good is found in its self-
consciousness yet also transcends it and [that] in this way hy-
pocrisy comes about. But historically the substantive is what 
comes first. 
Ethical life is not only the absolutely good but also the abso-
lutely true. It is the truth because actuality is here identical with 
the concept. Truth is where the subject takes up what is objec-
tive in its purity, not allowing free play to its particular reflec-
tions within itself. The good is the determination of the subject's 
self-consciousness, and activity is where the subject realizes what 
is objective and brings it forth from itself; it is at the standpoint 
of truth that the subject realizes what is objective within itself. 
The concept that is immediately realized and realizes itself is the 
truth. What is living reproduces itself; it is only a game with it-
self, it brings forth only what already is. The rational as such, 
law, can be called the concept, but it has its determinate exis-
tence [Dasein] in the individual subject, in its intelligence. The 
subject is the free concept, the concept that exists [existiert] as 
concept; the ego is the subjective concept. If I have an aim, I 
are Sittlichkeit (ethical life) and Sein (being). Another indigenous-foreign contrast 
is found in Hegel's use of the tetrns DtUein and &istenz-the fotrner indicating a 
mediation of the subjective and objective, and the laner a reflection into subjectiv· 
ity; it does not appear, however, that Hegel mainrains a systematic distinction be· 
tween these tetrns in this work (see Introduction, n. 1 ). 
130 

ETHICAL LIFE 
know it immediately as mine. But reality, the ethical'life of a 
people or family, is no longer this subjective concept~ instead 
the subject's relationship to them is as to what is objective. Be-
cause ethical life is the standpoint of truth, it must have exis-
tence [Existenz), must be actualized; the good must be actual-
ized by the ethical subject. What we have then is a movement 
of spirit in its reality. The standpoint is not that the good is not 
present; on the contrary, substance is eternally present. All that 
happens is that what is already present is brought forth. The 
spirit must be immune to the one-sidedness of subjectivity. It is 
the free will that is purified to universality. Right and disposi-
tion have completely permeated each other, [in such a way that) 
what happens should be the universal will; this its being is the 
essential disposition of the subject. The substance occurs as the 
universal actuality, and dissolves into many individuals, but in 
their disposition these individuals have returned to the universal. 
We are confronted here with two forms of right, the substance 
and its determinate existence [Dasein), the universal volition I 
84 
of all-the substantive right-and the right of individuals. Sub-
stance must be, and the individual must be; and since their roots 
intertwine, the individual subjects must be within the substance. 
The right of the individual subjects is the substantive right it-
self, in which they participate. Family right as [the right] of in-
dividuals to lead their natural life is a necessary moment, but 
only to the extent that it lies within the substance. Substanti-
ality, what is purely ethical, is die foundation. We do not have 
to regard peoples as an aggregate of individuals; on the contrary 
[it is) only the whole, the [sphere of] determinate existence, that 
has to be recognized, wherein individuals have their existence 
insofar as they are the actuality of the universal substance itself. 
s 70 
An ethical disposition on the part of the subject involves setting 
aside reflection, which is always ready to pass over from universal 
substance to the particular. It involves knowing and recognizing 
the universal element of substance, the laws, as an eternal mode of 
131 

ETHICAL LIFE 
being subsisting in and for itself and as the distinctive essence of 
self-consciousness; and it involves acting in, and being simply ori-
ented toward, its substantive vocation, which for the individual is 
both a particular sphere and the sphere of universal substance. 
In the same way the ethical disposition in relation to natural and 
contingent circumstances consists in being oriented toward the sit-
uation in question as to a mode of being from which, to the extent 
that such being involves injury to the subject, the latter abstracts 
the infinitude of its will. In this way of looking at it, as positive re-
lation to what is necessary, the subject salvages its free relation to 
the situation and to itself; and, while it may well experience natu-
ral pain, it does not regard itself as suffering wrong. 
Substantiality is essentially disposition. Insofar as this dis-
position pertains essentially to the subject, it consists in rec-
ognizing the laws; and insofar as this cognition of the laws is 
subjective knowledge, a universal element is already posited as 
inherent in it. It is essential for the ethical disposition that the 
subject be educated in this way; what one has to do, one must 
as 
do straight away without further hesitation. What is, what I must 
be, must be grasped immediately and done without more ado. 
This is where moral conceit intrudes. In the same way that it 
is one aspect of love, self-forgetfulness is also an essential as-
pect of ethical life. This constituted the character of Roman and 
Greek virtue, namely that all did straight away what was their 
duty, without moral hesitation and without the presumption of 
knowing better-the simple consciousness that the laws exist. 
This simple, undeviating, fixed orientation is a feature of the 
ethical disposition. Now individuals are assigned to a particular 
sphere in the whole substance, they have their particular sphere. 
[n their ethical attitude they will the universal, but the particu-
larity attaching to their activity-which has the universal as its 
end-means that each at his standpoint must do only what that 
standpoint requires. The whole is an organic life, in which the 
universal element is maintained only by each organ being active 
in its particular function-equipping oneself for one's particular 
sphere and, by being thus equipped, promoting the universal. 
132 

ETHICAL LIFE 
The subject also has a [detached2) attitude to contingent cir-
cumstances, insofar as it is itself external. Its life in the whole 
and its life in its particular sphere are spiritually identical. 'But 
for human beings destiny consists in becoming entangled with 
necessity. The ethical character here consists in having a straight 
and simple orientation toward circumstances, being rigidly ori-
ented toward one's situation in which the subject's freedom is 
infringed. The subject must see and judge: such are the circum-
stances, and in face of them this is what I have to do. But where 
the ethical disposition enters in is that the subject withdraws its 
will from that part of itself which is injured and makes it some-
thing external in relation to itself. All that belongs to human 
unhappiness is grounded in dependence on contingent circum-
stances. The extent to which human beings will feel the ensuing 
pain depends on the extent to which the injury involved higher 
interests for them, but they are aware that as far as their own 
inner being is concerned, these interests have the nature of con-
tingency, that it is not for them to invest their ego I in the con-
86 
tingent injury. The loss results in pain, for there is a lack of 
concordance with their needs. 
The truth is that the freedom of spirit does not reside in 
these things and that human beings do not believe they are be-
ing unjusdy treated by destiny since they withdraw their will 
from these things; what they have to do is sacrifice those as-
pects that have sustained injury. But the individual can also en-
dure wrong by demoting it to the level of mere being, [by tak-
ing the view that] wrong simply is. To linger in the feeling of 
being wronged gives rise to inaction because this feeling is con-
fined to the negative attitude. If I am not "in" the injury with my 
free being, then the injury too becomes only a particular thing, 
and the universal is salvaged. Pity is also something inessential 
here. The intuition that "this is so" is one kind of intuition, a 
positive relation to negative circumstances. Those who merely 
2. [Tr.) The Getman edicon, in an attempt co make the sentence meaningful, 
have inserted the preposition bin, whic:b usuaUy suggesn something further off or 
remote. The insertion of •detached• is our attempt co render this in English. 
133 

ETHICAL LIFE 
suffer have merely the feeling of the negative, but this fixed ori-
entation results in the subject's still having its positivity in this 
negativity. Antigone laments her destiny, and feels the injury 
deeply; but in this inconstancy of the external state she still has 
knowledge of herself.l The positive resides in the act of intuit-
ing that "it is." If one does not advance beyond saying "it shall 
not be," the individual remains at the stage of negativity that 
consists in saying "because it must be, I so will it," and force is 
denied the coercion it seeks to apply. Subjective willing, the sub-
jective disposition is the right disposition to the extent that the 
will and disposition are the universal. Now this substantiality 
has a religious aspect. 
s 71 
The ethical substance is absolute foundation. The spirit that is 
free from the particularity of subjectivity but that through subjec-
tivity has become actual as the disposition and activity of spirit, 
set apart in this way for itself and known by the subject as its sub-
stance, is the object of religious feeling, of religious intuition and 
contemplation. But the religious element [das Religiose] remains 
partly in [the sphere of] feeling and in [a state of] indeterminacy 
87 
with regard to the organic I particularization and actuality of the 
substance, and contains only contingent thoughts. In part the sub-
stance itself is limited at its various stages, and to this extent reli-
gion [is] negative toward these its aspects, or else [it] grasps their 
universal element only in its entirety. While religion can accord-
ingly be called a form of the ground of ethical life, it is no more 
than the feeling and intuition of this ground. 
In recent times several things have been made merely civil 
matters. For instance marriage has been made to depend on the 
mere arbitrariness of contract, and the root of family ties has 
been located in something arbitrary. In the same way the state 
has been regarded as stemming from the individuality of the 
3. [.Ed.) Hegel is probably referring here to Sophocles' Antigone 450-470. In 
another connection he refers in his Phenomenology of Spirit (trans. A. V. Mille.; 
Oxford, 1977) to the same passage (p. 261). Cf. Gesammelte Werke 9:236,509. 
134 

ETHICAL LIFE 
subjects. Once the freedom of individuals was made th~ sole 
ground of the state, the aim of the state became their mutual 
limitation. And since the individuality of the person was fhus 
made the basis, the state became a state based on need [Not-
staat], on coercion; for the individual subjects it became a third 
party. In opposition to this relationship of a merely civil con-
tract in the family, and in opposition to the state based on need, 
the contrary view has been advanced that it is universal spirit, 
the unity of spirit, that must constitute the [ethical] substance, 
not spirit as individual volition. 
The ethical substance is free from this particularity; individ-
uality is sublated. Spirit that is actual is the substantive spirit, 
and it is in its disposition as universal attitude that it has its 
essence, to the extent that it is set apart for itself. In relation to 
public life the substantive spirit is the peculiar spirit of the peo-
ple, the spirit that is within all, yet remains in undisturbed unity. 
In family life it is the basis of the lares [protecting deities]. Now 
religion is nothing other than the consciousness of spirit as uni-
versal, absolute spirit. Heathen religion differs from the Chris-
tian religion in that the spirits are limited spirits [by reason of] 
the transition to universal spirit. The spirit that a people wor-
ships as essential being ought not to be merely the spirit of the 
particular people in question, as with the Greeks and Romans, 
but to coalesce with the universal spirit. God is not to be rep-
resented as something otherworldly, as an ideal to be striven 
toward; in the ethical I substance God is omnipresent, is some-
ea 
thing living. This relationship characterizing religion lies in the 
[sphere of] feeling, and extends no further: it is a knowing of 
the substance, an immediate knowing, a believing, i.e., an im-
mediate knowing that the subject has its essential being in this 
substance, the feeling of the nullity of the external side of the 
subject. Religion may be a relationship of fear, in which4 the 
individual remains confined to the negative side, but the [cause 
of] trepidation resides in the fact that particular subjectivity for 
its part is the negativity of the substance in the consciousness of 
4. Ms. rrury also be rlllld: in that 
135 

ETHICAL LIFE 
nullity. Without fear there is no genuine love, for love is to feel 
the particular as of no account and to submerge it in universal 
consciousness. As actualized spirit the ethical substance particu-
larizes itself and thus becomes actual. But since religion remains 
fixed on the deity as such, particularization remains extraneous 
to the deity, and the religious side contains thoughts, reverence, 
but only thought directed to something remote.s Religion is 
essentially a mode of thinking; the element of religion is at all 
events thought, but it is only an immediate thinking, an intuiting. 
The extension of thought, in such a way that the concept 
differentiates itself as something concrete, no longer belongs to 
the aspect of religion. The [ethical] substance is a particular sub-
stance; it has different stages, e.g., family and state, and these in 
turn particularize themselves inwardly. The attitude of religion 
to such particularization is negative. What the religious sphere 
comprises is the fact of rising above particularization. If it re-
mains solely a religious sphere, it eschews all particularization; 
and if particularization is carried over into life, is made existent 
[existent], it gives rise to religious fanaticism. With this form all 
distinction of particularization disappears. Freedom and equal-
ity ought to be actual, and all ordering had the form of the neg-
ative; such was religious fury. If the religious sphere seeks to be 
the only form, without fanaticism, then we have the piety of in-
activity, content merely for human beings to love each other as 
Christians. This piety spells the disappearance of public life. So 
aa 
[it is] with the Quakers. I Nevertheless they have no choice but 
to renege on their principle of living as purely private persons 
and live in the state and engage in business. 
Religion can be called the form of the ground of ethical life, 
but this ground must pass over into existence [Existenz]. God 
would not be God if he did not become finite and know himself 
in this finite condition. Authentic actuality is to know oneself in 
one's reality. In religion it must come to consciousness that the 
true constit~tes the ground [of actuality]. Religion does involve 
S. [Tr.) The German plays on three forms of the word Denk11n, "thinking.• 
Gedanlum means "thoughts"; Andaeht, •reverem:c• or •devotion, • sugescs •think-
ing of•; and Hindenken is a thinking directed to something far off (bin). 
136 

ETHICAL LIFE 
• 
the relation of the particular to the universal, e.g., that supreme 
authority rests with God or that the individual laws derive lfom 
God. Now the aspect that one has in mind here is that these 
things have within them something divine, but as it occurs in 
the positive religions it is something false. 
S72 
The ethical substance is: 
(1) the immediate or natural ethical substance, the family [Fam-
ilie), which passes over into 
(2) civil society [biirgerliche Gesellschaft), which has initially 
as its aim the relationships and protection of individuals in their 
particular interests, but essentially it draws itself together into 
(3) a constitution of the state [Staatsverfassung], a public life 
and activity in and for the universal. 
In its immediate, natural mode the ethical substance is fam-
ily, which is based on unity of sentiment, on love. The family 
cannot remain in this immediate state; through its activity it 
comes in contact with others, who are also members of a fam-
ily. In this way there comes into being civil society, in which 
each family exists as individual. The purpose of this association 
is to protect individuals in their relationships, in their particular 
interests. The basis here is an external civil relationship; fami-
lies confront each other in business and occupational affairs. 
Concern for individuals is also useful and is thus the concern of 
all. Here the burgher [Burger) is a bourgeois.' The relationship 
[between families or individuals) is here one of civil trade, and 
this concerns the state economy and the right of jurisdiction 
and authority exercised by the police. The third stage is public 
life, I where life in and for the universal is the aim, where sub-
90 
stantive life has determinate existence, and where the individual 
exists for universal life as a public person, in other words is a 
6. ('&.) The German word for "citizen" (Bii7g17) is similar to the French bour-
g«>ii, which conveys the idea of an inhabitant of a marker town (bourg) and hence 
refers to an economic: as opposed to a political or public function; the latter is des-
ignated in French by the term eieoyen. Hegel alludes to this distinction here and in 
SS9. 
137 

ETHICAL LIFE 
citizen [Citoyen). Here it is the state that is taken as individual 
for itself, one state as over against others. 
1. The Family 
s 73 
The family has as its foundation the immediate substantiality 
of spirit, in other words self-sensing unity or love, the disposi-
tion of individual persons whereby they have their essential self-
consciousness in this unity. 
That the free will of the person occurs as an individual will is 
a subordinate standpoint. The rights that are founded on the 
family are different from the rights we dealt with in the case of 
property; their foundation is quite distinct and of another kind. 
Here we are dealing with substantive freedom and the founda-
tion is a universal will, whereas the will on which property rests 
is of a kind remote from substantive freedom. Personality, which 
is at the basis of ownership or property, is here rather dissolved. 
The family is here founded on an identity of will. This is the 
truth of the will, namely that according to itS concept it is a 
universal will. The disposition is here an essential moment, the 
moral moment, in which, however, the good itself constitutes the 
actual identity. This consciousness, or ethical life, has the shape 
of love, of the self-consciousness that one has not in oneself but 
in another, in whom one has one's own self-consciousness in 
such a way that this knowledge of the identity [of self and other] 
is the essential matter. Self-consciousness knows itself to be con-
scious of itself in the other, and is the intuiting, the feeling of this 
91 
unity. I The consequences of this family relationship will emerge 
as we consider the aspects of family life in more detail. 
s 74 
There are three aspects of the family to be considered: 
(1) The family relationship itself in its immediacy. 
(2) In terms of the external existence in which it invests itself: 
family property [Eigentum] and capital [Gut]. 
(3) The education of children and the dissolution of the family. 
138 

THE FAMILY 
The second aspect involves the process whereby the will of 
the family invests itself with external existence. This is where 
the relationship of right as such enters into play, but in a ~n­
ner subordinate to universal substantiality. The third aspect com-
prises the transition upon which the family enters, the depar-
ture of children to found new families of their own. 
A. The Family as Relationship in Its Concept 
s 75 
Because this substantiality is immediate, it implies the aspect of 
naturalness [Natilrlichkeit], of organic vitality. To this extent the 
idea is the universal in the form of species, the latter being dif-
ferentiated into natural sexes, whose particularity, however. is at 
variance with their immanent universality, the universality of the 
species, and is accordingly the drive toward self-sublation. In the 
natural state the identity of the sexes is distinct from themselves as 
natural beings, particularly as beings existing for themselves; [it is} 
a third factor that is produced, in which both sexes intuit their 
identity as a natural actuality and which itself both has the feeling 
of this unity and also, by its nature, needs help because it does not 
yet exist for itself. 
The universal exists in nature in such a way that existence 
[Existenz) is always individuality; and only the species, the in-
ner being, is the universal. Particularization is male and female, 
[the second stage) is rhe union of the sexes, and the third is what 
is produced, the product. In its immediacy the [ethical} sub-
stance is I what is living, the totality of the natural order in 
92 
general. The moment of immediacy involves setting oneself up 
in opposition. The transition from the general concept of the 
ethical to what is living has been made in such a way that the 
first stage, the natural order, exists. All we have here as yet is 
the immediate substance; subsequently this immediacy passes over 
and is sublated. At the higher standpoint we no longer have, as 
here, something merely posited. Absolute totality in fact con-
sists in this process of self-diremption. And to this extent natu-
ral, organic life is something posited. Life is the highest level 
139 

ETHICAL LIFE 
that nature can attain. What has being in and for itself only be-
comes for itself by opposing something to itself, and for it to do 
so being must first be posited. The universal does not yet exist 
in nature as universal, but only in thought; in spirit the species 
has being for itself. 
The immediate mode of the universal's existence [Existenz] is 
the difference between the sexes; this constitutes particulariza-
tion, the aspect of determinacy, of determinate existence [Da-
sein]. So we have the contradiction that this particularity is at 
variance with the species, and this contradiction is a deficiency 
for the universal; this feeling of an inner negative constitutes 
the drive [for self-sublation]. The inorganic cannot be its own 
and its other. or else it is neutralized; but what is living feels this 
deficiency, and this feeling of deficiency constitutes the drive to 
make itself the species. In its determinate existence the substan-
tive will is totality; the universal concept is the inner being, the 
species; particularization is the difference between the sexes. The 
organic is in the first place inner process. This does not belong 
here; here we are dealing only with the species. The one partic-
ular entity has the feeling of its identity in the other particu-
lar entity. In them is the drive to posit the species; there is the 
contradiction that in their determinate existence they are only 
particular beings yet have the species within them. They are re-
stricted and have their restriction within themselves, in their 
power. 
This is the necessary contradiction that belongs to the com-
plement of the concept; since the deficiency is made good by 
93 
union with the opposite, the drive, one's own I feeling, is satis-
fied. Human beings feel themselves in otherness; only in other-
ness are they conscious of their own preservation. In the natu-
ral order the unity is an existing, self-posited unity, whereas in 
the spirit this is not the case. At the standpoint of consciousness 
the concept is my concept, not distinct from me: both are iden-
tical. Actualized identity is reproduction, the result, the prod-
uct. Those who reproduce intuit their identity in their offspring, 
and their offspring have the feeling of unity; [the child has] its 
roots in the family from which it [has] sprung. In it, in the 
140 

THE FAMILY 
child, the species has attained determinate existence. Th~ germ 
of a plant contains the whole determination, the whole nature 
' 
of the plant, the leaves, flowers, and fruit according to theii•par-
ticular properties. This is ideally present in the germ. as thought. 
With this offspring the species begins; and the offspring is in 
need of help, for it has not yet posited irself in opposition to the 
external world or in the opposition between the sexes. For hu-
man beings to become what they ought to be, a major process 
of development is required. 
s 76 
The way in which this merely natural relationship is raised 
and transformed to the ethical is that the species is rationality, i.e., 
the inner unity and universality of the purely natural sexes in self-
consciousness, occurring here as the disposition of substantive 
unity; and that this love, along with the knowing and actuality 
inherent in it, is the essential element and goal. The drive and 
passion vanishes in its satisfaction, turning into this relationship it-
self; and the rational, purified through this sublation of the natural, 
subjective side, emerges as conjugal love. 
The merely natural relationship becomes immediately an eth-
ical one; this is in principle the transition from the animal to 
the ethical. The animal is species, but not species for itself; in 
nature existence [Existenz] takes the form of species. The spe-
cies becomes for the species through the death of the individual; 
but the power of the species-a power it demonstrates in the 
successive generations7-is such that of its own doing it emerges 
again as individual. The species, the inner universality, becomes 
intelligence, will, the universal knowing itself, and this is what I 
94 
being-for-self is. In self-consciousness the species is rationality 
knowing itself as universal; the sexes know universality, and this 
immediate knowing, this feeling, is love. This makes family life 
something rational and ethical. Now the aim of sexual union is 
that this love, this rationality, should take on determinate exis-
tence in the parmers' life. The drive and passion vanishes, etc. 
7. (Tr.J The ~nnan word Geschkcht can mean either "sex" or "generation. • 
141 

ETHICAL LIFE 
Love is a universal term: sometimes it means the unsatisfied 
feeling of the sexes for one another. Where this unity is not yet 
actualized, we have unsatisfied love, love as drive, as passion. 
Passion means that the subject feels the disappearance of its par-
ticular subjectivity and is gripped by a feeling of universal self-
consciousness. To love is therefore to feel the potency of nega-
tive unity and to suffer in the feeling that what ought to be-the 
feeling of extinction as a wholly separate subject and rebirth in 
the other-does not yet exist. Passion has only one object, in 
which the universal self-consciousness is bound up; being in love 
means that one is of the opinion that only through this specific 
object can [one] pass over into universality. This moment of 
particularity is based on the view that one's own particular qual-
ities must be one's starting point. It used to be otherwise, when 
parents chose spouses for their children according to their in-
sight and sense of duty, the basis being that the parents have the 
thought of duty and the insight that children must be married. 
The girl then loved the husband determined for her because he 
was to be her husband, and vice versa. Here love does not be-
gin in chance inclination, in the free choice [Willkur] of the sub-
ject, but in the thought of determination; it can be said that this 
way of doing things is the more ethical. But with us, the partic-
ular inclination contains the thought that there can be only this 
one subject with whom one can enter into matrimony. Infinite 
95 
and lofty as this feeling may be, nonetheless I only the particu-
lar interest of these two lovers is involved, and it arises only out 
of a sympathy for others. Antigone is destined for the son of 
Creon, yet it is not the interest of love that leads Creon to choose 
her, but the interest of the state. a And this love, or being in love, 
is for the most part the object of our comedies and tragedies. 
But this being in love vanishes through satisfaction, and this 
subjectivity disappears as soon as marriage comes on the scene; 
the heroes of novels become like everyone else. Animals and 
weaker [forms of] nature do not survive mating; for example 
8. [Ed.) Hegel is probably referring here to the conversation between Creon and 
Haemon in Sophoc:les' Antigone 726 ff. 
142 

THE FAMlLY 
the plant or its blossom dies off with pollination, and.;weaker 
animals too die in the satisfaction of passion. This negativity 
issues in ethicality; through the sacrifice of passion there 'arises 
platonic love. Since it is the particular personality that sacrifices 
itself in this relationship, it is it too that opposes the difficulties 
of entering into this relationship. The subject demands that its 
particular inclination, its particular free choice be satisfied, and 
it hesitates to place itself in a universal relationship. Love has 
many particular modifications, depending on its different rela· 
tionships in actuality and on the immediate personality. Platonic 
love is the intuition of the beauty of soul, and it views the mo· 
ment of transition to the sensual relationship as a debasement 
of this lofty conception. By its nature, everything negative has 
also a positive side, and it is the negacive side that results in 
the ethical relationship. The drive and passion vanish in satisfac· 
tion, and so it is from the natural drive itself that the spiritual, 
substantive relationship arises. It is precisely through the sat· 
isfaction of the drive that platonic love attains its truth. For 
example in all of Wieland's novels there is first of all platonic 
love, which is then made ridiculous as a result of being actu· 
alized.' We are told in the Bible that Adam knew his wife 
Eve [Gen. 4:1); the relationship of passion was past, and there 
emerged the relationship of conjugal love devoid of passion. I 
96 
§77 
It is also through their rationality that the two natural sexes 
acquire their intellectual and ethical significance. Their differences 
are the moments of the concept, and each has in the other the in· 
tuition of its reality. Thus the one moment is the knowledge of its 
free universality, the self<onsciousness of thought, and the willing 
of the universal, objective final end, while the other is the knowing 
9. (Ed. J Despite the general terms in which the reference is couched, the (ol· 
lowing works by Christoph Manin Wieland are in all probability chiefly relevant 
in this regard: D.,- Sieg thr N11tur ub.,- die S<bwiirmerey, oder, Die Abenteuer des 
Don Silvio von ROSIIIIIa (Ulm, 1764); Gesebiebu des Agtllhon (Frankfurt am Main 
and Leipzig, 1766-1767); and Geheimll Gesebiebu des philosophiseben Peregrinus 
Proteus (Weimar, 1788-1789). 
[43 

ETHICAL LIFE 
and willing of subjective individuality. In the natural relationship 
the former is therefore the powerful, actuating element in relation 
to the latter, which, as confining itself within subjectivity, is the re-
ceptive, submissive, abstractly universal element, like matter. The 
substantive life of the man is accordingly in the state; what per-
tains to natural needs, sensibility, and the particularity of life he 
finds in the family, in which the woman has her substantive life and 
in which her vocation lies. 
The sexes are naturally different, but this difference is re-
constructed within them by virtue of their rationality. Each sex 
contains both moments, but developed in different directions. In 
their relationship to each other, in being opposed in this way, 
both together constitute the whole; each has in the other the in-
tuition of its reality. In general the man is the knowledge of free 
universality; his character is such that it is his element, his voca-
tion, tQ bring forth what is rational. To the woman belongs the 
moment of the individuality of immediate life. At one time it 
was doubted whether the female sex formed part of the human 
race. Woman is a free being for herself, but the distinction be-
tween woman and man is presented by experience. 
Man is made for the universal interest, disregarding subjec-
tivity; to him belongs living and acting in the state, the realm of 
science and art. In nature a chance event may occur, a chance 
deviation from the essential vocation [of the sexes). There have 
been women who applied themselves to the sciences, but they 
never penetrated deeply or made any discoveries; they can pro-
duce what is pleasing in art, but its ideal, plastic element is be-
yond the scope of their action. If women play a major role in a 
97 
state, this is a I sign that the state is in its decline, for they intro-
duce the subjectivity of interests. Women are oriented toward 
subjective individuality; their principal sphere of action is the 
family, the lares [protecting deities) and hestia [goddess of the 
hearth] are their concern. The man has within himself the abso-
lutely substantive, the force, might, and form of activity. As the 
abstractly universal, whose basis is the interest of particularity, 
the woman does not have substantive but only abstract univer-
144 

THE FAMILY 
sality; she is the matter, the receptive material. The mari. must 
live in the State and seek tO promote universal ends. The woman 
is responsible for the [other] side of substantive life, name!~ the 
family; the man only turns to the family to meet his substantive 
needs. The woman must supply the man with his needs, and 
the man must find mental refreshment [ Gemut] from his wife 
within the family so that, reinvigorated, he may rejoin the quest 
to further the universal. Only the imagination [Einbildung], the 
direct result of which, however, is to give a false image [Verbild-
ung] of the two sexes, can tear them away from their [proper] 
vocation. 
s 78 
Ma"iage is the formal union of two persons of differing sex, 
brought to public recognition and so acquiring the status of a legal 
relationship vis-a-vis others. It is a union by virtue of which they 
bind themselves to make one person in love and mutual trust and 
to recognize this substantive unity as their essential vocation and 
duty. While it is true that such unity rests essentially on their dis-
position, it is at the same time, as a rational, universal unity, a bond 
raised above the contingency of passion and of particular predi-
lection, and it encompasses the different aspects of a particular 
determinate existence. 
By means of marriage the union of the sexes becomes a legal 
relationship, entered into publicly, and this can be done in the 
state before either a religious or a secular authority. It is of the 
nature of the legal relationship that it must be protected against 
others in this relationship. But insofar as this relationship rests 
on the inner I disposition, the authorities can give [it) legal pro-
ee 
tection only to the extent that it possesses external moments. 
Trust is the awareness that my interest is the other party's own 
interest and duty. When two people marry, it is their common 
will to make one person; the wife loses her name and no longer 
belongs to her family. A disposition in the sense of a particular 
and passionate predilection is excluded here, because the union 
is a universal union, a union for the duration of life. To the 
145 

ETHICAL LIFE 
extent that an estrangement is only partial, only momentary, 
this does not affect the relationship as a whole, does not annul 
the universality of the relationship. It is only when the estrange-
ment affects the general disposition that the whole relationship 
is annulled or can be annulled by the authorities. The underly-
ing substantive unity is a divine, essentially substantive relation-
ship, which in its determinate existence has various aspects. A 
particular aspect, such as the procreation of children, does not 
constitute its end, as in the case of animals, where perpetuation 
of the species is the highest end. In concubinage, the memory of 
the sexual relationship is predominant, whereas in marriage the 
principal element is unity. In the same way the mutuum adjuto-
rium [reciprocity of assistance] is only a particular end. So it is 
possible for people to marry even if one of them can no longer 
have children. The marriage union unites the different aspects 
of a particular determinate existence, and no single aspect is an 
absolute end on its own account. 
s 79 
Marriage is indeed based on the particular consent of the two 
parties, but this does not make it a contract properly speaking, a 
civil contract, because the parties do not give up only their partic-
ular right to individual objects. On the contrary, the whole imme-
diate personality is mutually sublated and enters into union, which 
for this very reason comprises the essential moment of the [mari-
tal] disposition. 
Marriage is not a contract properly speaking, not a civil con-
tract. It has been regarded as an improvement that marriage 
99 
is currently I viewed as a civil contract and [has been] wrested 
away from the church. Marriage can be an ecclesiastical con-
tract to the extent that it is an ethical relationship in which the 
individual partners give up their arbitrary will and make unity, 
which is an ethical and thus religious quality, their end. Con-
tracts regarding the actual property of the spouses do not affect 
the marriage itself. The authority whose guarantee is needed for 
the marriage may indeed be the ecclesiastical authority, though 
146 

THE FAMILY 
this is not necessarily so; it may also be the authority df the 
state qua ethical State. For example in France a family court 
constituting an ethical authority was ordained as court in ni~i­
tal cases. 
Kant presents marriage in a shameful, ugly manner; he says 
that marriage is a contract whereby each of the spouses gives 
his or her sexual parts to the other to use.to In this contract 
human beings make themselves a thing, though Kant believes 
that personality is restored to both by virtue of the fact that 
making oneself a thing is reciprocal. He goes on to say that to 
acquire a limb or member of a human being is to acquire the 
whole person.ll If one spouse leaves the other, the fact that 
the marriage is publicly recognized means that the external au-
thority can decide in regard to this external action, for this does 
not extend to the disposition. Moreover, the relationship is on a 
higher plane than mere predilection, and the fact of leaving one's 
spouse in no way implies the total alienation of the spouse's dis-
position. But Kant is wrong in saying that the other spouse has 
the right to lay claim to the absconding spouse as a thing.u It 
is the same with abandoning some piece of mental or physical 
labor for the other spouse. [This] always involves the particu-
larity of work and limitation of time; what I surrender is only 
a particular right, the subsumption of a particular thing under 
my will. But what enters into the marriage relationship is the 
whole personality; the parties mutually surrender themselves as 
10. [&/.] Hegel is here referring to Kant's Rechtslehre, p. 107 CS 24). Cf. Kant, 
Schri{ten 6:277-278. 
11. [&/.] Hegel is here referring, in part almost verbatim, to Kant's Rechts-
lehre, pp. 108-109 (S 25): ~[The) natural use that one sex makes of the sexual or-
gans of the other is an enjoyment for which one party surrenders itself to the other. 
In this act persons make themselves into things, which conflicts with their human 
rights in regard to their own penon. The sole condition under which this is pos-
sible is that, in one person's being acquired by the other (as it were as a thing), the 
latter in reciprocal fashion acquires the former; for in this way each regains himself 
and reestablishes his personaliry. But to acquire one of the limbs of a person is to 
acquire his entire person •••• • Cf. Kant, Schriften 6:278. 
12. [.Ed.J Kant, Rechtslehre, p. 108 IS 25). Cf. Kant, Schri(tm 6:278. 
147 

ETHICAL LIFE 
a whole. The man retains for himself the universal side, what 
penains to activity for the rational universal. 
100 
In the field of right the disposition I is superfluous; it makes 
no difference what my disposition is when I act, whereas in mar-
riage the disposition itself is an absolute moment. The question 
of what authority is the guarantor of the marriage has been dis-
cussed, but it is a matter for the constitution of the state whether 
the guarantee is the responsibility of the ethical state, acting 
through its official agencies, or of the church. 
s 80 
In essence marriage is monogamous because it is only between 
two persons of different sex that this specific relationship of in-
wardness can occur. Any other number distorts it, because it is in-
herent in the very concept of this union that one enters it as an im-
mediate person, in exclusive individuality. Moreover because the 
disposition is an essential moment-the foundation of marriage-
there can be as little compulsion to enter into marriage as there 
can be of any other positive bond capable of holding it together 
when there is total revulsion and hostility of disposition. A third, 
ethical authority is necessary, however, panty to counter mere opin-
ion about such a disposition and the detailed circumstances com-
prising it, panly to distinguish such circumstances from total es-
trangement, and [finally] to take official notice of total estrangement 
where it has occurred in order to pronounce a divorce. 
The third point, that of a ban on marriage on the count of 
consanguinity, belongs to the third moment, that of the dissolu-
tion of marriage. It has been held that monogamy, like marriage 
itself, could not be justified on the basis of the natural right that 
obtains at the natural standpoint.U It is only what pertains to 
freedom that provides the basis for marriage. There is in prin-
ciple no distinction between bigamy and polygamy, in that plu-
13. [Ed.} Hegel is possibly referring here to Kant's Redttslmre, pp. 109-110 
IS 26). Cf. Kant, Sehriftm 6:278-279. He is possibly also thinking of Montes· 
quieu's De J•estmt tks lois, book 16, dlap. 4, pp. 352-353. Cf. Moncesquieu, a:,.,es 
completes, p. Slt. 
148 

TH£ FAMILY 
rality knows no limit. The natural ratio of male to female bjtths 
has [also) been taken as a basis; but these natural data do,not 
affect rationality-this is one of the chance circumstances t~t 
manifest themselves in the state. (It was in fact found that there 
were more marriageable persons of female gender.) I Because in 
101 
marriage the immediate personality is given up and unity enters 
on the scene, this unity is not possible in polygamy, particularly 
[since) the two or more husbands or wives of a marriage part-
ner cannot enter into unity with one another, or be married to 
one another. If the husband has several wives, the wife does not 
attain to her rights, and the marriage does not become a gen· 
uinely ethical relationship, but remains at the natural stand-
point. In India women are capable of having children only from 
twelve to twenty years of age. 
But this very disparity of the two sexes in creating and pro-
creating is a proof that the procreation of children cannot be the 
essential, sole end of marriage. Disposition is an essential fea-
ture of marriage, which rests on the voluntary consent of both 
parties so that, even if the parents are opposed, the laws rec-
ognize the will of the parties as sufficient. The opposition of 
the parents cannot be an absolute obstacle. The more cultivated 
a people is, the wider the sphere assigned to the purely private 
disposition, etc. There may be estrangement in the marriage; 
the spouses may not have known each other sufficiently. Mar-
riage ought in principle to be indissoluble, for it ought not to 
rest on the passion of an instant from which estrangement could 
arise. In any event a third authority, an ethical authority, is 
needed to act in the case of disputes between spouses. It is often 
the case that relatives themselves seek to settle such disputes. 
The authority may be an ecclesiastical or secular court. But 
since it is customs that constitute the essential moment of mar-
riage, it is principally customs that such courts must bear in 
mind. There would be nothing more desirable than that mar· 
riage should be declared inviolable and that the spouses should 
live for each other in mutual relationship. When the question 
was under discussion in France the view was expressed that it 
was ridiculous for a husband to complain of his wife's infidelity, 
149 

ETHICAL LIFE 
particularly since it was shameful for him not to have managed 
102 
to prevent it. Customs make laws and laws make customs. I 
B. Family Property and Capital 
s 81 
As family property, property acquires the character of a posses-
sion that is independent of contingencies and is secure and endur-
ing, namely, capital [Gut].14 It is only with the family that continu-
ous income becomes requisite and that the self-interestedness of 
desires becomes a communally beneficial concern for something 
held in common, becomes a duty. 
Family possessions are something universal, to be used to 
care for the whole. They are independent of contingencies and 
time. For the family is something enduring, something lasting, so 
its possessions also do not depend on individual circumstances. 
Property relates to the legal aspect of possession; the family re-
quires to have capital, lasting possessions and income. What 
individuals do they do not do for themselves, so it is not a mat-
ter of self-interestedness, directed to satisfying individual needs, 
but rather each is concerned for something universal. 
s 82 
The husband is the head of the family and has to represent it 
externally to the extent that it exists as a legal person in relation 
to others. It is also for him to control and administer the family 
capital; but this capital is common property, and no member of 
the immediate family has particular property. 
To the extent that the family has property, it enters into a re-
14. [Tr.) Gut here means the goods, possessions, wealth, resources, estate 
owned by a family. As used by Hegel, it is a term related to but distinct from 
Eigentum ("property") and Besitz ("possession"), and funttions as a synonym for 
Vermogen ("resourtes," "estate"). In the published edition of the Philosophy of 
Right (1821), Vermilgen is used in the corresponding paragraph (§ 170). In the 
Heidelberg lettures, Hegel uses several tenns meaning "apiral": Gut, Fond, Kapi-
tal (cf. S 11 8). 
tSO 

THE FAMILY 
lationship to other persons, a legal relationship. In this relation-
ship the husband's role is to represent the family, while the Wife's 
essential activity is inside the home. 
\ 
s 83 
With the husband's authority over the family property, an au· 
thority that includes only the ethical duty to conserve it and to 
care for the family's subsistence, the communal nature of property 
I and the right that all members have to it come into conflict. This 
103 
is the reason for marriage settlements between spouses that would 
otherwise be invalid, and for arrangements to secure, or attempt 
to secure, the family property in some other way inconsistent with 
the free ownership of property (which by nature is a thing, not an 
item of capital} and with the changing character of external exis· 
tence in general. Something universal is therefore required in which 
the conflict is resolved in both its legal and its economic aspects, 
as well as detailed provisions governing among other things the 
family's capacity to inherit property in light of civic interests and 
dependent on recognition by the state. 
The conflict that arises here is as follows. Family property is 
supposed to be something solid, lasting, universal, for here we 
are considering an ethical aspect where whim no longer has any 
place, since [it] is the property of the family, of an ethical, es· 
sential, inner whole. As head of the family the husband is nec· 
essarily responsible for the control and administration of the 
estate [Vermogen]-and the conflict lies in the fact that he has 
the ethical duty to preserve and increase the family property, 
but also has the right of control over it, whereas all other mem-
bers of the family should not have any rights over against him, 
who is its head. 
Many institutions in the different nations are concerned with 
the enduring character of family capital. But the true relation· 
ship is one of common ownership: the spouses may not own 
particular property as panicular individuals. In marriage settle· 
ments the husband secures to the wife certain property which 
remains hers even after his death, and in this way the wife's 
151 

ETHICAL LIFE 
property is preserved for the family and is safeguarded against 
all contingencies and the dangers to which the husband is ex-
posed by the requirement to earn a living for the family and by 
his freedom to act as he chooses. These contracts have often, 
however, had the peculiarity that the wife continued to be re-
garded as still remaining in her [former] family, and if she died 
without children her estate reverted to her family. But this is 
wrong, for the new bond of marriage is not seen as what is 
alone essential. When the Israelites conquered Canaan, each fam-
104 
ily received its own plot of land, and even if it sold I or mort-
gaged it, etc., after forty-nine years, in the so-called jubilee year, 
it got it back free.JS These measures to confer an enduring char-
acter on family property are in conflict with the free ownership 
of property in general, as an essential corollary of the concept 
of full ownership. From the point of view of political economy, 
howev~r. it was found that landed property in the hands of pri-
vate owners was better cultivated than property that the person 
concerned tends only for a community and in which he has not 
the same interest as in what he owns freehold. A further factor 
is that the members of families are glebae adscripti [assigned 
to a plot of land], and usually the only reason why communal 
ownership holds them together is that this is inherent in the 
nature of this relationship. 
In general terms family capital constitutes an indestructible 
stem, but it is contrary to the nature of the case to form so solid 
a relationship from something external. Civil society as such, 
however, is the essential, ethically abiding soil in regard to which 
each can gain a portion for himself; and here there comes into 
play the system wherein all labor for the benefit of all, each par-
ticipating as his own capability and aptitudes permit. This con-
flict, i.e., its ethical aspect, is thus resolved by the state. The 
state must see to it that the family is given the right that the 
husband should use his aptitudes for the benefit of the family, 
so the state is fully entitled to take charge of the family estate if 
15. [Ed.] For the •jubilee year• and its associated a~Stoms see Leviticus 25: 
8-34. 
152 

THE. FAMILY 
the husband is a spendthrift. H the family property is ruin~ by 
chance or misfortune, the state, as universal entity, also has-the 
duty to maintain the panicular individual members of the f~­
ily. On the political plane many different nations have ensured 
[the permanence of) family property by providing that spouses 
who have children could not make testamentary dispositions 
such as would prove ruinous to the family property. The right 
of primogeniture can also be introduced in the interests of the 
constitution where it is the intention of the constitution to have 
an aristocracy. The conflict consists in the fact that no single 
member of the family has an exclusive particular right to family 
property, while the husband as head of the fami1y must have 
the right of control. I 
tos 
s 84 
The common ownership of family property forms the basis for 
the right of inheritance, which is not an acquisition of alien prop-
erty or property that no longer has any owner, but the coming into 
one's right of control or distinctive possession of capital that is 
essentially owned in common-a process that becomes more and 
more indeterminate as the degree of kinship becomes more remote. 
The doctrine of inheritance cannot therefore be dealt with 
under the acquisition of property. By vinue of the supposition 
that the members of the family were closest to the deceased, it 
might be said that, in order to obviate the inconveniences of the 
seizure of an estate that as a result of death had become res nul-
lius (owned by no one), it can be assumed that the family mem-
bers would normally seize [it); and it was consequently handed 
over to them. This is Fichte's conclusion.l' But according to the 
principles we have laid down, the situation is different. In di-
viding the inheritance regard must be had to degrees of kinship. 
In the case of more distant relatives there can be the right to 
16. [Ed.) Ficbte, Beitrag, pp. 147 ff. Cf. Ficbte, Gesamtausgabe 1:274-275. See 
also johann Gottlieb Fichte, Gnuullage du Ni#Urrechts 1111ch Principien tin Wis-
smsehll{tslehre, Zweiur Theil, oder An~ 
Naturrecht (Jena and Leipzic, 
1797), pp. 92 ff. Cf. F"achte, G~ 
4:57. 
153 

ETHICAL LIFE 
bequeath property by will, whereas children must receive their 
obligatory share. In many states the state inherited if there were 
no close relatives. One aspect of this is the taxes that can be im-
posed on an entailed estate. It is also the case that the more dis-
tant the relationship, the less do these distant relatives have this 
definite right to common ownership of the family estate. When 
the heirs are children, however, they are exempt from this estate 
duty. Equality of inheritance for relatives of like degree is the 
immediate relationship on which the division of the inheritance 
must rest. 
But there are also other ends that states have pursued in re-
gard to the transfer of property. For instance with more primi-
tive peoples the possession of property was what ensured the 
preservation of the family. Under ancient Roman law the goods 
of one family could not pass to another family: the sui heredes 
[one's own heirs] and agnates inherited before the cognates, 
and the wife's estate reverted to her former family and did not 
106 
pass to her children; I nor did the mother inherit the estate of the 
children. Children had no property of their own. H there were 
no agnates, the estate passed to members of the same gens [clan], 
though later the praetor called on cognates and agnates together. 
But with the Romans the right to bequeath property by will was 
carried too far; they could disinherit their children. This is also 
the basis for the legacy-hunting that Juvenal and others took 
as the subject matter for their satires.t7 The right to bequeath 
property itself also explains the existence of a distasteful rela-
tionship between the testator and those who have hopes of the 
inheritance and seek to obtain it by servility. This is the origin 
of the Lex Voconia, which debars women from being made 
heirs so that too large an estate should not remain in their hands. 
Family ties, which were the foundation of the Roman law of 
inheritance, became looser and looser. The equal distribution of 
property led to the rule that daughters could not inherit, in or-
17. [.Ed.l Sec in this regard Juvenal's Satires 1.1.37-41, 1.4.18-19, 4.12.94 ff., 
S.16.S4-S6. Also in his l~ures on aesthetics Hegel deals with Juvenal and Pcrsius 
only in the form of general references. Cf. Wuke 1012:118. 
154 

THE FAMILY 
der that they should not adjoin a large estate of their own to; that 
of their husbands. From this [consideration originate) several 
laws of the Greeks, who took steps to prevent the unequal dis-
tribution of property as a prime reason for the decline of a re-
public. In Athens there were hard and fast provisions governing 
dowries, and in Sparta the fact that most landed estates were in 
the possession of women brought ruin to the state. 
But the equal distribution of an estate can remain no more 
than a desideratum since the size of an estate is the affair of 
chance. This is why modem states allow wealth to accumulate 
without restraint and have institutions to care for the lower 
classes. 
C. The Education of Children 
and the Dissolution of the Family 
s 85 
Children have the right to be maintained and educated out of 
the communal family property. The parents' right to their children's 
services is based upon and restricted to the common task of look· 
ing after the family and education generally. Similarly the parents' 
right I over their children in regard to their freedom and life is re-
101 
stricted to the end in view, namely to discipline and educate them. 
In accord with the basic [family) relationship, the purpose of pun-
ishment is here essentially moral in nature, not a matter of justice 
but of the improvement and deterrence of a freedom that is still in 
the toils of nature. 
Children are an element in the family, but their aim is to 
leave it. Children belong to the family as a whole, so have the 
right to call on the family estate for their needs and their educa-
tion [Erziehung). And should the parents refuse to do this for 
their children, the state must intervene in order to maintain and 
enforce this right. It must not be the parents' aim merely to de-
rive benefit from their children's labors; the state has in conse-
quence a duty to protect children. For example in England six-
year-old children are obliged to sweep narrow chimneys, and 
lSS 

ETHICAL LIFE 
it is the same in manufacturing towns in England where young 
children have to go out to work and only on Sundays is any-
thing done for their education. Here the state has an absolute 
duty to ensure that children are educated. 
The services children render within the family also must not 
conflict with their education. Children must be accustomed to 
obey and must be compelled to renounce at an early stage in 
their conduct subjective capriciousness and whim. Children must 
be trained [gebildet] and educated; this is the rational basis un-
derlying the relationship. According to Kant, children form part 
of the home, so when they run away their parents have the 
right to seize them as things.•• Among the Romans the fathers• 
power over their children extended to their life and liberty; they 
could punish their children as judges. But the judge is, as such, 
a universal person and must prosecute the right without regard 
to the individual's welfare; by contrast the father must be con-
cerned with the welfare of his children, and this is a moral as-
pect. Parents may tend on the contrary to be harder on their 
children than the judge in that they may be under much greater 
108 
provocation; I for they see themselves in their children, and 
there is often a sense of personal injury, whereas with the judge 
there is no question of any sense of injury being involved. For 
this reason parents are very often less effective at instructing 
their children than teachers from outside the family. 
Children do not yet have actual free will, they are not yet 
persons; they are consequently ruled by their parents and made 
persons, educated. The relationship between parents and chil-
dren is the bond of love, so a father cannot make his child a 
slave or kill it as happened with the ancient Romans. Otherwise 
the relationship is merely a heartless, external bond, not an eth-
ical bond assuming a religious form; it is no more than a super-
stition, and spirit is no longer immanent within it. The parents' 
authority is restricted to the aim of having a disciplined home 
and educating the children; the sole purpose of punishments is 
the moral one of improvement. Deterrence can have an effect 
18. [.Ed.) Kant, R.ebtslebre, p. ttS IS 29). Cf. Kant, Scbriften 6:282. 
1S6 

THE FAMILY 
on the natural side because children are still, with their. free-
dom, in the toils of nature. So deterrence plays an essential role 
here. For the educator, the child exists as a concrete objeelt on 
whose disposition the educator has to work. 
s 86 
In regard to the family relationship, the aim of education is in 
general to raise children out of natural immediacy, in which they 
find themselves originally, to independence and free personality, 
and so enable them to leave the family, the substantive natural 
unity of which is thus dissolved. 
The aim of education is to subjugate the natural, immediate 
aspect and bring into prominence the aspect of self-determination 
or freedom. Spirit consists only in making itself what it is 
through its immediate activity. Human beings can only become 
free through the negativity involved in sublating natural life. Dis-
cipline I must begin with obedience, for one who has not learned 
1011 
to serve cannot rule; the entire capriciousness of children must 
be sublated. Spirit must come to the consciousness of its nega-
tivity. The child must come to view the free personality of the 
older members of the family as its own and submit to their will. 
The child has the proper feeling of its dependence and obeys 
the rational personality of its parents, to whom it is bound by 
love. What sets children on the upward path is their impulse to 
grow or mature, dissatisfaction with their present self. 
According to Montesquieu there are, unhappily, three kinds 
of education human beings undergo, from one's parents, [from 
one's) teachers and instructors, and from the world; and the 
education one receives from the world, fitting one as a citi· 
zen, stands in contrast to the other two kinds.!' The first kind, 
education by one's parents, is charaCterized by love, trust, and 
obedience; parents must concern themselves with their children, 
whether they are good or bad. This kind of education does not 
depend on the moral worth of the child, whose status is still 
19. [Ed.) Montc:squieu, De /'esprit des lois, book 4, chap. 4, p. 45. Cf. Montes-
quieu, CEu11res completes, p. 266. 
157 

ETHICAL LIFE 
that of a child only. At school the child is judged ac:c:ording to 
what it is, ac:c:ording to its deserts; here the aspect of merit does 
come partly into play. In the world, however, justice c:omes into 
play; human beings are of value not merely because they are, 
but through their merits. But the commonwealth also has the 
right to pay heed to the education of children. 
The character of the parents and the charac:ter of the world 
both play a principal role. A distinction has often been drawn 
between c:ultivation [Bildung] of the heart and c:ultivation of the 
intellect, but to the extent that both constitute true educ:ation 
(not formal educ:ation), they are interconnected. Of necessity 
children exist at first essentially in the sphere of love, of the 
family; it is dangerous to remove c:hildren even from parents who 
have a bad influence on them, for even bad parents love their 
children, and in this feeling the children must necessarily grow 
stronger. The initial education of children c:omes essentially from 
the charac:ter of the parents; it is this that draws them into the 
actual world. But this does not mean that children acquire pre-
110 
cisely I the character of their parents: for instance, a very indus-
trious mother may bring up lazy daughters, or a violent father 
may by his violence bring up timid sons. Morally religious par-
ents can make their children sick of the moral commandments 
bec:ause the children get the feeling of not acting from them-
selves. The character of the world colors the child's every repre-
sentation of the positive or negative value of things. All of us 
are children of our time; it is only those who follow wholly the 
spirit of their age that attain greatness in their time. It is true 
that high-minded teachers can achieve a great deal with chil-
dren, but it is a mistake to do as Pestalozzi and others have 
done and withdraw children from the world and educate them 
in such a way as to give them [only] their own interests.2.0This 
kind of education makes good private persons but not good cit· 
izens. It is by sensing higher aims in their parents that children 
become inwardly dissatisfied [with their present level]. For ex· 
20. [Ed.] In this very generally worded reference criticizing and apparently 
reinterpreting the Swiss educator Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi, Hegel is probably 
158 

THE FAMILY 
ample they are taught to make cardboard boxes, and since those 
teaching them pay a great deal of regard to the good worlCman-
~ 
ship of the boxes, the children believe they are thereby attaihing 
a higher level of interests since they see their teachers very inter-
ested in their work. Once children leave the parental home for 
school, the principle that comes into play is no longer that of 
immediate validity but of merit. Now the aim of education is 
for children to become independent persons and pass over from 
the sphere of love and obedience into that of free personality. 
For the members of the family form only one whole. This is the 
basis for the transition from the family to civil society. 
But we still have to consider the further aspect that the 
founding of new families, which enters on the scene with the 
emergence of free personality, does not take place within blood 
relationships. The aim of education is negative in relation to the 
immersion of freedom in nature. The dissolution of the family 
has two aspects: (1) that those who have left the family them-
selves reenter the family, and (2) so form other families for 
themselves. I 
111 
s 87 
One specific feature of the dissolution of the family is that the 
natural unity, the blood relationship, endures merely as ethical 
love, and that those [who] are so related by nature for that very 
reason introduce mutual separation, avoid entering into a marital 
relationship with each other, and when entering upon marriage 
take as their point of departure natural nonrelatedness. 
It has been maintained that marriage between blood relatives 
is not forbidden by nature; however, most peoples find it repug-
nant. The rational basis of this feeling has been indicated in the 
above paragraph. For one thing, it is in accord with nature, 
since otherwise the race degenerateS. But it is already inherent 
in rationality itself that the previous unity within the family 
referring to his Lienhard uml Gertrud (4 vols., Basel, 1781-1789), and specifi.::ally 
the volllll\e Wie Gertrud ihre Kinder lehrt (Bern and Zurich. 1801). But possibly he 
is also referring to Pestalozzi's practical activity in the children's homes and educa-
tional institutions he founded, especially the one in Yverdon. 
1S9 

ETHICAL LIFE 
should be sublated and that poles of the same name repel each 
other-those things that are already identical repel each other-
and only those who arc not of the same name attract each other. 
All strength, all energy rests on the opposition from which unity 
arises. MontcSquieu adduces the fact of having previously lived 
together as the ground for keeping a sense of shame among 
members of a family;11 but marriage has after all an ethical sig-
nificance, while the sense of shame is in fact based on this mu-
tual avoidance which is incumbent on blood relatives. Love be-
tween brothers and sisters must remain as an ethical feeling. A 
sister cherishes in more inward fashion love for her brother, 
whose action reaches out into the world. Antigone indicates 
the reason why, in order to pay the last honors to her brother, 
she risked her life for love of him: she would not have exposed 
herself to death for her children's or her husband's sake because 
she could get another husband and other children, but never 
another brothcr.n What makes our tragedies so lifeless is the 
chance nature of the object that is loved. But with Antigone what 
happens is necessary: she is so firmly attached to this original 
112 
bond of her family. I 
s 88 
The family disintegrates in natural fashion into a plurality of 
families whose reciprocal conduct is governed by their freedom as 
independent persons. Based on the substantive unity of the family, 
their individuality remains at the same time contained within the 
principle of universality-even if initially, by virtue of its separa-
tion from that of individuality, this principle is one of formal uni-
versality. This reflexive relationship of the two principles consti-
tutes civil society [burgerliche Gesellschaft]. 
In the case of the family, the universality is absorbed by one 
member. The principle of universality [of the one member] and 
the principle of universality [of the family] confront each other 
21. [Ed.) Montesquieu, De I' esprit des lois, book 26, chap. 14, pp. 142 ff. Cf. 
MonresquittU, <EullrtiS eomplitu, pp. 763 ff. 
22. [.Ed.) See Sophocles, Antigone 905-911. 
160 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
[as independent principles]. The fact that it is independent ~cans 
that the universality is not an essential universality. One f~ly 
grows into many families, and once the many families for~ a 
people [Yolk], the patriarchal aspect of the families [in originat-
ing] from one family disappears. The Jewish people originated 
from one family. It also happens, however, that many scattered 
families may be brought together to form one people, for in-
stance by a conqueror. 
2. Civil Society 
s 89 
The more precise concrete characteristic of universality in civil 
society is that the subsistence and welfare of individuals is condi-
tioned by and interwoven with the subsistence and welfare of all 
other individuals. This communal system provides individuals with 
the framework of their existence [Existenz] and with security both 
externally and in regard to right. So civil society is in the first place 
the external state or the state as the understanding envisages it [Ver-
standesstaatJ, since universality does not as such take the form of 
purpose in and for itself, but of means for the existence [Existenz] 
and preservation of single individuals-the state based on need 
[Notstaat]-because the main purpose is to secure the needs [Be-
durfnisse)Z3 [of individuals). 
Here the burghers are bourgeois, not citoyens.241 Individuals 
113 
have their own welfare as their purpose, they are persons gov-
erned by right, and the moment of right emerges in a universal 
form. But the individual's welfare and subsistence are condi-
tioned by the welfare and preservation of all. Individuals care 
only for themselves, have only themselves as purpose, but they 
cannot care for themselves without caring for all and without 
all caring for them. With their own selfish purposes they also 
23. [Tr.) In this and the following paragraphs, Hegel uses two closely related 
terms: BeJilrfnjs(se), which we tranSiare as •neec~• or •needs," and Not, translated 
as "need" or "necessity. • 
24. !Tr.) See above, S 72, n. 6. 
161 

ETHICAL LIFE 
labor at the same time for others. Here everything, including all 
acquisition of property, rests on contract. Every product is a 
product of many others; every individual product that satisfies 
my needs presupposes this chain of production. All work in con· 
fidence that their work will be used. Here is the sphere of the 
mediation involved in the fact that the individual's purpose also 
has universality as one of its aspects. But here we do not yet 
have life within the universal for the universal. Here the purpose 
is the subsistence and right of the individual. The universality 
that is in question here is only abstract universality, a universal· 
ity that is only means, so that this is the state as the under· 
standing envisages it. 
The purpose of acquiring rights is to satisfy one's needs; the 
protection and safeguarding of property in particular is the pur· 
pose of the state based on need. The unity of the family has frag· 
mented, the ethical relationship of the family has dissolved, and 
the state based on need is not an ethical state. The family is 
something substantive and must raise itself to the being in and 
for self of ethical life by transcending the antithesis. The anti-
thetical stage of the family is the state based on need, or ab-
stract universality. Here individuals as independent agents have 
to see to their needs in one-sided fashion; these needs constitute 
necessity, and this necessity finds satisfaction only in the univer-
sal context. 
s 90 
This sphere, in which human beings come on the scene as the 
concrete totality of their particularity and needs and have their 
particularity as their purpose, is the necessary moment of differ-
ence-the moment in which particular subjectivity, freedom of 
choice, arbitrary activity, and all the contingency attaching to na-
114 
ture I and happiness have their full play. The needs in question are 
not solely the immediate natural needs of animal life; nor are they 
the needs of the intelligence as it occurs in ethical life and scientific 
knowledge, the intelligence that has being in and for itself and has 
returned to itself from the sphere of difference and mediation. They 
are instead the former needs raising themselves to universality, and 
162 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
the needs of the ethico-scientific intelligence shining through into 
the particulat. In this sphere spirit is accordingly, in its format~ uni-
versality and honesty, implicated in necessity and inoons~cy 
with itself. 
By "human being" [Mensch] we mean the concrete totality 
of our many energies. Issued from the substantive universality, 
human beings are this universality, but they have here for their 
purpose particularity. This is the moment of fragmentation, out 
of which ethical life comes to itself. It is by differentiating itself 
inwardly and then completing itself, making itself whole, for it-
self, that the idea is strengthened. And the absolute force of the 
idea consists in maintaining itself in the sphere of difference 
and returning to itself from the absolute loss of its essence; in 
their antithesis [by contrast] natural things perish. At the stage 
we are here dealing with, all the contingency attaching to na-
ture and happiness has full play. In terms of existence {&is-
tenz] the sphere of the state based on need is subsequent to the 
sphere of ethical life. The formal aspects of ethical life emerge 
later than the ethical totality itself. 
Insofar as we are concerned with conceiving what is true, 
namely the ethical idea, the concept is what is concrete. What is 
primary and immediate is not yet in its truth. At the stage we 
have here, particular subjectivity is the purpose. The Christian 
principle is that each individual, as individual, is an infinite end. 
With the Oriental principle the individual disappears and is only 
an accident of the monarch or the priests. No state can subsist 
without the ends of universality, whereas in our modern states 
it is the viewpoint of subjectivity that is predominant, and much 
attention is paid to the welfare of the individual. Whenever this 
principle comes into play, the opposing aspect also manifests it-
self: in Athens, for instance, Diogenes and the Cynics arose to 
berate the proliferation of needs and pleasures and the resulting 
degeneration, I and to call people back to natural life, to the state 
11s 
of nature;2s it was the same in Rome with Persius and JuvenaJ.26 
2S. (Ed.] See Hegel's treatment of Diogenes of Sinope and the later Cynics in 
his Lectures on the History of Philosophy, trans. E. S. Haldane and H. S. Simson, 
163 

ITHICAL LIFE 
Christ called on his followers to renounce riches, and so did 
Diogcnes of Sinopc. Tacitus and Rousseau call for both outer 
and inner simplicityP But a people can no more be made up of 
Cynics than of Quakers. This simplicity they visualized is merely 
a turning one's back on the prevailing level of culture, and the 
distribution of one's goods to the poor is a limited matter, for 
if this is done there arc no longer any poor. It is necessary not 
[only] to remain in this sphere but also to accept the need for 
transition into it. It is necessary that a people should pass over 
from the simple state of nature into the proliferation of needs; 
but it is incumbent on human beings to raise themselves above 
this state of nature. Tacitus sees it as an expedient that Agricola 
sought to ruin the Germanic tribes by civilizing them, but this is 
not so.2B Human beings share with the animals drives pertaining 
to immediate natural needs, and if they do not rise above them 
they remain at the level of the beasts. 
The moment of necessity that we arc considering here also 
does not involve the sphere of ethical life and scientific knowl-
edge; it does not yet include the aim of the intelligence that 
grasps, knows, and enjoys itself on its own account. Ethical life 
and scientific knowledge consist in being raised above mere 
needs. What introduces an ethical dimension into this sphere is 
honesty. The need here is to issue forth into universality; ethical 
3 vols. (London, 1892), 1:484-487 (Werke 14:164-169). See also Diogcnes Laer-
tius, De 11itis 6.1-7. For AntiSihcnes sec Wilhelm Gottlieb Tcnnemann, Geschichte 
der Philosophie, 11 vols. (Leipzig. 1798 ff.), 2:87 ff. 
26. [Ed.] See for example the second satire of Juvenal and the fourth satire of 
Persius. 
27. [Ed.] The allusions here are to Tacitus's portrayal of the nonhero peoples 
in his De Gemumill and De llita et moribus Iulii Agricoltre; see CorMiii Taciti Libri 
Qui Supersunt, vol. 2, faK- 2 (Leipzig, 1907), pp. 220 ff., 245 ff.; and, possibly, to 
Rousseau's Lettres iaites tk Ia montagne (Ammrdam, 1764). The latter led to a 
controversy with Voltaire, who mponded with his anonymous article Sentiment 
des citoyens (n-p., n.d.). Hegel refers in comparable fashion to the controversy be-
tween Rousseau and Voltaire in his Phenomenology of Spirit, p. 319 (Ges12mmelte 
Werke 9:285, 511 ). 
28. [Ed.] Although he mentions the "Germans• here, Hegel is obviously think-
ing of Tacitus's portrayal of the way in which his fathcr-in·law operated in Roman 
Britain. See De llita et moribus Iulii Agricolae, S 21. 
164 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
life, scientific knowledge, and religion are not to be fotmd in 
this sphere as essential, but merely shine through into it. '~pirit 
exists in inconsistency with itself and seeks to pass beyond the 
[level of] need. 
s 91 
The citizens [Bilrger] of this state are private persons, linked 
to the universal by their needs. Their essential activity consists in I ne 
imparting the form of universality to, and thereby conferring va-
lidity upon, arbitrary desires as well as needs and their satisfaction 
(since this satisfaction has a wholly particular purpose). This for-
mative process constitutes education or cultivation [Bildung] in 
general. 
Our sphere is in the first place that of education or cultiva-
tion in general. Education is concerned with form, and the con-
tent can be of widely differing nature. The form of universality 
imparted here to the particular is education. The two extremes 
of particularity and universality are here [present). Particular 
needs are linked with the universal, and it is a question of rais-
ing their form to universality. But again it is this form of univer-
sality itself that is the means whereby individuals obtain their 
needs. The satisfaction of needs comes about through universal-
ity; by means of it human beings can subsist. The particular 
raises up the universal and again lowers it to particularity. Needs 
must obtain the form of universality and lose the singularity 
they have in the state of nature. Collaborative effort and the 
needs of others bring means into play. Labor is an abstract, not 
a particular activity. This is education in relation to needs. In 
the same way education of the mind means that my thoughts 
are not my thoughts but universal thoughts, something objec-
tive. It pertains to education that in their relation to self all in-
dividuals in their vanity give due scope to the ends, needs, and 
vanity of others. The highest form of education is also a form 
of simplicity. There are two kinds of educational deficiency: lack 
of cultivation and the kind of education whose practice is al-
ways surrounded and restricted by a host of specific consider-
ations. True education knows only one consideration, the sole 
165 

ETHICAL LIFE 
means that is appropriate to the case in question, and has thus 
111 
returned to the simplicity of nature. I 
s 92 
Civil society contains three elements: 
(1) The mediation of needs and their satisfaction in a system 
involving the needs of all: political economy [Staatsokonomie). 
(2) The protection of property through the legal system [Recbts-
verfassung). 
(3) General provision for the welfare of individuals both indi-
vidually and to ensure the existence of right: the police or public 
authority [Polizet]. 
The first sphere is a system involving the needs of all. Uni-
versality is here internal to the need-the mutual mediation of 
the needs of citizens. But we are not speaking here of the sort of 
political economy [Staatswirtscbaft] where the universal sub-
sists for the universal. The science we are considering here deals 
simply with the contingency of the needs of individuals. So the 
foundation is utter contingency. But this interweaving itself pro-
duces a universality, although conversely it is this very univer-
sality that actuates and fosters the needs and satisfies the partic-
ular needs. However, this contingency always raises itself to a 
necessity. We are considering only the basic elements of this sys-
tem. Here the universality is internal to the [system of] needs. 
The second point is the legal system. Here the purpose of 
formal freedom is to protect individual ownership, both for the 
sake of possession, which is a need, and for the sake of right it-
self. In civil society the legal system has its essential standpoint; 
in the ethical sphere it is a subordinate purpose. 
The third sphere is where the universal as such emerges, al-
though its purpose is still only the welfare of the individual. Pro-
vision is made for the right and welfare of individuals through 
external arrangements of universal scope. The role of the legal 
system is to annul infringements of right; that of the police is to 
prevent them. The Politeia2'J teaches the form of government of 
29. [Ed.] Plato's Republic. 
166 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
the people. With us "the police"JO may also mean somethliig uni-
versal over against the parti<.:ular dtizen, but this univerSal bas 
as its end the welfare of individuals as individuals, not, a~ I in 
118 
the Politeia, as a universality. In regard to needs and their satis-
faction, the system of social classes [Stiinde] here comes into 
play. 
A. The System of Needs: Political Economy 
§ 93 
An animal has a definite range of needs. In this sphere of de-
pendence, too, human beings prove their transcendence over ani-
mals and their universality. Immediate universality in the singular-
ity of concrete needs consists in the proliferation [Verfielfiiltigung] 
of needs; more precisely, it consists in their division and differen-
tiation into single parts and aspects, which in this way become 
different needs, more particularized and at the same time less con-
crete, more abstract. 
What we have to consider here are needs [and] the means 
of satisfying them. One human being's needs are mediated by 
others. The means of satisfying needs, i.e., work, is work for 
others in order to work for oneself; one procures one's needs 
through others. As universality, human beings should rise above 
their immediate single needs; this transcendence is initially only 
proliferation, or particularity. Allness is complete universality. 
Formally, the proliferation of needs comprises the character of 
rationality. A natural need, for instance to clothe oneself, is 
something concrete. Animals are cared for by nature. Human-
ity rises above the soil [from which it is sprung] and can live 
anywhere in the world. Hercules was attired in a lion skin, and 
this is a simple way of satisfying [the need for clothing]. Reflec-
tion fragments this simple need and divides it into many parts; 
according to its particular nature, each individual part of the 
30. [Tr.] Hegel is here playing on the root sense of Poliui and its derivation 
from Latin politia and Greek politeia, meaning "political authority," "political ad-
minisrrarion," "government," or "commonwealth." SeeS 117, n. 46. 
167 

ETHICAL LIFE 
body-head, neck, feet-is given particular clothing, and so one 
concrete need is divided into many needs and these in tum into 
many others. Comfort consists in hitting on just the suitable 
119 
means I of satisfaction. Division of the need makes it more uni-
versal, more abstract. The quest to discover means of satisfying 
[needs) is stimulated anew by each new means. This prolifera-
tion of means promotes comfort, but discomfort is introduced 
by the fact that so very many means are required. 
s 94 
This proliferation of means is mediated, for the specific sphere 
of need is immediate need, the requirements of nature; what con-
stitutes the mediation is that a self-consciousness relates to itself 
through identity with another self-consciousness. This universality 
has 
(1) a restricted, finite content because the individuals stand in 
relation to one another as independent, particular beings; so it is 
not inherent in their substance that they are identical but only in a 
content that, although it belongs to them, is distinct from them as 
a totality. Consequendy this unity is 
(2) only a represented [vorgestellte] unity and exists only in 
opinion [Meinung]. For representation is subjective knowledge, 
whose content has the shape of something other or alien, and this 
represented unity is only equality [Gleichheit]. 
In regard to their needs, too, human beings evince the char-
acter of universality. As self-sufficient consciousness they are es-
sentially relation, and the consciousness of identity is only a frag-
mented,31 restricted consciousness because they are separate from 
one another, essentially distinct. All individuals have their own 
peculiarities. In consequence consciousness enters the sphere of 
opinion and representation; representation is the knowledge of 
a restricted content. The identity of knowledge in represen-
tation is not posited by me. There is merely unity of representa-
120 
tion, not of knowledge. The consciousness of identity I relates 
to single representations, to single needs, and is thus merely an 
31. Ms. eould also be read: fragmenting 
168 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
opinion. Unity is here no more than an equality; the ~quality 
between one thing and another is an external relation. 
, • 
S9S 
This mediation has its starting point as such in the contingency 
and inequality that are to be found among different individuals in 
regard to modifications and needs. in particular to the way they 
are satisfied or to kinds of enjoyment. This perception involves the 
contradiction implied by inequality with the other in the conscious-
ness of equality, and justifies the drive to bring about and repre-
sent to oneself one's equality with others, the imitative drive, which 
affords the stimulus to obtain the same unknown enjoyment for 
oneself or in general to acquire what the other has. By dint of repe-
tition the enjoyment becomes something subjectively universal, a 
habit and need. It is then no less necessary to give this equality de-
terminate existence for the other, and to make oneself aware of be-
ing regarded and recognized [anerkannt] by the other as his equal. 
This is the well-known drive to be recognized by the other 
as equal. The drive and the energy [directed to it) must be re-
garded as grounded in rationality. The way universality appears 
in this sphere is that one perceives that others have this particu-
lar enjoyment, and there appears to be a particular need. Since 
needs exist in the realm of natural life and contingency, a diver-
sity of needs arises. All drives are based on contradiction. One 
is faced with the consciousness of one's identity with the other 
and at the same time the consciousness of inequality. The imita-
tive drive comes into play, coupled with confidence that what 
the other has must be pleasing to oneself too. The upbringing 
of children rests on this drive: grown-ups do it, and we want I 
121 
to do it too. It is the drive to imitate and to give oneself the no-
tion that the other has nothing we do not have. Fashion is one 
aspect of this, and to dress according to fashion is the most ra-
tional course, whereas we can leave it to others to bother about 
new fashions: one should not take the lead oneself, but one 
should also avoid idiosyncrasy. By dint of repetition, an enjoy-
ment becomes habit and a self-imposed need (e.g., smoking). 
One asserts oneself in order to be equal with others. 
169 

ETHICAL LifE 
s 96 
The other aspect that is likewise linked to this is the opposing 
one, namely that of annulling this equality, giving oneself value as 
something particular, the competitive desire to distinguish oneself, 
but to do so at the same time in a generally valid way, provided 
only it is a pleasant way. 
Once one is on an equal footing with the other, there is also 
a drive to give oneself value as something particular; but this 
quest for particularity leads to the greatest lapses in taste, for 
what is stupid is always something particular. However; every-
thing particular must have something pleasant to it. This drive 
to present oneself as particular also [occurs] in excess, and one 
aspect of education is that particularity annuls itself in particu-
larity. The sacrifice of vanity is at the same time a gratification 
of vanity, for instance in the case of compliments and the re-
fined conversation of society. This urbanity consists in making 
oneself interesting through the views one advances and by re-
specting the validity of the thoughts of others. In courtesy, van-
ity is gratified in being sacrificed. Universality must still shine 
through even in particularization. 
s 97 
The means of satisfying needs are specific external things, the 
utility of nature. To the extent that the need is already present, one 
122 
has a great choice among them. Conversely, their I particularity 
also gives rise to the specific nature of enjoyments and needs, in 
the same way that the drive to imitate and to excel leads in turn 
from the means to the proliferation of needs. 
Means are natural things, and with each thing the particular 
qualities in nature are essential. Natural things are useful inso-
far as human beings posit themselves as ends and the natural 
things serve them as means. Inorganic nature is nonliving na-
ture by reason of the fact that the concept is only something in· 
ward. In what is actually living, each member is necessary for 
self-subsistence. It is the essence of natural things to perish, and 
it is for human beings to make this finitude of things manifest; 
170 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
they need not therefore scruple about using natural thi~s. Hu-
mans comb the whole earth to find the most suitable ~ 
for 
their needs, even for the most humble end. The specificity of nat-
ural things is again primary, and enjoyment in tum is determined 
accordingly. Again it is a matter of chance that one human be-
ing is familiar with the particular use another makes of natural 
things (philosophy on the properties of coffee). This is where 
imitation and the drive toward a particular use arises. Our pur-
pose here is not to portray the satisfaction of needs but the means 
people use to satisfy them. 
s 98 
There is no limit to this proliferation of needs, in the same way 
that there is no means of delimiting what is natural need and what 
is a need based on representation, an imagined need. Luxury, which 
arises when social conditions tend to multiply needs, enjoyments, 
and means indefinitely, and make them more specific, gives rise to 
a no less infinite proliferation of need. And this need is confronted 
by an impenetrable, infinitely resistant material-namely nature 
as a means, the sort of nature that is possessed by free I will. But 
123 
since this need with its satisfaction has a mediation of this kind, 
it is entirely removed from the immediate necessity of nature; it 
is raised to the realm of representations and governed by inner 
freedom of choice [Willkiir] instead of external necessity and con-
tingency. It becomes a system of universal and abiding resources 
[VennogenJ in which all have the right and possibility-or capabil-
ity-to participate by virtue of their subjective aptitude and educa-
tion, by virtue of what they make of themselves. 
We are here concerned with the distinctive shape of need in 
this sphere. Needs and means are something external, natural, 
so that what has been subdivided assumes once again the na-
ture of externality and thus can be subdivided anew. To drink 
wine is a simple need, but people in wine-growing regions are 
exceptionally well informed about wine. The imagined need orig-
inates in the natural need, but the need of spirit is to transcend 
nature. This tendency toward an infinity of needs is luxury. This 
171 

ETHICAL LIFE 
proliferation of needs is made the subject of scorn by the Ro-
man satirists,ll who tell us how hundreds sometimes have to 
busy themselves to satisfy a momentary need and that just by 
so doing they in tum satisfy their needs. The entire system of 
the subsistence of the whole is founded on this superfluity of 
means and enjoyment. Where there is less luxury, there are 
fewer forms of universality and refinement, and less possibility 
of subsistence for many. 
It does not depend solely on the free choice of the individual 
to remove from need the character of a necessity; one is con-
fronted by a material that is owned by another. But even so the 
necessity ceases to be an immediately compelling one and is a 
necessity founded in representations, on free choice. In the rep-
resentational realm [and) in language the name is thus taken 
for the thing; only the names of things continue to be used, as 
with the means for [satisfying] needs, which in the system of 
means belong to the realm of free choice. So human beings are 
confronted here with the freedom of choice of their fellows. In 
124 
this way the natural character I of the means is annulled and 
nature becomes enduring. 
What we have here is a universal resource [Vermogen), not 
changeable nature but an ever-enduring wealth of society, made 
independent of nature. Participation in this wealth does not, 
however, depend merely on taking control of it, as in nature; 
instead it depends on one's education, i.e., on one's capability 
to satisfy one's needs by aptitude. Human beings are therefore 
thrown back on themselves in order to train themselves and 
give themselves aptitude. But the possibility of educating one-
self in this way again calls for a capital resource [ein Kapita/J; 
and the possession of this is again something contingent, a con-
tingency that must, however, be sublated by the state. 
s 99 
On the immediate level the proliferation of need leads to a 
like proliferation in stimulating infinitely manifold and ever more 
32. [Ed.) The reference is to juvcnal and Persius; d. Hegel, Wnk• 1012:118. 
172 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
strenuous activity. On the theoretical plane this involves a'·rapid 
succession of representations, the ability to grasp complex and~ uni-
versal relations, and refinement of the understanding and of lan-
guage; but it also involves a need for occupation [Beschaftigung]-
occupation in the form of work that must be appropriate to the 
needs of others and is refined or general in form. 
All activity is founded on some need. Activity contradicts 
a demand in regard to the determinate existence of spirit, and 
this contradiction is the feeling of need. Educated persons can 
be recognized by the fact that they have an unending succession 
of representations in a short space of time and pass over rapidly 
from one representation to the other; so with educated people 
the representations are more general whereas uneducated per-
sons do not get beyond single representations. A businessman 
or [government} minister must be able to pass over instanta-
neously from the weightiest subject to the most petty. There is a 
vast contrast berween the rapidity with which a minister and a 
shepherd pass over to another thought. The act of passing over 
from one to the other reduces the single thought to just one 
moment, and the universal aspect of the case comes to light. Peo-
ple of mature years, who are already I familiar with objects, per-
125 
ceive the universal aspect and hold fast to it, forgetting the indi-
vidual aspects of sense phenomena, which no longer have any 
particular interest for them. Children by contrast find the single 
phenomenon more striking and remember it better. 
The word "example" [Beispiel] implies that the universal is 
the essential while the single action [is} merdy incidental.33 Hu-
mans live in the realm of representations: the sound of speech is 
important for what it denotes, and not [merely] as sound. Words 
have determinate existence, but only through and for the act of 
representing. Speech in general is the system according to which 
things subsist in the representational realm, and it gains in uni-
versality to the extent that it becomes less concerned with ex-
pressing objects of sense. The true richness of a language is not 
33. (Tr.] The prefix lni· often suggests something standing alongside, exrra, or 
aa:essory (e.g., tli4 B•i1Uh111dm, "bystanders•). 
173 

ETHICAL LIFE 
its richness for sense phenomena in their particularity, but for 
universal relationships and definitions of relationships. 
Need gives rise to the necessity of occupation. Activity is di-
versified, and the restless urge always to have something to do 
becomes itself a need. A savage on the contrary is always loung-
ing about and only engages in activity when he is compelled to. 
Restlessness is a constant process of passing over [from one thing 
to another]. In the state this activity is a form of work that re-
lates to the needs of others; one's own indeterminateness, imag-
ination, and opinion must be given up, and one must direct 
one's work to a determinate end, for the sake of a need. This is 
why it is so good a training for people to work toward deter-
minate ends since in doing so they are obliged to give up their 
subjectivity. 
s 100 
The contingent circumstance that one person has a surplus of 
one means [of satisfaction) leads of itself to exchange [Tausch] 
against means that the other has in surplus. But the multiplication 
of needs demands the preparation of specific means for their satis-
faction; and the rationality involved in this is expressed by the fact 
that the use of natural things no longer consists in immediate ap-
propriation and enjoyment of them but is on the one hand pre-
pared for in advance by labor or work [Arbeit], while on the other 
hand labor itself is mediated by the use of tools [Werkzeuge], by 
126 
means of which I individuals make their activity specific and at the 
same time protect themselves against the mechanical relationship 
of wear and tear [Abnutzung). 
Need generally speaking produces activity. To be sure, ex-
change rests on the contingent circumstance that one person has 
a surplus of something; but to produce such a surplus here be-
comes an end, and the preparation of specific means to this end 
is called for. In our mode of life there are very few means that 
are used just as they are taken from nature. Most [means], even 
those to meet natural needs that animals have [in common] with 
us, such as food, are rarely used by humans without being pre-
174 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
' 
formed; we have already imparted our form to them. taken their 
strangeness from them by mixing them with other natural P.fod-
ucts that are opposed to them. For example, in preparing diiles 
for enjoyment, fat is removed from the animal tissue; at the 
same time the compounded dishes must be homogeneous. In 
this way we make nature homogeneous with ourselves, we as-
similate it to ourselves; and the fact that we diminish the ani-
mal function. e.g., of digestion. cannot be called a loss of vigor. 
The character of rationality in human beings shows itself in 
the means, the tools that they use. Through these tools activity 
is made more specific. By using a tool people insert a means be-
tween themselves and nature, and prevent the attrition of their 
energies by allowing the means to suffer the wear and tear and 
so preserving themselves. What is rational is in general what 
preserves itself, what exempts itself from change. This mediat-
ing use of tools is the invention of reason, and self-preservation 
makes this a duty for humanity. 
s 101 
Furthermore, the preparation of specific means calls for a par-
ticular aptitude and familiarity, and individuals must confine them-
selves to only one of these. This gives rise to the division of labor, 
[a multiplicity of labors,]34 l as a result of which labor or work be-
121 
comes less concrete in character, becomes abstract, homogeneous, 
and easier, so that a far greater quantity of products can be pre-
pared in the same time. In the final stage of abstractness, the ho-
mogeneity of labor makes it mechanical, and it becomes possible 
to install machines in place of people, replacing human motion by 
a principle of natural motion that is harnessed to secure unifor-
mity and to promote human ends. 
This is the basis for all factory and manufacturing labor. Each 
single operation is assigned to a single individual. In a smallish 
factory employing ten persons the daily output [per person) is 
34. [Tr.] The rext reads, die Teilung der Arbeit, to which the German editors 
have added in brackets, .;ne Vie/fait liOn Arbeiten. 
175 

ETHICAL LIFE 
4,800 pins, whereas an individual working wholly on his own 
can make 20 pins at most.lS The subjective change of represen-
tationsl' and [the change] in the work being done-this change-
over requires a certain time, more time than when the individ-
ual subject constantly repeats the operation in question. So [in 
a factory) the work becomes abstract, uniform, and thus easier, 
since there is only one skill the individual subject learns, only 
one routine he practices, and so he can acquire more readiness 
at this single operation. [By contrast] the work done by any ar-
tisan is more concrete: frequent changeovers are a necessity for 
him, and his practical knowledge must be manifold and extend 
to many different kinds of objects. This is why factory workers 
3S. (Ed.) By way of explanation see Adam Smith. An Inquiry into tin Nlltlln 
and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, vol. 1 (Basel, 1791), pp. 7-9: "To take an 
example, therefore, from a very triOing manufacture; but one in which the division 
of labor has been very often taken notice of, the trade of the pinmaker, a workman 
not educated to this business, which the division of labor has rendered a distinct 
trade, nor acquainted with the use of the machinery employed in it, to the inven· 
tion of which the same division of labor has probably given occasion, could scarce, 
perhaps, with his utmost industry, make one pin in a day, and certainly could not 
make twenry. But in the way in which this business is now earned on, not only the 
whole work is a peculiar trade, but it is divided into a number of branches, of 
which the greater part are likewise peculiar trades ••• and the important business 
of making a pin is, in this manner, divided into about eighteen distinct operations, 
which, in some manufactories, are all performed by distinct bands, though in oth· 
ers the same man will sometimes perform two or three of them. I have seen a small 
manufactory of this kind where ten men only were employed, and where some of 
them consequently performed two or three distinct operations. But thoush they 
were very poor, and therefore but indifferently accommodated with the necessary 
machinery, they could, when they exerted themsclva, make among them about 
twelve pounds of pins in a day. There are in a pound upwards of four thousand 
pins of a middling size. Those ten persons, therefore, could make among them up-
wards of forty·cight thousand pins in a day. Each person, therefore, making a tenth 
pan of forry·eight thousand pins, might be considered as making four thousand 
eight hundred pins in a day. But if they bad all wrought separately and indepen-
dently, and without any of them having been educated to this particular business, 
they certainly could not eac:h of them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a 
day; that is, cenainly, not the two hundted and fortieth, perhaps not the four thou· 
sand eight hundredth part of wbar they are at present c:apable of perfonning, in 
consequence of a proper division and combination of their different operations. • 
36. (Tr.) That is, the mental activiry required in switc:hing from one operation 
to another when an individual is working alone. 
176 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
become deadened [stumpf) and tied to their factory and depen-
dent on it, since with this single aptitude they cannot earn a liv-
ing anywhere else. 
'> 
A factory presents a sad picture of the deadening [Abstumpf-
ung]37 of human beings, which is also why on Sundays factory 
workers lose no time in spending and squandering their entire 
weekly wages. But once factory work has reached a certain 
degree of pedection, of simplification, mechanical human labor 
can be replaced by the work of machines, and this is what usu-
ally comes about in factories. In this way, through the consum-
mation of this mechanical progress, human freedom is restored. 
A factory can thrive in a country where there is great poverty 
and people have to make do with little; but in England I the cost 
128 
of labor is exceedingly high, and yet the factories prosper be-
cause machinery does away with the need for human labor, 
so the English can supply cheaper goods than other nations in 
which workers cost much Jess. 
The mechanical tools people use are also machines, since they 
are not wholly dependent on human activity and instead hu-
man strength is largely replaced by mechanical means. But with 
all mechanical motion the uniformity achieved is not lasting: 
the tension on a watch spring is always greater at the beginning 
than later, and it is we who have to introduce the uniformity of 
movement. Human beings are accordingly first sacrificed, afrer 
which they emerge through the more highly mechanized condi-
tion as free once more. 
s 102 
With the transformation of contingency from that of external 
nature into the form of free choice [Willkur), the scope of contin-
gency is made infinitely more extensive as a result of the inequality 
of natural bodily and mental talents and the infinitely diverse and 
complex circumstances underlying in general the indeterminate in-
equality of resources. However, the essential inequality based on 
37. (Tr.] See below, S 118, n. 48, 
177 

ETHICAL LIFE 
this system of needs and means constitutes the difference of classes 
or estates [Stande)lll-the difference of the particular subsystems 
contained in the universal system of needs, the different kinds of 
means they have and work they do. 
Instead of the dependence of humanity on external nature, 
we are now in the presence of subjective contingency. The whole 
is raised above immediate dependence on nature, but subjective 
contingency, human free choice, comes into play in regard to 
people's mental and bodily talents, and this contingency is in-
finitely greater than that of nature. The individual's participa-
tion in and contribution to the collective estate depends on that 
individual's talents. In this respect the class or estate individuals 
attain to is in each case a matter of particular destiny, which de-
pends partly on their talents, partly on inclination and chance 
occurrences. People have little choice as to what they determine 
t29 
themselves to become. The I opportunities to acquire aptitudes 
are also few and far between, and there is in addition little in 
the way of particular incentives to enter certain vocations [in 
preference to others]; all the greater is the part played by con-
tingency. And this is the reason for the subjective inequality of 
resources, the antithesis of which is an insubstantial chimera; 
for the whole system rests on the subjective character of talents 
and the variously contingent character that in turn attaches to 
these subjective talents. In more determinate terms, the differ-
entiation constitutes the division of classes or estates. The state 
must respect the aspect of inequality because it is one aspect of 
the free choice present in the contingency and freedom of the 
individual. Admittedly something universal must endeavor to 
avert the consequences that might ensue from this if they are 
38. [Tr.] The word Stimtl means "(social) class," "status," •standing," or "es-
tate," while the plural Stiintk c:an also tefer to the groups (the "estates") compris-
ing a parliament, or to the parliamentary institution itself (the •estates assembly; 
see S 148 ). The traditional estates were the clergy, the nobility, and the commoners 
(bourgeoisie). For Hegel the social classes ace identified not so much by degrees of 
wealth (upper, middle, lower, e~.) as by function (agric:ultural, commercial, manu-
facturing, civil, religious, e~.). 
178 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
harmful. The whole must articulate itself, and this articul'arion 
in regard to the manifold character of needs and work iS-the 
necessity of classes, whose higher necessity is founded in rea'ion 
since each living thing must become inwardly unequal. To feel 
pity that one human being must suffer more because of his needs 
than another is an unjustified sentiment. 
s 103 
These classes are specified conceptually as the substantive [sub-
stantielle} class, the formal [formelle} class, and the universal [all-
gemeine] class. 
(1) The immediate [i.e., substantive] class satisfies its needs from 
resources in the form of property [Gut): the agricultural class. By 
agriculture the nomadic life of savages, who seek their livelihood 
from place to place, is tied in tranquillity to the soil, and the 
contingency of external change is likewise restricted to the regular 
processes of elemental nature. The procurement of means too is 
confined by agriculture to a definite single season, which in conse-
quence gives rise to a concern to make these temporarily available 
means permanent and creates the need for recognized ownership 
of possessions. The resulting form of work determines the living 
productive activity of nature; on the other hand it has no value on 
its own account but is only a means, and I the main purpose of the 
130 
natural productS amassed is to provide subsistence that is not fur-
ther mediated. 
The sphere we considered under family is an integral feature 
of the agricultural class. The era during which agriculture comes 
into being is one of the principal eras in the history and religion 
of all peoples; this is how the mysteries of Ceres came about. 
The savage ceases to direct his reflection to the whole gamut of 
contingency and directs it instead to what lies before him, to the 
soil. Hunting involves a nomadic existence in which the means 
to satisfy need depend on the chance character of obtaining or 
finding something, and it is the same with fishing. 
Agriculture spells the end of nomadism, with its alternating 
extremes of dire need and momentary surplus that cannot be 
179 

ETHICAL LIFE 
stored for the future. To be sure, agriculture also involves the 
demental aspect of nature, but no longer nature in its contin-
gency, but nature that changes in necessary fashion and must 
always return. On the remporal plane too, there is only one sea-
son in which one can procure for oneself the means of sub-
sistence, which gives rise to concern for the other seasons, so 
farmers acquire a sense of present and future. The need for 
ownership arises. For ownership comprises the aspect of free-
dom and that of the universal, i.e., of something that has to be 
respected by all. The ideal form of taking possession, the culti-
vation of the land, denotes my possession, and this form must 
be respected. Ceres and Triptolemus did not merely found agri-
culture but also laid the bases of lawful ownership. One's land 
is a lasting, permanent possession, especially insofar as the in-
ner universality must have a determinate existence; right must 
be known and respected. 
The farmer is not mainly concerned with the form, namely 
that the land must be cultivated or the animals fed; this hap-
pens only in order to increase and facilitate the life of nature it-
self. It is gifts of nature that ensure the farmer's existence [.Exis-
tent); the relationship here is between what is living and what 
131 
is living, I not between human beings and their own invention. 
They do not have themselves to thank for everything, but intuit 
organic life in general. So what we have here is rather the class 
of innocence [Unschuld], of faith; heart and mind do not yet 
have the consciousness of obligation [Schuld], the awareness 
that what one has is one's own. Nor does any major mediation 
enter into the system of satisfaction of needs. The family itself 
prepares manual tools, clothing, etc. Subsistence does not de-
pend on the work and needs of everyone else. 
§104 
[(2)] With business or trade [Gewerbe), the reflective [i.e., for-
mal) class, the chief aspect is the form and an abstract profit, one 
that does not serve directly for gratification. A man bdonging to 
this class processes raw material, and the form he gives it is what 
180 

CIVIL SOCil\TY 
makes the thing of value. He is therefore impelled in the direCtion 
of mediation with others in a variety of ways, in his reflection and 
in regard to his need to exchange the products of his work, a'ad 
also in regard to his tools. As more abstract in character, the man-
ufacturing class [K/asse der Fabrikant] has to deal both with a life· 
less material and with a mechanical form; and the more perfect, 
i.e., the more limited, the aptitude required, the more dependent 
is the value of its output on a contingent factor, that of the fur. 
ther perfecting of the aptitude of others, and other external cir· 
cumstances. For the purposes of universal exchange, money-the 
abstract value of the commodity-becomes a need and by its cir· 
culation multiplies the amount of property indefinitely. The com-
mercial class [Handelsstand], whose business is to act as a uni· 
versal intermediary in the reciprocal exchange of manufactured 
articles, accumulates wealth, which is subject to no inherent quali-
tative limit, so that the pursuit of wealth extends indefinitely and 
for its part in tum gives rise to the proliferation of needs and means. 
In the manufacturing class work is abstract in character, 
whereas the third class again involves universality; it is here [in 
the manufacturing class) that wealth originates. The main thing 
in business is the form, one's own I aptitude, but this form is 
132 
not due to nature but to oneself. The articles produced by the 
business class are not those that serve the needs of the producer; 
his aim is rather to make a general profit, out of which he can 
supply his needs. With us, the agricultural class has also joined 
the business class, and the main thing is no longer to preserve 
the farmer's (means of} satisfaction. Instead the farmer has 
an eye to what is most profitable in order to exchange it for 
other people's products-[an eye,] in other words, [to] the 
kinds of produce for which human labor is least needed since 
he no longer regards the people in his service as belonging to 
his family. 
In the business class the principal concern is not the raw ma· 
terial but the form produced by the worker's activity; he there· 
fore has himself and his own activity to thank for everything. 
This is the reflective class, where one becomes aware of oneself 
181 

ETHICAL LIFE 
and one's activity. One only produces means in order to obtain 
the means for the satisfaction of one's needs. The business class, 
the individual member of it, has the self-awareness that it is 
through his own activity that he subsists. Its main aspect is not 
to be dependent on external nature; yet the members of this class 
are partly dependent, since they must obtain from others their 
raw materials and their tools, which others manufacture for 
them. The needs of others also make possible the sale of their 
products, and they are dependent to this extent. But exchange 
occurs only when the one has a superfluity of one thing and 
the other of another thing, and is possible only when people 
live side by side; hence business is essentially an urban growth. 
While it costs more to satisfy needs in a large town, some non-
immediate, derivative needs such as tools can be had more 
cheaply. 
The artisans of this class see, it is true, to their individual 
needs, but there is not the same degree of abstractness present 
in their workshops as with the manufacturer, for whom the 
mechanical plays a greater part, the essential purpose being to 
simplify work. The more mechanical factory work becomes, 
133 
the more dependent people are on the factory, and in order I to 
ensure their livelihood the public authority [Polizei] intervenes, 
according privileges and restricting the number of workers; 
guilds [Zunfte] come into being, so that excessive competition 
is prevented. If there are too many craftsmen in a town, the in-
dividual craftsmen automatically suffeJ; and the influx of further 
craftsmen cancels itself out. With factories it is otherwise: since 
their work is abstract and they need a larger market for their 
large quantity of products, manufacturers have to seek a wider 
circle in which to sell their products. The artisan producer, on 
the other hand, works only for a specific circle. The manufac-
turer is confronted by a greater degree of contingency-the fact 
that other factories open, which invent better machines or have 
cheaper workers or an easier supply of materials; and in this 
way factories are ruined if other factories open in the area where 
they sell their products. For example most of the Dutch facto-
182 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
ries have been ruined by the English. And as factory ~rkers, 
who always have a single abstract type of work, have gr~t dif-
ficulty in switching to another kind of work, and factori& are 
easily ruined by [changing) fashions and all the contingent fac-
tors mentioned above, poverty easily arises. 
Commerce [Handel] comes into play as means, while money 
is needed as the universal means of exchange of needs (the agri-
cultural class affords more scope for exchanging needs [directly} 
against needs, and here [monetary] exchange plays a minor role). 
That. one country should have much money is not by itself the 
criterion of its wealth, for in this country money is cheap, i.e., 
the goods are dear; but where money is in short supply, it is 
dear and the goods are cheap. An essential factor in the case of 
money is circulation. In a country where there is litde money, 
exchange is inhibited. Where the circulation of money is great-
est, there wealth is greatest. The more money circulates, the 
faster does the same sum of money become a means for every-
one through whose hands it passes, and each of these has the 
possibility of profiting through the sum of money in question. If 
there is insufficient coinage to serve as means of exchange, its 
place is taken by paper money; I the rdative position of goods 
t34 
is fixed in relation to paper money, but circulation is facili-
tated. The wealth of the nation is not increased by increasing 
the amount of money; it is only the circulation that is increased. 
For example, in times gone by, France experienced a great in-
crease in wealth through paper money. It is admittedly better if 
coinage is in use, but even paper money is not to be regarded 
as a national misfortune insofar as it conduces to increased 
circulation. 
Within the business class the commercial class constitutes the 
universal class; its business is to trade the means produced for 
other means, to exchange the surplus of the one, be it in artifi-
cial or natural produets, for the surplus of the other. The main 
thing is profit. The commercial class has to do with means as 
universal means; it has to do with the universal means, money, 
and to this extent its efficacy extends to the universal. And the 
183 

ETHICAL LIFE 
great man of commerce, who has to do with what is universal 
in the needs of nations, who has the map lying before him, has 
a great status. Wealth and profit become an indeterminate quest, 
not merely to the extent necessary to satisfy his needs, and the 
relation to individual need is more or less general. 
In republics an inordinate increase in wealth is dangerous, so 
legislators have sought to counteract it. For example the richest 
citizen in a demos [populace) had to pay for the plays; in this 
way wealth was honored, but he was obliged to reduce his es-
tate, or limits were placed on accumulation. The inheritance 
laws were also directed against excessive enrichment. However, 
commerce seeks to awaken new needs among the nations; for 
this reason the English, for example, make the Chinese such great 
presents of woolen material, in order to give them the need for 
it and so gain a new market for selling their goods. 
S lOS 
(3) The universal class [the class of civil servants) in general 
has as the aim of its work the universal element in the social con-
135 
dition itself; and for this reason I the universal element itself must 
make provision for the needs of this class, and it must be raised 
altogether above want and [the necessity of] working directly to 
relieve want. 
The universal class pertains to the essential organization of 
the state, and has its actual existence in the constitution of the 
people. It has as its aim the universal as such, namely that right 
should come about and that there should be security. In all 
other classes the aim of each is to look after himself; but this 
class must be removed from want and must be looked after by 
the universal. The task of providing for its needs must be as-
sumed by the state. The individuals [of this class] may each also 
have particular aims in the form of remuneration, etc.; this is 
not an essential aim, however, but must be regarded as a means 
to attaining the universal aim. In order that this may be the 
pure aim of their work, they must not have to work in order to 
relieve need; by virtue of their office they must be independent 
184 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
as far as needs are concerned. The relationship must 'be so 
determined that in performing their official duties the1 are 
not bound in regard to their needs. This must be taken ~ 
of 
through taxes or independent possession of property, as used 
to happen in earlier states where various state employees were 
given property so that independence enabled them to devote 
themselves to effective action for the general interest. The uni-
versal class also includes teachers, who apply themselves to the 
various fields of knowledge for the greatest good of the com-
munity. It is honorable for a state if, in order to support the 
universal class and in particular develop knowledge, it confers 
on individuals who devote their whole lives exclusively to this 
purpose certain privileges or independence of means. Instead of 
this it was the custom in Germany to give privileges to the 
nobility, who abandoned themselves to the most shameful pas-
sions at the expense of their few vassals. 
s 106 
This differentiation of classes, which lies in the concept of the 
matter under consideration, must also be only a differentiation pos-
ited [as] such by the different determinations of the concept. I So 
t36 
regardless of all accidents of birth and nature governing the class 
to which individuals first belong, it must be left to their own activ-
ity to determine to what class they themselves wish to belong. 
Only in this way will more honor and power be ascribed to sub-
jective contingency, free choice, and self-determining consciousness 
than to natural contingency. 
It must be a matter of chance for individuals to what class 
they belong, in which they are born; but our entire environment 
at birth consists in relationships whereby we must belong im-
mediately to the class in which we are born. However, this con-
ceptually necessary differentiation of classes was regarded for 
instance by Egyptians and Hindus as naturally necessary, and 
so made permanent, and this gave rise to castes. The result is to 
deprive human beings of the freedom to rise above these natu-
ral circumstances. No personal advantages can raise the barrier 
l8S 

ETHICAL LIFE 
of the castes, and subjective contingency and the consciousness 
of freedom cannot take effect. In the Roman state too we see 
the abrupt distinctions between patricians and plebeians, result-
ing in constant inner strife. For privileges accorded to one class 
in regard to communal tasks are very oppressive. For instance 
the Prussian nobility used to have the sole right to be commis-
sioned officers. This class distinction based on privilege, where 
one class participates to a greater extent in communal tasks, is 
one of the most repugnant forms of distinction. In England and 
France large property owners are regarded as a true nerve of the 
state because they can be independent of the sovereign's favor 
and all [thought of] profit, and this is an essential relationship. 
§ 107 
It is in the class system that human particularity in fact receives 
its rights. The ethical disposition here is rectitude [Rechtschaffen-
137 
heit] and esprit de corps [Standesehre], i.e., the disposition I to make 
oneself a member of one of these necessary elements of civil soci-
ety through one•s own activity, industry, skill, and conformity to 
right; and, through this process of mediating with the universal, to 
be something and to be recognized both in one's own eyes and in 
the eyes of others. Moreover, morality has its proper place in this 
sphere characterized by reflection on one's own doings, and where 
the contingent nature of individual need makes a single, contingent 
act of assistance a duty. 
As concrete individuals we each exist in particular external 
circumstances. But apart from their particularity human beings 
must also have as their aim universality. The other aspect, how-
ever, is the ethical disposition, which consists in the fact that all 
human beings must have a class status and educate themselves 
for it; but the class they educate themselves for depends in part 
on chance circumstances. It depends upon the opinion the indi-
vidual has of a particular class, and the material circumstances 
and other properties that constitute it. In Plato's state the rulers 
allocate children as they judge fit to the class for which they 
186 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
seem suited, and educate them for it. 39 But here subjectlve free 
choice, or self-determination, is suppressed. Freedom in 'P,artic-
ularity is free choice. To maintain oneself in the chosen ~tus 
and carry out the corresponding duties is rectitude. Now each 
class is something universal, and rectitude is ethical life in the 
sphere in question. It is not yet ethical life [as such], because 
human beings must have still higher aims. Thus rectitude can-
not be regarded as the aim, for there must be other ends that 
transcend this sphere. 
Esprit de corps [Standesehre] is the consciousness of recti-
tude, of being regarded as upright by one's class and having 
the appropriate standing within it. Human beings must resolve 
to be something particular in the class relationship, they must 
assign to themselves a class status. In maintaining themselves 
within the I restricting confines [of class status), they confer on 
138 
themselves the essential moment of actuality, a moment that is 
necessary in order for them to attain their freedom. Rectitude 
consists in giving oneself a status and being righdy what people 
are in the status one has assumed, and in this rightfulness one 
rises in one's sphere above it. By esprit de corps we mean that 
the individual is a useful moment for the universal. "Service-
able" or "useful" is said of something that is a means for some-
thing else. As we ourselves are our own end, we cannot be 
means, cannot be serviceable or useful. But though we may be 
ends in ourselves in our activity, our activity here becomes en-
tangled with the end pursued by all others. By their particular-
ity human beings are restricted to the determinate existence of 
all others, but they must raise themselves from this particularity 
[while still] in it. In this sense people ask what someone is, i.e., 
what status a person has, and someone with no status is noth-
ing. However, by virtue of their determinate existence, humans 
have to make themselves actual and to maintain themselves in 
this particularity. This is the ethical aspect of this class [system]. 
39. [fd.] Hegel is referring to Plato's Republic 460b-d. 
187 

ETHICAL LIFE 
The determinate existence of morality constitutes this sphere, 
properly speaking; as moral beings, humans must here do their 
duty for duty's sake, but morality does not indicate where duty 
lies, and does not comprise duties in their determinateness. The 
stage of morality comes into play once one seeks to return wholly 
within oneself; it is one's class status that constitutes the real 
content for duty, that imposes determinate duties that can be 
known to everyone. 
One feature of virtue is that individuality, by self-determina-
tion, endows itself with a specific character; the essential fea-
ture of virtue is that one has endowed oneself with a virtuous 
end or purpose. Now insofar as it is one's class status that oc-
casions virtue, virtue is no longer contingent, conferred by in-
dividuality; for one's freedom lies solely in the fact that one 
confers status on oneself. However, it is this status, and not in-
dividuality as such, that prescribes duties for all persons of the 
class in question. A benevolent person has the intention of help-
ing others, and this depends on his free choice. But in this sys-
tem of mediation those who care for themselves are also caring 
for others; they are acting for themselves and [at the same time] 
139 
looking after others. I The very actions that are in other spheres 
a matter of free choice become necessary actions in the sphere 
of mediation, and little of the merit for this accrues to the indi-
vidual. If we spend our money on our needs we are giving our 
money to others, though on condition that they do their duty 
and are industrious; in so doing we give them a juster feeling of 
themselves than if we give our money away to the poor, for the 
poor, when given alms, have no feeling of independence. 
This is the necessary connection underlying this [system of) 
mediation: that those who look after themselves are also look-
ing after others. Nevertheless an element of contingency can en· 
ter in here, namely that provision is not made for others: want 
or need. On the general plane it is for the state to prevent uni-
versal need by taking appropriate measures, but there can also 
be subjective want or need, where people have to be helped in 
their frame of mind by word and deed; but even in the case of 
individual need it is better for provision to be made by the state. 
188 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
It is true that people usually prefer to retain their freedom of 
choice in helping others in need rather than leave the state to 
' 
help by means of general provisions. And the free will is after 
all involved here too if the individual regards this concern on 
the part of the state as something rational; in this way individu-
als can act in benevolent fashion using the machinery provided 
by the state. Subjective assistance must be reduced to the mini-
mum because it can harm instead of helping. 
s 108 
By means of education [Bildung], through whose universality in-
dividuals work off their immediate subjectivity, and through the me-
diation of the universal interchange of work and means [of satis-
faction], individuals become and emerge for themselves as free will 
[freie Willkur) or subjectivity of will, a subjectivity that is, how-
ever, inwardly universal. Formal right makes its appearance, and, 
however intimately it is implicated and has its essential content in 
the aim of [satisfying) needs, it must also, as the substantive ele-
ment underlying this aim, be embodied in something independent 
of it, namely the administration of justice. I 
1«1 
This negativity of singularity involves the emergence of uni-
versality, and as free will in general, this universality is an es-
sential element of myself. All people are, have, work. enjoy, etc., 
to the extent that everything they do, have, and enjoy is medi-
ated by others; yet in this mediation they return to themselves, 
exist for themselves. This being-for-self is the moment of right. 
The whole sphere exists only because there is such a thing as 
right; we all view ourselves as persons governed by right, and the 
fact that we are recognized [as such] is the subjective element. 
B. The Administration of Justice 
s 109 
Both the administration of justice [Rechtspflege] and actual le-
gal relationships presuppose laws founded on right [Rechtsgesetze] 
as something valid in and for itself; and such laws must be re-
garded essentially in this light. Legislation itself belongs to another 
18!1 

ETHICAL LIFE 
sphere than this; it is at the same time the practice of the courts 
and the distinctions that arise out of the indeterminately differing 
cases that come before them which give rise to the need for further 
determinations and the indeterminate further development of the 
legal understanding as opposed to the no less necessary simplicity 
of the laws. 
We are here considering the universal determinations of the 
administration of justice, namely laws founded on right. The 
administration of justice is not concerned with legislation, where 
the laws are handed down by a higher authority; the laws are 
assumed to be already there. The fact that the legislative and ju-
dicial functions cannot be combined in one person is clear from 
the consideration that, if they were, the judicial authority would 
itself make the law for the case that was to be judged, and there 
would then be no subsumption. 
The development of law founded on right and the differenti-
ation of cases is an affair of the understanding. In his Republic 
141 
Plato finds it unworthy of himself, and of honest men, I to pro-
nounce on individual laws and how they are to be subsumed 
and further developed, a process that extends and continues in-
finitely.40 What constitutes the formal character of law is that 
its concept is this infinite to which it tends, but that this is to be 
applied to the finite. A perfect, fully complete code of laws is 
an unattainable ideal; rather it must be continually improved. 
There should be a code, but it is continually being added to, is 
continually in the making. In this field of infinitude the material 
is empirical; the definitions established by the understanding are 
constantly subject to fission. This is the field of arguments and 
counterarguments, where there is no stopping. 
It is from this actual adjudication or practice of the courts 
that all laws originate. The actual pronouncement of judgment 
gives decisions that, even though tailored to single cases, be-
come universal laws; in this way a law takes shape on the basis 
of similiter ;udicata [similar judgments]. The courts cannot be 
40. (EJ.) The allusion is to Plato's R.,mlk 42Sc:-e. 
190 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
dead organs of the laws; the judge's own understanding, own in-
sight, always has a part to play. The Roman practice of ha:ving 
each year a new praetor, who set limits to his caprice by r\lles 
of his own which he prescribed for himself before taking up of-
fice, was a very erroneous one owing to the fact that the judges 
changed too often. It was the Romans above all who developed 
the legal understanding; since public life was suppressed under 
despotism, the understanding directed all its lively attention to 
the development of law. Now on the one hand we have the re-
quirement that the laws should in themselves be simple princi-
ples, in the same way that the principle of right is a simple prin-
ciple and because this simplicity is necessary for the individual's 
insight into and familiarity with the laws; on the other hand the 
specific determinations of law must be able to keep on develop-
ing freely. I 
t42 
s 110 
In being brought before the courts, right enters the essential re-
lationship that it has to be known or recognized [erkannt]. This 
gives rise to the requirement that in order to be legally binding, ac-
tions should of themselves be invested with this form from start to 
finish. The legally binding character of contracts and other actions 
that call for implementation does not, according to this distinc-
tion, rest merely upon these transactions themselves but just as 
essentially on their formal character congruent with the laws. In 
other actions recognizability [Erkennbarkeit] resides partly in ex-
ternal circumstances, the way they are heeded, assessed, and com-
bined, partly in the testimony of others; this testimony has the 
form of subjective assurances, to which taking the oath is designed 
to impart maximum objectivity. 
Here we are dealing with the determinate existence of right, 
with its recognizability. Now what constitutes the existence of 
right, what is its recognizability? We have here the antithe-
sis that persons may have right [on their side] but their right 
must be recognized. This gives rise to the requirement that ac-
tions that are to be recognizable should be brought to court 
191 

ETHICAL LIFE 
and recognized by the courts; these are the requisite legal for-
malities. Uneducated people may regard it as repugnant in the 
extreme that their right or its recognition should depend on 
something external, but it is its formality that constitutes the 
determinate existence of right. The laws have to determine what 
is necessary for the action to be sufficiently recognizable; but 
this is an affair of the understanding, subject to contingency 
and arbitrariness, and consideration must be given to what ex-
tent one circumstance is sufficient [for the purpose]. An action 
itself subdivides into many acts, and each act may be separate, 
[i.e.,] separate from the principal act, e.g., a contract and its 
performance. Consideration must also be given to what extent 
an actus is important or necessary for the subsistence of the 
contract. In order that there may be no more excuses, all neces-
sary circumstances have to be taken into account. 
The formalities and their validity rest then on their external-
ity. In the case of other actions, especially such as are not di-
143 
reedy I destined to be executed in court, there must be a combi-
nation of external circumstances; regard must be had to what is 
objective, circumstances that are present as effects or conditions 
from which it is possible to infer the cause. Account often has 
to be taken here of contingent circumstances, and the necessity 
of combining so many circumstances brings into play subjectiv-
ity, the moment of contingency, in connection with the subjec-
tive education and perceptiveness of the judge; the judge's zeal 
and diligence also necessarily play a part. 
Of itself testimony is something subjective, circumstantial, to 
the extent that it is retained in the individual consciousness of 
something that is past. What it depends on is the chance pres-
ence of the subject. We have here an assurance or affirmation 
by the subject, and as affirmation this is something wholly sub-
jective; but an attempt is made to impart objectivity to this sub-
jectivity by means of taking the oath. (The aspect of the admin-
istration of justice we are considering here is that right must be 
recognized, must be recognizable for the courts, and this is the 
reason for legal formalities.) Witnesses should testify according 
192 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
to their knowledge. In the oath I declare myself to be ob}~ive. 
I express my being [Wesen), and I link to this essentialityfWe· 
senheit) the specific af.firmation I make. The oath is therJfore 
something religious. In calling on the supreme being [das hi>ch· 
ste Wesen] I transcend all particularity and leave aside all sub-
jective aims. My deposition shall have the same certainty as my 
being has for me; I am trusted to leave aside all subjectivity. For 
this recognizability on the part of the court, it is necessary to 
go back to what is most objective in humankind, to religion, to 
morality. Since perjury is possible, taking the oath must be car· 
ried out as a religious actus, to be performed with a certain so· 
lemnity. Among the English it is also a dangerous custom that 
the cold formality of taking the oath, if it is sworn by two people. 
makes the issue wholly certain; and the mercantile spirit is such 
that perjury is easily committed, with the result that other citi· 
zens may innocently fall into extreme misfonune. Nor should wit-
nesses have to take the oath in regard to wholly petty matters. I 
144 
Under German law, in addition to all other evidence, crimi-
nals cannot be condemned until they have confessed. This is a 
very humane provision, for the judge's cognition may be falsi-
fied by a strange concatenation of circumstances. Another rea· 
son why this acknowledgment by criminals is a very good idea 
is that the criminals themselves as judges must pronounce sen-
tence against themselves, so this also does honor to rationality. 
Confession alone is not sufficient, for persons may be so tired 
of life as to accuse themselves falsely. In England the judge 
himself warns criminals not to harm themselves, not to confess 
anything. But this is to take the attitude that they must regard 
the court as if it were their enemy. Instead, the true attitude is 
that the court has to bring crimes to the light of day, and crimi-
nals are at the same time seen as human beings in general, who 
are expected to indicate what they know of the circumstances. 
The truth is that it is not contrary to [their] humanity but rather 
that the accused become universal persons (intelligence, reason, 
a being governed by right) when they contribute to revealing 
the truth and uncovering the crime. 
193 

ETHICAL LIFE 
Tortures were commonest when people believed in ghosts, in 
times of superstition. For example the Egyptians put to death 
whoever wittingly or unwittingly killed an ibis or a cat; this is 
certainly very degrading, but however bad it is, it is not as bad 
as the use of torture. For if someone did not confess under tor-
ture, it was supposed that he was being aided by the devil. The 
cramps and convulsions were attributed to the devil who was 
aiding the poor wretch, and instead of arousing pity these symp· 
toms were themselves taken as evidence against him. 
In these times we see the most fearful evil raging unchecked. 
Apart from the recognizability of crime there is a second aspect 
145 
of crimes to be considered, which also belongs to this sphere. I 
s 111 
In addition to being recognized as deed and action, crimes also 
involve the negative aspect whereby their nullity has to be given 
determinate existence. It is only through civil society that the 
concept of right receives the form of something that has being in 
and for itself, opposed to the particularity of self-related need and 
interest, and constituting, in the form of law, the ultimate, self-
reflected ground. In this universal the subjective element, which in-
volves the immediate annulling of crime in the form of retribution 
[ Wiedervergeltung], falls away. This is because what is injured in 
crime is right as right; hence the party injured from the standpoint 
of right withdraws from the proceedings, and universal right, which 
now exists for itself, takes over the prosecution and punishment of 
crime. 
In addition to the fact that the [criminal] action, as a positive 
action, must acquire determinate existence for the court, crime 
also i'nvolves a negative aspect, which must also be brought into 
existence, by means of which the nullity of the crime-which 
is null within itself-is sublated, is itself annulled. This came 
about through retribution in the form of revenge, but here we 
have the concept of right as Jaw, as a universal or ground, as 
what is substantive or essential. As the ground or reason for 
which something is punished, we point to the law. Now that 
194 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
the concept of law has acquired universality, it constitutes the 
ground, but law expresses only the simple form of this ldgical 
connection. Now that right is the ground, it is not the injtked 
party who has to be given satisfaction but the law. The injured 
party is a concrete person, and since this concrete person ex-
ercises right, particular interest, the infinitude41 of personality, 
comes into play. In the state this subjective side falls away, and 
it is not so much that retribution is exacted from the wrong-
doer as that he is requited for his action. The "re-" does not 
have here the meaning of abstract equality; what is requited is 
the value in generaL Right exists in the law as something uni-
versal, and the courts are a form of activity devoid of particular 
interest. In crime right is infringed as right, the universal as I 
146 
universal, and here it is not a matter of subsumption. The uni-
versal has been negated, so it is a universal instance, a public 
person, [e.g.,] a fiscal accusateur public [public arraigner), on 
whom the task of prosecuting falls. Nor can there be any role 
here for generosity or pity on the part of the injured party; in-
stead it is the universal that enters into play as what has suf-
fered injury. 
§ 112 
The exercise of right by the universal is no longer directed against 
criminals as something contingent and an external power. Right 
also belongs to criminals: it protects them and is accomplished in 
them as their own power and essence. This exercise of right thus 
becomes a reconciliation [VersohnungJ brought about by justice, 
both objectively and subjectively as far as the disposition is con-
cerned; and revenge is transformed into punishment [Strafe]. 
The transition from revenge to punishment is as follows. 
The wrongdoer's relationship is not with the injured party but 
with injured right in itself, with the administration of justice. 
For in the case of revenge [the compensation exacted] does not 
41. [Tr.] See below, S 114, exposition. 
19S 

ETHICAL LIFE 
impinge on criminals as their right but as the rights of others, 
of the injured parties. Right in the form of law impinges on 
criminals as something majestic, something universal, free from 
subjectivity. Human beings are honored by the justice that pun-
ishment is, because it is their own will that is rdated to them in 
the form of essence. With retribution as revenge, where a sub-
jective will comes into play, the progression of revenge extends 
ad infinitum, but [here] compensation takes the form of con-
tradiction resolved. In punishment wrongdoers find themselves, 
are present to themselves, with the result that punishment is 
something self-enclosed; it disposes of the matter. 
s 113 
In right, which exists in the form of universality that has being 
for itself, punishment too acquires a universal meaning accord-
ing to its content. As annulment of the crime, the injury {done to 
the criminal] is, to be sure, necessarily proportionate to it, but in 
the presence of universal right this proportionality is found not 
in the individuality of existence [Existenz] but in accord with the 
147 
essence of right. I This allows greater freedom to the manner in which 
the crime is atoned for, with the exception of [forfeiture of] life, 
the qualitative nature of which is infinitely varied. Since the deter-
minate existence [Dasein) of the individual consists, in civil soci-
ety, in being recognized, this stage also includes disgrace as a mo-
ment of punishment or as punishment itself. If disgrace is not mere 
shaming but destroys the reputation, it is something lasting whereby 
the offender loses his status. 
What is expressed here is (1) that in retribution, in the prin-
ciple of punishment, the equality involved should not extend 
to empirical qualitative equality; what is involved here is value. 
The qualitative character of crime is raised to universality, and 
punishment acquires the form of value, value viewed from its 
universal, essential side. In our sphere, the sphere of thought, of 
reflection, it is in general always the case that everything passes 
over into universality. This is characteristic of thinking beings, 
who raise themselves above existence [Existenz]. Outside the 
196 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
sphere of civil society, the commutation of punishment is an af-
fair of caprice and whim, for it stands over against the offeruter 
as something immediate, and this arbitrary element is unri~t­
ful. Free rein is here given to the qualitative manner in which 
crime is punished, and the invidious equality which is not ap-
propriate to a universal being that rises above immediate exis-
tence [Existenz] and appearance falls away. This universality 
introduces a liberality into the requiting of crime, even though 
the moment of equality is demanded by justice. As an inesti-
mable possession life is something qualitative, and here no ex-
change is possible; and the punishment for murder must be 
capital punishment because life is beyond valuation. 
(2) Another aspect here is injury to the determinate existence 
that is recognized, to honor. Punishments that involve no more 
than a momentary shaming in the eyes of others, to the devising 
and invention of which much ingenuity used to be devoted, have 
now largely been done away with. Here the whole punishment 
consisted in shaming. These punishments [where] one was con-
tent with this actus are no longer appropriate according to our 
customs, and more prominence is given to retaining I and main-
148 
taining the thought of them. A punishment seen as a merely mo-
mentary shaming would be converted in our eyes-we being no 
longer so naive as our forebears-into a lasting loss of reputa-
tion, seeing that with us reflection has become preponderant 
and forgiveness no longer follows immediately after repentance. 
In ecclesiastical penitence too, transgressions are no longer an-
nulled by repentance. Moreover these punishments were only 
for the lower classes. 
Associated with the disgrace that is retained and is therefore 
permanent are branding and flogging, which was followed by 
banishment; this meant that disgraced subjects were no longer 
capable of earning their livelihood in their own locality but could 
again do so in foreign lands, where they were unknown. So it 
was customary to look at once at an offender's back to see if 
he had already been branded. A disgraced person can be reinte-
grated by society. With the substantive [agricultural] class, where 
197 

ETHICAL LIFE 
there is more spontaneity and reflection is not so developed or 
adhered to, disgrace does not strike as hard as with the higher 
classes, so disgrace has not the same importance and value for 
all classes. It was also the custom for the common people and 
court bailiffs to seek to make their abomination of crime known 
through their own activity, but this is wrong. Hanging is also 
regarded as demeaning because the noble possession that is life 
is taken away by a mechanical implement that costs so little. 
Beheading is now more accepted, and the guillotine has been 
deemed an important invention because the chance character of 
the executioner's skill does not here enter into play. However, 
this form of punishment is more of an indignity than to be 
killed by the free action of a human being. It is repugnant to see 
this action brought about by lifeless machinery. 
Now that crime assumes a universal form, it becomes pos-
sible to take into account the moral aspect, the moral improve-
149 
ment [of the criminal], which I does not influence the justice of 
the punishment. 
§ 114 
The universal that is infringed through wrongdoing is not merely 
the concept of right but is present as civil society, which has as its 
basis and the ground of its subsisting the task of securing the life 
and property of individuals; consequently it avenges, in the injury 
done to the individual, the injury done also to itself as universal, 
and it modifies the penal provisions accordingly. 
In crime injury is done to civil society, to a universal. Indi-
viduals are injured in their personality, and it is open to them 
to regard this as something infinite; but as has been said,41 the 
qualitative and quantitative must be defined in terms of their 
external being. Since civil society, [which] has its essential being 
in what constitutes life and possession of property, is injured as 
a universal, an offense may become more important, by reason 
of the threat it presents to the basis, the substance of civil soci-
ety, than it would be if all it amounted to was injury to the indi-
vidual-e.g., theft and robbery. In civil society the role of right 
42. [Ed.) See above, S 47. 
1!18 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
is to be the unity of the universal and the particular wills. '9ut-
side civil society it is a matter of contingency whether I le\lve 
the other unimpaired or vice versa since we have not yet rec-
ognized our rights reciprocally, and I know that I am related 
to the other in contingent fashion and have to guard against 
being injured by him, have to arm myseH so as to defend my-
self against him. In civil society right has validity as law, i.e., it 
is recognized, and an injury that occurs here is a wrong in a 
wider sense than where there is not yet a state. The criminal 
acts (1) wrongly in general, and (2) against his own recognition 
of the law. So in civil society offenses can be punished more 
severely I than they can be in the abstract, in and for them-
150 
selves. And it depends on the view taken by civil society what 
importance it attaches to an offense and how severely it accord-
ingly punishes it. 
An offense is intrinsically dangerous in proportion to the 
other offenses it makes possible. Yet it should be taken at its 
own inner value, according to its universality. A totality is the 
illumination of the singular by reflection. An offense is inwardly 
more important [by virtue of] this inner universality: if the uni-
versality is regarded as a totality the offense is punished by ref-
erence to other single actions; but an offense must be punished 
according to its own inner importance. And since security of 
life and security of property are the basis of civil society, an of-
fense against this basis is an offense against the universality and 
is punished more severely as harming the universality. It seems 
quite disproportionate for theft to be punished by death. The 
loss another incurs through theft may be minimal; but since the 
security of civil society is thereby impaired, it can impose more 
severe penalties. However. civil sociery can only modify the pun-
ishment in light of the injury done to the universaliry; overall it 
must take into account equaliry of value, and the injury done to 
the universality is only one aspect to be considered. To be sure, 
the offense must be elevated to the [plane of] universality, but 
not indeterminate, abstract universality. 
There are also other considerations that may render punish-
ment more severe, e.g., if there was a conspiracy or if it is not 
199 

ETHICAL LIFE 
the offender's first offense. An essential aspect of the action is 
the will, and the will that acts is subject to quantitative differ-
ences and gradations. Anyone who conspires has overcome aver· 
sion to crime, and has strengthened his will by using people 
who serve him rather as means; and the action is that of a more 
intensive will. It is the same when the will has passed through 
several stages. Repetition of the offense shows, for instance, that 
I crime or evil has become the general, continuing dement, has 
become a habit. And in imposing punishment all this must be 
taken into account. But the degree of danger is only one aspect, 
and a misleading one at that, for the implied idea is that what is 
punished in the offense is the possibility of something extrane· 
ous to it. 
s 115 
Right as it exists in and for itself in a given case, and [right) as 
it has determinate existence according to legally determined norms 
(in other words, as recognizable and subject to proof in court), are 
in one respect extraneous to each other and also contingent in-
sofar as the latter, existence for its own sake, is the external side, 
whereas right should come about in and for itself. Moreover, the 
more highly developed the laws are, the more manifold do they 
become for the concrete case and the more therefore do the judg-
ment and application of the laws depend on the subjectivity of the 
judge. As a consequence it is necessary to have not only a judicial 
system based on legal forms [Rechtspflege der Formlichkeit) but 
also one based on equity [Billigkeit]-not merely to the extent that 
in the event of loss, regard is had to equitable assessment of the 
thing in question and the condition and wdl-being of the parties, 
but also to the extent that in regard to form, judgment is pro-
nounced in such a way as to be subjectively and adequately recog· 
nizable. The demand for a simple legal process as opposed to the 
long course of a more formal process also becomes important with 
regard to the difference between the classes-the simple, substan· 
tive mode of thought of the one and the more refined, formal, ob· 
durate reflective thought of the other. 
One knows one is in the right, but one cannot enforce one's 
200 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
right, cannot make it recognizable because its determinate exis-
tence lacks the recognizable norms, and this is a terrible fee.ling 
for us. Both are necessary, that one should be in the right '4nd 
that one's right should be recognizable. In the event of conflict 
actual right must take precedence over the formalities. For ex-
ample in a testament or will, if certain seemingly quite inessen-
tial formalities are lacking, the whole will is I invalidated. Cer-
152 
tainly the judge can argue that if these formalities are neglected 
false wills can easily be made; but in so arguing he is taking the 
part of the law and seeking to give a possibility, the possibility of 
something extraneous, precedence over right properly speaking. 
To an unsophisticated person it must seem terrible that lack 
of a formality, the mere possibility of falsification of a deed, 
causes judgment to be rendered against the true right. The judi-
cial system is nearly as important as the law itself, and among 
civilized peoples should be as fully developed as possible. But in 
England the most erudite jurist is incapable of knowing all the 
laws and how they qualify each other; so the laws are in the 
utmost confusion, but the judicial system makes the deficien-
cies imperceptible or almost so, and for the freedom and rigbt of 
the citizens a good judicial system is more necessary than a new 
legal code. 
For rights to be recognizable the judicial system must pay 
due regard to fortnalities; but these formalities should not im-
pede right, and in the conflict between right and formalities, 
formalities are to take second place. It is not only the formali-
ties that proliferate as the cultural level rises, but also the laws 
themselves. It is not the judge's role to be a mere organ of jus-
tice; there are a great many calls on his reflective thought. 
Moreovez; there must be courts of equity, over against the 
courts of law, in order that regard may be had not merely to 
right as right but also to the welfare of the parties; it is these 
questions of welfare, sympathy, etc., that have to be taken into 
account in equity proceedings. When the damage caused to one 
party by nonfulfillment by the other party of a contract entered 
into between them cannot be wholly demonstrated and has to 
201 

ETHICAL LIFE 
be evaluated approximately, we have a proceeding in equity, 
where the (mode of] existence [Existenz} of both parties is also 
taken into account. Right ought to come about as right, but the 
courts have to decide according to their formulae and cannot de-
153 
viate from the formal law. But a court of equity I could obviate 
the resulting wrong, and the evidence here must consist in indi-
vidual circumstances. In England, for example, one can choose 
freely whether to leave the decision to the rigor of the law or to 
equity. Such decisions in equity make people conscious that they 
are getting their rights, and this is worth a great deal. Thus the 
Lord Chancellor attaches more weight to a draft will, a rough 
copy often without a trace of formality, than to an earlier will 
concluded in due and proper form. 
The difference between the classes must also essentially re-
sult in differing forms in law. Thus the substantive class is con-
cerned with its own distinctive right; not every single detail is 
essential to it, all it wants is right in general, its attitude is the 
substantive attitude; and it is only in the reflective class that 
each individual circumstance has to be explored. 
s 116 
Proliferation of the laws makes comprehensive knowledge of 
them a distinct profession to which individuals must devote them· 
selves completely, and [knowledge of the laws] becomes all the 
more alien to the mass of the people, although they form the basis 
and embodiment of its right. So it is not so much by virtue of their 
own insight that the parties are subjectively convinced of their right 
as by trust [Zutrauen]. They gain this conviction partly through 
jury courts made up of their peers, partly through the publicity of 
the proceedings; together these two form the main guarantees of 
the impartial administration of justice. Further requirements in re· 
gard to the formal constitution of the courts concern their colle-
giate form, the plurality of instances, and especially the indepen-
dence of the judges both in their functions and in the terms on 
which they hold their office. 
Since individuals must devote their entire course of study to 
202 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
knowledge of the law, this knowledge, and the means wliereby 
one comes by one's right, become a closed, incompreheilsible 
book for the great mass of the people. For the individual the'oad-
ministration and course of justice become no more than a mat-
ter of fate, a wholly alien power. I Right-the very thing in which 
154 
human beings ought to have their consciousness of freedom-
and the process of right become for them an alien power: the 
costs levied by lawyers and the state result in litigants seeing 
a higher conspiracy directed against them, a conspiracy of the 
higher classes, whereby a gulf opens up between them and their 
right; all they get to know of the law are the legal costs. What 
is wholly lacking is precisely the subjective aspect, that individ-
uals know how right comes about for them. For this alienation 
of right from subjective consciousness we have to thank our Ger-
man youth who went, some ten thousand strong, to Bologna to 
study Roman law. 
One of the most important things would be-since one's own 
insight is not possible owing to the proliferation of the laws-
for trust to develop between lawyers and those who seek right. 
And trial by jury and the publicity of legal proceedings are the 
main means of maintaining trust and leaving it to the subjects 
to choose between arbitration and the formal process of law. 
Courts of first instance should also first seek to bring about an 
amicable settlement; but there is an ambivalence here, in that the 
office of arbitrator is simultaneously held by the judge, to whom 
it is accordingly all the same how he puts an end to the dispute, 
whether by legal process or by mediation. In fact there should 
be a separate authority for each function, having just the sin-
gle purpose and concerned to realize it. Another factor that 
comes into play if the two are combined is the judge's subjective 
financial interests, partly for himself, partly for his friends the 
advocates. With jury courts composed of peers there are two 
aspects, the facts of the case being established by the jury and 
the president of the court confining himself to pronouncing the 
law in regard to the facts as established, subsuming them under 
the law. 
203 

ETHICAL LIFE 
But there must also be the subjective conviction that right 
is being implemented; care must be taken to foster a trust and 
155 
awareness that one is receiving one's right. I The chief necessity 
for this, however, in the case of a fully developed legal system is 
that all should know themselves to be involved in the process; 
and this is ensured by the jury courts, which must be chosen by 
the people, not as in France solely by the prefect. Nor may they 
be chosen judicially but only according to the trust the electors 
have in particular in the candidate's morality. The members of 
the jury must be independent men in relation to their superi-
ors, and it is very important that they should not have to keep 
looking over their shoulders; they must also be of independent 
character. A citizen who has lost interest in the state and is ac-
customed to doze his life away in mental dullness and politi-
cal inactivity may be very disinclined to occupy a public office of 
this kind without remuneration, and in despotic states this state 
of affairs is quite acceptable to the common people. The upper 
classes, on the other hand, find it more oppressive, since they 
stand nearer to the despot. The fact that people have lost the 
habit of public service in this way may be one reason why jury 
courts have not become as firmly established in France as one 
must wish. The jury members must be of equal birth with the 
accused, and he must be confident that they have the same in-
terests and the same circumstances as he has. 
It is for the jury to determine the nature of the crime, who 
committed it, and in general to investigate the facts of the case, 
and this is within the ken of every educated citizen. The assis-
tant magistrates of our forebears were citizens of the munici-
pality; they were not lawyers and they were unpaid. But these 
courts had the shortcoming that they consisted of permanent 
members and they filled any vacancies that arose themselves. 
This ability to appoint new members themselves is a very com-
mon feature of our municipal administrations, despite its falli-
bility; and the administrators are not even properly account-
able. It is true that no supervision is possible with regard to the 
courts, but the fact that they are permanent and self-renewing 
204 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
in this way makes them alien to their fellow citizens ana' inde-
pendent of them. This may also be the reason why these---
. 
' 
tant magistrates have sunk to a very low status and [are) for"the 
most part inactive members I of the court. 
156 
Another actus is the application of the legal penalty to the 
crime once it has been established, and this is for the judge as a 
legal expert. But he must first once again put specific questions 
to the jury concerning the facts of the case. If he can put partic-
ular questions to them concerning each single circumstance and 
so more or less question them at his discretion, he can draw his 
conclusion from the mass of answers, and yet still decide ac-
cording to his will; and the jury ceases to be of any effecr. In En-
gland there must be a unanimous decision by the jury because 
the decision must be homogeneous, and this unanimity is to be 
preferred to the French system, under which a two-thirds ma-
jority is sufficient and the judge's vote is decisive. The offender's 
confidence in regard to his sentence is also necessarily greater 
if unanimity is required. [For the jury] to pronounce sentence 
would be contrary to the relationship between one citizen and 
another, and the task of pronouncing [sentence on the basis of) 
the laws belongs to a distinct court composed of judges des-
ignated [for the purpose]. It is not for them [i.e., the jury] to 
pronounce on what is objective or abstracr. What is essentially 
distincr activity according to the concept must also involve a 
particular, separate mode of acting, and so the jury's role is to 
pronounce only on what is subjecrive. The police adopt a hos-
tile attitude to the offender and seek to make him liable to pun-
ishment; the judge on the other hand, since he is pure justice, also 
takes the part of the offender, so judge and police must also be 
separate authorities. 
Another essential feature, originating in Germany and still 
quite widespread, is that legal proceedings should be public. All 
citizens must themselves be able to hear why their fellow citi-
zens are condemned, for it is not merely the accused's right that 
is the object of judgment but the universal right of all. This also 
eliminates divergence between the popular view of the offense 
20S 

ETHICAL LIFE 
and the judgment of the court. The accused too, if his judgment 
is pronounced before his fellow citizens, is honored by the fact 
that the people are participating in the investigation. Action that 
has to be conducted in public has, however, a quite different 
157 
significance in general terms. I 
Another essential requirement is the collegiate form of the 
courts. This originates from Germany. The collegiate form of 
the courts does admittedly cause delay in reaching decisions, but 
without it there is all the more scope for arbitrariness and par-
ticular interests. But since each college must have an assessor, 
what happens is that since anyone can become an assessor each 
assents to the other's proposal since he hopes to be similarly 
treated himself; and because the responsibility rests on the whole 
college, the individual's responsibility becomes less. However, 
the assessor must so order his work that his proposal has uni-
versal validity within itself, and as far as answerability is con-
cerned the assessor's is greater. Moreovet; as a communal whole 
the college is in a stronger position to stand up to despotism, 
since the individual's freedom of action cannot here be so influ-
enced as to sway matters unduly one way or the other. Each 
member of the college enters into an established whole, and there 
are not so many fluctuations in attitude and procedure. Plu-
rality of instances is also very necessary, since anyone who be-
lieves himself wronged can still appeal to higher instances; the 
court of third instance is usually only a court of cassation, which 
merely examines whether the due forms-43 have been properly 
observed by the lower courts. This succession of instances does 
also hold up the rapidity of proceedings, and to this extent it 
has an inconvenient side. In times gone by, things in Germany 
had reached the point where a prince's subjects regarded it as 
fortunate if they were exempted from the court of third instance, 
the imperial court, where cases often got stuck for a century or 
more. 
In monarchies it is an essential principle that the monarch 
should not act as a judge himself, in order that it should not be 
43. Ms. could also be read: the formulae 
206 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
his personal caprice that pronounces the verdict, and alfo be-
cause he has so much other power already. And the one- who 
judges should have no other power over the parties thaQ to 
judge them. Hence in recent times the prince only has the right 
to appoint the judge, who is independent in his I functions. The 
158 
prince has also the right of pardon, but not the right to make 
the penalty more severe. Regarding Frederick Irs action in re-
lation to the miller, when he dismissed several judges because 
they denied the miller his right in favor of the nobleman, the 
king's action was justifiable insofar as he believed the miller had 
been wronged.44 But no member of the court can be deprived of 
his livelihood arbitrarily. It is also natural that accused persons 
should have defending counsel because they must be given som~ 
one in whom they have trust-this was the first point we dealt 
with.45 
C. The Police or Public Authority"' 
s 117 
In the system of needs there are general resources [Vermogen] 
available for the needs of all. In the administration of justice the 
abstract right of individuals is maintained, but in the system of 
needs their welfare is an end only for themselves; nor is their end 
the universal connection berween needs and the means of satisfy-
ing them, despite the fact that their subsistence depends on this. 
44. [Ed.) Hegel is here referring to the case of Arnold the miller. Arnold's mill 
had been put up for auction by his feudal lord owing to his failure to pay his 
ground rent, and his Qlunterplea was rejected on more than one oc:c:asion. His ar-
gument was that a QI"P pond bad been Qlnstructed upstream from his mill, and 
this had deprived him of the water. Finally be appealed to the king, who eventually 
decided in his favor and sent the responsible magistrates to prison. See Guprllt:be 
Friedrichs des Grossen, ed. F. v. Oppeln·Bronikowski and G. B. Volz (Berlin, 
1924), pp. 190-193. 
45. [Ed.] See the dictated paragraph at the beginning of this section. 
46. [Tr.) Hegel uses the word Poliui (cf. Greek politeia, Late Latin politia, 
"state,• "commonwealth," "political administration") to denote what we would 
c:all "the public: authority" or government regulation of industry and Qlmmerc:e, 
and this is how we have translated it except where the reference is clearly to the 
police as agency of law enforcement and prevention of crime (e.g., in S 119). 
207 

ETHICAL LIFE 
The universal must therefore become active for itself as such, and 
must eliminate and sublate the immediacy and contingency inher-
ent in the system of needs as well as the external contingency that 
is to be found in the exercise of administrative justice. 
Here we consider the concept of public authority and its ob-
ject. The state based on need has as its end the system of needs 
and formal right; the universal is limited to this sphere of need 
and of right. On the whole, people are not well disposed to the 
public authority, but however unpopular it is, it is all the more 
159 
necessary. I The system of needs continues to be strongly marked 
by contingency, which must be counteracted by means of some-
thing universal; the sphere of right too is marked by this contin-
gency, and to sublate this must be the aim of the public author-
ity. All citizens make their own welfare their sole end and rely 
on the universal connection [between their needs and those of 
others]. But the universal must have itself for its purpose, must 
become really existent as a universal. But each posits his inter-
est as the sole end and lets it stand opposed to the interest of 
another class; the public authority then has to act as a moder-
ating factor and seek to maintain equilibrium between all. The 
subsistence of the whole is subject to contingency, and in this 
struggle individual parts would be destroyed. The sphere of 
right by which formal right is actualized is also conditional; the 
administration of justice is contingent on the offender being 
brought to court, while the purpose of penal justice is that no 
crime should exist. We can deal only with the main aspects of 
the public authority. 
s 118 
The first contingency is that involved in the individual•s partici-
pation in the general resources, since this participation presup-
poses health, skill, capital [Kapital], and so on, and also a major 
conjunction of factors far removed from the individuat•s own or-
bit. As born within civil society, individuals are [dependent] on 
these resources for the actualization of their right to live [and] have 
to accept them as the inorganic nature and external conditions 
208 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
governing such right. The whole community [das Allgemeine)41 
must therefore nlllke provision for the poor, in regard both to 
what they lack and to the idle, malevolent disposition that may 'te-
sult from their situation and the feeling of the wrong they have 
suffered. 48 
Individuals have to rely for their capital [Fond) on the gen-
eral resources. Their skill or work is not the only condition for 
them to be able to draw on these resources, for this requires 
skill, I health, and a certain capital [Kapital]. Now that states 
160 
have recently entered the field of business and commerce, it has 
been said that this is no affair of the state and, even if individu-
als are ruined, only raises the level of the whole. All people have 
the right to live, and not only must this right be protected, not 
only do they have this negative right, hut they also have a posi-
tive right. The aim of civil society is the actualization of free-
dom. The fact that human beings have the right to live means 
that they have the positive, fulfilled right: the reality of freedom 
should be an essential consideration. 
The life and subsistence of individuals are accordingly a uni-
versal concern. This universal should itself be its own conscious 
end. Since everyone works for himself, it is for civil society to 
have as its end what is [the universal concern). For individuals 
the general resources belonging to society constitute the aspect 
of inorganic nature, which has to present itself to them in such 
a way that they can take possession of it. For the whole earth is 
occupied, and they have in consequence to rely on civil society. 
The reason individuals have a right to the earth is that they have 
the right to live. [Even) if it is only individual factors that make 
47. [Tr.) In this sccrion Hegel frequently uses Allgemeim and GemBinsame as 
vinual synonyms. 
48. [Tr.)ln both the Heiddberg leawes and lhe Berlin lecaues of 1818-19 
and 1819-20, Hegd's dcsuiption of poverty is more delailed and passionate, and 
his critique of existing social conditions more thorough, than in the published ver-
sion of the Philosophy of Right. To lhis disc:ussion of poveny should be added his 
depiction above (5 101) of the •deadening" of human beings under lhe conditions 
of factory labor. See Shlomo Avineri, "The Discovery of Hegd"s Early Lectures on 
the Philosophy of Right, • The Owl of Minervd 16 (1985): 199-108, esp.l04. 
209 

ETHICAL LIFE 
this difficult for human beings, these are particular factors over 
against their right to live; the sick or insane are cases in point. 
The right to live is what is absolutdy essential in humanity, 
and civil society must make provision for it. A poor person is 
one who possesses neither capital [Kapital] nor skill. In states 
where the poor are left to fend for themselves their situation 
may become miserable in the extreme. For instance they have 
no clothing and, since they cannot go to church, they are de-
prived of the comforts of religion. It is not possible for them to 
obtain their right through formal justice-merely appearing in 
court--owing to the costs involved in the formal process of jus-
tice. They are at a great disadvantage in religion and justice, 
1s1 
and also in medicine I because it is only from the goodness of 
their hearts that physicians attend them, and the hospital au-
thorities also take a great deal off their patients for their own 
profit. This contingency must be overcome by the whole com-
munity [das Allgemeine]. In the first place special provision must 
be made for the indigent in a fatherly fashion, with due regard 
for panicular circumstances. In addition, efforts must also be 
made to combat the idleness and malevolence that poverty usu-
ally brings in its train; and it is in the very areas where the poor 
are in fact most supported on compassionate grounds that lazi-
ness and a disinclination for work are found. In southern lands, 
where the necessities of life are few, we find this immediacy, 
this insouciance, out of which people have to be tom, for they 
should be self-dependent by virtue of their work. Idleness easily 
becomes vice, and the feeling of having suffered wrong and of 
not being the equal of others leads to malevolence among the 
poor. Civil society must keep the poor working; in this way 
there awakens in them the feeling of standing on their own feet, 
which is the best counter to malevolence. 
But whole classes, whole branches of industry can succumb 
to poverty when the means this sector of the population pro· 
duces are no longer sold and their business stagnates. The con-
junction of the different factors involved goes beyond what 
the individual can grasp, and here the state must provide. The 
210 

CIVIL SOCJETY 
complexity of civil society itself also leads to poverty, since'.the 
means of satisfying needs are too diffic:ult [to obtain}. For ~y 
many people are invariably attracted by the possibility all ha~ 
of earning their living among the numerous population of a 
wealthy country or town. For example, this far-reaching possi-
bility draws many people into a capital city, but for the individ-
ual this possibility is a matter of chance, and the rabble [Pobel] 
increases by leaps and bounds along with poverty. And because 
people know that their community has to support them, as in 
England, indolence increases. For this reason civil society also 
has the right to keep the poor occupied. I 
162 
s 119 
The contingency in regard to criminal law partly concerns the 
discovery and prosecution of the offenders. But above all, criminal 
jurisdiction is itself contingent and conditional insofar as it depends 
on the commission of crimes, which are contingent actions, for the 
prevention of which the police must be on their guard, with the 
admittedly ill-defined proviso that they do only what is necessary 
and that in other respects the freedom of action and movement 
of citizens should not be curtailed-above all, that they should not 
appear to be everywhere under supervision. Of themselves, actions 
governed by right and the private use of property also involve more 
general relations to others and to their use either of their own 
property or of property owned in common. To this extent it is the 
task of the public authority to supervise and regulate this general 
relation, which could give rise to damage and wrong to others. 
Crime has to be punished, but all that pertains to identifying 
and apprehending criminals is the affair of the police. This can-
not be the responsibility of the coutts themselves because the 
role of the police here is to be as it were the enemy of criminals, 
and they seek in all possible ways, often by cunning, to uncover 
crimes-the courts must keep their dignity intact-and the de-
tection of criminals is something subjective, not yet involving 
justice. Crimes are to be regarded as contingent actions; the fact 
that someone is evil must be seen as something contingent, and 
211 

ETHICAL LIFE 
the nullity that seeks to endow itself with positivity is crime. 
But the police should prevent crimes. Evil should not happen, 
and there should be an authority that prevents it. Here we are 
talking about what should be, and this is the standpoint per-
taining to the organization of the state based on need. Fichte's 
state is centered on the police, to whom it seeks to accord par-
163 
ticularly wide scope, I but his state is a state based on need. Ac-
cording to Fichte, no persons can go out without having their 
identity papers with them, and he deems this very important so 
as to prevent crimes.4' But such a state becomes a world of gal-
ley slaves, where each is supposed to keep his fellow under con-
stant supervision. 
This police supervision must go no further than is necessary, 
though it is for the most part not possible to determine where 
necessity here begins. Thus it could be assumed that the police 
should not enter one's house without a special order, for what 
the family does within the home must be unobserved. In the 
same way it is repugnant to see policemen everywhere. In this 
respect secret police would be best, for people ought not to see 
that they are exercising supervision even though such supervi-
sion is necessary. But the purpose of what is hidden is [in this 
event] that public life should be free. The disposition of police 
officials to be false and do all they can to catch someone must 
be neither suppressed nor encouraged. 
In London use is made of people who have no official role 
to go after criminals, but anyone who brings a criminal in is re-
warded. These people, or police spies, hunt around, without be· 
ing officials, out of subjective interest, and they seek themselves 
to make criminals or to impute crimes falsely. For example poor 
Irishmen were made counterfeiters without knowing what they 
were doing, and were then arrested.SO This can give rise to an 
abyss of depravity. 
49. [Ed.) johann Gottlieb Fic:hte, Gnmdlags dss Naturrscbts nach Principim 
der Wisunscha(tsl~. Zw.iur Theil, oder Ang8Wandtu Naturrecht (Jena and Leip-
zig. 1797), pp. 146 ff. Cf. Fichte, Gssamtm~sgabe 4:87 ff. 
SO. [Ed.) See AUgemsine ZsiiUng, 21 <Xtober 1816, p. 1177: "Great Britain 
(from a London papeJ; 9 Oct.) •••• The polic:e offic:en Brook, Pelham, and Plower, 
212 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
The police have necessarily to cause a good deal of incbnve-
nience, e.g., by inspecting identity papers. But this. is a n~-
sary regulation, and the one who performs it is doing so frG.m 
duty. His disposition does not come into the matter if he checks 
on someone, since people are after all supposed to be honor-
able; rather for the police official, I am a subjectively strange 
individual. The police also have to ensure that no one harms 
the communal property nor the rights of individuals through 
the use one makes of one•s own property. With the rapid pace 
of life, and all the thrust and busde of civil society, tasks of an 
ephemeral nature, which so many people perform, have to be 
made simple. What each single individual would have to do is 
taken over by the whole community. I The police enter on the 
164 
scene and reckon how use of my private property could injure 
others. But there must be a certain liberality in this calculation, 
for otherwise the police can interfere ad infinitum in the use 
made of private property. Apart from this, no limit can be set 
within which this supervision must be confined. The police are 
hated because they [have to] proceed in such a petty fashion 
and have such petty things to do, and because in removing ob-
stacles they act only negatively, not positively. It is only in coun-
tries where there is no police force at all or a very bad one that 
the value of good police is felt; for a good police force should 
not be noticed at all, and since it is not seen doing anything, it 
gains no praise eithe& 
s 120 
What is absolutely necessary to promote the prosperity of all 
civil business is a rapid, clear system for the administration of 
justice, and civil and political freedom in general. But bearing in 
mind that satisfaction even of the most individual needs depends 
on the availability of means produced by others, these means, as 
who suborned dlree ignorant Irish day laboret~ into raking part in counterfeiting in 
order to pin the blood money for clenoliiiCilla them, were yesterday evening con-
demned to death for counterfeiting. As this crime is equated with ueason, they will 
be dragged to the place of exeamon. The dlree Irishmen had already been par-
doned by the Prinec Regent." 
213 

ETHICAL LIFE 
something intended for general use, call for a system of supervi-
sion. Moreover, the mutually opposing interests of the different oc-
cupations and trades, coupled with the dependence of the major 
branches of industry and the individuals linked to them on the 
competition of others (including foreign concerns), call for a gen-
eral system of care and oversight. Such care includes the means and 
institutions of general utility established for the use of all, and ulti· 
mately colonization, which becomes necessary with a people whose 
industry is continuing to progress. 
Civil freedom in regard to the administration of justice and 
political freedom are necessary moments. For example our gov· 
ernments go to great pains to raise the level of the sciences. Their 
prime concern, however, in this respect should be to ease the 
burden under which [intellectual] property suffers. As long as it 
is permissible for scholars to be robbed in all due formality, it 
165 
cannot be said that the sciences I are being given external pro· 
tection. In the same way in all other lines of business, justice 
must be dear and expeditious. Thus the right of exchange must 
be executed promptly for the merchant. Provision is made for 
bondsmen and slaves: their needs are satisfied in exchange for 
their labor. Citizens also work for their needs, but there is a 
world of difference between the activity of free citizens and 
slaves because the former work in the feeling that their prop-
erty is protected. Political freedom is likewise very imporrant, 
and where it is lacking, where it is suppressed, the state declines. 
For example Poland, for all its great past, was brought low, ini· 
tially in its industry, through the oppression of the nobility. The 
towns that once were so famous fell into decay, and now they 
are known only by name, and the whole country is partitioned. 
[It was) the same with the Italian cities, which used to be so fa· 
mous but for want of political freedom and independence are 
now for the most part insignificant backwaters. For without 
the administration of justice and political freedom the desire to 
enjoy, own, and acquire property disappears. It is only when 
there is rapid and transparent administration of justice and free· 
dom on the political scene that business activity becomes brisk. 
214 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
Each one of us, however, is dependent on others in reg;~d to 
even our most individual, trivial, and n~essary requirem~ts. 
We can say that we should examine this commodity or that ar-
ticle that we purchase to see whether it suits us, whether it is 
not too dear; but if we had to examine all such details it would 
require of us a great deal of time and trouble. So the commu-
nity must relieve us of this trouble and effort. Now since all 
have this concern, the community too, as something universal, 
has the right to examine these articles; for otherwise it could be 
said that it is not the concern of anyone how buyers and sellers 
conclude contracts with one another. But the article, e.g., bread, 
is offered for sale as something universal, and the individuals 
who come to buy it do so in contingent fashion, as abstract 
individuals. Hence the community has to I supervise and inves-
166 
tigate the general usability of the article; and the little effort it 
expends saves an infinite number of particular efforts of indi-
viduals, and those who work for others are relieved of this con-
cern. The dividing line here is indeterminate. The concern of 
the public authority must be confined solely to general com-
modities; and more artificial articles, which satisfy only particu-
lar needs, ought to be none of its concern; but it is not possible 
to indicate how far this ought to be extended. 
The whole community must also ensure that individual citi-
zens can satisfy their needs, i.e., that the commodities are avail-
able in adequate quantity and at not too high a price; but it 
must also take care that prices do not fall so low as to make it 
impossible for the producer to subsist. The business class and 
the agricultural class come into opposition in this way; the 
farmer wants to sell his produce dear, and the artisan wants to 
have it cheap. This puts an end to the equilibrium between the 
different classes, and frequently for relatively long periods. In 
England this is often the subject of deliberations in Parliament, 
and some years ago the import of fruit was permitted only if 
its price reached a certain level on the internal market. The 
commercial class has an interest that its goods should not be 
too highly taxed in order that their consumption should not 
215 

ETHICAL LIFE 
decrease, and since consumption rises disproportionately when 
prices are low, the exchequer draws in more when taxes are 
light than when they are heavier. 
The commercial class also has an interest that, in order that 
the country's own factories may grow, the import of products 
that are to be manufactured by them should be made difficult 
or prohibited. The reason why the freedom of trade among all 
states gives rise to difficulty is that an international treaty of 
this kind is something contingent and each state's principal con-
cern must be its own subjects. In England all enterprise is spec-
ulative in character, even the agricultural class tending in this 
direction. But the state must not be so closely tied to other na-
tions' needs as to make it possible for one business class to be 
187 
ruined if the link is destroyed. Commercial interests I and the 
interests of manufacturers are often in opposition here. And no 
interests of the one class may be exalted at the expense of those 
of another class. Thus annual fairs are organized where mer-
chants from abroad can also sell their wares in order that the 
consumers are not delivered over unduly to the caprice of the 
manufacturers of their own district or state; and by imposing 
high factory-gate duties on outgoing materials a state may im-
pel foreign manufacturers to come to it and use its nationals in 
their factories. If one class sells its goods in distant lands, the 
individual members of the class cannot clearly see how their af-
fairs are going, and the state must see to it. [It is] the same with 
the introduction of new machinery, as a result of which manual 
workers lose their jobs. The community must facilitate the in-
troduction of machines, but at the same time provide for those 
whose livelihood has disappeared. The state must look abroad, 
to obtain benefits for its subjects by trade negotiations. Roads 
and canals are particularly conducive to industry, but even more 
so the sea. It is also a distinctive feature of the sea that it im-
bues the commercial class with the dimension of courage: over 
against the principle of one's own utility, profit, and enjoyment, 
danger enters on the scene, and this gives rise to a courage, an 
indifference in regard to this end itself. For this reason the sat-
216 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
irists of old were unjustified in the strictures they passed on an 
adventurous spirit. 
~ 
H the population increases too much, the reSult is colonlla-
tion. Where property is indivisible, only one of the family be-
comes a freeholder and the others become servants, and here 
population remains stagnant. But where farm property can be 
divided up and there is freedom, there is a marked increase in 
population, and land becomes insufficient. People must then 
earn a necessitous living at factory work without free indepen-
dence; or else the state must see to it that they are given some 
uncultivated land or land not fully used by its occupants on 
which to realize the demands they make on the state to earn 
their living, and where they I can live in the same way as in the 
188 
home country-and this is bow colonies come into being. France 
and England have many colonies. Since these colonists forever 
remain citizens of their home country, they are very useful to it. 
But where a state faced with such land shortage makes no pro-
vision for its citizens, then the result, as with us here in Ger-
many, is emigrations, caused by overpopulation and the demand 
to be able to lead a specific mode of life. Migrants from Ger-
many, however, go out as individuals, and instead of being of 
use to the home country as colonists, they become assimilated 
to other peoples since their own country does not care for them. 
Initially colonies depend on the home country, but they gradu-
ally become independent and form states on their own. 
s 121 
Lasdy it is essential 
(1) that each individual should be allocated to a specific class 
or estate [Stand] and should take steps to acquire any specific skill 
or property qualification required in order to enter it; 
(2) that the classes in general, and also their various particu-
lar branches, should be formed into corporations [Korporationen) 
since they have the same vocation, [the same) concerns and inter-
ests, in order that what is implicidy alike should also become 
really existent in the shape of something communal [Gemeinsame] 
217 

ETHICAL LIFE 
and universal. [This is necessary in order to provide] for the com-
munal interest and [to ensure] an esprit de corps and individual 
welfare, and also, since each individual in his particularity is rooted 
in a universal, [to ensure] the essential strength of the whole. 
The natural diversity of the classes must not merely remain 
a natural diversity; it must also become really existent as a uni-
versal in order that it may be recognized as a universal. To have 
a real civil existence (Existenz] (qua bourgeois), everyone must 
belong to a specific class. However. it is first necessary to exam-
ine whether one has the appropriate skill and means to do so. 
These classes, which initially relate mer~ly t~ ~e~~. must become 
firmly established corporations. The rational element in corpo-
169 
ratiOns is thai the 1 universal represented by the communal in-
terest must become actually existent in determinate form. The 
atomistic principle-that each individual fends merely for him-
self and does not bother about a communal [end], the principle 
of leaving it to each and every one whether one wishes to join a 
certain class, not examining a person's suitability from a politi-
cal point of view since after all {as we are told by those who 
favor this principle) someone whose work fails to find any fa-
vor will shift to another line of business-such a principle aban-
dons the individual to contingency. 
The reflective standpoint of our time, ,!hl! @.~9IJUS.tk-spirit, 
~pirit that consists in taking pride in 9~-L~dividl:l_al inter-
~ 
and not in what is communal, i~ harmful an_d has b~ught 
about the decay of the corporations. Through this spirit Ger-
~any disini:egra.ted iiltc)aro;s and the empire went into de-
dine. The onset of this period of disintegration, this spirit of 
barbarism, came at a time when every baron and petty munici-
pality was crossing swords with the others, and so it came about 
that towns were formed through the conflict between burghers 
and nobles (the future patricians). The towns formed alliances, 
and so the Hanseatic and Swabian Leagues came into being, and 
in this way civil society was formed by means of corpora-
tions. In the towns all the trades were for their part also corpo· 
rations, and we had the esprit de corps of the guilds. This was 
218 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
the high tide of civil life; enjoyment lay in what was communal, 
and people did not amuse themselves for themselves but iA the 
community. 
\ 
Now th~~pirit is un!}erm~-~1? that ~pk are asbame4_gf 
their class, are unwilling to be seen as members of it, and take 
pride in themselves alone. The Greeks and Romans made the 
natural line of descent from a progenitor the basis of their divi-
sions. The basis we use, resting on one's trade, on a common, 
enduring, and present interest one has freely chosen, is a supe-
rior one. To be sure, the citizens of a city can also be divided 
from the point of view of the public authority according to dis-
tricts, but this is an external, purely spatial relationship-the 
basis here is the lifeless numerical one. 
It is the same with the division of the civil militia into com-
panies, this being done according to size, which is an external, 
unreal, and bad way of doing it as opposed to the way it was 
previously divided, according to corporations. But what also 
happened was that each corporation-not looking to the whole 
but I merely to itself, since the authority of the state was insuffi-
110 
dent-amassed all the rights it could lay its hands on, disre-
garding the rights of other corporations. For the state_ to be able ~ 
to subsist, it was tl.!_erefo~ary fo~~oratiO!l!.!C?. be 
deprived of their ~ower and prestige, and so they feU into de-
_jax. Corpo~as 
~-;_- ~~i.J!i piQvldi!"ti..lPi·~ c~miii~n i~~­
c;!ta-and the: w:ed to acMil..£91!mlOn is..a constaqtl:r.J'~ring 
~ut 
everyone must also take pride essentially in belong-
ing to a community, and the pride that consistS in seeking to 
shine as an individual ought not to be. The whole, the state, 
only achieves inner stability when what is universal, what is 
implicit, is also recognized as universaL The sphere of needs 
involves particular ends, which are, however, ordered as some-
thing communal. The whole is divided into parts whose deter-
minacy resides in the system of need. The essential interest of 
all particulars is to subsist, and this links them to the particu-
lar sphere. It rests on the particular vocation people elect for 
themselves; it is a real sphere, a concrete sphere pertaining to 
219 

ETHICAL LIFE 
(! activity. The particular ends of people are essential to them, but 
·;[together] they form something communal, and this is the most 
\essential aspect of civil society. 
3. The State 
§122 
The immediate substantiality of the family, substantiality at the 
level of feeling [empfindende Substantialitiit], or the ethical sub-
stance as individual, passes over, of itself, into civil society, whose 
particular aims and interests dissolve into a universal interest for 
one aim, the inner roots of which are the family, while its external 
reality, which must be brought back from unconscious necessity to 
universality, is civil society. Spirit in the natural state leads to an 
association of families, while particular needs lead to civil society; 
but as absolute duty, the universal that exists in and for itself leads 
111 
to the state [Staat]. J 
The state here differs from the state based on need that we 
encountered in the second sphere. The two principal moments 
arc simple subStantiality and its fragmentation into the sphere 
of difference. The former takes the form of feeling [Empfind-
ung], love, truSt, etc., while the latter takes the form of need to 
subsist for oneself, but in dependence, for something other than 
oneself.Sl This latter is the status of relationship-of indepen· 
dence, to be sure, but illuminated by something other than the 
self. It is the sphere of appcaranceSl in general, in which freedom 
exists in formal fashion. The one is solid identity, the other its 
fragmentation; as the first [sphere] is marked by the tie of love, 
so here we have the tie of necessity, where people behave to one 
another as independent beings. The third is the unity of the two, 
which appears as consciousness of freedom. Freedom exists as 
necessity and necessity as freedom. In civil society freedom is not 
a product of separation but of the natural tie. Here in the state 
Sl. Ms. could also"" r~~ad: in dependem:e on something other than oneself 
Sl. (Tr.] In the German there is a wordplay between hneinscheint ("illumi· 
nated") and E.rscheinung ("appearance") that cannot be reproduced in English. 
220 

THE STATE 
it is the product of separation and free, self-determined Ullion. 
Absolute duty leads into the state. The ethical life of the staJ;e is 
that freedom should be, that what is rational, the universal \\.ill, 
should happen as a necessity and have external existence,S3 
The inner roots of the state are the family. Family and state 
stand over against each other; the ruler is seen as the supreme 
head of a family, and the state continues to be based upon the 
family relationship as what is universal and all-embracing. The 
external reality of the one absolute end is civil society; however, 
this is the moment of negativity, where the form of universality 
emerges from need. This form of universality is a necessary mo-
ment of the state, but not for the purpose of particular needs; 
on the contrary, the essential end here is the free will. It is by re-
producing themselves for the welfare of individuals that the ends 
or purposes constitute [themselves], but they dissolve in the wel-
fare of the universal. The universal element in the state does not 
allow the particular purposes to ossify as such, but ensures that 
they keep on dissolving in the universaL I 
112 
s 123 
The state is the actuality of the ethical spU'lt as the mani-
fest, self-transparent universal will, achieving knowledge and ful-
fillment in custom as it exists immediately in the individual self-
consciousness. It is in the knowledge and activity of the individual 
self-consciousness that the state has its mediate actuality, just as 
53. (Tr.] dass Frriheit sei, dass dos Verniinftige, der allgemeine WiNe, als eine 
Notwendigkeit gescbehe rmd iiiiSSerliehu Damn balnt. C£. a similar formulation in 
the exposition to S 134: •wbar is rational musr happen" (was veminftig ist, rtriiSS 
gescheh~n). These formulations differ subtly bur significandy from the famous die-
tum found in rhe Prefac:e ro rhe published version of the Philosophy of Right: 
•Whar is rational is acrual; what is actual is rational" In the earlier lectures the 
emphasis is on a dynamic, unfinished process, and there is no legitimation of what· 
ever exists as rational. (Such a legitimation is nor intended in the Iacer formulation 
either sinee what is "actual" differs from what is empirically "reaL") See Elements 
of the Philosophy of Right, ed. Allen W. Wood. trans. H. B. Nisbet (Cambridp, 
1991), p. 20 (incl. n. 22). See also Shlomo Avineri's discussion of this matter in 
•ne Discovery of Hegel's Early Lectures on the Philosophy of Right, • The Owl of 
Minerva 16 (1985): 202-204. 
221 

ETHICAL LIFE 
the individual self-consciousness, by virtue of its disposition to 
know the state as its substance and the end and product of its ac-
tivity, has its freedom in the state. 
In the state the universal will becomes actual; the universal 
has determinate existence as absolute end. Here there is no long-
ing, nothing beyond our ken, no future; the purpose is actual 
and present. Identity is where what lies within is immediately 
external, so that inwardness occurs as externality and vice versa. 
The growth, etc., of a plant is something external, a determinate 
existence; but this concept constitutes its inner being, its na-
ture. The essence of self-consciousness is what is rational; only 
in self-consciousness is the rational will present. Spirit is here 
what has been brought to the fore, what is clear to itself and 
universal; it does not occur as in the sphere of necessity and as 
in civil society, but occurs as freedom. What we have here is 
the universal that knows itself, the will whose form is that of 
universality. 
In the same way that the universal is known here as law, 
which is revealed, so too it is actualized. Here the universal is 
the custom of a people, which is spirit and has the form of a 
universally natural event. A living organism is the first and the 
last because it has itself as the product of its activity. This activ-
ity constitutes the individuality of self-consciousness, which pos-
its itself as negativity and is the free ego, infinite relation to it-
self. Spirit has its actuality in the individual self-consciousness. 
Reason is essentially concrete and thus spirit. Spiritual natural-
ness [geistige Nattirlichkeit] gives rise to the family, need to civil 
society, and free will to the state. With the will as free will it is 
not only the good as an end that is required but the good in its 
actuality; howevet; the good is an idea, in the sense that it is not 
173 
immediately actual. In the state the good is I actually present, 
not something beyond. Animal organisms continually produce 
themselves, but what they produce already exists-they only re-
produce. [It is] the same with good in the state. The good is not 
a random disposition, not a disposition of the conscience; it is 
external, actual existence, and in order for it to be, the state can 
employ coercion. 
222 

THE STATE 
§ 124 
The right of the state consists in the idea of the state beintt.~ec­
ognized and actualized. Individuals have the right with their Par-
ticular will to enter the state and form part of it. H they do not 
enter it of their own free will, they place themselves in the state of 
nature, where their right is not recognized, and this recognition 
must come about by natural means, through the struggle for rec-
ognition and use of force. In this relationship of force the divine 
right is on the side of the founder of the state. 
The state is universal will, which is actual universal self-
consciousness, the idea of God. For this reason the universal es-
sence of the state has also been worshiped by the nations as a 
god. It is freedom in its universality and in its actuality; that 
this idea should be, is the supreme right. Freedom is pure ac-
tivity, and this activity qua freedom is self-consciousness; thus 
the idea is realized in the individual self-consciousness. As in 
abstract right persons place their freedom in external, natu-
ral things, so the material form of substantial freedom is self-
consciousness. Substantial freedom invests itself in the individ-
ual self-consciousness, which is devoid of rights over against it. 
If individuals oppose this idea, they are devoid of rights, wholly 
lacking in dignity. The absolute right of the state is to be actual-
ized by means of the individual self-consciousness. 
It is a matter of free choice for individuals, who have per· 
sonal freedom, whether in principle they wish to enter the state. 
They ought to have their idea in the state, ought to become ac-
tually free through the negativity of their particularity. Self-
consciousness is the essential moment in the idea of the state. 
[But] if it is the particular will of the individual not to be in the 
state, then that individual resolves to exist as an immediate en· 
tity I and enters the state of nature over against-the state; the 
174 
consequence must be conflict between the state and the indi-
vidual. What is free must have itS knowledge in another self-
consciousness: this is itS higher mode of existence, existence at 
the representational level. It is only in the will of another that 
an individual can have this determinate existence through be-
ing recognized by the other•s will. There is in consequence no 
223 

175 
ETHICAL LIFE. 
longer a mutual indifference between persons; there must be 
mutual recognition, and there arises the struggle for recognition 
whereby one accepts the risk of giving up the natural mode of 
existence. In opposition to immediate being, freedom presents 
itself solely as negativity. Each of us incurs this risk in which 
we expose our natural being to being negated. Any who resolve 
on their own account to retain their freedom vis-8-vis the state 
thereby contend with the state for recognition; but divine right 
rests with the state, which therefore has the right of coercion in 
regard to those individuals who resolve to remain free in nature. 
The founders of states must be regarded as heroes who are 
founders of the divine right [gottliches Recht] and who there-
fore have the right of coercion; they are regarded as heroes by 
the nations even if they have used force to bring their individual 
subjects together. 
s 125 
Another feature of the founding of states is that in cases where 
corporations and. associations of civil society, which rest in the 
-first place on a common inter~p;.tic~r purpose, are in pos-
session of a power that belongs conceptually to the state-possess-
ing it not as an emanation from the state but as a purely private 
right of their own vis-a-vis the state-then the state as universal 
unity has the absolute right to annul such particular possession. 
r · It is very often the case with us that states developed out 
of corporations, e.g., through feudalism; this explains the peo-
, 
. -· .. ·-·-· 
; pl~ual~against the magJ;tates.in our states. As third estate 
I 
[Stand] the people I in tum formed corporations, by means of 
which they took advantage of the weakness of the state to se-
cure privileges for themselves. 
~ 
been these privileges agail)st wlllch the whC?le tendency 
of recent times has been directed. In other countries such as 
""ffiilce and England the state established control over these par-
ticular rights. But in Italy for instance the opposite happened. 
The fact that private citizens reduced the state to ruins might 
give the semblance of being freedom. If single citizens, be they 
224 

THE STATE 
individuals or corporations, possess rights belonging to th~·state, 
the state has divine right over against them, and can and ipust 
take these rights from them....COiporations cl~~m their privil~ges 
as their private property, and they have form on their side. In 
Germany the ~upreme authority has sold or handed over one by 
one these rights belonging to the state. The constituent members 
of the state have arranged matters with the supreme author-
ity in such a way that it handed over to them as purely private 
rights these rights belonging to the st~~ in this way the 
rights of the state have become jura s(~gulorum [private rights] 
in a manner absolutely contrary to right. No regard was had to 
where these rights came from or to the fact that they were state 
rights that cannot be possessed by individuals. 
There is a work by Moser enumerating all these rights pos-
sessed by individuals, both state rights and their purely private 
rights. 54 Here bt:_l()gg..the revek.ltions.n(_recc;pt times. There _ _\Vere 
classes [Stiinde] and _i!l_d_ivjd~b w..lm pgsscss.td....as .purely: pri-. 
vaterlghts, rights belonging to the state, especially in regard to 
tax~!.J~,g,,_lreedom from tax~iiP!l) and jurisdiction. And our 
day has seen a step taken toward the rational existence [Exis-
tenz] of the state that has not been taken for a thousand years 
past: the right of reason has been asserted over against the 
form of private right. Private circles protest loudly at this, and 
in France the emigres still want to have their privileges back. In 
the same way the nobility in Germany invoke right in support 
of their former privileges. But only rarely can the state be bound 
by right to pay compensation. Thus no compensation can be 
demanded in regard to freedom from taxes, because the classes 
in question no longer have to render any services; if there were 
to be compensation, the state would take away with one hand 
what it gave with the other. There can be no question of de-
manding compensation for all such rights as that of jurisdiction 
or the exclusive right of appointment to the rank of officer and 
54. (Ed.] Cf. Johann Jacob Moser, Ne/4# TIIUtsches Stlllltsrecht, 23 vols. 
(Stuttgart, Frankfurt, Leipzig, 1766-1782). 
225 

ETHICAL LIFE 
176 
other offices, I since it would rather be open to the state to pre-
sent this class with a bill for its enjoyment of these rights. It is a 
different matter when there is vassalage, as in the case of laude-
mium [seeS 25 exposition]; the form here becomes one of pri-
vate property, and to the extent that the property is supposed to 
be, and to become, free of servitudes, those who gain thereby 
must pay compensation to the losers. The universal element 
constituted by the will that exists in and for itself is here con-
fronted by nothing that could make itself particular. 
S126 
The life of the state is 
(1) its organism in relation to itself in the form of constitutional 
law [inneres Staatsrecht]; 
(2) its self-sufficient individuality in relation to other states: 
international law [ausseres Staatsrecht]; 
(3) its universal idea as genus or generation [Gattung] and as 
absolute power vis-a-vis the individuality of single states: history 
[ Geschichte ]. 
For example an animal organism articulates itself in the first 
place from within. Secondly, organic nature is turned against a 
nature that is inorganic over against it. The third aspect is the 
process of generation [Prozess der Gattung]; as universal power, 
the genus pursues its development and presents itself as univer-
sal. In the same way the process of the state is, first, that it has 
its life within itself, then the need to exist over against other 
states as power and authority. This is the stage of irritability, of 
war and peace with other states, the state maintaining itself here 
as an independent, self-sufficient individual. Thirdly, universal 
spirit actualizes itself as world spirit [Weltgeist]; the genus man-
ifests itself in solely negative fashion vis-a-vis individuality and 
relapses continually into singularity, while the universal becomes 
more manifest. The ensuing stage of history is always higher, 
and this is the perfectibility of spirit. It is not merely that the 
genera manifest themselves by means of the extinction of the in-
dividuals; in sublating its phenomenal form, the spirit of the age 
177 
[Zeitgeist] attains in the transition a higher stage. I 
226 

THE STATE 
A. Constitutional Law 
§127 
~ 
l 
The life-principle [LebendigkeitJ of the state as an ethical to-
tality is actualized to such an extent that the universal free will 
brings itself forth with necessity; only to the extent that it does so 
is the state an organic whole. Its constitution or system of govern-
ment [VerfassungJSS is the rationality of a people and the organiz-
ing principle of its freedom. 
For the will that is free in and for itself to be, it must be with 
necessity. Freedom must be, not in the sense of contingency but 
in that of necessity. Its actual being consists in its inner organi-
zation. A people is rational only to the extent that its constitu-
tion is rational. By "people" [Yolk] we mean a unity in regard 
to customs, culture, etc., and this unity is existing substance [die 
seiende SubstanzJ. The people as pure and simple mass is still 
devoid of rationality, for rationality is only the whole system; 
thus the sun and the earth are not rational, but the solar system 
and its organization expressed in time and space is rationality. 
The mass is not what is rational: one cannot have respect for 
a people as mere people. A people that does not have a noble 
constitution is a bad people; only the universal can be genuinely 
respected. It is a different matter if one is comparing individ-
uals with individuals in [the realm of] morality. The constitu-
tion means that the universal will must be brought forth. 
§128 
As an external necessity the state stands opposed to private in-
dividuals and to the system of needs and particularity in general, 
to the extent that this system's purpose and that of the state con-
flict. Since the former purpose becomes firmly fixed as an external 
purpose for itself, I the power of the state appears as coercive power 
178 
and its right over against such purpose as a right of coercion. 
Such external necessity is not the necessity of freedom. Such 
necessity occurs when purposes pertaining to the state based on 
SS. [Tr.) By •ronsritution" (Vn{AfSimg) Hegel means Dot merely a written doc::-
ument but rhe way in which a government is ac::tUally organized. 
227 

ETHICAL LIFE 
need clash with the state. The state must not allow the purposes 
of the state based on need to take root within it, but must con· 
standy draw them back within its substance; its attitude to them 
is merely negative. If a corporatio.!!_!dopts an attitude counter 
to the universal purpose of the state, if what is private-seeks 
to us§ mc·_State-inerelt_!~~~~~~ar~rposes, t~~~ t~~-state 
appears as a CQ~civ~er. This struggle is on the one hand 
what gives life, on the other hand it is the state's inorganic na· 
ture, which it constantly has to bring back into universality. If 
something that has its particular purpose opposed to the pur· 
pose of the state becomes fixed on its own account, the state be-
comes an external over against this external. The state's right of 
coercion enters into play when the state departs in any respect 
from what is ideal [idee/1).5' We now have to consider the con· 
ditions of inner necessity. 
s 129 
There are two aspects to be considered in regard to the consti· 
tution of the state: 
(1) The concept of the state in terms of its inner organic deter· 
mination. 
(2) The allocation of individuals to its universal spheres of ac· 
tion and their participation in them. 
But the concept of the state itself comprises two moments: 
(a) to be universal, pure spirit, and 
(b) to be actualized spirit, bringing itself forth through its own 
activity. 
Actualized spirit involves the self-determination and individual-
ity of the will, whereas universal, pure spirit is the substance, the 
end, and the self-consciousness of all. But where, as actuality and 
activity, this individual will of universal spirit behaves as an in-
179 
wardly I inarticulated mass, it is caprice and contingency, and the 
whole is no more than an immediate actuality. 
The concept of the state is in principle the universal as such. 
56. Ms. could also be read: when the state contains anything not penaining to 
the idea [ideal) 
228 

THE STATE 
The first aspect is universal spirit viewed on its own aCCQunt, 
while the second is how the individuals making up this macuial 
are allocated to universal spirit. There must be organic life witlun 
the state, and individuals must have a determinate share or par-
ticipation in the universal sphere of action. The first aspect is 
the life of spirit on its own account, of which we say that it 
is active universal will, universal freedom determining itself in-
wardly. To this extent law plays no part, and it is thought [that 
is active); however, where the will is concerned, law springs 
into action. The universal spirit is in the first place simply pure 
universal spirit, but it is also concrete universal spirit, which 
reproduces itself; together these two moments constitute spirit. 
An individual is the son of his people; all he knows is contained 
in the universal substance. The universal is the soil in which he 
has a mode of being, a position. So it is also the purpose of all 
individuals that this essence, this substance should be,S7 that it 
should be continually brought forth. Individuals are moments 
of this substance; their knowledge of themselves is as of partic-
ular beings, but all their knowing is mediated by substance, it· 
self immediate. This substance is the real self-consciousness of 
all. As far as this self-consciousness is concerned, the universal-
ity of knowledge-the spirit inherent in the knowledge of all-
is communal spirit. But if this spirit were to remain something 
whole, substantial, it would be something inwardly inarticulated, 
its will would be only whole, undifferentiated will, it would be 
caprice. Spirit is [here] immediately actual; it is what knows and 
what is known, and this knowledge is itself self-consciousness; 
the spirit has actuality. Individuals' certainty or certain assur-
ance of themselves is the immediate actuality of spirit. But im-
mediate actuality is contingent; it is a I possible actuality, one 
180 
that either may be or may not be. 
Substance, however, is immediate actuality, and as such has 
57. [Tr.] dass diesel Weun <Iiese Subsumz sei. Our ttanslation construeS the two 
nouns to stand in apposiJion (and rhua adds a comma between them) ramer than in 
a subject-predicate relation (which would translate as "rhat rhis essence should be 
rhis substance"). 

ETHICAL LIFE 
not yet genuine reality. It is to this that one is referring if one 
says there must be a corporate spirit in the state; this corpo-
rate spirit is then the universal foundation, but one must rise 
above it. A corporate spirit does not come about simply by en-
couraging or commanding people to display it; such encourage-
ment is moral in character, since it is imputed to the subject. The 
corporate spirit is an attitude, but it must be an end in itself for 
each individual and cannot be left to the will of each individual 
as something moral. By command it is imputed externally as a 
duty. The corporate spirit exists; for it to do so, the life of the 
state must be actual. The English have a corporate spirit be-
cause they know all individuals receive their right, and the state, 
as universal will, is their will, the people's own will. In the state 
all nations find the essence of their freedom, find their substance. 
In Oriental despotism, however, there is no articulation, indi-
viduals disappear in the one will, and the unity is inwardly un-
articulated. It is the same in a purely democratic state, to the 
extent that ea~h -indi~idual has only to-say_his w!!J_~!l~ this will 
ini"me~titi~.iO pUs; ana·wearethe~ n~ in the presence 
of necessity but of an undifferentiated mass, which can be as well 
one thing as another. 
s 130 
It is in its organic inner activity [Tiitigkeit], freedom as negative 
self-relation, that the spiritual substance brings itself forth in living 
fashion. Universal spirit is in consequence differentiated inwardly, 
and its universality is engendered from this differentiation, from 
the articulation and apportionment of its universal sphere of ac-
tion and power into the different moments making up its concept 
as into distinct powers and spheres of action. The fact that the ul-
timate aim, which is a universal work and mode of being as well 
as a universal human attitude or disposition, is engendered from 
the determinate action of the different spheres of activity, consti-
tutes the inner necessity [innere Notwendigkeit] of freedom. 
Necessity involves the existence of two self-differentiating en-
181 
tities, two distinct self-determinants in which the concept I is di-
vided; but the concept exists in both of them, and their move-
230 

THE STATE 
ment consists in dissolving into this identity. Absolute spirit de-
termines itself and is nature, but is truly spirit in returning wiifun 
itself. It is only through this differentiation that spirit is life. Aqi-
mals that are less than perfect are those with a low degree of ar-
ticulation, which exist as [mere) masses; with higher organisms 
reproduction involves the mediating action of movement. Ani-
mals that are all of one piece are those with a low degree of cor-
poreal organization. 
The essence of spirit as state is to differentiate itself inwardly, 
to divide itself; in this way it loses its contingent character. It is 
only as a result of this division that it is something living, or-
ganic. Enjoyment arises only in the form of coming back out 
of this differentiation. In religion the individual rises above the 
plane of work. Universal freedom is also no [mere] enjoyment, 
no rest, but something serious. Living actuality consists in the 
continual self-generation and self-determination of substance; 
this moment of negativity is the moment of freedom. The dis-
tinctions within the state must exist as members, each with its 
peculiar organization, which are inwardly independent and gen-
erate or reproduce the whole. Spirit exists as pure substantial 
unity, but in this self-differentiation it makes itself the cause [of 
the different powers and spheres of action]. To say that the best 
constitution is the one where the best people rule is to say some-
thing very trivial, since the question whether the constitution is 
to be good cannot be made dependent on contingency. Plato and 
Aristotle regard it as divine good fortune if government is in the 
hands of the best, and believe that necessity is to be found when 
they are at the helm.sa 
§ 131 
The concept of the state comprises the following three moments: 
(1) The universal rational will, both as the constitution and con-
stitutional laws and as laws properly speaking: the constitution it-
self and the legislative power [gesetzgebende Gewalt]. 
SB. [Ed.] Hegel is referring to Plato, Re[Jublic 412c; and Aristotle, Politics 
3.1S.1286a38·b11. 
231 

ETHICAL LIFE 
(2) The particularization of the universal will by subsuming the 
particular under it as counsel and reflection, partly by raising it to 
182 
and equipping it for the form of universality, I partly by applying 
the universal to the individual: the executive power [Regierungs-
gewalt). 
(3) The reflection of the whole into itself, the individual will 
as the ultimate power of decision and command: the sovereign or 
princely power [{Urstliche Gewalt). 
These three moments correspond to the moments of the con-
cept itself, in the same way as in the organism we have sensi-
bility, irritability, and reproduction as the unity of sensibility 
and irritability. The state is (1) a universal as universal; the uni-
versal as universal subsisting in and for itself is the constitution, 
and the universal in relation to the particular is law. Law is the 
universal element in the particular. The constitution is absolute 
power. In the state it is not given; the state has only the legis-
lative powec. (2) The executive power, whereby the universal is 
applied to the particular and the particular is raised to the uni-
versal: the application of the constitution and the laws. This in-
cludes equipping or preparing the particular for the laws, and 
also the power of enacting. Application of the universal to the 
particular is also one mode of enactment. (3) The subjectivity 
of the whole, whereby the whole becomes a subject: here we 
have the apex of the pyramid. 
Kant declared that freedom is only ensured by the separation 
of powers, and he distinguished (1) the legislative, constituent 
power, (2) the judicial power, (3) the executive power.n The 
idea here is that each of the three powers retains the ultimate 
power of decision, and this makes them three powers; but since 
none of them is subordinate to the others, the whole is not an 
organic whole, and since each is separate from the others, they 
do not form moments of the concept. The legislative power 
gives laws, and the laws are only what is universal, and the uni-
versal as power of decision is something subjective; but the uni-
59. [Ed.) Kant. It«hrsWr., pp. 164-173 (SS 45-49). Cf. Kant, Sclni(un 
6:313-318. 
232 

THE STATE 
versal must be transparent to itself. However. these different mo-
ments should be living, so each should include the other~two 
within itself. The legislative power is enacting, and 1 the execu-
183 
rive power too has the power of decision. As living, the sover-
eign power is also, to be sure, what has the power of decision, 
but it decides according to the universal and in the universal. 
s 132 
This division is 
(1) the absolute guarantee for freedom, because through it 
alone freedom has actual rights within itself. Right is the existence 
[Dasein] of freedom, but existence is to be found only in determi-
nation and differentiation. By virtue of the fact that in the con-
stitution the particular spheres of action of the universal will are 
present not only [as] duties but (as differentiated powers) also as 
rights, the universal will is coupled to particularity, namely to the 
sphere to which belong the peculiar activity and the interests of in-
dividuals-individuals who have to defend the rights of this sphere 
as their own, in the same way that being assigned to such particu-
lar duties they are educated by means of this division of the uni-
versal labor and have their peculiar self-consciousness in sustain-
ing one essential moment of the universal will as a right that belongs 
to them. 
[We still have to describe] how the particular will of individ-
uals as particular is and can be combined with the universal 
will. For individuals to be active, for them to have an [active] 
interest, they must possess something particularly their own. 
Since they are living, actual subjects, it must be the case that in 
working for the universal they attain their particular purposes. 
If the state as individual has to maintain itself against another 
individual, another state, the entire state and all its citizens are 
involved. But things are different within the state itself. Peo-
ple take no share in the universal unless it is in their own self-
interest. But the universal must occur necessarily, and the moral 
will can be disregarded here; instead, since the universal! must 
184 
occur, the individuality of each as such must reside in the uni-
versal. The universal must be accomplished and in such a way 
233 

ETHICAL LIFE 
that the individual, in accomplishing the universal, is work-
ing for himself. The particularity of the individual will must be 
maintained in the universal will. Here we have universality and 
particularity conjoined on the real plane. On the one hand this 
is patriotism, while on the other it can be said that the individ-
ual is acting egoistically. The corporate spirit or patriotism does 
not afford this guarantee; instead it is when the universal will 
particularizes itself that it ceases to be a merely moral will and 
becomes [a] necessary will. 
Now the division consists in individuals being assigned a 
sphere of action in which they have their existence [Existenz] 
and in which their honor resides, a sphere that is of service to 
the universal. Patriotism en masse has no inner necessity, and 
involves no rights. Likewise there are no rights in despotism. 
The well-known saying divide et impera [means] one must di-
vide in order to have to deal with particulars as particulars and 
not with everyone bound together; but it is just this principle of 
"divide and rule" that also first gives rise to freedom since it 
sublates the elementary level of volition and action. (The fact 
that the state has rights vis-a-vis other states follows directly 
from the fact that it is distinct from them, but we are speaking 
initially of relationships within the state itself.) 
For freedom to exist as right, it must endow itself with im-
mediate externality. It is only through the process of differen-
tiating and determining that this universal freedom attains ex-
istence [Dasein] within itself, attains being-for-other. Judgment 
[Urtei/]60 is the immediate existence of the concept; it is only as 
judgment that the concept is made existent. Rights arise in that 
the constitution is what makes freedom existent, i.e., panicular-
izes the spheres of action of the universal will. As essential mo-
ments of the freedom of the whole these spheres exist in neces-
sary fashion, and duties and rights come on the scene. By this 
60. [Tr.] Hegel thought that this term, normally translated "judgment," con-
tains within itself the idea of a primal division or differentiation (ur-tei/en). How-
ever, urtei/en derives from erteilen (to share out or distribute) and is not connecred 
etymologically with the idea of "primal division." 
234 

THE STATE 
means the universal and the particular will are united. Ii'idivid-
uals to whom such a sphere of action is assigned as they :t,feely 
choose, and who devote themselves to it, have their aptitu&. in 
the specialized field in question and, as particulars, belong to 
it, I their own peculiar interests and activity being vested in it. 
185 
In patriotism the aim is that all should be alike, but here where 
we are dealing with education we have particularization. In a 
republic, where the educational stage has not yet been reached, 
we have this virtue of the ancients [pauiotism]. But this mo-
ment of infinite value that individuals have within themselves 
as individuals, this principle of the Christian religion to the ef-
fect that each single individual should be deemed of value as 
such, [that there] should be no slavery, that all should know 
themselves equally in religion [as] objects of divine love-this 
requires that what is individual must give itself existence [Exis-
tenz], and its determinate existence [Dasein] is particularity. The 
subject is only what is singular; the particularity or determinate 
existence of the subject comes from the predicate or attribute, 
and particularity relates to universality. On the one hand the uni-
versal must particularize itself; [on the other hand] not only does 
the individual have its essence, its substance in particularity, but 
also it maintains itself in this particularity, and as this particular 
it knows itself as in the universal, it labors for the community 
[AIIgemeinheit]. 
Only through its bringing forth does the individual subsist in 
its particularity, and this is its interest. Its pure interest is that 
this end should be brought about through it, that as the result 
of bringing forth it should posit itself, that it should have in the 
product the consciousness of itself; it must know the product 
as its own. The content is something particulat; has determinate 
existence, and can therefore differ greatly! it may relate either 
solely to the subsistence and instincts of individuals (and this is 
self-interest) or to the universal. If in their patriotism the will 
of all is directed to doing what is universal, this particulariza-
tion is overcome. After the Peloponnesian War, for instance, the 
Greeks became restless, each wanting to be involved in every-
thing and do everything, and the whole then degenerates into 
235 

ETHICAL LIFE 
powerlessness. It is by particular spheres of action being as-
signed to individuals that this division comes about. Labor be-
comes abstract and acquires the form of universality, and indi-
186 
viduals must I educate or train themsdves for their sphere of 
action. On the universal level, in the sphere of mass existence 
[wo das Massenhafte existiert], the universal becomes something 
contingent, since all believe that the only thing needed is their 
good will and no particular aptitude is necessary. 
In regard to individuals, education or training is an absolute 
necessity. In recent times those who have acquired no aptitude 
for a particular class go into the universal sphere of the mass 
[Massenhafte], the military class, and there prove lacking (e.g., 
Colonel Massenbach, who as quartermaster-general failed to re-
connoiter on the occasion of a number of engagements and so 
caused very serious damage to the Prussian army and showed 
himself completely incompetent, never knowing where he was; 
in recent times, being no longer of any significance for the mili-
tary, he emerged as a patriot). 
This education is something immediately necessary. If indi-
viduals vest their aptitude in a particular sphere of action, they 
must defend this status and view it as their own. A universal 
spirit of patriotism is formed by the fact that universal freedom 
comes about through particularization. There must be universal 
patriotism, but it must come about through esprit de corps. n 
Now if such corporations have many privileges, they can be-
come dangerous to the whole; they must be given their purpose 
by the ui:iiVer5a1 and for tlie universal. It is only through their 
actions, through their activity, that people proclaim what they 
are, but this activity must have its ground, its logical connec-
tion, in the universal. It must be a concern of the universal that 
they perform their functions not as single individuals through 
their contingent freedom of choice but as members of a corps. 
And in entering on a concern or sphere of action of the state, 
they make the state the center of their activity and attitude, and 
61. (Tr.] Here the text IISC$ the French phrase instead of Stantkub,. And iust 
below, the word Korps (•corps") is innodiiCed. 
2.36 

THF. STATE 
the entire corps must defend its concern and becomes answer-
able for it. To be sure, individuals must stand at the al>ex, but 
the corporation causes them to operate through a corps 6j coun-
selors. In the corps each defends his own honor and the ·honor 
of the corps as a whole. I 
1e 
s 133 
Since this division makes the particular spheres of action self-
subsistent bodies with their own peculiar rights, it cannot 
(2) make the spheres mutually independent so that the unity 
of the whole should result from their self-subsistent action. But 
equally, as they are within themselves a totality, on the one hand 
they have their determination and their rights only in and through 
the general constitution [of the state], while on the other hand for 
the ultimate decision of will they must join together in an actual 
individual unity. 
The different spheres of action and powers must essentially 
join together in a dual unity, in inner unity and in essentially in-
dividual unity. Each particular sphere of action subsists for it-
self and has within itself the whole concept, and to that extent 
a totality determined in such a way as to constitute a moment 
of the whole. Where individual classes or corporations cared 
for themselves (e.g., the Hanseatic League in Germany, which 
took to itself and invested itself with the state's duty and right 
to protect trade), this caring did not issue from the whole, and 
is a matter of their caprice. But the fact that all spheres of ac-
tion or powers in the state must issue from what is universal is 
the inner unity and the external unity, the unity that exists in its 
own distinctive way. 
It seems somewhat superfluous that a supreme power con-
sisting in this subjective unity should unite all powers; when 
each single power is acting as it should, it seems that the uni-
versal thereby becomes existent ipso facto. All French consti-
tutions had the defect that they lacked the subjective unity, the 
apex, which came necessarily into being in the form of imperial 
and then royal power. The interplay between juxtaposed pow-
ers none of which forms the apex of the pyramid inevitably 
237 

ETHICAL LIFE 
results in one or another power rising above the others and 
standing over them. In France, where the king was only in-
188 
valved in negative fashion in the I universal power, being able 
to do no more than veto the proposals of the legislative body, 
the apex was too weak, and a state of tension became unavoid-
able the more the legislative body considered itself justified in 
its proposals that were rejected. In this mutual independence of 
the powers these two powers stood over against one another, 
and unity could only be decided by means of conflict. First the 
legislative power prevailed over the royal power, and the king 
was sentenced and executed by the legislative power. Then the 
Committee of Public Safety rose to the top, and the very top of 
the pinnacle was Robespierre. This point of unity centered in 
an individual, to whom the legislative power was slavishly sub-
servient, performing deeds that attracted universal amazement. 
A wholly republican constitution was drafted, for the legislative 
body had collapsed. However, this democratic constitution could 
not take effect because of its inner nullity, and the Directory's 
constitution came into being. But the basic evil remained not-
withstanding, in that the legislative power was quite indepen-
dent of the Directory, which was surrounded by a great show 
of pomp and might. Th~•inevitable struggle ensued, each side 
making it a point of duty to save the state; however, the power 
that was at the head of the army, the executive power, was the 
stronger. The apex of power was then reestablished by Bona-
parte, first as consul, then as emperor; but because in so doing 
he did injury to the rational, the apex he established was over-
thrown despite the external power at its disposal. 
This is why Fichte, in his constitution, set up two self-subsis-
tent powers in opposition to each other, the executive and the 
ephorate. The ephorate's function was confined to supervising 
the laws, and its authority supposedly consisted in the fact that 
it first drew the executive's attention to any mistakes that oc-
curred and, if they were not put right, it then imposed an inter-
189 
diet restraining the executive in all its branches and I overthrew 
it; and the entire might of the people was supposed to enforce 
238 

THE STATE 
the interdict of the ephorate, in which its whole confidence 
rested. ' 2 However, the hollowness of this constitution is alleady 
apparent from the facts that two self-subsistent powers are'top-
posed to each other and that the executive can easily send the 
whole ephorate into exile, as the French did. In Sparta, where 
the ephors were very strong, they gave rise to a terrible aristoc-
racy, which Cleomenes and Agis-the noblest characters known 
to us in history-were unable to overthrow when they wanted 
to bring back the former constitution of Lycurgus. This simple 
subjectivity, this simple apex of power ([as) in the moral sphere 
the conscience) is necessary essentially in accord with the con-
cept. In England the king is this ultimate apex too, but the 
constitution as a whole reduces him virtually to a cipher. Since 
1692 there has never been a case of the king's vetoing a parlia-
mentary decree, and the cabinet, which is responsible for every-
thing, also becomes as nothing if it does not have the half of 
Parliament on its side. However, this inner unity of the concept 
must also be actualized. 
s 134 
The first and most important question seems to be: By whom is 
the constitution of a people or nation [Volk] to be made? Yet the 
constitution should be regarded rather as the foundation of a peo-
ple's life in the spheres of right and ethics, existing in and for itself, 
and essentially not as something made and subjectively posited. Its 
absolute cause is the principle of a national spirit [Volksgeist) as it 
develops in history. The causes of the individual factors determin-
ing this development may be very diverse in shape. This historical 
element in the development itself gives the constitution the shape 
of a higher authority. 
In this section we pose the question: Who is to make the con-
stitution-the people or someone else? And the answer I is: No 
190 
62. [Ed.) johann Gottlieb F"achtc, Gnmdlage des Naturrechts tu~ch Principisn 
der Wiuenschaftsl6hre (jena and Leipzig, 1796), pp. 192-193, 207-213 (S 16). Cf. 
Fichte, GesamtaHSgabe 3: 440, 448-452. 

ETHICAL LIFE 
one. it makes itself. There is nothing easier than to formulate 
the general principles of a constitution, for in our day these con-
cepts have become conventional abstractions. The past twenty-
five years have seen a score or more of constitutions, all defective 
to a greater or lesser degree. The constitution is the foundation, 
the basis on which everything transpires. I~ 
therefore be 
viewed .!!U.!l.ttcmalioundation, not as _!..n_wifact -AiJcOiistitii~-­
tions are also the inne--r-dcvelopmcntS'~f the national spirit, the 
foundation in which it expresses tfle stage of self-consciousness 
it has reached. In the constitution we have the people with its 
spirit, and this product of the national spirit can only be further 
determined in a specific individual way. 
Above all, it is a wholly abstract, empty question to ask, Who 
is to make the constitution? Rousseau presented the constitu· 
tion as a social contract of all with each and each with all;'l 
but this implies the whim or freedom of individuals to choose 
whether to enter [into the contract] or not. The national spirit, 
however, is something necessary, and has merely to be known; 
and this knowledge cannot be the affair of the whole people, 
but only of the best educated, of the wise. It is false to leave the 
framing of the constitution to what is properly called the peo-
ple [Yolk], since the people do not have a mature inner aware-
ness of the national spirit [Volksgeist]. Formerly legislation was 
regarded as something divine; Moses' constitution was given by 
God. In Athens civil strife made the constitution unworkable, 
so it was judged necessary to formulate what united all the citi-
zens, and Solon was entrusted with the task of drawing up the 
constitution. Solon made use of the oracle as his authority. The 
heroic figure of Theseus united the people who were living dis· 
persed. Louis XVIII gave his people an inviolable constitution; 
the king, as highest authority, gave the constitution, incorporat-
ing in it all the liberal ideas the national spirit had developed 
63. (Ed.] jean jacques Rousseau, Prindpes du droit politiqu• (Amsterdam, 
1762), esp. book 1, cltap. 6 (pp. 26 ff.). Cf. Rousseau, Du contrat soci41; ou, Prin-
Qpls du droit politique, in Rousseau, CEurwes complites, vol. 3 (Paris, 1964), pp. 
360 ff. 
240 

THB STATE 
since the time of the Revolution. The people were dimly aware 
of what they had to have. Public opinion, this powerfullexer I 
191 
of today, includes an essential element of reason, but eq~y 
superficiality and falsities, and cannot be taken as an infallible 
guide. The authentic part of the [French) national spirit, what 
it produced, [the king) bestowed on the people in the Charter 
[of 1814); and whether by calculation or free choice, he did not 
display the petty-mindedness of the emigres and his own rela-
tives. That he gave the people the constitution was only the act 
of authority, but the content was the national spirit refined. 
Now this charter is a beacon, and its basis is the form of per-
manence. The better is here the worse because it does not incor-
porate the form of permanence; and so, in order not to take 
away the form of permanence, which is essential, it is prefer-
able to leave what is bad in the constitution. The constitution 
as a whole must be based absolutely on immutability. But the 
constitution itself, the national spirit, is something divine, which 
makes itself in history, through its own doing. 
The princely authority in general was viewed as something 
divine, but the constitution must be so regarded. It is the spirit 
of the people that produces and develops the constitution; con-
sequently it must be subjected to further individual determina-
tions, but this can happen in many ways. Single provisions can 
be changed, but not the whole that is gradually evolving; and 
the nation cannot suddenly change the whole consciousness of 
its spirit, as would happen if the constitution were turned up-
side down. The vassals may engage in open conflict with the 
prince, or the prince may seek to exalt the crown, or the peo-
ple its powet; at the expense of the other. Educational processes 
bring about a peaceful change, a casting off of the old shell and 
a rejuvenation of the constitution. The executive, as middle es-
tate, struggles with one of the other two sides, prince or people. 
If the prince subdues the vassals, a rational constitution can en-
sue, or at least one that constitutes a formal whole, and this is 
what happened in England and I France-the king subdued the 
192 
vassals. The converse happened in Germany and Italy. 
241 

ETHICAL LIFE 
The national spirit is the substance; what is rational must 
happen.64 Since in principle the constitution is a development, 
the individual moments acquire the form of something won by 
struggle, either by one side or the othet; people or prince, by 
contractual means or by force. (The form of the state is not in 
fact essentially that of a contract.) The fact that the constitution 
appears as something won by the struggles of one's forebears 
confers a higher authority on the external shape; however, gen-
uine rationality is the inner authority, being in harmony with 
the national spirit. The contractual form of constitutional de-
velopment is not in fact the rational, but merely a formal prop-
erty. But the rational must always find a way, for it possesses 
truth, and we must cease to fear that bad constitutions might 
be made. 
s 135 
The general dividing line between constitutions is between those 
that are based on nature and those based on freedom of the will. 
In the case of those based on nature, people who are weaker in 
disposition, or in other ways, attach themselves to families of no-
ble lineage or heroic dynasties and assume a stance of naturally di-
vine dependence on them. According to this principle, however, pri-
vate right and political right belong to the will of the individuals 
as such as their own property. The patriarchal and Oriental sys-
tems, then the aristocratic system, and finally the democratic system 
mark the transition from the natural principle, where dependence 
is envisaged in naturally divine fashion, to the principle of the will, 
the principle of the spiritually divine. 
Whether the state coheres on the basis of nature or of the 
freedom of the will is what forms the dividing line between con-
193 
stitutions. I Every concept begins in immediacy, in nature, and 
strives toward rationality. Everything depends on the extent to 
which rationality has replaced nature. 
Historically the nations see in the will of heroes something 
divine; this is the starting point in mythology, and this can be 
64. [Tr.] was flllmiinftig ist, muss gescheben. See above, S 122, n. 53. 
242 

THE STATE 
called the state based on nature. H it happens that someon~,sur­
rounds himself with satellites and brings cities under his sway, 
this is only a passing moment of tyranny. Certainly there ~as 
to be a concentration of physical and spiritual strength, but the 
main factor is that the heroes are envisaged as divine beings. 
The king is the priest, so the oldest form of monarchy is a 
theocratic monarchy; with a few nations such as the Jews theoc-
racy predominated, whereas with the Greeks, Romans, and most 
other nations the royal power predominated. Since human be-
ings did not yet have a high degree of self-consciousness, they 
did not make it the determinant for their actions but had re-
course to oracles. The weaker obeys the stronger as having the 
stronger will of freedom, but obeys him as something particu-
lar, as a superhuman being. 
The main consideration is always the stronger disposition, 
but also frequently physical strength, to give protection against 
wild beasts. Thus we find originating among the Romans, Hin-
dus, and Greeks a natural diversity of castes. The Hindus believe 
the supreme being created four castes, and this system of caste 
distinctions seems to have become permanent. In Rome it is 
also very important which families founded the state; here the 
plebeians seem to have come to the state without a master, as 
a result of conquests, etc., and only later did they become con-
scious of the freedom that was their due. 
The first principle to oppose this natural origin of states is the 
contemplation of the divine will, while the second is the con-
sciousness of freedom and the infinitude of self-consciousness. 
It was necessary for the unity based on the king, founded as it 
was on I the patriarchal constitution, to change into aristocracy 
194 
(as there is a transition from the unity of God to polytheism), 
and only then did the democratic principle emerge, the prin-
ciple in which each individual beholds his freedom. As opposed 
to the naturally divine view this democratic principle could ap-
pear profane. Thus it is also said that God must be perceived in 
nature, but in opposition to this first way of envisaging the di-
vine the freedom of the individual was the profane element; yet 
it was this that marked the transition to the spiritually divine. 
243 

ETHICAL LIFE 
The transition from envisaging the divine as an immediate 
property possessed by only a few to a democratic conception is 
a necessary transition. Democracy is the beginning of the free-
dom of the will; but democracy can no longer endure in the 
regulated state, for otherwise terrible conflicts arise. In other 
words, the principle of labor is the precondition for democracy. 
Aristotle's classification of constitutions as democracy, aristoc-
racy, and monarchy is based on the old constitutions. 6S In this 
regard Montesquieu says of democracy that its principle is vir-
tue, while the principle of monarchy is honor and the prin-
ciple of despotism is terror." Particularity of purposes does not 
enter into play in democracy, but the state as a whole; to the 
extent that customs in a democracy cease to be virtuous, free-
dom is lost. When virtue disappears. ambition and the quest for 
fame enter the hearts of those capable of it, and avarice into 
the hearts of all; for all persons seek to take from the state's 
resources as much for themselves as they possibly can. A repub-
lic is the rule of a few and the unrestrainedness of all. I would, 
says [Montesquieu]," have as scant regard for a young man 
who did not desire a republic as for an old man who did not 
execrate it. The principle of particularity is not contained in de-
mocracy, and if it comes on the scene, it has an annihilating 
effect on it. If it is not reconciled with the universal, the prin-
ciple of particularity has a destructive effect, and this is what is 
lacking in democracy, namely that this principle, which must 
come into play, is not contained in it. It is only this reconcilia-
tion that makes the principle of particularity harmless. 
1&5 
Montesquieu goes on to say that the principle I of aristocracy 
6S. (Ed.] Aristotle, Politics 3.7.1279a-b. Aristotle de~ribes how sovereign 
power in a scare can lie with eirher rhe one or a few or the many. If rulers exercise 
their power to rhe maximum general good, the resulting forms of rhe state are 
mona~hy, aristocrac:y, and polity; if rhey exercise it for their own advantage, the 
resulting forms are tyranny, oligarchy, and democracy. 
66. [.Ed.] Montesquieu, De /'esprit des lois, book 3, chap. 3 (pp. 26 ff.); chap. 
6 (p. 33); chap. 9 (pp. 35-36). Cf. Monresquieu, ®lvres completes, pp. 251 ff., 
256-257,258-259. 
67. [Ed.] Montesquieu, De /'esprit des lois, book 3, chap. 3 (pp. 26 fl.). Cf. 
CEMfWIS comt>letes, p. 252. 

THE STATE 
is moderation;'8 for here we have a plurality of rulers, so as to 
moderate the aristocrats' envy of one another. The arist~ts 
have to moderate themselves vis-a-vis the burghers to who"'\n 
they stand so dose. In monarchy the place of all virtues is taken 
by the laws, although the motivation is honor."' Each contri-
butes to the common welfare, believing that he is seeing to his 
own interest, and that by each making himself his own end the 
interweaving [of individual ends] gives rise to the whole, but not 
that everything should fall into ruin as in democracy. 
Now if democratic virtue is opposed to monarchical egoism, 
monarchy seems something lower, but esprit de corps comes 
into play, and rectitude is virtue. In accord with these ends of 
particularity, civil society also passes over into concern for the 
universal, since the individual parts attach themselves to the 
whole. In monarchy the individual's disposition does not play 
an essential part, but as a result of the transition the universal 
qua universal becomes the end of political life. With honor the 
personality is the end in the eyes of others, but in reality, too, 
egoism must come into play. 
In despotism the principle, according to Montesquieu, is fear. 
The grandees depend on the prince's caprice, and the head of 
the lowliest subject is under the protection of the laws.70 For an 
attack on one individual among the people is an attack on the 
whole people, and the despot is lost; the grandees by contrast 
oppress the people and are too dose to the despot. The reason 
why educational progress is impossible in Turkey among the 
better Turks is that if they or the despot deviate from [tradi-
tional) religion or customs and seek to distinguish themselves, 
the people fall upon them in droves. Fear of the grandees and 
of the people en masse holds the despot in check, and the more 
despotic and cruel he is toward the grandees-for it is only 
68. [Ed.] Montesquieu, De /'esprit des lois, book 3, cllap. 4 (pp. 29-30). Cf. 
c:Euvres completes, p. 254. 
69. [Ed.] Montesquieu, De /'esprit des lois, book 4, c:hap. 6 (p. 33). Cf. 
c:Euvres comp~tes, pp. 256-257. 
70. [Ed.) Montesquieu, De /'esprit des lois, book 3, cllap. 6 (pp. 35-36), Cf. 
CEu~~res completes, pp. 259-260. 
245 

ETHICAL LIFE 
toward them that he can be so-the easier the lot of the people 
usually is. In monarchy the powers that are available in despo-
tism to the despot vis-a-vis the grandees (although not against 
the basic laws) must be divided; as a single individual the mon-
arch cannot do everything, but must entrust the execution to 
196 
others. I In a feudal monarchy the grandees have an inherited 
power, and the lesser burghers depend on them; Poland for in-
stance was a monarchy but could be viewed as a republic. Both 
for his own safety and for the safety of the people, it is impera-
tive for the monarch to divide the powers; if he combines them 
and gives them to his satraps, they need only to lift a little fin-
ger to be independent. 
"Empire" [Reich] is to be distinguished from "monarchy"; 
for example, Germany was called the German Empire. "Em-
pire" can here mean "anarchy,,. for the obligation of the princes 
to obey depended on their might, and the petty princes were the 
most loyal. In aristocracy the division of powers is less marked, 
for the council, made up of aristocrats, has the legislative and 
executive power, particularly since those nobles who are not 
in the council also draw to themselves the remaining branches 
of the executive power, so that in fact, even if not in law, the 
subjects are deprived of any share in the executive power. In 
democracy all powers merge together in immediate fashion, the 
people being the supreme lawgiver and the supreme judge. An 
individual, e.g., a general, is still needed for execution, but the 
power is not definitely transferred to him, and he does not know 
how far be can go. The people lack stability, and with them no 
laws are firm. In the same way as today one hears abuse of the 
rulers, so in Thucydides' day there were complaints about the 
people. 
s 136 
More precisely, the nature of the constitution of a people or 
nation depends, leaving aside the question of what distinguishes it 
geographically, on the stage attained by its self-consciousness in 
regard to freedom, on its spiritual education in general. Of impor-
246 

THE STATE 
tance too is its external size, in terms of which the corporate in.ter-
est becomes closer to or more remote from individuals, and t'¥ir 
active participation in it more or less important, in the same ~y 
that a nation's self-consciousness of its I inner political indepen-
197 
dence is bound up with its relationships to other nations. 
The spiritual education of a people or nation, which has 
the utmost influence on the constitution (as it does on what 
is animated by it), renders a constitution that is suitable for 
some other people unworkable for this one. What is rational 
must be,n but it has its existence [Existenz] only in the self-
consciousness of a people. Thus there is nothing so irrational as 
for us to have recourse for our constitutions to those of the 
Greeks and Romans; much that was possible in these states is 
inapplicable in contemporary states. People are constantly com-
plaining that so little use has been made of history; but in-
dividual cases are infinitely diverse, and laws too differ in the 
spiritual realm, for human consciousness, as perfectible, is con-
stantly developing. 
The geographical criterion makes a great difference in the 
constitutions of peoples who live in different climes, necessarily 
so, since climate plays so great a part. In the same way that, 
with birds, in the South everything is directed to the brilliantly 
colored outer plumage, while in the North it remains internal 
and their adornment consists in their beautiful song, so it is 
with human beings. Within the universal condition of being hu-
man, there is a very great diversity of views from one people to 
another. 
The historical stage a people has reached also has a great in-
fluence on what constitution is suitable for it. The external size 
too makes for differences; thus despotisms can become immense, 
but democracies can occur only in small states. In Rome the em-
pire's excessive extension over such heterogeneous peoples nec-
essarily led to collapse; and it was the height of folly on the 
part of Brutus and Cicero, and so many other individually great 
71. [Tr.) Das Vert~Un(Uge soil sein. See above, S 122, n. 53. 
247 

ETHICAL LIFE 
men, to imagine that Caesar's removal would restore the repub-
lic. In most cases the extension of the state introduces into the 
198 
constitution elements I that can only be inimical to it. So in-
ferences cannot properly be drawn from small states to large 
states, especially in regard to their external independence. Small 
states, which are independent only in name, are more in the 
condition of a merely civil society. The relationship to other 
(powers), the feeling of impotence, is such that both rulers and 
ruled do nothing to cause a disturbance. Large states, which 
have a lot to do with other nations, depend for their continued 
subsistence on the attitude they adopt toward them. The big-
ger the state, the more alien the corporate interest becomes for 
single individuals. There is not the same interest in unity in the 
consciousness of the farmer and of the merchant engaged in 
ocean trade. The larger the number of citizens, the less possibil-
ity is there for individuals to exert a significant influence on the 
whole, and they lose interest. What the single individual can do 
appears as of minimal importance. 
The consciousness of the national honor of a small state is 
qui~ different from that of the citizens of a large state, and this 
makes for a different consciousness of the strength of rights 
in general. This is what is happening in regard to freedom of 
the press in the duchy of Weimar, where the duke, acting solely 
on his own, promulgates a deaee against the freedom of the 
press granted by the constitution. The fact that England is sepa-
rate from the Continent, and able to exert influence so widely 
through its mastery of the seas, makes for a distinctive spirit 
and a distinctive external constitution. It is the same with North 
America, where the excess population of other states has settled 
and agriculture, which is elsewhere the basis, is only now ex-
panding. The remoteness from Europe makes a wholly dis-
tinctive constitution essential. It is only under such peculiar cir-
cumstances that Quakers, whose principles forbid them to be 
citizens, can yet be citizens of the state. So one cannot say that 
because this is possible in the North American republics, there-
199 
fore [it must also be possible here in Germany]. I 
248 

THE STATE 
s 137 
For a people that has developed to civil society, or in general to 
consciousness of the infinitude of the free ego in its determina~ ex-
istence, in its needs, its freedom of choice, and its conscience, con-
stitutional monarchy alone is possible. For particularity reflected 
into itself is on the one hand universal spirit articulating itself, as 
inwardly concrete individuality, into its particular moments: the 
constitution. On the other hand it is the moment of actualized in-
dividuality, of the individual subject: the monarch. 
The highest form of a people is for all the individual mo-
ments to be developed and completely cultivated to form a self-
contained system that, in its different moments, has constructed 
the whole. This national consciousness rests on the conscious-
ness of the infinitude of the free ego. The being-for-itself of the 
individual, which appears as a vice in democracy, and the ap-
pearance of the arts and sciences, which was the main factor in 
the downfall of Athens (since the learned men and artists made 
themselves independent only for their art and science without 
regard for any political interest), were a sign of the height of 
cultivation attained in Greece, but at the same time of the ruin 
of the state, which did not include these elements in its consti-
tution. To the extent that this principle comes into play, the mass 
character of democracy and despotism is eliminated, and frag-
mentation sets in. The intermediate moment between the two 
extremes is to have one's own choice in one's action, to be able 
to act freely according to one's conscience. Reflection exalts this 
particularity of the individual to universality; and the fact that 
particularity, in being for itself, is also for the universal, makes 
the constitution a whole in its tendency to separate out into to-
talities, which, as a result of this articulation, themselves consti-
tute moments of a whole. This principle of particularization de-
mands laws that guarantee its particularization and at the same 
time lead the particularizations I back to the universal. The par-
200 
ticnlar raises itself to individuality or subjectivity and to univer-
sality. Now the constitution must contain particularity, while to 
bring universality into effect is to negate particularity; the other 
149 

ETHICAL LIFE 
extreme is the supreme apex [of power], which exists as indi· 
vidual subject, the monarch. These three moments are nothing 
other than the outward forms the concept itself assumes [in re· 
lation] to universal freedom. We now have to consider these 
three moments and how they pass over into the one whole. 
a. The Power of the Sovereignn 
s 138 
The power of the sovereign [die {Urstliche Gewalt] itself con· 
tains three moments: that of the universality of the constitution 
and the laws, which provides its substantive basis; that of counsel 
[Beratung] in general; and that of ultimate decision. As the indi-
vidual factor, this decision pertains to an actual individual as a nu-
merical unity, to the monarch, who as the ultimate and immediate 
singularity of the abstract self of the will is destined for the role in 
immediate, i.e., natural fashion, in other words by birth. By this 
means the ultimate, actual unity of the state can be made the aim 
of arbitnty will [Willkur] and drawn down into the sphere of 
particularity as one particularity over against others. lnterfactional 
strife around the throne itself and the enfeeblement of the power 
of the state for factional advantage are inhibited and sublated, and 
the contingent element in the personality of the monarch becomes 
a maner of less account thanks to the fact that the constitution and 
the executive power form an inwardly consistent whole. 
Each of the three powers is [a] self-enclosed whole, but in-
sofar as they are members of the whole, each of them in tum 
contains the three moments. The basis of the power of the sov-
ereign is the constitution, and not everything covered by legisla-
tion is included in it. Constitution and laws make up the basis 
72. [Tr.] Hegel's discussion of the power of the sovereign or prince (Fiirst) in 
the Heidelberg lectures differs in certain respects from the uearment found in the 
published version of The Philosophy of Right. In the earlier lectures, the suictly 
limited powers of the monarch are more dearly articulated. See Shlomo Avineri, 
"The Discovery of Hegel's Early Lectures on the Philosophy of Right, • The Owl of 
Minerva 16 (1985): 204-205. 
2SO 

THE STATE 
of sovereign power, in accord with which the sovereign must 
rule. lin the second place, there is the moment of particulariza-
201 
tion, of the application of the universal principles to the pktic-
ular laws: counsel. And third comes this final point, the individ-
ual self, an actual individual, constituting the apex of the whole 
pyramid. The power of the sovereign is itself one moment of 
the constitution; and the rational element in accord with which 
the power of the sovereign has to regulate its decisions is the 
laws, which are already in existence for it. By counsel is meant 
that particular matters are subsumed under the universal, that 
consideration is given to what is practicable and most advan-
tageous, at which point ingenuity intervenes in order further to 
derive the universal from the particular and give it the force of 
law; this is the moment of reflection. Counsel involves a council 
of ministers or cabinet [Ministerium]. Only what pertains to the 
ultimate formal decision is for the monarch as an individual. 
He has to say, "I so will it"; this is the final moment of individ-
uality. This final certainty-mere deciding taken for itself-per-
tains essentially to an immediate numerical unity. In the state 
this culminating element is something external; in morality it is 
internal, it is conscience, this focus of inwardness, which decides 
according to what it sees as best. This merely formal element 
pertains to the monarch as such. 
The notion that the welfare of the peoples should depend on 
the contingent individuality of the monarch is in the main a 
modem view. For previously the sovereign was the focus wherein 
the nation's entire wealth, pomp, and splendor became visible. 
In modern times, however, this is no longer the case. The sub-
stantial class alone still has this trusting belief in the monarch 
and believes it is only the officials who oppress them, all un-
known to the good monarch and not at his behest. For the 
burgher class the monarch is a matter of indifference. They sub-
scribe to the philistine philosophy that it is unjust that so much 
should depend on the monarch as one selected by the chance of 
fate, [asserting] how they would willingly rule themselves better 
and [complaining) how high the taxes I are. In a mature consti-
202 
tution the individuality of the monarch becomes unimportant 
251 

ETHICAL LIFE 
owing to the state's being organized in a rational, stable man-
ner, and it is in this very insignificance of the person of the ruler 
that the strength and rationality of the constitution reside. At 
all events, however, more may depend on the ruler's personality 
in one constitution than in another. 
The splendor that radiates from the monarch, and the money 
he consequently expends on his court, are in our day covered 
for the most part by the ruler's private estates and domains. 
It was formerly the case that the people saw in the monarch's 
splendor its own enjoyment. But if the monarch does not pos-
sess private property of his own, provision must be made for 
him by the community in such a way that he appears as the 
richest and also outshines all his subjects in pomp. The general 
view is that the former way of regarding things is even better, 
when the people laid store solely by the ruler's palaces, temples, 
and the like, not by his private property, and the whole realm 
was rich whereas the individual was poor, possessing his wealth 
in the common treasury. 
Now because the immediate, ultimate decision pertains to the 
monarch, he must be monarch in immediate, natural fashion, 
as a result of birth. The ultimate abstraction of inner certainty 
is immediacy. With election one always has in mind what is ob-
jective, what is better, the pros and cons, whereas what is needed 
in the case of the monarch is the purely subjective, not the 
objective. We will be speaking more of this later in connection 
with the estateS, the legislative power. This final decision is the 
principle of the monarch. In days gone by this final decision was 
to be seen in oracles, the flight of birds, etc. All things give rise 
to an endless series of pros and cons, and this final "I will" is 
needed to cut the matter short. In former days the priests used 
to live among the people without being involved in actuality 
and pronounced the final decision in instinctive fashion. As to 
deciding on the basis of the entrails of sacrificial animals, this 
is like allowing oneself to be guided by chance when one is of 
two minds within oneself. I But nowadays self-consciousness has 
reached the stage of internalizing this element of chance and no 
longer leaving it to external nature. 
252 

THE STATE 
So this ultimate oracle, this contingent element represented 
by the final decision, resides in the monarch. In the same. way 
that in ancient times this decision was removed from partidalac-
ity [by oracles], so with us it is removed from pacticulacity by 
birth; and monarchical succession becomes, by virtue of this 
birthright, a natural matter. An elective monarchy seems at first 
sight to be more rational if one says, "Let the best person rule." 
The whole assembly of free citizens meet together and to the 
plaudits of the whole people proclaim the candidate their ruler; 
but this can only occur with a relatively uncultivated people, 
where the ruler must be principally a commander. For in elec-
tive monarchy it depends on the opinion of the particular indi-
viduals who is to be monarch, so that arbitrary will [WillkiJr] 
is made the first power in the state. Particularity engenders fac-
tions. The particular interests of individuals enter into a com-
pact with the ruler and, as a result of the privileges they annex 
to themselves, undermine the constitution. Those responsible for 
electing the ruler are concrete individuals, who are striving to 
attain particular aims. For it is [one] moment in the state that 
particular interests should exist, while election would be an 
act from which [particular] interests should be absent; and this 
would be a contradiction in the constitution. Much argument 
has been devoted to the fact that our rulers do almost nothing 
but sign their names, but the value of this formal element goes 
unperceived. 
s 139 
The objective element in decision-making, the content, and also 
the legal and practical considerations, do not fall directly within 
the subjectivity of making decrees and are therefore the object of a 
counseling process [Beratung] distinct from the formal will of the 
monarch. The monarch is accordingly not answerable for all exec-
utive actions. He is the supreme representative of his people, but 
neither is he the highest functionary of the state, nor is he the paid 
agent of the people, nor again is he in I contractual relationship 
204 
with them. Such definitions imply a grounding through the will, in-
compatible with the immediate subjectivity that is the determining 
253 

ETHICAL LIFE 
characteristic of the concept of monarchy. The monarch is also re-
sponsible in particular for the final decision in the appointment of 
state functionaries and for the administration of justice in the par-
doning of criminals. 
The monarch acts solely as subjective agent, and it is only 
the objective element in an action that can be justified. So he is 
not answerable, for in his acts of government he is not respon-
sible for this objective element but only for the wholly formal 
element of the will. In the same way that oracles, birds, and 
stars are not answerable for what they indicate, the monarch is 
not answerable either; and in this sense it is rightly said of him 
that he has no judge but himself and God above him. The di-
vine nature of the monarch's authority is that he has within him-
self the moment of immediacy. What is rationally divine is the 
constitution, while the monarch is the naturally divine. 
The monarch's freedom of choice [Willkur] is abstract free-
dom of choice. To be sure, negative unity is the most spiritual 
element, but at this highest level the element of subjectivity 
comes into play for the sake of reversion.'-~ James II of England 
affirmed the divine authority of kings, but this implied that the 
objective element too-what right is-was a matter for the king's 
freedom of choice. For instance we are told God can do as God 
chooses, and that divinity is to be found not in nature but in 
miracles. James II retained his freedom of choice, but the objec-
tive element of willing was severed from the royal freedom of 
choice, and taken over by Parliament. 
The monarch is the supreme representative of his people. He, 
and the state functionaries, are representatives of the people just 
as much as are those elected by them. In particular the monarch 
as the ultimate apex represents his people in relation to other 
states. He is not the highest functionary of the state, a paid 
agent of the people and in a contractual relationship with them. 
205 
The monarch is; this supreme contingency is; the I externaliza-
73. JTr.] Or: at this highest level revenion brings into play the element of sub-
jectivity [auf diuer lentm Spitu ist des Zurilclcgangs wegen das Moi1Uint der 
Subjelctivitat]. 
254 

THE STATE 
tion of objective will is. What is introduced with the monarch 
is the element of ungrounded, groundless, formal decreeing. It 
is not a contract because then it would depend on the peOgle's 
freedom of choice whether and how it wished to come to terms 
with this subject rather than another. In elective monarchy it is 
a blend of particular interests and objective considerations that 
determines the choice. But when a dynasty dies out, there is a 
break or vacillation in the natural order of things and another 
family has to be chosen. 
We will discuss the appointment of state officials by the mon-
arch later.'• The sovereign power can only pardon on grounds 
presented to it. The act of pardoning is the responsibility of the 
one with whom right and wrong cease to exist {as they cease 
to exist with conscience). Courts of justice often recommend of-
fenders to the ruler for pardon. 
s 140 
The second moment in the power of the sovereign consists in 
a body of counselors [eine beratende Stelle], who bring before the 
monarch the universal aspect of the matter, its content and the con-
siderations involved, its objective aspect in general. This may be 
a cabinet or council of ministers [ein Ministerium], which stands 
at the apex of the executive power for the purpose of deciding on 
particular matters; or it may be a council of state [ein Staatsrat) to 
prepare and advise on general matters as such and as laws. These 
counselors are answerable for the actions of the executive; their 
personal choice and dismissal alike rest with the free choice of the 
monarch, with whose particular person they have to deal. Since it 
is the ministers who are answerable for the power of the sover-
eign, there can be no action by the ruler determined in a merely 
personal manner (e.g., by the monarch's subjective environment, 
namely the court); his every decision must be signed by the com-
petent minister. 
74. [Ed.] SeeS 144. 
255 

ETHICAL LIFE 
It is the duty of the council of state and the council of min-
isters to lay before the monarch the objective side of the con-
siderations involved; the minister has to sign the sovereign's 
decision and is answerable for it. Here we are considering the 
monarchical power to the extent that it relates to universality; 
206 
the moment of universality is the I second moment of mon-
archical powe& It is the council of ministers that brings to the 
monarch the objective side of the question, the considerations 
involved, that in general informs him about it, and he can then 
decide one way or another on the basis of these considerations. 
The will can decide this way or that; but it is inherent in the 
way the state is organized that the rational must happen.7S It is 
organized as an inwardly organic system, wherein particular ca-
price evaporates in the face of universal necessity. The power of 
the system is the rational, and it is in this that one must trust 
and not regard the power of the contingent as preponderant. 
The ultimate subjectivity is contingency; but how does it enter 
into the necessity of the whole without having a destructive 
effect? As the keystone of the edifice it is a necessary moment 
in the whole, and the whole and this necessary moment in the 
whole both subsist. A monarch at the head of a state that has 
no rational constitution extends his caprice over the whole and 
is capable of ruining everything. That what is necessary by vir-
tue of the concept-that this exists, must inspire the people with 
confidence. 
To make great demands of the sovereign implies in principle 
the notion of a despotic state, lacking a rational constitution. 
The monarch is surrounded by something mysterious, which the 
common man cannot and should not see through, so he attrib-
utes all power to the ruler, who shows himself in princely pomp 
and believes that everything depends on him. It is for the sov-
ereign to decide according to the rationality of the matter, as 
demonstrated to him by the council of ministers. For this rea· 
son it used to be thought that the best course was to give sover-
15. [Tr.] dlw das Vemiinftip gueb.hen muss. See above, S 122, n. 53. 
256 

TH£ STAT£ 
eigns a special training, since someone who was in himself well 
educated would certainly choose what was best. But the sover-
eign is first by nature, and so beyond all aims of particul~ty­
beyond pride, conceit, envy, hatred, and the like. As immedi-
ately recognized by all as first, the sovereign cannot feel pride. 
This reverence is paid to him through the fact that he is recog-
nized; with the sovereign all these passions of the intermediate 
estate fall away. Under the constitution that we are in the pro-
cess of developing, the sovereign can only be avaricious for 
himself, but cannot so cause damage to the state, I for not he 
201 
but the council of ministers has to administer the resources of 
the state, and his ample income must come from the household 
funds allocated to him. Debauchery [on the part of the mon-
arch) can also have no effect on the whole for the further rea-
son in particular that he can easily gratify all passions; and the 
position of the one extreme, the sovereign. is as simple as that 
of the other extreme, the man of the soil. 
Since matters are brought to the sovereign by the ministries, 
his conceit no longer comes into play, for it is not he but the 
minister who has made the proposals, and it is no longer a 
question of his insisting on imposing something maintained by 
him. He views things in more indifferent fashion opposed to 
all spheres and aims of particularity, views them with a simply 
[einfach] educated understanding, and it is highly probable that 
he will choose what is rational. Since, however, the ministers 
have to deal with the person of the monarch, have to explain to 
him the whys and wherefores and persuade him, and accord-
ingly have to adapt themselves to the personality of the mon-
arch in order to bring their plans into effect, they must par-
ticularly avoid making him obstinate, and must flatter him by 
attributing all merit to the monarch, rather than to themselves 
who have done aU the preliminary work. (For if anyone is de-
sirous of imposing his particular will, naturally anyone who 
also has something to say on the matter comes treading on his 
heels.) This is why the course foUowed is often not the best, 
why it is that someone is very active on behalf of something, 
257 

ETHICAL LIFE 
with a show of moral or empty vanity," and evinces a self-
relating interest; true zeal often accomplishes the least. All per-
sonal willing must remain hidden from sight. These are matters 
relating to the practical skill of ministries, for it is up to the 
ministries how they bring what they are answerable for to fru-
ition. The person of the monarch may involve numerous chance 
attributes, so he must be a simple person, not answerable for 
anything [panicular). 
The ministers must be chosen by the sovereign; he also has 
to choose all other officials, I but it is only the ministers he is 
free to depose at will. Should it not be the case that ministers 
can be appointed and dismissed by the monarch, we would have 
a directory, and they would carry everything into effect, or else 
sovereign and ministry would be in hostile opposition to one 
another. A ruling council of this kind inevitably leads to the for-
mation of factions, and the supreme power of the state would 
be drawn down into particularity, into faction. It must be for 
the monarch to choose his ministers, first because they have to 
deal with his personality, and also because otherwise one would 
get an aristocracy instead of a monarchy. 
Because of his attitude, as a result of which any link to alien 
interests is foreign to him, the monarch will not choose his 
favorites because he will not wish to lay so great a burden on 
them and stand in this relationship to them. The impermanence 
of sovereign favor is an essential moment, because by flattery 
the sovereign can be brought to despise people and set no store 
by their personality. And precisely this attitude on the part of 
the monarch provides a guarantee that he will choose appropri-
ate ministers. Moreover, given the extent of the business and 
the interests [he has to bear in mind], an incompetent minister 
will not remain in office for long. The mass of the nation re-
pudiates the incompetence of ministers and stands firm against 
them. The main guarantee of the competence of ministers is 
76. [Tr.] E.itelkeit. The text would make more sense if it read E.iferk•it, •zeal· 
ousness. • See the reference to •uue zeal• immediately following. 
258 

THE STATE 
their answerability to parliament. to which they have to' indicate 
clearly what they intend. So a ministers position is ~ 
most 
dangerous in the state, for he has to defend himself ~ainst 
the monarch, against his colleagues, against public opinion, and 
against parliament. The French and English ministers are neces-
sarily our examples here. Men who maintain their position as 
ministers, and show themselves good at the job, merit the high-
est respect. 
The guarantee of parliament is specially effective in compel-
ling the monarch to choose suitable subjects and to pay heed to 
talent, virtue, reaitude, and practical ability in the ministers he 
is to choose. The prince regent, who had his friends in the op-
position party and his enemies in the cabinet, was not able, I 
209 
when he acceded to power, to make his friends ministers but 
had to keep on the former ministers. In the same way the pres-
ent French cabinet is made up of enemies of the royal family, of 
ultraroyalists. These examples show that the choice of ministers 
in a monarchy with a good constitution is not merely a matter 
of the ruler's caprice. 
The main function of the council of state is to advise on bills 
to be laid before the legislature, so it has no decisive power. The 
monarch cannot be answerable for all actions of the executive, 
but only the ministers. We can see from history how the pre-
vious coupling of the monarch's personality with the power of 
the ruler has given way to the ministerial system. A matter of 
particular complaint was the corruption of the courts, i.e., 
of the monarch's entourage, because so much depended on the 
personality of the monarch, and the basic interest of the court 
was to plunder the state and use it to its own advantage by mere 
favor, without regard to any ensuing harm to the state. There 
was at these courts an evident contradiction between [at one mo-
ment) making everything a point of honor and the next mo-
ment groveling abjecdy. Thus under Louis XV one noble family 
bad the important office of banding the king a towel when he 
retired to the privy, since this gave an opportunity to speak with 
the king; and a mother, in order that her son, who was still a 
259 

ETHICAL LIFE 
minor, might retain this offic:e, which otherwise was lost to the 
family, presented herself to the astonished monarch as he was 
in the privy. Here was to be seen maternal love and conc:em 
for her family contrasting with the mOSI abject baseness. And 
among us too it is a matter of surprise if the king is not able to 
do something, e.g., make an appointment. as a matter of favo.; 
210 
without the consent of the competent ministers. I 
b. The Executive Power 
§141 
The executive power [die Regierungsgewalt], here still seen only 
as directed within, concerns in general the p~~on 
an<!__!V~ll­
being of the particulii-an<l-tlie ta~!Jfb:acfi~U!-~ct!9 the uni-
versal as well as providing public iDititufttms for_general ~· 
Particular concerns as such are in the first plac:e t~_parti~lar 
P.!~-~rty, ai_~, -~nd interests of Jhe ~diYidllill9cal co-!!!_~1:1-~ties, 
guilds, estates, and corporations, and are administered by these 
bodies tllemSdves as amatter "of right. This self-administration also 
has the ethical aspect that individuals see their proximate, particu-
lar interest become a universal matter in which they find reSected 
the state as a whole-what binds them together, their activity and 
concern for the state, which imparts absolute subsistence to their 
sphere. 
As the second moment the executive forms the mean, the par-
ticular, but only insofar as it is directed within, not yet without, 
vis-a-vis other states. Its 9._bject is to JDain!!in th~ w~ 
of 
._the particular spheres iP their panicularity: (1) that they sub-
sist, and (2) to lead them back to the universal. For the particu-
lar continually seeks to grasp the universal to itself and to iso-
late itself at the expense of the universal. And the fact that the 
particular spheres arc necessarily self-governed constitutes the 
democratic principle in a monarchy. 
In considering the executive power two aspects have to be 
borne in mind, [first] the maintenance of the whole in the par-
ticular spheres of the executive, i.e., in such a way that the 
260 

THE STATE 
particular parts do not act in a manner contrary to the Univer-
sal. Particular concerns are the estates or classes, guilds~· cor-
porations, provinces, cities, local communities-whatever hils a 
determinate interest in common. What is communal must be 
present as actually so. A local community [eine Gemeinde] is 
constituted as a whole; in many respects it has a communal 
aspect [ein Gemeinsames)-the greater the community [die Ge-
meinschaft], the more respects in which it does so. The particu-
lar concerns must be preserved-must remain as they are. This 
must continue to be left to the estates themselves, I for it is 
211 
rightfully what belongs to them, their own concern, which they 
attend to on their own account. 
The second moment is the universal, contrary to which they 
may not act. A local community must have property; as an 
independent corporation it is, morcove~; in no way under age, 
and there is absolutely no reason why it should be unable to ad-
minister what belongs to it itself. This seems recently to have 
been quite forgotten, especially because the city magistrates, etc., 
administered very badly and, what is more, did not even defend 
the community's resources. This failure of the magistrates, as the 
proper authorities of the people, to discharge their functions 
made it necessary to take their administrative role from them. 
Howeve~; what should have been done was to organize this self-
administration in another way, for the higher officials, in their 
thirst for power, took on the contrary almost all administration 
into their own hands. 
This is the point of view of right, that individuals have the 
right to administer their resources, while the ethical aspect is 
that [citizens] find in their corporation a state in the govern-
ment of which they share, and in which they carry their partic-
ularity over into the universal. Nowadays governments have re-
lieved the citizens of all these cares for a universal. But this 
is the democratic principle, that the individual should share in 
the government of local communities, corporations, and guilds, 
which have within themselves the form of the universal. 
In a thoroughgoing, complete democracy each individual 
261 

ETHICAL LIFE 
shares in all rights of government and administration; but as al-
ready demonstrated, a democratic constitu_Iio~ is not viable in a 
relatively large and civilized state. Corporations provide every-
one with a state in which they can be active according t~ 
CO~<:r~te being. But-it- is o~ly to the exteiittliifihey fiave r1ghts 
"tlirough the corporations that individuals are duty-bound to 
cleave to them and make them their concern. This is particu-
larly the case in England, and patriotism assumes the form that 
the preservation of the state is the concern of all, for all have 
their particular concern in their particular sphere, and it is only 
through the state that this particular sphere exists. Since they 
acquire this particular sphere in their class status, they are 
working for the universal, which only exists by virtue of this 
212 
articulation. I 
§142 
Not only must the individual communities, districts, provinces, 
trades, and classes be bound together into a whole and as such 
have rights for promotion of the communal interest and their par-
ticular aims. First and foremost they must also be inwardly consti-
tuted and have advisory and decision-making authorities [Behor-
den] in the form of officers of their own-directors, managers, and 
the like. On the one hand these authorities have the power to make 
or endorse decisions, yet are at the same time subject to higher 
authority; on the other hand what they look after is what directly 
belongs to and concerns their circles. Hence the filling of posts 
for civil authorities must generally be a mixture of popular elec-
tion by the commonalty [Burgerschaft] (or class or those having 
the same class status) and a separate system of appointment by 
higher authority. 
The fact of the individual classes being constituted must be 
recognized in the state; they must have rights, and they must 
look after their interests themselves, partly because they have a 
particular aptitude for so doing, but also partly and principally 
because they must have their activity in so doing, and have 
their interest in so doing. The members of the class must pro-
262 

THE STATE 
mote their concerns through the exercise of their will; and in 
this way the citizens become conscious that it is also o~n to 
them to be active in their corporation. It is only through\his 
activity itself that a communal spirit (which is only contingendy 
a moral spirit) is formed. This activity for a particular state 
must be carried out by particular officers, who deliberate in re-
gard to it. It was a particular defect of earlier corporations that 
the officials themselves chose their successors; this gave rise to 
an aristocracy, which afforded an example of the particular in-
terest that was taken into account in making the choice. But as 
members of a whole, corporations must in turn be subordinate 
to higher authorities. Since the officers [of the corporations] must 
themselves have authority, the corporations must, to be sure, have 
a voting procedure, but the directors or managers, whoever they 
may be, must have an authority over against those by whom they 
are chosen. There must also be a specific provision making them 
independent of the members of their local community, etc. I It 
213 
~s necessary for guilds, etc., to elect their director, but he must 
t~n be confirmed in his office by the senior officials, so as to 
confer on him the seal of authority. 
§ 143 
Secondly, the executive power prevents the particular interests, 
classes, and officers from going outside the bounds of the univer-
sal. [If they do) they are brought back within it by the effortS of 
agents of the executive, the state officials and the higher authori-
ties, who are constituted essentially on a departmental basis and 
form a pyramid at the apex of which stand the ministries. The 
essential point in regard to the organization of governmental au-
thorities is that on the one band civic life should be governed in 
concrete manner from below where it is concrete, but that on 
the other hand the business of the community should be divided 
into its abstract branches looked after by special authorities as dif-
ferent centers [of administration) but converging again in the su-
preme executive power to form a concrete [means of] supervision. 
The point of view here is that the executive power brings 
263 

ETHICAL LIFE 
these spheres baclc within the universal and must take action 
against their infringements on one another and on the univer-
sal. Conflict arises in that the governmental authorities like to 
keep the civil authorities in their place, and their vanity and 
particularity come into play in this connection. Civic life is con-
crete, and where cases of civic matters come before the gov-
ernment, they too are concrete, and differences come into play 
which have to be allocated to particular authorities. The sepa-
rate administration of the various branches is a necessity in gov-
ernment. They must converge in a unity both above and below 
themselves. The various branches are first divided and go their 
different ways, but then have to combine at a higher level from 
which the whole can be viewed. 
Owing to the many affairs it has to deal with, a ministry 
214 
must have ~e£.1!rtl!!!=~ts for I separate types of business, 
but at the same time too one department that takes account of 
the universal interest. This arrangement involves tremendous 
difficulties. Vertically, aut~~-'-
!P.J.J~t be . .Qrganized.J}JLa .de-
partmental baSis~ A departmental system has the disadvantage 
of delay, but it baS1in its favor] tradition and it upholds a cut-
and-dried, definite mode of acting, since the personality of the 
individual involved makes no difference, has no influence on the 
course of the whole. 
Another way in which authorities can be arranged is for a 
president to have officials working under him, but for him alone 
to be answerable and consequendy [able] to annul or alter their 
work, as soldy answerable for it. But this gives undue scope 
to caprice and personality, and there is undue delay until the 
new president has worked himself in; there can be no unifor-
mity here. Only in the case of danger to the state may it be nec-
essary to transfer more power to a single individual, but never 
in peacetime. 
It seems to be the best thing for ministries if there is a central 
department, and the separate ministry departments for individ-
ual branches would have to include specialized technical ad-
visers in addition to members of the central department; the 
264 

TH'£ STATE 
minister must stand at the summit of the whole edifice. There 
must be one central point for particular types of bus~ess, 
namely the ministry; but this must in turn first particularizb it-
self into ministerial departments, and the whole must be subor-
dinate to the ministC£ 
s 144 
The objective factor in the appointment of councils, authorities, 
and state officials is proof of ability-a proof that, as the sole con-
dition, gives every citizen the possibility to seek, albeit at personal 
risk, to enter the universal class. 77 Individuals admitted to the uni-
versal class make it their concern to devote themselves to the ser· 
vice of the state in all that they are and do (both in the spiritual 
sphere and in regard to needs), and the authority they enter is a 
particular branch of the universal business, justified by the consti· 
tution. In view of their I particularity and their official duties alike, 
21s 
it must be possible for them to be dismissed from the positions to 
which they have (as far as the subjective side of appointment is 
concerned) been called by the sovereign, not by arbitrary decision, 
but solely as the result of a formal j~dgment. 
The objective aspect is that/individuals who wish to enter 
the service of the state must first prove their ability. Herein lies 
the genesis of present-day higher education, that the possibility 
of participating in the service of the state is open to every citi-
zen and is not confined exclusively to individual classes or con-
ferred by birth. Not all can take part in the universal activity of 
government, but all must have the possibility of doing so, and 
must be given the right to do so by education directed to that 
end. Plato, who had not yet attained to the viewpoint of free-
dom, has everyone assigned to a particular class, without re· 
gard to their freedom of choice, by the supreme governmental 
authority according to its insight.78 The [sole] condition for 
entry to the universal class is proof of ability. In addition the 
17. [Tr.) The class of civil servants. 
78. [Ed.) See Plato, R..publie, esp. 412b-414b and S3Sa-S36d. 
265 

ETHICAL LIFE 
state can fix the number of civil servants it needs, and in this 
way the intake declines. There must accordingly be a system 
of examinations in order to demonstrate ability. Large states 
are fortunate here in this regard because in them ability is all 
that needs to be taken into account, not, as in small states, sub-
jective circumstances. For example in small provinces [Lande] 
where there are provincial universities, account is taken of the 
fact that an individual's uncle, father, and grandfather were 
learned men. But since all universities in Germany should form 
a whole, the compulsory university qualification should be elim-
inated and all teachers should be appointed solely on the basis 
of objective factors. 
Appointment to a post is the responsibility of the sovereign, 
for which the individual subject is something contingent. But as 
civil servants the individuals appointed must have rights they 
can lose only as the result of a formal judgment. They have a 
right to their post; but this irremovability must affect not only 
the [officers attached to] couns but all officials. Individuals de-
vote themselves to the service of the state and pin to it their 
spiritual existence [Existenz] and their existence [Existenz) as 
pertaining to their needs. 
216 
The state authorities I in which individuals work must be 
sanctioned, must be firmly defined, by the constitution. What 
the authority does must be based on right, and if a higher au-
thority does not approve it, it can rescind it only by a formal 
process. By this means individuals have the opportunity to show 
their character and rectitude, but their rights and the rights of 
their entire authority, the corporation so to speak to which they 
belong, must be guaranteed. This constitutional justification of 
authorities is one of the main features in the constitution of a 
state. 
The position of government officials is safeguarded in two 
ways. In the first place, they can be removed from their post 
only on the basis of a formal judgment; they have their rights 
and so are independent as far as their particularity is concerned. 
They have renounced [enrichment from] the communal re-
sources of the state, profit, etc., and the state has accepted their 
266 

THI!. STATE 
attachment to the business and property of the state. And this 
sure protection necessarily restores their independence to tHem. 
Secondly, the authorities themselves are justified by the con"ki-
tution, have certain firm rights by virtue of it. It is a major safe· 
guard for servants of the state that they have rights, provided 
they are discharging their official duties. 
§145 
Civil servants are answerable in the first place to their superior 
authorities, whose essential concern it must be to maintain the 
authority of the government, represented as it is by civil servants, 
and whose members are drawn from within the same particular 
class. There must be a further safeguard outside this circle, partly 
at a further remove in the estates assembly,7' but partly in the hier-
archical organization of the civil service itself and the rights con-
ferred on the particular spheres of civic life. By this means the 
power of government officials, which impinges directly on the citi-
zens, I is in the first place limited primarily to supervising, advis-
217 
ing, and taking formal decisions, and civil\,servants are obliged to 
become genuine officials of the state, i.e., officials of the citizenry 
as well as officials of the sovereign. This obviates one of the great· 
est ills that can befall states, namely that the class of officials-
which makes up a major part of the middle class, and in which is 
to be found the intelligence and developed consciousness of right 
of the people-may become remote and alien, and, by its skill and 
education and use of official authority, may provide a channel for 
caprice and the oppression of citizens. 
The principal ill to which our states are subject is that a mid-
dle class is forming in place of the old feudal nobility. And it is 
no longer birth but general education that is the distinctive fea-
ture of the middle class; this makes it necessary to the sovereign 
and peculiarly alien to the people. The privileged position this 
education confers on the middle class may enable it to impress 
the sovereign and oppress the citizens, although it is not some-
thing innate like nobility but something acquired. This undue 
79. [Tr.] See below, S 148. 
267 

ETHICAL LIFE 
power of the middle class is commonly the essential ill affecting 
our states. It is usually now officials who pour abuse on sover-
eign and cabinet, aware of their rascally tricks and oppressive, 
discouneous behavior to citizens, and who assume the mantle 
of defenders of the people in order to distract their attention 
from themselves. 
This form of oppression must be obviated but in such a way 
as not to impair the personal, essentially necessary authority of 
officials. The higher authorities must make it their concern to 
suppon the authority of the officials; and it is not enough to 
rely on the junior officials' being answerable to the senior offi-
cials as a safeguard against oppression, for the interests of ju-
nior and senior officials vis-a-vis the citizenry coincide. Recently 
an attempt has been made to keep a rein on the junior officials 
as far as possible through the superior authorities by getting 
211 
them to submit reports on all their I official activities. But the 
fact that things got even worse after this is enough to show of 
how little use this is. Moreover, in itself the written word is life-
less and indefinite, and there are far too many special reports 
for the senior officials to be able to examine and appraise them, 
so there is precious little protection for the citizen who has to 
complain to officials about officials who are then judged in se-
cret. A safeguard of this kind must therefore lie outside this cir-
cle itself, in the estates assembly. In order to obtain their rights, 
citizens must be able to turn, first, to the nearest responsible of-
ficial, then to the senior official, and, if they get no satisfaction 
from that quarter, to the estates assembly. 
One major safeguard must reside directly in the determina-
tion of the rights and duties of officials (it can easily be seen 
how much indeterminate freedom it is necessary and useful for 
the press to enjoy), and [in the fact] that all propeny belonging 
to .fOr,powions is.a.~.t.:.ccd..hJ. ~QWA aurhQt.iries, and 
the officials have only a formal pmv.ca:..Gf.decision. If the essen-
tial role falls to these officers of corporations, so that the offi-
cials cannot do exactly as they please but can only take the for-
mal decision, then the officials become true officials of the state. 
This ill of our rimes mJISl be eliminated by organizing [the 
--·- --
268 

THE STATE 
civil service] ~~ the botto~~d all other plans are of no 
use or avail. I ;M=tlfe-m1mfMthe official, his remuneration is 
the principal thing and he and his family exist for that alonc}.he 
easily comes to see his post as existing for his own sake, not 
that he is there for the sake of citizens, and he believes his only 
duties are to his superioJ; who can promote him. The educated 
middle class constitutes the peopte•s consciousnessot~cfmn 
and rig&'t; the developed consciousness of right is to be found in 
the middle class. But if this class does not have the interests of 
the citizens at heart, it is like a net thrown over the citizens in 
order to oppress them, particularly as the entire class forms a 
whole since its interests are one and the same. Alienated from the 
people, officials become, by reason of their skill, themselves 
the object of the people•s I fear; even the way they talk strikes 
219 
the ears of citizens as gibberish, a kind of thieves• slang. They 
see only the consequences of their efforts to secure their rights, 
but not the course and manner of the proceedings. Officials must 
therefore accustom themselves to a popular approach, to pop-
ular language, and seek to overcome the difficulties this occa-
sions them. 
c. The Legislative Power 
s 146 
The legislative power [die gesetzgebende GewaltJ is concerned 
with the state in its universality, partly as laws properly speaking, 
partly as internal concerns of government of a wholly universal 
nature, and partly [as it relates] to the basis in the constitution, 
which exists in and for itself but itself becomes more developed in 
the course of further elaboration of the laws and in the progressive 
character of the universal concerns of government. The develop-
ment of spirit unaccompanied by a corresponding development of 
institutions, so that a contradiction arises between the two, is the 
source not only of discontent but also of revolutions. 
As the omnipotence of the rational in general, the legis-
lative power is not executive power [exekutive Gewalt], not 
the power of government [Regierungsgewalt]. As encompassing 
269 

ETHICAL LIFE 
individual cases, however, the concerns of government properly 
speaking are more universal in nature and, as such, the object 
of the legislative power. For instance, duties and taxes in a state 
are an essential, universal element, but their magnitude is a tem-
porary consideration, as is the question what articles should 
be subject to taxes; so the system of taxes is a temporal system, 
subject to changes. But since taxes embrace all interests alike, 
they are an essential object of legislation. The finances of the 
state encompass only the resources required for administration, 
and here too the legislature has a part to play, though not a 
controlling part. The legislature is also responsible for the com-
220 
petence of particular authorities and the demarcation I of what 
should in principle be left to one type of officials for decision. 
The constitution must be presupposed, for the existence of a 
legislative power is itself a moment within the constitution, and 
the legislative power itself presupposes an ordered constitution, 
but the constitution as universal substance that takes on imme-
diate existence in the legislature. 
The constitution must provide an unassailable, sacrosanct ba-
sis, but the fact that it affects legislation and the executive im-
plies that the spirit of the constitution develops, and the con-
stitution is transformed; the substance alters under the influence 
of the legislative power. If the spirit [of the constitution] be-
comes of itself progressively more mature and institutions do 
not alter with it, there is genuine discontent, and if nothing is 
done to dispel this, we get disturbances of the peace owing to 
the fact that the self-conscious concept contains other institu· 
tions than actually exist; there is a revolution. Now revolutions 
, derive either from the sovereign or from the people. For ex-
ample Cardinal Richelieu suppressed the nobles and exalted 
the universal over them. This was despotism, but by suppress-
ing the vassals' privileges he was doing what was true. In the 
case of the Germans, who were his enemies, he supported the 
vassals against the nation. He did not achieve recognition. His 
people, which he sought to raise, hated him, while the Germans 
saw in this ruination of Germany the palladium of German 
freedom; and this set the pattern for the Peace of Westphalia. 
270 

THE STATE 
However, one must know how to recognize whether 'this is 
true discontent; for often the general grumbling of the people is 
not a call for what is better, so the government must scmtimze 
the peopte•s wishes and should yield only when it is convinced. 
The executive must therefore wait until the thought that has 
been expressed has matured. and until the good thought has 
become the thought of the whole people. Sovereigns who have 
not waited long enough have done harm despite all their power 
and good I intentions. This insight into what is better must rise 
221 
up from below, and must have permeated the lowest as well as 
the upper strata. This is why Joseph Irs actions appeared des-
potic, because he did not wait for the proper moment to arrive-
to do so is the mark of a very great spirit. For if it is planted in 
a still unready soil, the good on the contrary bears evil fruit. So 
the legislature must not be in the hands of those who, guided 
by their own interest, oppose such mature concepts of right, be-
cause this would prevent the constitution from ever developing 
to express the true concept of the self-consciousness of unity 
and right. 
§147 
The legislative power is an essential I?.!S.!!!-C?.U~~~Ij and 
one of the falsest ways of looking at it is to view it as essentially 
opposed to the executive. However, of necessity it cannot be en-
trusted to a council of state, to ministerial authorities and legisla-
tive commissions of the government. Its maitL~tur~-~s-~~ prin· 
~ip!~f cl~ 
estat~ (c:(gs $tandis~he], in order that what is 
ordained as universal will and as the rational sho}lla Qi ·so not-·-
mereTy contingently-and implicitly~ -b~t- ~Jso e~Jl!i.filiy_ .iUld neces-
S!fil)'. invo}vi~ ~ctive p~rticiP.~tiOO. and ilie self-conscious trUSt of 
she general cmum.q~alry. 
The legislative power is an essential moment of state power. 
This is inherent in the concept of the state itself. The classes or 
estates are a a major element in the legislative power. Contem-
porary discontent in this respect has resulted in peculiar atti-
tudes and sentiments that have to be transcended, for instance 
the view that legislative power is soldy the province of the 
271 

222 
ETHICAL LIFE 
estates assembly, or that the estates are all that is good and ra-
tional while the ministries represent the bad, so that the estates 
must oppose the ministries-the view that the excellent I and 
good comes solely from the people. These sentiments must be 
transcended. It is the highest interest of the estates themselves 
that the government should be strong and powerful and that 
the estates assembly should initially be subordinate to the gov-
ernment; it should not take the lead among the people in adopt-
ing a hostile attitude toward the executive power. Ultimately, a 
hostile attitude of this kind would result in revolution, whereby 
only those who hold the executive power in their hands would 
be changed, but what is conceptually necessary would neverthe-
less return. 
The reason why legislation cannot be entrusted solely to a 
council of state or a ministry, despite the fact that they obvi-
ously understand it best, and ~y the.._!!~~~ Il!ust hav~ a 
role, [is as folio'!.§]: if it were merely a matter of ability to act 
-rot-rlieurii;eB"ai interest, ministries would be sufficient for the 
purpose. In estates assemblies the most talented members are 
always those who have held high state office. But in regard to 
what has to be established as universal will, in the sphere of 
right, an essential feature is the self-consciousness of all, the in-
terest that comes only with one's own activity. Only so is right 
present for itself, even if it may previously have been present 
in itself. For it is a matter of contingency if the government's 
actions bring about the universal, and the sole reason why there 
must be an organized state is that what is fitting may occur 
necessarily. 
S148 
The estates assembly [Stiindeversammlung)BO contains in its con-
cept on the one hand the moment of the universal will as what is 
80. [Tr.) Cf. French etats ginb11u:x:, the legislative assembly in France prior to 
the Revolution of 1789, composed of representatives of the three estates (clergy, 
nobility, and commoners). The more normal English term is "parliament. • The terms 
S~mmlung 
and P~~rlllm.,t occur synonymously in S 149 (see n. 81 ). So~M­
times the abbreviated form Stiintle (estates) refers to the legislative body. 
272 

THE STATE 
rational in and for itself. Here, where the executive is defined in 
opposition to it, the latter is the abstract individuality of sovereign 
power, [namely) contingency and arbitrary will. On the other bait~ 
the estates assembly gives visible expression to the people, in its 
abstract sense as a mass, distinct from its orderly government by 
the state; and to the extent that the mass of the people is viewed in 
its determinateness, I it is a mass of individuals and of particular 
223 
classes, whose interests are incumbent on the estates assembly, in 
contrast with which the executive characterizes itself as the univer-
sal element of the state. There has to be a twofold safeguard in the 
way the legislature is organized, ensuring that the assembly, as giv-
ing visible expression to the people en masse and upholding par-
ticular interests, does not become a power over against the state; 
and that the state itself, as executive, does not seize to itself the 
functions of legislation and become a merely sovereign power. 
The estates assembly represents the people. It contains the 
moment of the untv~Lwill in the twofold sense: (1) [that it is) 
the will that is in and for itself rational; and (2) that it is not 
just in and for itself the universal will, but is also for itself since 
each individual has his self-consciousness in it. On the one hand 
the assembly represents the universal will; on the other, the 
people appear here as a mass-the individual and the individual 
classes with their particular interests. From the point of view of 
regarding the universal will as present in it, all that remains 
with respect to the government is that without the estates as-
sembly it would represent the arbitrary and bad; this is the 
usual assertion of demagogues. It is to be hoped that God may 
grant that rationality should be a feature of the estates assem· 
blies, but let us not accept the above assertion. Mter all, the 
people as they are found in the estates, in opposition to the gov· 
emment, are something coarse and elemental, a contingent mass. 
It is th~fo!!.,LerJ. erroneous .to..oppose !h~ p.eop[e t~ th~ateo 
for "itb9ilt ~a_fficulation, without tlte di~eqsiQp of the state; the 
~Jlle . .laclt rationality and are m~r~y-~ mass. 
· 
With regard to the people as a mass, it is important to 
note that they never patendy assume this form, for if they did 
they would appear as an untamed element. The people have to 
273 

ETHICAL LIFE 
appear in the compartmentalized order of their civic life, as laid 
down in the constitution; only so are they recognizable by rea-
son. To speak of "the people" is a completely empty phrase. If 
the people are viewed as a mass in its determinateness, then 
each head of a household, I each corporation retains its own par-
ticular interest. This individuality, this interest of the particular 
estates, has, in the estates assembly, to be set over against the 
rational universal. 
The second aspect of the estates assembly is that the people, 
~parate entities, are pre~ent the~~- jn t~ir _corpO[;tions. It 
used tobe· ihe case in Germany tliat all estates--clergy, nobility, 
peasants-had their individual interests, which they sought to 
exalt to the exclusion of all else. But they were in any event de-
barred from participating in the overall whole (e.g., [decisions 
affecting) war and peace), and this universal was none of their 
concern, nor could they affect it indirectly. I~_ constant quest 
.was to extort something from_thc.w.bnle and take one's pda~ili. 
:P~and 
have as much ill ane.'s purse as pessible. 
From- this second point of view the state's attitude is that it 
always has the interests of individuals [in mind], but always 
S~!l!m.!!.ts~.£~-~~~1_. In a well-
organized state, however, neither of the two main viewpoints 
should dominate for its own sake. This must be ensured by the 
fact that (1) rationality does not rest solely with the citizens, 
(2) nor does it rest merely with the government-it is not par-
ticular interests that come to the fore, nor does the estates as-
sembly exist solely for the interest of the individual classes. The 
one viewpoint is as erroneous as the other. It always used to be 
the spirit of the former provincial diets to look after their indi-
vidual interests, the nobles for their own sake, the towns with 
an eye to their particular privileges, etc. To view the estates from 
the one side alone is false, and if one or the other side is present 
(and not the other], this undermines the constitution. Both points 
of view are one-sided; the estates assembly must be viewed in 
the light of neither the one [alone] nor the other, nor must the 
one feature or the other actually figure in the state [to the ex-
clusion of the other]. 
274 

THE STATE 
s 149 
The above-mentioned safeguard derives from the universal. frl)m 
the concept of the legislative powet; the fact that for its actiotas 
[are needed]: I 
. 
225 
(1) the monarchical principle as the universal individuality of 
state power, responsible for proposing laws in due form and con-
firming the resolutions of the other elements; 
(2) cabinet [Ministerium] and council of state as advisory bod-
ies, playing their part with knowledge and oversight of all branches 
of the state administration and its requirements; 
(3) the estates assembly, [which] itself defends the viewpoint and 
interest of particularity and individuality, but in such a way that 
the members receive no instructions from their electors and are 
equally bound to foster the universal interest. 
[(1)) As a result of this arrangement, the ministers, as an-
swerable for their actions, have to propose what is good. It must 
always seem as if the action derives from the sovereign. Legis-
lative proposals must therefore emanate from the sovereign, as 
far as form is concerned. The estates assembly cannot make any 
proposals on its own account; the initiative for laws rests essen-
tially with the power of the sovereign. It must not seem as if, 
formally speaking, a law derives from the estates assembly; for 
the formal proposal the assembly must have recourse to the mon-
archical principle. For if the assembly formally proposes the 
laws itself, this implies its independence from the power of the 
sovereign. After all, laws also have to be enacted in regard to 
the executive sphere and administration, and if the assembly also 
had the power to propose legislation, it would be capable of 
embarrassing the state power through its demands. In England 
both the monarch and ParliamentBJ can propose laws; but if it 
were to happen, as has not happened for a hundred years past, 
that a proposal by Parliament was not approved by the regent, 
this could easily endanger the state. In England the king must 
also have ministers in the lower house; howevet; they cannot be 
81. {Tr.) The teXt here uses Stiimktlersammlung, but later in the sentence, 
Parlament. 
275 

ETHICAL LIFE 
made peers, since if they were, they could no longer sit in the 
lower house. The only reason why the celebrated Pitt was not a 
peer was so that he could carry weight in the lower house. Thus 
the [English] constitution itself is a grave danger to the good of 
the state, and only abuses-the ancient privileges-can preserve 
it. As a result of abuses, towns that have in some cases com-
pletely disappeared have the right of representation, and this 
226 
makes it possible for the party in power I to be sustained, since 
something is always arranged by bribes. England is also not 
affected by the vulgar sense of being continually hostile to the 
cabinet and government, and many people who arc concerned 
about the common good side with the party in power. If the 
cabinet no longer has the majority in important matters, there 
must be a change of cabinet, for in that case the party that does 
not in fact always declare itself in favor of the party in power, 
but only when it believes it owes it to the good of the state to 
do so, has come out against it, and the cabinet must fall. So the 
estates must only have the right to present to the cabinet their 
wishes in regard to a legislative proposal, in order that it may 
submit them as a proposal. In addition, the cabinet must endorse 
the assembly's resolutions. 
(2) Cabinet and council of state must be given an essential 
role to play in the estates assembly. However, they must not 
have the right of vote but only to make proposals and examine 
and explain the issues involved. In addition, ministers and coun-
selors of state must be present in order to elucidate the issues in 
regard to whatever the assembly wills. It is essential to have the 
concrete perception of the ministry that lives in the thick of the 
matters under discussion. This practical knowledge as to all 
the different effects a regulation will have is something that only 
the cabinet can have, overseeing as it does all departments; 
for regulations affect different parts of the state very differently. 
For if the ministries have no share in the assembly, the assembly 
as proposing and the government as not approving start libel-
ing each other, which becomes unnecessary and avoidable by 
having the ministers speaking in the assembly. The opposition 
216 

THE STATE 
too has a major and necessary part to play in enlivening the as-
sembly's debates. Here ministers can be questioned on anytl\ing; 
here they can show their talent, skill, and presence of ni$d, 
since they are I under constant attack from the assembly, which 
221 
stands over against their ministry, and since the assembly's pro-
ceedings must always be public. And this is the most vexatious 
thing about being a minister, for here he often has to spend six 
to eight hours thinking and speaking about what are in part 
unexpected questions. This check on the executive is the best 
guarantee for having ministers who are competent and whose 
attitude is governed by right. It is an outstanding spectacle to 
see such matters examined by ministers and estates. 
(3) The estates may not vote and act in the sense of a single 
city or class, but must vote and act in the sense of the whole. 
The parliamentary constitution is based on the interests of the 
particular estates, but for particular interests the members have 
no particular instructions for their corporation and from their 
corporation, but have [only] the communal interest. The state's 
impulse is to absorb all particular interests in the interest of the 
community. Its business is not to have regard to individuals as 
such, but to act according to universal rules, which may be very 
oppressive for particular spheres and individuals; and this is es-
pecially the task of the estates, to alleviate this inequality that 
results from these universal rules for particular classes or corpo-
rations. Members of the estates assembly are especially knowl-
edgeable about the particular spheres, while the ministry has 
knowledge of the universal and has the task of regulating the 
particular will. The relationship between the estates provides an 
excellent basis on which to form a council of citizens to advise 
the government, but such joint advice is the product of the ad-
vice tendered by all three powers, those of the sovereign, the 
executive, and the estates. 
s 150 
The guarantee that members of the estates assembly will have 
the necessary qualifications can be divided into, on the one hand, 
277 

ETHICAL LCFE 
[the security that results] from their having wealth or resources in-
dependent of state resources and of executive favor as well as of 
228 
trade I (this being bound up with the interests of legality and the 
maintenance of civil order); and on the other hand their attributes 
of rectitude, skill, and familiarity with the interests and institu· 
tions of the state and civil life, gained through the actual trans· 
action of business and governmental or other office and attested 
in fact. [It] also [resides] in a sense of governmental responsibil· 
ity and the conception of the state formed and tested in the same 
manner. 
Some people regard it as superfluous to say that certain qual-
ifications should be possessed by members of the estates, and 
that the people themselves know who means well by them. But 
"meaning well" counts for very little, and is of no use; what is 
needed is general familiarity with the edifice of the state. More· 
over, how are the people to know who means well by them?-
by their opinion,u perchance? But this opinion is very much 
a matter of chance, and this empty possibility, this chance ele-
ment, this opining must be excluded. For if it is merely a matter 
of opining, then it is those who for the most part hold the floor 
in taverns, who mean right ill by the government, and who 
know how to declaim, who are elected to estates assemblies. 
So it was in France, where actors, barristers, rough-mannered 
Capuchins, and the like [were elected] to the assembly. From 
an exaggerated sense of right, those members who had been in 
the first legislative body passed a law to the effect that those of 
their number who over a number of years had shown courage, 
resolve, and knowledge were [not] to be elected to the new 
legislative body. As a result these street-comer orators and 
Capuchins came to the helm, and it was they who caused the 
revolution to go off course. 
The two necessary guarantees concerning members of es-
82. [Tr.]ln the German there is a wordplay between the verb meinen (to mean) 
and the noun Meinung (opinion). In the next sentence, the verbal noun Meinen 
(opining) is used as well. And there is a play ~n 
gut meinen (to mean well) 
and (in the second sentence below) recht feindlieh meinen (to mean right ill). 
278 

THE STATE 
tates assemblies are as follows. In the first place, they must,have 
wealth or resources independent of state resources, [so tha'] in 
order to support themselves and their families they do not IlC!Cd 
to enter the service of the state. In many states the opposite was 
the case, and posts for which no altogether exceptional aptitude 
seemed necessary were put up for sale. In I England all officers' 
229 
posts were sold, and the purchaser could sell them again as his 
own property; and yet the English armies acquitted themselves 
very creditably. This way of doing things is very pernicious, but 
where it is not introduced, there is scope for a system based 
on favor; Where the delegate has means independent of the re· 
sources of the state, there is no longer any room for favor. Above 
all the delegate's mode of acquisition [of his wealth] must not, 
like trade, be dependent on fortune, and his status must not 
unduly arouse avarice. The possession of independent means 
[ensures] the interests of legality, namely that the state should 
be preserved along with all particular interests and classes. Ad-
mittedly there may be individuals who sacrifice their own and 
their family's well-being for the well-being of the state. This is 
possible and desirable, but it is a matter of chance, and the state 
cannot expect a guarantee whereby it is necessary for individu-
als to sacrifice their own well-being and that of their family. In 
a well-organized state such tragic virtues should not be needed. 
The second guarantee is the question of ability, but not solely 
of familiarity with where this or that state official is less than 
efficient, or familiarity with a multitude of well-appointed plans. 
The sole guarantee is that he [the member of the estates assem-
bly] has attested his rectitude and aptitude by what he has done, 
through the actual transaction of business, by holding govern-
ment office. To be familiar in the abstract is quite different from 
familiarity attested in practice. It could at all events be made a 
condition that only those who have proved their worth in gov· 
emment office should be elected to the estates assemblies, for 
the mere confidence of the citizens is something subjective. More· 
over, a sense of governmental responsibility is tested by hold-
ing such offices, the majority of which-those for the particular 
279 

ETHICAL LIFE 
spheres of civil life-must be held without remuneration. In these 
governmental posts one also gets to know the rabble and that it 
230 
has to be ruled.•ll 
s 151 
These are the reasons for dividing the estates assembly into two 
chambers or houses [Kammer]:" 
(1) By providing [houses of] the first and second instance-as 
with law courts and government authorities-one has a surer guar-
antee of ripeness of decision, specifically in regard to the most 
important matters, namely universal affairs of state; and one also 
removes the contingent character pertaining to the mood of the mo-
ment, which can attach to any decision by a numerical majority. 
(2) But principally, there is less chance of the estates' being in 
direct opposition to the government in the event of diversity of 
views on important matters. Between the one [i.e., lower] house 
where the democratic principle must be predominant [and the gov-
ernment] there is a mediating element [the upper house], which if 
it takes the side of the democratic principle gives it all the more 
weight, and if it diverges from it prevents it from appearing in op-
position to the supreme power of the state. 
In the concrete circumstances of a state it is necessary for 
business to be divided, and it may become advisable to a greater 
or lesser degree to differentiate activities. In the same way as in 
the case of law courts there must be a higher court to which it 
is possible to appeal, so here too there must be a second house 
in the estates assembly. The government may have to suspend a 
single house and appeal to the people on important issues, but 
this can only occur in important cases, for the consequences are 
always harmful if the government comes into opposition with a 
83. The text eonlinull$, brllllking off at the bottom of the page: The 8CIISC of ex· 
ercising right, in general the sense of the state, whereby the citizen diffen &om the 
rabble, whereby the 8CIISC that all particular spbem 
84. [Tr.] The arguments for a bicameral legislature are much more explicit in 
the Heidelberg lecrum than in the published version of the Philosophy of Right 
(see SS 305-308). 
280 

THE STATE 
single house in this way. To avoid this it is better for there to 
be two houses. Each house must have a veto; for something to 
be valid, it must have been accepted by both houses-a ·single 
bouse and the government are not sufficient. So neither house 
may be outvoted. In earlier times this was not the case in Ger-
many; once the electors and colleges of princes had voted, the 
vote of the college of cities was not needed. [It was] the same in 
France, where there were previously three estates, one of which 
could be outvoted. I This at all events must not happen; all 
231 
estates must give their agreement and have the right of veto. 
Two houses are necessary, each must have a veto and a deciding 
vote. An assembly can be carried away by the mood of the mo-
ment. This does not happen so easily if there are two houses. 
Speedy and precipitate decisions are averted by this means as 
[well as] by having the necessary rules of procedure, namely 
that matters to be discussed should be the subject of prior ex-
amination by committees of the house, that proposals should be 
submitted and discussed more than once, that decisions should 
not be taken in haste, etc. In an emergency, it must be possible 
for the detailed rules to be set aside. The first decree acknowl-
edges that there is an emergency, while the second sets out the 
text of the decision; so in this case it may be unnecessary for 
the proposal to be submitted three times OVCI: Such exceptions 
may be called for frequently; but in this way a government that 
wants to have something approved can arbitrarily get it de-
clared an emergency matter. The mood of the moment could be 
prejudicial in such cases if there were not two houses to coun-
teract the contingency of the moment. 
Often a small majority can decide the matter one way or the 
other. This appears as a matter of chance, since the equal votes 
for and against appear as negative votes, and the others, consti· 
toting the "majority, ... s as deciding votes. Examples of this are 
85. [Tr.] Here (and below) the rext uses the loanword Majoritiit. whereas in 
tbe preceding sentence tbe normal German term Meh~l is employed. We have 
marked the difference by the use of quotation marks. Hegel's point is that in such 
cases the so-aalled "majority" consists in only the deQding votes. 
281 

ETHICAL LIFE 
to be found in the proceedings of the English Parliament. Dur-
ing the examination of the living allowance for a princess who 
was marrying a Prussian prince, the discussion bore on the ques-
tion of increasing her income. An equal number of votes were 
cast for and against, and there was still one man to vote, a lord 
who had previously been infamously condemned, and he voted 
against the increase. So the decision depended on him. Now here 
we have the matter decided by chance, because it was only the 
"majority,. that decided. This chance element must be avoided. 
The decision must flow from repeated deliberations ensuring 
that the matter is abundantly ripe for decision, not from the 
contingent nature of a handful of subjects. If there is only one 
232 
house, in the event I of its rejecring the government's proposal 
it would appear to it [i.e., the government] as an opponent, 
and hatred, tension, and friction would ensue. If there are two 
houses and they both vote against, the government has nothing 
more to say; the decision has double weight. If the houses differ 
in their opinions, the appearance of opposition is between the 
two of them. They do not in any way appear in opposition to 
the government, and there is no hatred or tension on the part of 
the government vis-a-vis the house that has voted against be-
cause the dispute is seen merely as one between the two houses. 
If there were not two houses, the only means available in the 
event of contradiction would be either to dismiss the govern-
ment or to dissolve the house. The latter course would appear 
as an attack on the freedom of the people, while the former 
would endanger the existence [Existenz] of the state. 
§152 
The existence of two distinct houses is not merely a matter of 
numerical division but takes shape as the determinate difference 
that is inherent in the classes of civil society and in the qualifica-
tions of members of the estates that provide a guarantee [of their 
suitability]. These qualifications include in the first place the pos-
session of permanent property that is independent of both state 
and trade, and that is free from the uncertainty of possession in-
volved in such forms of ownership and from the quest for a profit 
282 

THE STATE 
to be gained from the want and needs of others-[ that is_flanded 
property [Grundvermogen], which for this very reason is the'~rop-
erty of a whole, of the family. Since it is important that there 
should be in the state a class of citizens or rather families who be-
long in this independent way to the universal class, and [that] 
these families should make up the natural substantive element in 
the state, this [class], and the first estate of civil society, that of 
landowners [GiiterbesitzerJ, acquire in this way a political impor-
tance and vocation. This can be called a hereditary nobility, but 
one that enjoys no other privileges and feudal rights. On the con-
trary, by virtue of its I position it must do without the rights of 
233 
other citizens and families since its political preeminence must be 
limited to one member of the family, who has moreover to show 
himself in other respects suited to exercise his political quality, and 
who must be legally debarred from other forms of business and 
commerce, and even from rightfully disposing of a specific part of 
the family estate. 
It used to be the case that if a noblewoman married into a 
bourgeois family, this was noted in the civil register. And the 
same thing happened if a bourgeois man married into a noble 
family, but in this case his name was marked with an inkblot in 
the register of nobility. There is no place here for these distinc-
tions; members of the upper house must have more duties than 
privileges. Their means make them independent, and by rea-
son of their fixed vocation for political life they are obliged to 
give themselves a higher political education. The various other 
estates in civil life are interested only in their particular classes, 
concerned only for them on an individual basis, and are thus 
cut off from the whole. But the higher, hereditary classes are tied 
to participation in the universal sphere by virtue of their situa-
tion. Their proximate aim may well be their particular [inter-
est], but their essential aim is the universal. Members of the 
second house are chosen by the people, organized into corpora-
tions and estates. 
The main characteristic of the first house is complete inde-
pendence through having fixed means and a fixed vocation to 
pursue universal aims as a result of hereditary succession. There 
283 

ETHICAL LIFE 
is no place here for the pursuit of abstract profit, for cunning 
or guile. The basic quality of this nobility is the possession of 
land [Giiterbesitz], landed estate [Gnmdvermogen], not merdy 
capital [Kapital] lent at interest, involving the pursuit of profit. 
Even large-scale traders, though they disregard petty gains and 
their business involves them in universal matters, are always af-
ter profits, albeit on a larger scale, and seek to accumulate inde-
terminate wealth. By the nature of the case landed property in-
volves satisfaction of the family, making all pursuit of profits a 
matter of no account. 
The first house contains the universal class, the landowning 
class. Members of the agricultural class who wish to enter the I 
estates assembly must not only belong to this immediate class 
but be wealthy landowners, having a universal quality through 
their education. They must be exempt from considerations of in-
determinate profit, such as affect the mercantile class; their lands 
must be inalienable. It cannot be by accident that they possess 
property. For lands to be inalienable, there must be hereditary 
succession and, to that extent, a nobility. However, there is no 
longer any room for a nobility that lacks all recognized employ-
ment and is proud of the fact, nor must it take precedence over 
the middle classes in offices of state. A nobility of this kind must 
have no privileges, as in England; and the exercise of certain 
trades, and also the right to dispose of landed estate, must be 
forbidden to it. It has to accept the sacrifice of renouncing the 
general civil right of doing whatever does not adversely affect 
the rights of another. Patrimonial jurisdiction is not, properly 
speaking, of great importance; however, the state must not seek 
to derive profit from the administration of justice. There is still 
less cause for the president of the patrimonial court to pocket 
the legal fees; for if the state does profit from the administra-
tion of justice, at least this means that it needs to levy less in the 
way of other taxes from the population. Apart from the fact 
that someone is a landowner of this kind, he also has to prove 
his suitability, but such proof must not become a mere formal-
ity as in France. 

THE STATE 
§ 153 
The second house comprises in general the second estate o{ civil 
society; and it does so in the form of deputies (Deputierten], 'who 
are elected without regard to property qualifications, unless it be 
their having held governmental or other office, and without salary. 
However, they are chosen not by an [agglomeration] dispersed into 
atomic units, but in the articulated system made up of their dif-
ferent associations [Genossenschaften] and thus by the vote of a 
commonalty [Burgerscha{t] from which no actual citizen [Biirger) 
is excluded, I regardless of means. The right to choose deputies and 
235 
the political action this represents is not, in consequence, a single, 
nonrecurrent action for the dectors, nor is it handed over to single 
individuals as such but is essentially entrusted to local communi-
ties [Gemeinden] and other duly constituted associations. In this 
way these associations enter the state in a political context, and 
the election of deputies, and with it the existence [Existenz] of the 
estates assembly, rests on a duly constituted guarantee. Further-
more, there is such a close connection between the estates and the 
constitution of the whole that a free attitude on the part of the 
electors and also a free and constitutionally minded attitude on 
the part of the deputies is only possible if the rights of individuals 
are safeguarded by making the administration of justice and jury 
trials public, and if the rights of the particular local communities 
and interests are safeguarded by the free establishment of civic 
authorities and self-administering bodies. 
For the first house, participation is based on the correlative 
attributes of landed estate and family. In the second house the 
family has been fragmented, and participation is based on the 
system of needs. No one in the state must be allowed not to 
be a member of an association. The system of needs comes into 
play in the form of deputies of the associations. Election must 
be by the commonalty in general, i.e., by the associates of one 
or another corporation [Korporation]. In regard both to elec-
tors and to deputies, there is no room here for the property 
qualification; it is superfluous. For since most of those elected 
will have held government posts, in electing them to such posts 
ZBS 

ETHICAL LIFE 
the electors will have already taken property or resources [Ver-
mogen) into account. If these representatives of the people draw 
a salary or receive remuneration, their position alters completely; 
the office of deputy must not offer any financial advantage. Only 
in the case of small states may the state's external dependence 
so affect the spirit of the citizens that they are unwilling to take 
on the post of a deputy unless it offers advantages. 
Electors do not participate in the election as single individu-
als but as an association. For the individual has no duties qua 
236 
individual. One has duties I only to the extent that one exists 
and has to act for a universal. This is what makes corporations 
so strong. If it is for associations to send deputies, and all citi-
zens must be members of an association, then every active cit-
izen can also take part in the election. It goes without saying 
that day laborers, servants, etc., are not [allowed to vote, but) 
are excluded as not being members of an association. Voting 
rights must rest in commonalties, in corporations. Citizens must 
make their choice in ordered, recognized associations. Only in 
this way is the right to vote ensured; and the fact that an elec-
tion is actually taking place [is ensured by the fact) that the 
right to vote rests with corporations, in that it is no longer left 
to the chance patriotism of individuals. Something must exist 
in the state that involves a commonality of right and duty. If 
the executive takes it into its head to carry out actions alone 
that ought only to be performed with the cooperation of the es-
tates, there are specific authorities to remind the government of 
its duty. The public character of the courts, which must be jury 
courts, gives citizens the self-confident feeling that they are get· 
ting their rights and that the state's interest is being served. 
There must also be self-administration of the citizens' commu-
nal property. For if the citizens are harrassed by officials, there 
arises an indifference in regard to the universal, the view that 
the government is merely burdensome. All too frequently the 
character of authorities and officials is compounded of pride, 
sordidness, and dishonesty. There is a great call in recent times 
for estates, but if these estates were to lack a sense of the state, 
286 

THE STATE 
they would bring with them hatred for officials, judges, ~d the 
government. 
P54 
A further point that can be noted in regard to an estates assem-
bly is that its sessions must be held in public-partly as the means 
whereby its actions become universal property for the conscious-
ness of individuals I (who thereby achieve correspondingly greater 
237 
power), partly in order that it and its members may gain from 
public opinion an oversight and weighty judgment of their work-
but above all so that public opinion itself may attain both to an 
insight into the actual affairs and condition of the state and to 
a rational concept and correct judgment in regard to them, and 
also in regard to the personal element in ministries, government 
authorities, and members of the estates. Only in this way is an 
estates assembly both itself the antidote to self-conceit among its 
members and one of the most important means of education for 
the people. 
The above desiderata were not to be found in the former 
German provincial assemblies or diets, and the citizens could 
not be blamed for shedding no tears at the loss of institutions 
that did more harm than good. [What was formerly regarded 
as] the good, if it [proves to be] bad, has by vinue of its author-
ity all the more pernicious an effect. If the sessions of estates 
assemblies are held in public, this provides a means of keeping 
the people informed and enabling them to take pan in the af-
fairs of the community. The estates then have the opinion of the 
entire people behind them to support them. Where there is a 
revolution it is harmful for the proceedings of the estates to be 
public. This happened in France where the rabble followed what 
was going on and applauded or hissed, and if its opinion was 
unfavorable was only too ready to wreak revenge on whoever 
spoke against it. A member of the assembly who has aroused 
lively discussion in the chamber will moreover frequently con-
tinue the debate within his family, where everyone knows ev-
erything, and in this way his views too will be refined. And by 
287 

ETHICAL LIFE 
this means the public gains familiarity with the administration 
of the state, and its judgment is formed. How vastly more ad-
vanced the English people are than the German. How false and 
silly is the judgment one usually hears [in Germany], even from 
those who shout the loudest, such as Colonel von Massenbach, 
by contrast with the judgment of the English. [It is] the same 
with the judgment in regard to the ministers and the sovereign, 
and the people's familiarity with affairs is confined to the purely 
private side, which is after all of subordinate importance in re-
lation to the state. For great statesmen often pay very little heed 
to their private behaviot; deeming it of small account by com-
parison with their office. It is only by holding sessions of the as-
238 
sembly in public that people get to know what is genuinely I 
important. The consequence is that no member of an assembly 
will get away with being only superficially or moderately well 
informed, and self-conceit is most severely punished and put in 
its place. Thus [it happened] with Count Waldeck in the Wiirt-
temberg Diet when he accused the ministry of not having taken 
even one of ten apparently good measures to counter the previ-
ous year's scarcity; but the house had of necessity to reject all 
ten. The estates assembly, where the noblest and best of the 
people sit and where everything comes up for discussion, is 
the most important means of educating the public opinion of 
the people. In this way public opinion arrives at maxims that 
have immediate validity and at sound common sense. When a 
people obtains this education [Bildung], having regard to the self-
conscioumess of its freedom and its right, this provides the root 
of all public virtues [Volkstugenden]. 
§155 
Directly bound up with the existence [Existent] of an estates 
assembly and the public conduct of its business, as well as with a 
consistent constitution, is the possibility and efficacy of freedom of 
the press [Pressfreiheit] in regard to matters of state; [likewise the 
possibility] that other individuals from the general public should 
have their say publicly as they please; and the possibility for all to 
288 

THE STATE 
participate directly. For one thing, it is only if the assembly's pro-
ceedings are public that regular legal action can be taken against 
those who infringe freedom of the press; for another, people·\re in 
this way informed about affairs of state, public opinion is firmly 
based and oriented along the right lines; and for this very reason 
false judgments and public calumnies can be seen to be unimpor-
tant, and the government and public ligures can therefore be indif-
ferent to them. 
Provincial assemblies and freedom of the press are two mat-
ters that engage attention more than any others. They can only 
exist within a consistent whole, but within the latter they are 
necessary links in the chain of the whole. In a large state free-
dom of the press is this complementary element. In such a state 
the local communities can only I be represented in the estates 
239 
assembly by deputies since not everyone can take part in it, the 
infinitely greater number being unable to do so owing to their 
occupation and education. This essential complementary ele-
ment consists in gaining an immediate hearing for one's views. 
But such freedom of the press is only possible where there 
is a good estates assembly whose proceedings are public, and 
where there are judicial proceedings involving jury courts, so 
that all know how and by whom they are being judged. If all 
people can write whatever they want, there is nothing to pre-
vent all manner of libelous attacks on fellow citizens, officials, 
and rulers, and the revealing of all family secrets. But to enact 
laws as to where libel begins and ends is a difficult matter that 
causes endless trouble in France, Germany, and Holland, espe-
cially nowadays when the most libelous statements can be made 
using expressions that are not indictable. It is not possible to 
enact laws to cover this unless the libel is recognized. But this 
recognition must be by jury courts, for then the author of the 
libel and also the government, officials, and any private parties 
to the case are sure of getting their rights; and a decision can be 
taken by their peers, by judges they have chosen themselves, in 
regard to mere evidence of a libel. Someone accused of libel 
through the press is also not entitled to adduce as evidence the 
289 

ETHICAL LIFE 
correctness of the facts; provided they are libelous, he is punish-
able. For example, someone who prints a parliamentary speech 
in which accusations are made may thereby be guilty of libel 
even though there was no libel on the pan of the orator. A ma-
jor point here-and this was introduced by Pitt in England-is 
that the jury does not judge solely on the faets of the case but 
primarily on whether there is libel or not. 
Furthermore, if freedom of the press is to be introduced 
without doing harm, the people must already have attained a 
higher level of public education. Calumnies and false judgments 
concerning individuals and governmental affairs are of no con-
sequence to the individuals and ministers concerned. They do 
not need to worry about them, I they can pay no attention to 
them, since the people arc fully informed as a result of the pub-
licity [given to the assembly's proceedings), and in this way free-
dom of the press gives rise to indifference and insensitivity to 
the kind of respect one finds in other countries. It is open to one 
to lodge a complaint on this score, and one will certainly be ac-
corded one's rights; but one deems it beneath one's notice, one 
rises above it. In England all the people read the abuse and cen-
sure directed at those who stand above them, whereby they see 
them dragged down, as it were, to their own level from posts 
they cannot themselves attain. Very many people spend whole 
days and nights thinking of caustic things to say about others. 
To judge from these articles, public opinion seems to be deci-
sively opposed to the cabinet, but genuine public opinion shows 
itself in a very different light where it matters, in that in such a 
state the cabinet cannot remain in office if true public opinion 
is against it. 
ps6 
An estates assembly cannot be regarded as having actually en-
gaged in activity until it includes an opposition, i.e., until the uni-
versal interest becomes at the same time a particular interest within 
the assembly itself, and, on the basis of the constitution, the minis-
terial posts become an interest of ambition. Virtue in the state is 
not a moral abstraction from particularity of interest; it is rather 
290 

THE STATE 
that this particularity vests itself in a universal interest o~ the es-
tate or of the state. 
. 
Here we are dealing with political virtue as opposed to 'moral 
and religious vinue. If the estates assembly is essentially of one 
mind in opposition to the government, then the government 
must either split or dissolve itself; and since this leads to the de-
struction of the state, the government as the repository of power 
must dismiss the assembly. If on the other hand the assembly 
were unanimously in favor of the government, it would not 
be fulfilling its vocation or attaining its goal. Of necessity there 
must be an opposition within the assembly itself; I the cabinet 
241 
must have the majority in an assembly, but the opposition must 
necessarily be there as well. The estates assembly is the main 
council of the state. The sovereign power, the cabinet must es-
sentially have the majority, for this is implied in the concept of 
a cabinet; otherwise it is not the cabinet. If the cabinet is gener-
ally in a minority, it must be replaced by another cabinet, and 
this too can last only as long as it has, in general, the majority 
on its side. There must be three parties in the assembly, two 
that are directly opposed to each other, the party of the people 
and the party (that] is absolutely always on the side of the gov-
ernment, and then a sizable third party, which usually takes the 
side of the cabinet but on the whole is nonpartisan in its ap-
proach. This third party is an aristocratic party, based on noble 
families. It is usually thought that civil servants ought not to be 
members of an estates assembly on the ground that they are on 
the side of the government; but the government, as unity of the 
whole, is the foremost element that has to be preserved. As for 
civil servants, whose corporation must in itself have rights and 
who cannot simply be dismissed, they are not unduly depen-
dent on the government. Yet they are for the most part the best 
educated, who were at universities, and bring with them into 
the assembly this mentality trained for office. 
What is chiefly necessary in general is for the interests of par-
ticularity to merge into the interests of the universal. This is in 
fact one of the principal features in a large civilized state, that 
the interests of particularity should have been fully developed . 
.291 

ETHICAL LIFE 
lt is only in small states that there can be republican constitu-
tions, where the main consideration is moral rectitude; in large 
states it is not possible to have regard to moral and religious 
motivations. Where ambition and status-seeking come into play, 
there is accordingly justification for an opposition as such. The 
ethical life which is present within the state specifically requires 
that the interest of particularity as such should exist, but should 
in turn be linked with the universal interest of the state or es· 
tate. The statesman's virtues are not solely moral virtues. What 
242 
counts here is actuality, and the ethical consists solely I in this 
subjectivity's having its determinate existence in the universal. 
Ambition is this virtue within the state; particularity must make 
itself known along with the other virtues of the state. Miltiades' 
aim was the well-being of the state, but the virtue of such he-
roes was the element of nature. The prevailing moral stand-
point of modern times has been apolitical in the sense that we 
seek to discredit someone's action (and believe that we do so) 
by saying he only acted in this way from ambition. We always 
consider the subjective side and through it become distrustful of 
proposals or actions. The necessary mistrust is that the others 
should not approve the maner in hand simply on trust; on the 
contrary, it is only when its real value has been ascertained that 
it becomes universal. But what we mean by virtue in the state is 
that what one person proposes partly from ambition others find 
to be concordant with the universal. Among the Romans [and 
other peoples} there were and are a multitude of philosophical 
and religious sects, such as Cynics, etc., or Quakers. But a state 
made up of such citizens could not subsist, and the latter sub-
sist only to the extent that others take on the business of the 
community for them so that they are only parasitic plants, inca-
pable of forming a state on their own. To be abstracted from 
particularity is to be severed from organic life. 
s 157 
Apan from collaborating on laws concerning the judicial and 
political sphere and determining the rights and mode of operation 
of the panicular spheres of civic life. the estates are responsible, 
292 

THE STATE 
in regard to the executive power, for receiving and examining com-
plaints by individuals concerning actions by officials and govern-
ment authorities, for indicting ministers, and in particular fb~ an-
nually approving taxation, by which means they retain indirect 
control over governmental affairs in general without the govern-
ment's actions themselves being subject to their decision. In regard 
to the sovereign power, they are responsible for supervising the 
succession to the throne, especially I in the event that the ruling 
243 
dynasty dies out and a new one comes on the scene. 
Here we are dealing with the responsibilities of the estates, 
initially their particular responsibilities. As the constitution is 
progressively developed, disharmony may ensue as a result of 
one branch•s being more advanced than another, and in such a 
case the estates assembly must find a remedy. Laws differ from 
ordinances and from cabinet orders; in a well-ordered state 
there should be no place for cabinet orders since no one is re-
sponsible for them. It is not possible to indicate precisely the 
difference between laws and ordinances. Individual associations 
must have the right to present petitions to the estates assembly; 
this must be a sacred right, and the assembly must examine and 
check such petitions closely. In a well-regulated state there can 
be little necessity for formal indictments of ministers, especially 
as they have to render account of their actions; however, they 
must be under threat of such indictment in the event of their 
failure. 
For the estates the approval of taxation is a way of control-
ling all government actions, since taxes are the means to all gov-
ernment actions and nowadays nothing can be done without 
money. Taxes must be regulated according to the revenue from 
crown lands, and to this extent account must also be rendered 
to the estates assembly concerning them. Formerly taxes had 
the form of a levy imposed on a particular piece of land, along-
side which there might be a plot to all intents and purposes free 
from tax; and revenue was virtually the private property of the 
sovereign, out of which he had to meet expenditures. Customs 
duties had merely the form of taxes-it was not their purpose 
to facilitate trade. Only in modem times have taxes come into 
293 

ETHICAL LIFE 
being, and the sovereign is given a civil list, for example in En-
gland. But all other levies imposed on landed estate as rights, 
ground rents, or tithes must be annulled before taxes can be im-
posed equally. In France all these levies were annulled by revo-
lutionary decree. 
Government actions themselves are not subject to the estates 
244 
assembly, I but only the taxes that provide the means for them. 
Owing to the supervision exercised and the whole way the state 
is organized, the government cannot be extravagant; and the 
other extreme, the estates' stinginess with the necessary taxes, is 
also precluded by the political sense [actualized] in a constitu-
tion where everyone partakes in the universal-the sense of hav-
ing one's pride and honor in the greatness of the state and the 
great deeds it performs. There is nothing that must not be given 
up for the sake of this whole, whereby one's particular interest 
is protected and furthered. 
The monarch, as the ultimate pinnacle of the subjectivity of 
certainty, must be made permanent as a result of natural succes-
sion, and it is for the estates assembly to preserve this security 
of inheritance of the throne. If the dynasty dies out, the estates 
of the realm must see to it that a new dynasty ascends the throne 
without disturbances; and since nature ceases to determine the 
succession, it is for the estates themselves to make a choice. 
S158 
The wholly universal affairs of the state, however, concern both 
the public training [Erziehung) and education [Bildung) of individ-
uals to serve the purposes of the state, and art, religion, and sci-
ence in and for themselves--these being the intuition, feeling, rep-
resentation, and knowledgel6 of the absolute essence of the state 
and of nature. The highest satisfaction of spirit, in which it recog-
86. [Tr.] Intuition (Ansdlauung) is the mode of cognition appropriate to art 
(Kunst); feeling (G4uhl) and representation (Vomellung) are the modes appropri-
ate to religion; and knowledge ( Wissen) is rhe mode appropriate ro sc:ienc:e ( Wis-
sensdlaft), meaning academic: learning in general and philosophical knowledge in 
particular. 
294 

THE STATE 
nizes the state, the lives and actions of individuals, and also his-
tory and nature as the absolute mirrored in actuality, [is) an 'mtu-
ition and occupation to which a people's express vocation, spliere, 
and status must be dedicated. 
We are referring here in the first place to training and educa-
tion on behalf of the state; training and education on their own 
account come later. The state has to see that this right of indi-
viduals to education and training is realized. Public educational 
establishments must in part afford opportunities for training, 
but in part they must be obligatory and necessary, and it must 
not be left to the free choice of individuals and parents whether 
to avail themselves of them. Children become children of the 
state. I Specific education by means of instruction is the objec-
24S 
rive element, and this is what the state must and can take notice 
of. Education in general takes place of itself, without the state's 
having to enforce it. The education of a succeeding generation 
is the direct consequence of the education given to the preced-
ing one. The state is ethical spirit, spirit in and for itself, and 
constitutes the essence of all individuals; but the state appears 
as a state in time. 
It is through religion, art, and science that the essence [We-
sen) of the state, its freely emergent spirit, is intuited-this be-
ing an intuition [of] the intellectual element in actuality [das 
Intellektuelle der Wirklicbkeit]. The state must regard this as an 
end in and for itself, an end such that it is justified by this very 
intuition. Spirit is actuality; hence the life of religion, science, 
and art must not exist for itself alone but must be the life of 
the state, and spirit must portray itself as actuality. The self-
reflection of the ego must as such attain its freedom. The in-
tuition of essence [die wesentliche AnscbauungJ is through art; 
religion involves still more, namely the intuition and conscious-
ness of unity with the absolute object. The mystical element or 
inner core of religion is the self-consciousness of individuals 
in their absolute spirit; this is the supreme satisfaction of self-
knowing reason. This world shows itself in history as a mirror 
image of the absolute. Science [WissenscbattJ is not merely be-
lieving in a general, abstract way but more precise cognition. 
2.95 

ETHICAL Lll'E 
As the state is spirit in its actuality, these are essential ele-
ments in it. Knowledge of the absolute must also comprise 
actuality. There must accordingly be a church in the state, in-
dependent of the state but one with it. The understanding [Ver-
stand] has recently arrogated so much to itself that the need 
[for a church] has emerged once more. The church must not 
portray itself as an earthly kingdom within the state, for other-
wise the state must tum against it. Religion is a universal mode 
of representation [Vorstellung] and thought [Denken], but not 
246 
yet conceptual thought [Begreifen]; this I higher level is science 
[i.e., philosophy]. The church has opposed science and has ne-
glected to endow itself with this higher level, to raise the truth it 
contains to the sphere of science. Science and the church must 
not be mutually opposed, even though particular spheres are 
necessary for both. 
We have spoken of the absolute concerns of a people: reli-
gion, art, and science. Knowing is the highest way in which rea-
son is real, and this reality must come about in a people. There 
must be one class in the people that devotes itself to it. There 
used to be monasteries where people shut themselves off from 
the world but were of no benefit to the universal interest since 
they only looked after themselves. Contemporary states arc still a 
far cry from establishing universal institutions for these spheres; 
the universities and academies of sciences have taken the place 
of the monasteries. It used to be the case that religion was 
attended to by fear of God, and the arts and sciences by the 
princes; but the needs of these spheres are not necessarily pro-
vided for in this way. However, people who devote themselves 
to them must not bury themselves so deeply in them as to lose 
themselves, as happened for instance in Egypt. The other ex-
treme of our times is that the state is regarded as merely attend-
ing to the protection of its citizens. In its institutions the state 
must be a temple of reason. This is how philosophical cognition 
must comprehend the state; and even if individuals cannot know 
it in this way, at least they have the impression that the state is 
something rational. 
296 

THE STATE 
B. International Law 
StD 
~ 
A people is a single entity, and it is only through determination 
and particularity that individuality has existence [Dasein] and ac-
tuality. Each people accordingly has its determinate anthropologi-
cal principle, which I develops in its history, and to this extent is 
247 
a nation [Nation). In this way at the same time it exists for itself 
over against other such individual entities, and as absolutely self-
sufficient its relationship to them is that pertaining to a state of na-
ture [Naturzustand). International law [aussere Staatsrecbt] is there-
fore a mixture of universal and positive right and of contingency 
andpowe~: 
What international law is concerned with is the being of 
a people for itself, but it involves only an "ought," that right 
should be. Here we are concerned only with the self-sufficient 
over against the self-sufficient. Existence [Dasein) means being 
something determinate in relation to something else. Each peo-
ple has an immediate natural determinacy within itself, a par-
ticular character and particular geographical circumstances. It is 
not by chance that the spirit of each people differs from that 
of other peoples. The world-historical [principle] is a necessary 
principle; it is a particular principle that develops within the 
hisrory of a people. World history is the portrayal of how these 
[national] characters constitute moments in the world spirit. We 
are all born, natus, in such a way as to belong to our nation and 
to a greater or lesser degree share our people's specific natural 
characteL This "belonging to one's people by nature, • [in con-
trast with) entering a specific state of one~s own free will as an 
individual, gives rise to a conflict, which must be eliminated. 
According to the former principle none of us have the right to 
leave our people. In many states it was therefore made the rule 
for everyone to swear the oath of allegiance on reaching man-
hood. For instance the English government did not recognize 
emigration and recruited as a sailor every native-born English-
man it laid hold of on shipboard. 
291 

ETHICAL LIFE 
A further [cause for] conflict would be whether a nation has 
the absolute right to constitute a state. That is the natural thing, 
but a nation can also fragment into several states although it is 
enfeebled if it does so. If by contrast several nations constitute 
one state, the state retains a certain weakness, which is only 
eliminated after centuries of amalgamation. [It is] the same with 
the Jews. They have a religion of their own, which also con-
tains a political ingredient in that they cleave to their religion 
248 
and in conformity with it hold apart from all I other peoples 
and may not even eat or drink with a non-Jew. Now insofar as 
the Jews have in their religion principles that preclude all links 
with other citizens and impede the unity of the state, [their ex-
clusion from the state seems to be necessary]. However, custom 
and the impulse imparted by universal rationality to abandon 
these disharmonies make such exclusion unnecessary. It is cus-
tom that prevails over principle; this is why governments are 
justified in not taking consistent measures against this unyield-
ing opposition. Moreover, their constitutions are too firmly es-
tablished for such opposition to be capable of causing any harm. 
At all events, international law contains something universal in 
the relationships [among the peoples]. Since the starting point is 
freedom of choice, these relationships rest on contracts, which 
however contain no guarantee. 
s 160 
A people's highest honor is to maintain its independence or self-
sufficiency [Selbstilndigkeit]; this is the being-for-self of its actual 
essence. This negative unity of the whole is the ideality of the par-
ticular spheres of civil life and of the subsisting-for-self of individ-
uals. It is the domain in which the substance [of the state), as the 
power of actuality in relation to life and property and their rights, 
brings the nothingness of these things home to consciousness and 
makes sacrifice for the recognized status [Anerkanntsein] and in-
dependence of the whole a duty for all; whereas for the state of 
being recognized in regard to individual matters and external po-
litical relations in general, it specifies a particular part [of the peo-
ple] as the estate of courage [Stand der Tapferkeit]. 
298 

THE STATE 
As negative vis-a-vis other peoples, a people therein exists for 
itself. Through the coherence of the whole all spheres converge 
together in the state, and all people attain their purposes in their 
sphere. It is in this ideality that the negativity, the power of 
the state, I comes into play. For those who live quiedy in their 
249 
sphere, the nothingness of what they possess is brought to con-
sciousness. Individuality involves the ascent to negative unity. 
All peoples strive to be a central point, and in Germany we find 
that every imperial city, every petty province regrets that it is 
no longer a central point. Nor is the people's wish in Germany 
directed to having just one central point, but to a federal union 
of the individual central points. The independence of the people 
is the element of all its negative unity, in which family life and 
all domestic happiness find their power. The particular must 
possess its right in the universal, and the universal must exist 
through the particular. 
Wars may be condemned by morality, which can say that 
wars ought not to be; but the state is not merely an "ought." 
Rather wars must be regarded as necessary because independent 
peoples exist alongside one another. Individuals must feel the 
ethical substance, the spirit of the whole, in relation to which 
individuals are ephemeral. What is demanded is to sacrifice one-
self to this substance willingly. Wars are like winds upon the sea; 
without them the water would become foul, and so it is with 
the state. This ethical aspect-the dimension the state acquires 
inwardly as a result of its external nature-is the highest view-
point from which war can be regarded. In its manifestation, 
war is this orientation outward, which nevertheless operates in-
wardly and shows the nothingness of particularity. 
This inner sacrifice is demanded not merely in disposition but 
in actuality. This element-to sacrifice life, property, and rights 
for the preservation of the whole-requires an independent peo-
ple and a constitution that subsists within itself and preserves 
irself. In a small state that is not self-sufficient much can arise 
and endure that cannot endure in an independent state. Some-
times at the request of smaller states, sometimes on their own 
initiative, more powerful states may take upon themselves the 

ETHICAL LIFE 
task of preserving peac:e in smaller states. 87 The constitution can-
250 
not be guaranteed by a more powerful people, I for this would 
be the utmost disgrace. As a direct consequence, there is a duty 
incumbent upon all to sacrifice themselves for the preservation 
of the state. Individuals have their hono.z; their essential subsis-
tence, in the state alone. Properly speaking, individuals can sac-
rifice themselves only for the state as a whole, for if a citizen 
were to go to war for his property, he would be staking his life 
for the sake of his property, although without his life his prop-
erty would be of no use to him. 
For the recognized statuS of specific individual matters, the 
state appoints a separate section of the people. For the only cir-
cumstance in which the whole people takes up arms is when 
the independence of the whole is jeopardized. It is just not pos-
sible for individual interests to be made an interest of this kind 
for the individual citizens. For these particular interests the state 
must have an army, representing the element of courage. This 
moment of negativity, of courageous sacrifice, demands an es-
tate to which entry must be open to all. However, if there are 
not enough volunteers, the state can oblige certain citizens to en-
list by law. A territorial militia, which must be held only in re-
serve, can only be used when the independence, the autonomy 
of the state is in danger. The dangerous feature about arming a 
whole people to ensure its independence is that one abandons 
a merely defensive system and acts offensively. 
S161 
Since the right of states vis-a-vis one another is based on their 
relationship as [that] of self-sufficient individuals, [which is] the 
relationship [that pertains to] a state of nature, it extends only to 
reciprocal recognition as independent entities-entities, that is, that 
attest themselves to be free by waging war and exercising power, 
with whom it is at the same time possible to live in a condition of 
peace. 
87. A serarmce fragmmt follows: But a state that is not independent 
300 

THE STATE 
What states have to demand of one another is recognition-! 
251 
to be recognized [as] free, independent individual entities. 'What 
is free as something naturally free only evinces itself by deitaon-
strating that its life is a matter of indifference to it; and this ex-
istence of what is free can be shown only in war. As a natural 
mode of recognition, this recognition comprises an element of 
contingency; and as natural attributes, strength, size, level of re-
sources, talent all affect the outcome. The right of states on the 
one hand is the demand that they reciprocally recognize one an-
other; on the other hand it has to be proved that they in fact do 
so. H a state has a constitution that threatens the independence 
of other states or that is incompatible with a condition of peace, 
the latter states can either refuse to recognize it or else call on it 
to change its constitution in that respect. They cannot formu-
late this demand in the direct sense of requiring the state to de-
viate from its constitution, but the demand can be formulated 
indirectly. For example the [other] states refused to recognize the 
French Republic. The constitution is the inner life of the people, 
and the people should have a constitution that enables other 
states to live at peace with it. Insofar as uncivilized peoples 
have virtually no constitution, and the civilized peoples who 
live alongside them accordingly cannot rely on them and never 
feel secure, they take it on themselves to compel these rough 
peoples to accept a fixed constitution. 
s 162 
The more specific obligations incumbent on states rest on posi-
tive treaties, and the fundamental principle of international law as 
the universal right that ought to be valid in and for itself is that 
treaties ought to be kept. But because of the principle of indepen· 
dence, the reciprocal rights of states are actualized only in their 
particular wills and not in a constituted universal will. The propo-
sition therefore does not go beyond an "ought.,. Numerous injuries 
inevitably occur in the manifold relations between states and be-
tween their nationals. The question as to which of these are to be 
regarded as assaults on the state as a whole and on I its honor, or 
252 
301 

ETHICAL LIFE 
as a definite breach of treaties, or as a danger threatening from an-
other state, is indeterminate. If states disagree over such questions, 
the matter can be settled only by war. 
The universal obligation of states is that they recognize one 
another; if they wish to enter into other obligations toward one 
another. they conclude treaties. As with single individuals, the 
peoples or nations should have rights vis-a-vis each other. But 
since the rights they are willing to cede to each other are arbi-
trary, they have their determinate existence only in the particu-
lar will of the contracting parties. They achieve existence as a 
result of reciprocal free choice; by being actualized, their will-
ing attains existence and ought to be recognized by others. 
The universal element of will, i.e., the fact that they have de-
fined their rights reciprocally, does not as such involve actual-
ity; if this universal were actually present, their relation to one 
another would no longer be that of states confronting one an-
other as particulars. All we have here is the proposition that 
treaties ought to be kept. This "ought" is a matter of contin-
gency. A single individual of a state, or whole classes or corpo-
rations of its citizens, may be injured or adversely affected by 
another state, through its enactments. Now the aim of the state 
is the well-being of its subjects. It is a fact that states conclude 
numerous treaties with one another. In the absence of treaties, 
the state can regard the injury done to an individual as one 
done to itself or simply as an injury to the individual. If the 
states see it as a merely personal matter, they leave the individu-
als to themselves; and it depends on each state what it is pre-
pared to tolerate from another state-it may regard its honor as 
at stake in minor injuries. The state does not have to wait for 
direct injury or attack; on the contrary, the mere danger of an 
attack or injury, or excessive growth in strength, may cause a 
state to resort to war. When Joseph II carried out domestic im-
253 
provements I in Austria, he made other states jealous of him. 
Such representations, views, and judgments determine whether 
the mutual relations between states will be peaceful or hostile, 
as also the strength of the injured state (which enjoys a kind of 
superabundance of health) and its power to provide all this [sur-
302 

TH£ STATE 
plus] energy with an external oudet. After a lengthy period of 
peace, when the country's coffers are full and many of its young 
men are eager for wa~; a trivial insult readily becomes a dtuse 
for the outbreak of war. As we are here dealing merely with an 
"ought, .. it is just not possible to say anything against wars since 
states are opposed to one another as individuals living in nature 
[Naturindividuen). Kant and others have spoken of perpetual 
peace, as and this is a well-meaning thought, which is also mor-
ally good; but the starting point has been that war is something 
that ought not to be. Yet without war peoples sink into merely 
private life-the security and weakness that make them an easy 
prey for other peoples. War is something ethically necessary. A 
league to preserve perpetual peace always necessarily involves 
the free decision of individual states whether to remain in the 
league or not; for without this freedom of decision they are no 
longer independent states. 
It is also a well-meaning thought, advanced some thirty years 
ago, that the human race should form a single state.89 What 
holds the individual states together in such a league of all states 
88. [Ed.} Hegel is referring to Kant's Zwn ewigen Frieden: E.in philosophiscbu 
Entwurf (Konigsbe~g, 1795); cf. Kant, Scbri{ten 8:341-386. In his article "Ober 
den Gemeinspruc:h: Das mag in der Theorie ric:hrig sein, taugt aber nic:ht fiir die 
Praxis,• Buliniscbe Monatsscbrift 22 (1793): 201-284, Kant himself refen 10 
C. I. C. de St. Pierre's Proiet de paix universelle (UtreCht, 1713) and also 10 Rous-
seau's treatment o( the subject in his E:dTait du projet tis PRix PBT[Jetuell4 tis Mon. 
mur /'Abbe de St. Pierre (n.p.,1761) as prec:unors for the plan for universal inter· 
national peace; cf. Kant, Scbriften 8:312-313. In the Metaphysics of Morals Kant 
reverts ro rhese problems in conncc:tion with his discussion of international law 
(S 61). Cf. Rechtslehre, pp. 226 ff. (Kant, Sdlri{18n 6:3So-3S1.) 
89. [Ed.) Hegel may here be recalling Kant's article "'Ober den Gemeinspruch," 
in which he took issue with the "proposal for an international State" as envisaged 
by St. Pierre and Rousseau (see previous note). On the one hand Kant points to the 
impracticability of such a project; on the other hand he concludes thar it is theoret-
ically valid. In the short article "Idee zu einer allgemeinen Gescbic:hte in weltbiirg-
erlicher Absicbt," which had lint appeared in 1784 in the Buliniscbe Monats-
schrift 4:385-411, Kant had discussed this idea-likewise with reference to St. 
Pierre and Rousseau-in the c:onrext of his scheme for a philosophy of bisiOry of 
humanity. In his "seventh proposition" Kant here sees as the bisiOrical goal of the 
human species rhe establishmeot of a "league of nations" such as would form rhe 
prerequisite for the introduction of a "perfect civil constitution." Cf. Kant, Schrif-
1811 8:24-26. 
303 

ETHICAL LIFE 
is merely an "ought," and the whole league is based on free 
choice [Willkiir]. At all events the individual must desire the 
opposite of war; but war is a philosophically essential element 
of nature. 
s 163 
War, being a condition devoid of right, a condition of violence 
and contingency, involves right-insofar as it is waged between 
peoples that recognize their independence on a reciprocal basis-
254 
only to the extent that it I preserves the possibility of peace and is 
not waged against purely private persons who are distinguished 
from the state. In other respects the way states behave to one an-
other in general rests on a nation's customs [Sitten] as the inner 
universality of behavior that has being in and for itself and en-
dures regardless of circumstances. A further point is that in war 
a people's independence is exposed to contingency. However, the 
higher right to which they are subject is contained in the universal 
world spirit. 
Here the transition to a higher level is indicated. War draws 
all possible talents out into mutual antagonism; but even in the 
condition of universal absence of right [some] rights ought to be 
valid. In the first place, by virtue of the fact that war is waged 
by states that mutually recognize one another, the possibility 
of peace must remain, and envoys and members of parliament 
[may] not be harmed. Everything that does not belong to the 
actual state--c:ivillife, religion, academic establishments, the law 
courts-ought to be spared insofar as it is only actual states as 
states that wage war upon one another. However, this too is 
by and large only an "ought," foi; after all, these things belong 
to the state and provide it with means. Moreover, in the event 
of an emergency the state can seize [the] funds of particular 
spheres within it. For if the state is in danger of losing its free-
dom, the particular spheres have no rights in relation to it; and 
it must also sometimes deprive the state with which it is at war 
of these means or resources. 
304 

THE STATE 
Custom is what most firmly regulates behavior in time of 
war. Where there is no longer any possibility of peace, where the 
independence of one of the peoples is threatened, it becomes a 
war whose sole aim is mutual destruction. H for example en-
voys were murdered, this would be a signal for a war of this 
kind. If a people in whom civil society has developed becomes 
embroiled with a people that has reached this level of civiliza-
tion, they do not take it so much to heart if a I part or province 
255 
is incorporated into another state, since those who pass over 
retain their rights, religion, etc. The Poles defended themselves 
honorably, but were too late in the attempt to equip themselves 
with a rational constitution. However. the [Polish] people were 
inwardly fragmented, tom by divisions. Among civilized peo-
ples there are fewer and fewer such internecine wars because 
there is a more highly developed being-for-self of families and 
individuals. Thus unity is weaker and there is no danger for the 
totality of rights and institutions, for religion, education, etc. 
The Spartans made all Messenians who did not emigrate slaves. 
[It was] the same in the Orient [i.e., China], where in the capi-
tal all men, women, and children were murdered. 
Since war dissolves international Jaw, all that can remain is 
what exists as an inner element within peoples, namely ethi-
cal life. Our practice is to spare prisoners who are no longer 
dangerous; army chaplains and medical officers are not for the 
most part treated as prisoners. In the Polish Wa; Suvarov had 
every Jiving thing in the suburbs of Prague massacred when he 
captured it. Since envoys represent their people, the murder of 
envoys is also a weighty occurrence. But as states are unwilling 
to stake their independence lightly, they view this latter insult as 
a single circumstance and disregard it. This [is what happened] 
with the French envoys who were murdered in Rastatt. The 
highest point a people can reach is to preserve their indepen-
dence and sacrifice everything to it. But this independence is 
nothing absolute, and it can be destroyed. Something higher 
transcends it, world spirit, and where the latter emerges, the 
rights of the peoples disappear. I 
256 
305 

ETHICAL LIFE 
C. World History 
§164 
The principles of the particular folk spirits [Volksgeister] are re-
stricted. The unrestricted spirit is the universal spirit, which exer-
cises its absolute right toward the folk spirits in world history as 
the court of world judgment!H)--11 judgment, moreover, that is ren-
dered not merely by its might and a blind destiny but by the neces-
sary development of its self-consciousness, whereby a single nation 
or people is made responsible for implementing a single moment 
and stage, which it receives in the form of a principle. Such-and-
such a people is dominant in world history during such-and-such 
an epoch; and in contrast with its absolute right of being the ve-
hicle of this present highest stage in the development of world spirit 
[Weltgeist], the principles of other peoples are without rights. 
Absolute spirit, existing in and for itself, is actual in self-
consciousness. The state is this actuality. The state is inner life, 
but is something particular in relation to other peoples. All that 
is required of the universal constituted by the right of peoples 
is to be. But what is universal in and for itself is world spirit. 
Here spirit is striving to grasp itself in its highest form. And 
the highest moment is world history, the absolute process into 
which the independence of the peoples is transposed; in relation 
to this process the independence of the peoples is of no account. 
Pragmatic history indicates the causes of the rise and decline 
of peoples. If one seeks to establish why a people fared as it did, 
the reasons are so closely interconnected that one continually 
encounters further causes. World history is this divine tragedy, 
where spirit rises up above pity, ethical life, and everything that 
in other spheres is sacred to it; it is where spirit brings itself 
forth. One is sad to see the decline of great peoples, the ruins of 
Palmyra and Persepolis, and how in Egypt everything has fallen 
into ruin. But what has been laid low, has been laid low and 
had to be laid low. World spirit is unsparing and pitiless. Even 
257 
the finest, highest principle of a people is, I as the principle of a 
90. [Tr.) See the next note. 
306 

THE STATE 
particular people, a restricted principle, left behind by the ad-
vancing spirit of the age [Zeitgeist). Nothing profounder ~ 
be 
said than Schiller's words, "World history is a court of warld 
judgment [die Weltgeschichte ist ein WeltgerichtJ. "~t No people 
ever suffered wrong; what it suffered, it had merited. The court 
of world judgment is not to be viewed as the mere might of 
spirit; the genus has the might of the universal over individuals, 
which are accidents, but the genus in tum relapses into individ-
uality. It is in these individuals that the genus in turn has its 
next determinate existence; this is a tedious process, where the 
same thing keeps on happening. World history, on the other 
hand, is always an advance to something higher. Moreover, it 
not merely "is"; "isness" [das IstJ is the ultimate, simple condi-
tion devoid of concept: something "is" because it "is." 
The destinies of peoples do not involve merely being, which 
would be contingent in its manifestation, but a conceptualized 
being. To be sure, one must harden one's heart when contem-
plating the destinies of peoples, but they are not [what they are) 
merely because they are. Children do not yet comprehend them-
selves inwardly; it is only later that they make themselves free. 
In the same way epochs in world history are distinct stages in 
consciousness; each people has its development latent within it-
self, but in this great nexus of world history each people has a 
particular principle. Its history is only a development within it-
self, in an individual people. 
Since one people is dominant in [a given epoch of] history, 
its principle is also introduced into the other peoples. A people 
whose principle coincides with the stage attained by the spirit 
of the age is the dominant people, and its deeds are the most 
excellent. The three hundred Spartans at Thermopylae form a 
moment of world history, even though sev-eral thousands have 
often fallen no less bravely. In contrast with such a people in 
whose deeds world spirit manifests itself, the rights of other 
91. {Ed.] Friedrich Schillez; "Resignation: Eine Phantasie," line 95, in Thalia 
(1786). See Schiller, W~rke: Nationalausgabe, vol. 1, Gedichte, 1776-1799, ed. 
Julius Petersen and Friedrich Beissner (Weimaz; 1948), p. 168. 
307 

ETHICAL LIFE 
peoples are of no account; grievous though it may be to watch 
how it tramples them under foot, it fulfills its role. In the Ro-
man people the injustice of continually interfering in everything 
was justified because it was the right of world spirit. Individuals 
258 
who take the lead in such a people and at such a time, I even if 
they act in an immoral fashion by despising the rights of others, 
are nonetheless responsible for its being executed [i.e., the right 
of world spirit]. Here the absolute idea of spirit has absolute 
right against everything else. 
s 165 
There have been four world-historical realms: (1) the Oriental, 
(2) the Greek, (3) the Roman, (4) the Germanic.'l 
World history was earlier dealt with in terms of the four mon-
archies, and this was based on the fact that the history of all 
other peoples is related to the world-historical peoples. It is in 
these four worldviews that spirit has attained knowledge of it-
self through these stages. There are peoples who lie on the pe-
riphery of this development and who are not world-historical. 
As folk spirit, determined by nature, spirit comprises many gen-
era and species, since this natural side must also have its right; 
and the species in question are sometimes only dimly illumi-
nated by world spirit in that they are to a greater or lesser de-
gree closely related to the folk spirit of the leading people. In 
the Oriental realm we have despotism, in the Greek democracy, 
in the Roman aristocracy as opposed to democracy; while the 
absolute foundation in the Germanic realm is the principle of 
the inwardness of spirit. 
s 166 
(1) The worldview of the Oriental realm is substantial, and it 
first arises as a natural whole, patriarchically governed, in which 
92. [Tr.J The "Germanic• (gmnaniscb as disrinc:t from deurscb, •German•) 
includes for Hegel virtually all of modem Europe and might be regarded as a syn-
onym for "European• {a term Hegel rarely uses). Among the Europeans Hegel 
accords a special role to the so-called "Nordic principle" {S 169) in developing the 
principle of inwardness. 
308 

THE STATE 
individuals as sons have no personality, [no] right or propercy on 
their own account vis-a-vis the ruler. and in which distinctiofts of 
class, of civil I life are fixed by birth as separate castes. In it the SfC· 
259 
ular government is at the same time theocratic, the ruler is also the 
high priest or a god, the constitution is religion, and religious and 
moral precepts and usages are at the same time laws of the state 
and laws of right. 
This is the necessary first configuration, that of inward re-
flection. Freedom is not yet present, and individuals know only 
the whole as their essence. As sons they have no right, no prop-
erty of their own vis-a-vis the head of the family. World spirit 
passed beyond this immediacy to another people, but took the 
principles with it in order to develop them further-as in the 
Indian, Persian, Chinese, Babylonian, and Median empires. Of 
these the Chinese is the most highly developed. Here hierarchy 
and the patriarchal relationship extend down to the lowest mem-
ber of society. Vis-a-vis the monarch no right, no property is 
valid. The viceroys are in their turn patriarchs of their province, 
and the father possesses all rights over his children, whom he 
can even have executed although he cannot kiJJ them himself. 
If a son commits a crime against his father, this is the most hei-
nous offense and plunges the whole province into confusion. 
And these original principles are further developed to encom-
pass civil life. 
We find the same basic view among the Persians; here the 
king was the reflection of the sun, and his princes represented 
the planets around him. In India the division into classes was 
more marked, and the prince is frequendy distinct from the high 
priest. In their cosmogony they portray the caste system as of 
divine origin. The basis of the transmigration of souls is that al-
though aU human beings have emanated from God, their pres-
ent status is a misfortune, and it is only through purification in 
the world that they can return once more into the godhead. 
This main dogma of the Hindus makes the sphere of finitude 
merely a contemplation of the beyond, merely a relation of ac-
cidentality, to be taken up again into the infinite in merely un-
conscious fashion, and not to grasp the infinite oneself in one's 
309 

ETHICAL LIFE 
260 
consciousness. All constitutional laws I and laws of right are 
[for Muslims) contained in the Koran; in the same way even 
precepts governing etiquette, washing, eating, etc:., are presented 
as religious laws. Muhammadanism is a purification of the Ori-
ental worldview insofar as it does not accept the decline of 
spirit in humanity; this intellectual difference is the only essen-
tial one. In this worldview spirit is also seen as a natural ele-
ment, as the sun. 
s 167 
(2) The Greek realm has as its basis Oriental substantiality, 
which is, however, born out of spirit into spiritual individuality 
and transfigured into beauty. The one substance has dispersed into 
many peoples, in whom the essential element is unconstrained and 
serene ethical life. The principle of personal right emerges, but still 
compounded with and subordinate to the substantial, ideal unity-
a self-determination whose resolutions come from within itself, al-
though not yet ascribed to self-consciousness but to an external, 
superior [power). The constitution is on the one hand democratic:, 
but on the other hand this democracy still contains slavery. 
The Greek realm can be regarded as the antithesis wherein 
Oriental substantiality is differentiated. The wild life of nature 
is here moderated, and what dominates is the individual spirit. 
The Greek realm is the world of ethical life, where the good 
resides in the communal spirit of one's people. The Greek gods 
represent spirits of the people, but the natural element is still 
present in them: Jupiter is the thunderer, Poseidon is still god of 
the sea, etc., but the ancient Titans, the natural elements, are 
banished to the fringes of the world. An and industry can be 
recognized here. 
Here we have a fragmentation into many peoples, but since 
they know themselves to be infinite they do not yet sever them-
selves from the universal. In the severe Doric character individ-
uals are still more attached. to the whole, whereas the Ionian 
261 
character displays this free I individuality. Here is the happy con-
sciousness of being in ethical identity with one's whole. How-
310 

THE STATE 
ever, the laws are still directed wholly to the preservation of the 
state. In regard to inheritances the Athenians took steps to pre-
vent the undue increase and ao:umulation of wealth. The we.alth-
iest simply assumed, as the wealthiest, the cost of popular 'and 
also religious festivals. It was for the richest man in a demos 
to assume this, and if he was unwilling to do so anyone could 
offer to exchange his property with him. They laid store by the 
universal, but individuals were not here serfs for the construc-
tion of monumental works, as they were in the Oriental realm. 
The final decision lay with the oracle. as self-consciousness 
did not yet have this subjective certainty. In Socrates we see 
the emergence of morality-the principle of being-for-self with 
its attendant dangers; this was also why Plato did not incor-
porate it in his Republic and made all property communal. It 
was, however, a necessary element that Socrates grasped; the 
Athenian people recognized its destructive effect and in punish-
ing Socrates, who stood at the apex, punished themselves. With 
Socrates decision-making first becomes an inward process. 
The principle informing democracy here was, as Montes-
quieu says. virtue, this unconstrained ethicallife;'l it is also pos-
sible to see here aristocratic principles. Personal freedom was 
not yet recognized as something absolutely universal; the free 
citizens were the aristocrats, and they were not yet conscious of 
the necessity of the freedom of all. 
s 168 
(3) The Roman realm completed the tearing apart of ethical 
unity into the extremes of the being-for-self of self-consciousness 
and abstract universality. While the aristocracy was the starting 
point for the constitution, the aristocratic principle of substantial 
intuition did not come into play on its own account but in opposi-
tion to the opposing democratic principle, which was also present. 
I And as a result of this clash the former principle developed into 
262 
93. [Ed.) Monresquieu, D• l'6S/Irif tks lois, book 3, chap. 3 (pp. 26 ff.); d. 
Montesquieu, <Biwru complitu, p. 252. 
311 

ETHICAL LIFE 
superstition and power devoid of right, while the latter eventually 
led to the dissolution of the whole. In the ensuing general misfor-
tune and death of ethical life, the particular individualities of the 
peoples died out, the formal right of personality was developed, in-
dividuals were degraded to the level of private persons, all equal 
with one anothet; and the only bond left to hold them together 
was an abstract arbitrary will whose growth assumed monstrous 
shapes. 
The 6rst realm is natural substantiality, the second spiritual 
substantiality, while the Roman realm introduced as the third 
element [formal right] and contains the opposition that is death. 
For the founders of the state were robbers, whom no ties could 
hold togethec. We can see the many forms fragmentation took: 
Numa was the first to introduce religion, while the Etruscans 
first brought aristocracy, which was opposed to the principle of 
personal freedom; and the whole history [of Rome] comprises 
this struggle between plebeians and patricians. During the aris-
tocratic domination the principle of natural ethical life emerged 
only in opposition, and religion declined into superstition. The 
democratic principle also won rights for itself in the state, but 
this development of democracy brought down the whole. The 
appearance of the democratic principle brought about the dis-
solution of the whole. The shape this folk spirit assumed-this 
universal death of ethical life (all folk spirits were collected to-
gether in a pantheon)-was that of world spirit. 
To this period belong the cessation of all public interest and 
the full development of formal right; [it is] as with a corpse, 
which in itsdf is dead, yet contains the life of the worms. The 
individual elements made up the whole without a central point; 
there was only one individual, bereft of universality, who was 
at the apex. Arbitrary will devoid of reason came on the scene. 
We see appearing these monstrous shapes, where individuals 
go so far as to view themselves as deity. This is the most mon-
strous thing that has been seen in regard to self-consciousness, 
263 
that it is driven into Oriental forms; I yet these shapes were 
necessary. The character of the Roman realm was this tearing 
apart, this death. 
312 

THE STATE 
s 169 
(4) In this unhappiness self-consciousness is pressed back upon 
itself. Yet from the infinite anguish, for whose embodiment world 
spirit had held in readiness the Jewish people, self-consciousness 
lays hold on the infinite positivity of its inner core; and the task of 
developing the world configuration [Weltgestalt] of this inward-
ness is entrusted to the Nordic principle, to the Germanic peoples. 
The beginning of national unity is not a religious or natural prin-
ciple but the heartfelt comradeship and fidelity of free people, who 
attach themselves to a courageous leader and are rewarded by him 
with conquered land in return for which they owe him freely given 
loyal service. Once this had been formalized in a legal system which 
suppressed the other free subjects of the realm, it became the feu-
dal relationship. 
The Roman world is the world of difference, of disunity, out 
of which self-consciousness was pressed back upon itself. World 
spirit had prepared this infinite anguish for itself in the Jewish 
people. Earlier Jewish history pertains to the East. The Jewish 
God is not this substance that is actual in Oriental fashion, but 
a Beyond over against the plurality of nature and of spirit. This 
alienation, this anguish, this unhappiness was already present at 
an early stage in this people in order that, when it would be-
come the anguish of the world, it should be set forth completely 
in the people of Israel. The Hindu principle still holds out the 
hope of the individual's being able to return again to divinity, 
but this was not the case for the Jews. 
From these birth pangs there developed for humanity the con-
sciousness of inwardness. This consciousness reached its full de-
velopment among the Germanic peoples. For them the unity of 
the state was not a natural unity in the Oriental manner nor a 
religious unity, but a unity born of inwardness, from I the self. 
264 
Initially it rested on the free choice of a chief, to whom of its 
own free will and choice the people attach themselves with con-
fidence. Here we have the principle of inwardness, out of which 
the feudal relationship arose. The apportionment and distribu-
tion of conquered land became the subject of obligation, where 
it is no longer a question of particular arbitrary will. So here we 
313 

ETHICAL LIFE 
have particular choice along with obligation that is meant to be 
valid in and for itself; and this is a contradiction. 
s 170 
In its immediacy this inwardness is a secular realm founded on 
congeniality [Gemutlichkeit], but because this principle is still ab-
stract and undeveloped, it is also a realm of crude arbitrariness, of 
barbarous customs and a legalistic feudal constitution. As such it 
is opposed to the intellectual realm of truth derived from infinite 
inwardness. In the struggle between these two the realm of truth 
eventually lowered itself to the earthly level of actuality and rep-
resentation while the secular realm raised itself to the principle of 
rational knowledge. In this way their inner reconciliation came 
about, a reconciliation in which the state as constitutional mon-
archy is both image and actuality of developed reason, and self-
consciousness consequendy has in the state its actual knowledge 
and volition. In the same way it has in religion the freedom and pe-
culiar identity of its rational intuition and feeling, while in [philo-
sophical) science the actual state, the [realm of) nature, and the 
ideal world are recognized as mutually complementary manifesta-
tions of one and the same reason. 
This is the culmination of the entire presentation. The in-
wardness of self-consciousness in its infinitude, the principle of 
truth, initially came on the scene divided into a spiritual and a 
secular realm. The latter, founded on congeniality, was a realm 
of crude arbitrariness, of legalistic right, the realm of barbar-
ism, [one] of whose main principles was that of congeniality. Bar-
barism properly speaking was present here-I congeniality pass-
ing over into vengefulness, into the most vehement self-wilJ and 
passion. Particularity, the peculiar disposition of individual in-
clination, of arbitrariness, was not yet sublated in it. Opposite 
it stood the realm of the universal; but it only stood opposite it, 
and it was no easier for it than for the secular realm to develop. 
Beauty, where particularity is not yet subjugated by the univer-
sal, still involves this crude, untamed element. The intellectual 
realm also developed to the point where it formed a wholly 
314 

THE STATE 
earthly realm; the life of the clergy displayed unbridled license 
along with self-mortification. The most temporal and common 
relationships were set alongside the eternal. The secular·.realm 
developed on the other hand toward the principle of the ratio-
nal will. And as neither was any longer in advance of the other, 
there occurred this reconciliation, and the state became a con-
stitutional monarchy, an image of developed reason, the articu-
lation that becomes a whole. 
Self-consciousness had also achieved its own volition and was 
no longer merely looking at something it did not understand. 
Freedom of self-consciousness in religion, constitutional monar-
chy, and cognition of the truth are the principles of our time. 
Rationality is to be found in the middle class, which is the intel-
lectual estate. The people are a material extreme; to say that the 
people will what is good means that they do not want to be op-
pressed, and that they want to give as little as possible and get 
as much enjoyment as possible. It is through the middle class 
that the wishes of the people are laid before the sovereign. 
315 
Concluded on 14 March 1818 
P. Wannenmann 

APPENDIXES 

INTRODUCTION 
BERLIN, WINTER SEMESTER 1818-1819 
Supplementary Notesl 
ToS 1 
Natural right is the antithesis of positive right. The will is es-
sentially freedom. The source of right is in spirit; it cannot be 
grounded in any external authority. God is adduced immediately 
as the source of the Mosaic laws; divine authority is also adduced 
as the source of royal power. This assertion has been interpreted 
erroneously as meaning that the actions of kings can be arbitrary 
and need only be grounded in the kings themselves. This has led 
to the utmost despotism, with God regarded as something other-
worldly, alien to spirit and remote. This is not God; whatever is 
divine is rational, and vice versa. In regard to actual freedom, 
the will must be what is most rational; those at the head of the 
1. [.Ed.] Wannenmann's transcript of the 1818-19 Berlin leaures c::ontains only 
the Introduction. This is also evident from the date given at the end of the tran· 
script, "Berlin, 10 November 1818." But even the lnuoduction is not transmitted 
in full, as c:an be seen from c::omparison with C. G. Homeyer's transcription of 
these lectures: Naturredlt und Staatswissenschll{t nach tkr VorlesungstUichschri(t 
11011 C. G. Homeyer 1818-19 (in G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlmmgm iiber Redltsphilos-
ophie 1818-1831, ed. K.-H. Dting, vol. 1 [Stuttgart-Bad Canstatt, 1973], pp. 217-
352). Wannenmann did not transcribe the text of the main paragraphs dictated by 
Hegel for SS 1-6 but only Hegel's expositions. Only in the part headed "To S 7" 
did Wannenmann include both the dictated passages and the expositions. He prob· 
ably only intended to rec::ord additional materials so as to supplement his transcript 
of the Heidelberg lec:tures. The headings given by him-"To S 1, • etc.-also relate 
319 
269 

INTllODUCTION (1818-tsU) 
state must have a wholly rational will. But this is no alien, other-
worldly authority. The divine will is the will of reason; this reason 
is the universal element of the essence of the state. Natural right 
has no other determination than the realization of reason. 
To remark (a).Z Positive right is right to the extent that it pos-
sesses authority and is known publicly. There can be no constitu-
tion founded on right that contains provisions directly contrary to 
rational right; the distinction can only be one of form. Confidence 
and faith are the universal ingredients of the organization of the 
state. The individual's own consciousness ensures respect for posi-
tive right; where individuals depart from it, coercion is used, and 
fear keeps them on the right track. The universal must be in con-
formity with reason; authority and form constitute the positive 
element of the laws. There is a blending of this kind in all states; 
there are in fact no states where irrational determinations have not 
been preserved in positive right. Positive right is valid, whether or 
not it has been justified at the bar of reason, whether or not it has 
been recognized by individual subjects; so it may also contain ar-
bitrary provisions that run counter to freedom. The constitution 
270 
of the stare develops progressively; and all the institutions I it en-
compasses should develop concurrently and in equal measure. If 
one institution develops on its own account while others remain 
behind, a discrepancy arises, since they all ought to be in harmony, 
coherent and interacting. In Germany this has been neglecred, and 
recently introduced institutions often do not fit in with those of 
longer standing. It is the same in England, where all disorders and 
to the corresponding se<:tions in the Heidelberg lectures, and for this reason his 
numbering of the se<:tions does not coincide with Homeyer's. The dictated passages 
and expositions collected together under the heading "To S 7" correspond to 
S S 7-10 of the Heidelberg lectures and to S S 8-16 of Homeyer's transcript. Wan· 
nenmann separates only by dashes those materials assigned by Homeyer to distinct 
sections. In the dictated passages there is word·for-word agreement between the 
transcripts of Wannenmann and Homeyer. All the more astonishing is the diver· 
gence in their record of the expositions. The differences are so great it c:ould be 
thought they are made up of materials from different lec:tures. In these c:ases it is 
for the present impossible to decide how the rwo texts relate to what Hegel said. 
Homeyer's text gives a stylized impression, almost as if it were the result of funher 
reflection. 
2. [Tr.) This corresponds to S 2 of the 1818-191ec:tures. 
320 

INTRODUCTION (1818-tiU) 
discontents derive from the struggle that the rational constitution 
has to wage against the many privileges that impede it and COnflict 
with it. On the one hand privileges are right; on the other ~nd 
they are wrong, because they infringe and curtail the rights of oth-
ers; so they make a constitution founded on reason positive and 
arbitrary. In England there are villages of no importance, or vil-
lages have even been inundated by the sea and destroyed, that have 
the franchise, while large cities like Manchester that came into 
existence later do not. 
To remark (b). Reason projects an ideal state, an ideal constitu-
tion, from which the shape of actuality is very different. 
To S23 
In nature the living being' is directly identical with its concept; 
the inner core of natural beings is their concept. The freedom of 
human beings, however, consists precisely in transforming their na-
ture, in making their nature for themselves. The principle of right, 
too, is not rooted in subjective human nature. The ground of natu-
ral right is not to be found in instincts and inclinations. Instincts 
or drives are forms that do not correspond to the essence of spirit; 
although the inner core, the content is objective, as inclination or 
instinct it exists in subjective form and may be intermingled with 
determinations of a private nature. However, rational organiza· 
tion of the system of right must contain nothing but the univer· 
sal. The content of instincts is in any case the same as that of all 
determinations of the state, but the latter I must be grasped in their 
211 
objectivity. 
By "nature,. we understand on the one hand the concept ores· 
sence of something, but on the other hand it has a different mean-
ing. The state of nature for humanity is not yet the condition of 
freedom but the condition of wrong. According to Hobbes, one 
must emerge from the state of nature.S Human beings must pass 
3. [Tr.] Wannenmann's SS 2-6 correspond toSS 3-7 of the 1818-19 lectures 
as transcribed by Homeyer. 
4. Ms. reads: the concept 
S. [fd.) Hobbes, De Ciue 1.13. a. Thomae Hobbu Malmuburiensis Opn11 
Philosophial Quu Latine Scriplit, eel. G. Molesworth (London, 1839-1845), 
2:166. 
321 

INTR.ODUCTION (1818-1819) 
over to consciousness; they must be in a state not of innocence but 
of responsibility, i.e., what they do must be their work. Natural 
freedom, arbitrary will, and desire must surely be given up in the 
[political] state. As freedom has to express or realize itself, the 
concept has to enter the sphere of externality and to that extent 
enters into nature. The soil of nature is [not) the principle of nat-
ural right-neither immediate nature nor spiritual nature. In the 
child the will is still natural, it is not yet free; it is free will in po-
tentiality, not yet in act. 
It is said that human beings are instinctively drawn toward 
what is right, toward sociability. It is true that the content of this 
instinct comes from reason, but it is subjective and does not yet 
exist in a universal, objective free manner. We must take these de-
terminations, such as sociability, objectively and consider them in 
their rational form. The basis of institutions governed by right is 
of necessity wholly objective, for what is subjective, feeling, as-
sumes a different form from one person to another. People who 
appeal to their feelings or conscience are withdrawing from the 
universal; they all have the same right to have their own feelings, 
their own conscience. But the concept of freedom, the idea, must 
become existent, and this externality involves the element of mu-
tual exclusion. However, this externality is only the sign of the con-
cept; it is [not) permeated by the idea. Necessity consists in there 
being two self-subsistent and opposing entities that are essentially 
one within the concept. However, the natural must be in accord 
with the concept. Manifestation on its own account is a [form of) 
nature. Necessity is only appearance. Free will means to recognize 
212 
nothing else as self-subsistent over against oneself. I 
To§3 
Determinists believe that remorse and guilt are illusions. I find 
within myself that I determine myself. To be sure, this is a fact, but 
philosophy cannot rest here: it demands that freedom should be 
necessary, and the proof of this must be contained in the preceding 
parts of [philosophical] science. Dialectic is the soul of universal 
being [AIIesseiende] itself. This soul passes over into conscious-
ness; it is in spirit that the contradiction of consciousness is re-
322 

INTRODUCTION (1818-1819) 
solved. Truth resides in the free spirit, in freedom. In the other I 
am related only to myself, and subjective and objective are identi-
cal. The outcome of philosophy is at the same time also the sub-
stance. The pure indeterminacy of the ego, pure thinking, pure in-
tuition, occurs in everyone; we all know that we can abstract from 
all sensations, even from the ultimate [one], that of life. The ego is 
perfect emptiness. The concept of the will can only be grasped as 
the unity of its two moments. The one is the consciousness that I 
can simply abstract from everything; the purity here is pure think-
ing, the pure ego, and its pure reflection within itself. I can negate 
everything, and this is one moment in my self-consciousness. And 
the Hindus confine themselves to this intuition: they cut them-
selves off from everything and know themselves in simple unity 
with self. In this sense the ego is utterly infinite, like space. [But] 
this is only what is universal in the wiU, the emptiness of abstrac-
tion. Freedom must externalize itself. Universality is in an absolute 
sense the basis. 
ToS4 
The second moment is the opposing one, the moment of deter-
minacy, of restriction, of differentiation. If we consider what the 
first moment is, we see that the second is contained within it. The 
particular is itself contained in universality; the indeterminate I is 
273 
the negation of the determinate, and itself includes the determi-
nate. The analysis of universality yields the moment of determinacy. 
That which has something opposed to it is only one of the two 
sides. The human being's first elevation above the finite is only an 
abstract infinite; both moments are merely ideal. The ego must 
pass over from the finite to the infinite; God must decide to pass 
over to the finite.' What is differentiated constitutes, as differenti-
ated, the one side. Only by positing both am I totality. To posit 
something determinate in the will is to make a resolution; I invest 
myself in this determinacy, I am in the content of my purpose. A 
plant opens itself up; what is already contained in it emerges into 
6. Ms. reads: The ego muse pass over from the infinite co the finite; God must 
decide 10 pass over co the infinite. 
323 

INTilODUCTION (1818-18U) 
determinate existence. Indeterminacy is expansion, while the sec-
ond moment is contraction. 
ToSS 
The will is the concrete. The first two moments are merely mo-
ments of the understanding [verstiindige Momente] and of them-
selves possess no truth; it is only with the will that the rational [das 
Vemiinftige] arises. Everything restricted is the dialectical within 
itself. The truth of the two moments is that the one is contained in 
the othe~: Actuality is the undivided unity of inner and outer. It is 
only through the will that the human being is, properly speaking, 
actual. So the will is genuine individuality, the totality of the two 
individual moments. Universality is equality with oneself. Univer-
sality is the return from something other to myself. What is dead 
is the universal, what is identical with itself, while it is only through 
negativity that what is living becomes identical with itself. The 
will arises only with affirmation as the negation of negation, of 
restriction. This unity is the genuine element in the will. It is only 
274 
by the activity of sublating my restriction I that I am universality. I 
will something, I posit a barrier within me; but I posit this purpose 
as mine, I relate myself to myself. The only reason for positing a 
purpose is to posit myself identical with myself. The two moments 
are mere possibilities, but necessary moments of the will. Regard-
less of the fact that I posit for myself an actual purpose, I nonethe-
less know myself to be free in so doing; it is only a possibility for 
me, and I remain the controlling power. It is only when I have 
acted that it is no longer a possibility. In its concept, however, the 
will is not yet the will that has being for self, the will in the idea. 
ToS6 
The will consists in remaining, within its restriction, at home 
with itself [bei sieh]. This is the concept of the will, but philosophy 
cannot stop at this point; the concept must be present in its deter-
minate existence. As idea, the idea has no determinate existence in 
nature. The species does not appear in nature, it remains the hid-
den inward element; the power of the species is evident in the fact 
that individuals die, but this does not cause it to emerge. The free 
324 

INTRODUCTION (1818-1819) 
will by contrast is that for which this concept is. I must equal I, as 
Fichte says.7 Self-consciousness [comes into being] in becoming the 
free wiD that has being in and for itself. The will determines i\ylelf, 
invests itself in an object, but this object is itself; in its object it is 
at home with itself. This is the absolutely real will. Children only 
possess freedom in its concept. The will has being for itself& when 
it has the concept as object. But what is free must, in its further 
development, have no other intuition but that of its freedom; this 
is the further goal of [philosophical) science. Humanity's vocation 
can only be absolute freedom. In nature God is identical with him-
self; nature is God's mirror wherein he recognizes himself. I 
275 
ToS 7' 
[§ 8) Insofar as it is, the abstract will has a [mode of) being, 
but only an abstract [mode of] being. Every desire consists in our 
wanting or willing something, but the content is still a natural con-
tent. What is mine is mine only because I will it. I am in this con· 
tent, but it is not yet posited by freedom itself. 
[§ 9) The natural will is the will in the sphere of instincts and 
inclinations, and it can be affected by the contingency of imagina· 
tion and fancy. None of these determinations and no instinct is ab-
solute with me as it is with an animal; I can choose, I am the uni-
versal over against them. Arbitrary will in general means that I, as 
the indeterminate, determine myself to something, I resolve; and 
this resolve constitutes my universality and my particularity. Since 
I have determined myself, I nonetheless remain at the same time 
7. [Ed.] An allusion to Johann Gottlieb Fichte's Gnmdlage der gesammtm Wi.s· 
senschaftslehre: Handschrift fUr seine Zuh6rer (Leipzig, 1794), pp. 1-17 (S 1). CE. 
Fichte, Gesamta#Sgabe 2:255-264. 
8. Ms. reads: in itself 
9. [Tr.) As indicated by the editors (above, n. 1), what Wannenmann designates 
as "To§ 7• coaesponds toSS 7-10 ol the Heidelberg leaures and toSS 8-16 of 
the 1818-19 Berlin lec:tures as ~ribed by Homeyer; Starting with S 10 of the 
latter, Wannenmann provides both Hegd's diaated parasraphs and the expositions 
recotded by auditors; and srarting with S 11, he marks the transitions between elk-
ration and exposition by dashes. We indicate in brackets the correlation ol Wan-
nenmann's text to the 1818-19 sec:tions, and whether the material is from dictation 
(dia.) or exposition (exp.). This information is provided by a table in the appendix 
of the German edition. 
325 

INTR.ODUCTION (1818-18U) 
something universal; I can give it [what I have determined myself 
to be) up. In my desires and instinctS I can pass over from one 
purpose to the other, but in terms of its quality the other is also a 
natural purpose, so I do not by this means escape from finitude. 
The aim of this natural will is happiness, which is, however, only 
the semblance of an idea, as envisaged in reflection. To will noth-
ing is likewise an abstract moment; if we were to hold fast to 
this abstraction, we would disappear within ourselves. The natural 
will or arbitrary will is the stage of reflection. 
[S 10 diet.) But the will that has being in and for itself has for 
its content its own infinite form. In this way it is true because it 
determines itself to be in its determinate existence or as standing 
over against itself what its concept is-the pure concept [that) has 
the intuition of itself as its reality. It is free because it relates itself 
to nothing other than itself; and it is universal because in it all 
limitation and individual particularization is sublated, the latter 
residing solely in the antithesis between the concept and its object 
or content. 
[S 10 exp.) Truth is the coincidence of concept and content; the 
will that has being in and for itself is the truth. In a good state 
278 
freedom has actuality in the idea. An I untrue object is a bad ob-
ject; it does not correspond to its concept. The standpoint of the 
will that has being in and for itself is the standpoint of truth. The 
will that has being in and for itself is universal, and individual par-
ticularization and all subjectivity of the will are dissolved in it. I 
am only evil to the extent that I will to act as an individual ac-
cording to a particular principle. In the will that has being in and 
for itself, freedom wills itself. Universality is what is self-identical 
in what is differentiated; this is genuine universality. Presumably 
the universal will is also the will of all individual beings; but even 
if it is not, it nonetheless remains universal will. It is the criminal's 
own will in and for itself that he should be punished. 
[S 11 diet.) The subjective element in the will means, in the 
first place, that the will is the absolute unity of self-consciousness 
with itself; secondly, it means the particularity of the will as ar-
bitrariness in the contingent content of its purposes; thirdly, it 
means a one-sidedness of form, insofar as the willed content, what-
326 

INTRODUCTION (1818-1819) 
ever its other properties may be, pertains only to thinki~g self-
consciousness. -
{§ 11 exp.] If I am coerced, I do not possess myself in this 8ftiv-
ity: it is not subjective will. If people accomplish something as 
slaves, from superstition or faith, it is not theirs; the self is not in 
it. In action the self-consciousness ought to be identical with itself. 
In the second case the evil will is the subjective will, and it is op-
posed to the universal will; subjectivity consists in the particularity 
of the content. In the third case the subjective forms the antithesis 
to objectivity, to reality. The concept of the particular will is still 
confined within immediacy. -
[§ 12 diet.) To the extent that it has itself as its determina-
tion and is thus identical with itself, the will is the utterly objec-
tive will; but this identity and universality is at the same time 
form as opposed to the mode of determinacy of the will, which 
arises only in self-consciousness. Objectivity is thus the immediacy 
of determinate existence [Dasein] as external existence [iiusserliche 
Existenz].-
[§ 12 exp.] The objective has two meanings. In one sense it is 
no less one-sided than its antithesis, the subjective. In the other 
sense it is the will in the harmony of its concept. -
[§ 13 diet.] The will that has being in and for itself is ! the idea, 
211 
and is in itself the unity of subjective and objective, in contrast 
with which the merely subjective determination of will is a contra-
diction. As opposed to the latter form, the unity of subjective and 
objective is what ought to be, the merely subjective determination 
losing its one-sidedness and becoming objective. This unity is to 
this extent a purpose of the will, and the will is the drive to realize 
itself and the activity involved in doing so. The absolute drive, and 
the determination of the free will, is for the universal will to come 
about, for freedom to be actual. -
[§ 13 exp.] The will is only alive as movement. All organic life 
consists in the fact that the universal posits a difference within 
itself, but continually sublates this difference. What ought to be 
suffers from a deficiency; it only ought to be, it still is not. Drive 
occurs where there is a contradiction; the rational is this drive to 
sublate the one-sidedness. Pain means that the negative exists as 
327 

INTRODUCTION (1818-lSU) 
a deficiency for a living being, in regard to which the negative 
is purely a barrie~ What is inorganic feels no pain. All drives are 
based on pain. This contradiction is the root of drive. What is one-
sided about purpose is its form. Activity consists in sublating the 
negative and positing the subjective. Freedom, the inmost nature 
of the universal will, has also to become actual. And how it does 
so is the business of our science. Intelligence presupposes a pre-
existent worJd; the case is different with the will, which must al-
ready be present for the intelligence. What comes last is objective 
spirit. The realizing of the will is the bringing forth of the reconcil-
iation of intelligence and will. The idea must realize itself, and what 
we have to consider is the development, the realization of the idea. 
The will must be to itself the object, I = I. At the same time the 
will has to attain the form of being distinct from itself. The abso-
lute idea musr differentiate itself. The idea is concrete, it contains 
the moment of difference within itself. In the independence of the 
differentiated moments the idea must preserve its unity. The drive 
of the idea is to actualize itself, and in this way it gives its mo-
ments independence; but in this externality it must remain identi-
cal with itself. -
[S 14 diet.] That a determinate existence is the existence of the 
will that has being in and for itself is what we mean by right. Duty 
278 
is a relationship of this kind insofar as I it counts as essential for 
me, and insofar as I have to recognize it, respect it, or bring it 
about.-
[S 14 exp.] That a concept or a determination is valid must first 
be deduced in philosophy. The will that has being in and for itself 
must exist determinately [der an und fUr sich seiende Wille muss 
dasein]. In everyday life we say that something is righdy made if it 
corresponds to a standard or a concept. I possess a right as a per-
son, for this is the existence [~) 
of spirit, it is freedom. Duty 
is the correlate of right. Freedom cannot be infringed; by infring-
ing it I do something stupid. Determinate existence [Da.sein] is a 
being for other [Sein fUr Anderes], so it has a side on which it can 
be grasped or infringed by others. The drive of the will that has 
being in and for itself is to realize itself; hence duty also [arises]. 
Duty means that I respect that wherein the free will is the univer-
328 

INTJlODUCTION (1818-tsU) 
sal will-and therefore my will too. So someone who has no rights 
has no duties, for he is not actual as free will. -
' 
[S 15 diet.] Right is something sacrosanct because it is ~e de-
terminate existence of the absolute concept, of self-conscio~ free-
dom. Howevet; the formalism of right and duty arises out of the 
difference in the development of the concept of freedom. As op-
posed to merely formal [formeUes] (i.e., absttact and therefore lim-
ited) right, spirit, having brought the further moments contained 
within freedom to consciousness and actuality, has (as the more 
concrete and universal) a higher right.-
[S 15 exp.] Self-conscious freedom is the highest thing on earth; 
the contemplation of this idea in its simple shape is the object of 
religion and philosophy. Right is everything wherein freedom ex-
ists. I have a right to live, whereas animals have no right to live. 
All the law has to tell us is what right contains; we cannot de-
rive right from it. What is sacred as such must be utterly concrete; 
what is merely formal [das Formelle] is not sacred. According to 
its concept, right is the identity of freedom. In right in the strict 
sense it is only the abstract freedom of my will that has determi-
nate existence, whereas in the state what is free is a universal, con-
crete spirit. The right of individuals is accordingly something sub-
ordinate, something merely formal as opposed to the right of the 
state. The determinate existence of individuals is also contained 
within the state, but their right I is present here as sublated. The 
279 
moral element is formal [formal] only in relation to the concrete 
spirit. What I recognize as right ought to be in conformity with 
my conscience, but ethical spirit is on a higher plane than merely 
formal conscience. Right and morality are only moments in rela-
tion to ethical life, which stands above them as substance. A peo• 
pie that has a more developed spirit of freedom stands above an-
other people that is less civilized, and the ethical life of the latter is 
merely formal in relation to the higher spirit, which as spirit has 
the right to impose itself. World spirit has the highest right be-
cause it is what is most concrete. Because it is idea it must invest 
itself with determinate existence, and its existence destroys what 
counted as valid with individual peoples. The merely fortnal ele-
ment in right also arises in regard to one and the same relationship. 
329 

INTRODUCTION (1818-liU) 
The family constitutes a whole, while a person as an individual 
person is something subordinate, wherein the rights of personality 
are absorbed. It is only when the ethical whole made up by the 
family is broken up, when marriage is dissolved, that the merely 
formal right of individuals, what belongs to them, reemerges. We 
always pass from the more abstract right to a higher, more con-
crete spirit. The free will as mere predisposition, as mere concept, 
must become identical with itself. In its beginning this idea is only 
the concept; it still has no immediate existence, it is merely abstract 
right.-
[S 16 diet.) The idea of the will is (initially in abstract fashion 
and so in immediate existence) the sphere of abstract right. The 
second sphere is the reflection of the will into itself, entailing its 
division on the one hand into itself (as subjective will) and an ex-
ternal world, on the other hand into the idea of the good as the ul-
timate end possessing being in and for itself: the sphere of moral-
ity. The third sphere is the unity and truth of the first two, in which 
the thought idea of the good is realized in subjective freedom and 
existence [Existenz] in such a way that freedom exists just as much 
as necessity and actuality: ethical life and the state. -
[S 16 exp.] In his Republic Plato attributes to Socrates the 
statement that justice is more evident in the state than in the indi-
viduaJ.IO Only in the state has right attained actuality. It is no co-
incidence that human beings have entered the state, in which alone 
the concept of freedom attains its independent determinate exis-
280 
tence. In the beginning we see the idea in I its abstraction. The idea 
is still in immediate being; it is I, this particular individual, who 
am still the determinate existence of the idea. Right is here what 
the individual person does as a free person. If I, as an individual, 
call something mine, I have invested my freedom in it. The con-
cept of freedom and its determinate existence are here still ilnme-
diately identical. The second stage is the separation of the concept 
from its reality; the universal separates from the individual. It is 
only here that the idea of good as the ultimate end arises. The idea 
ought only to be realized. In the sphere of morality my freedom 
10. (Ed.] Plato, Republic 368e-369a. 
330 

INTilODUCTlON ( 1818-1819} 
of choice ought to give itself the good as its object. ~ 
life is 
primarily that wherein freedom has its existence [Existenz). My 
particular determinate existence [Dasein} ought likewise to ·r.eceive 
satisfaction. The second sphere contains only the demand for such 
compensation; here we have only an "ought.,. In the third sphere 
freedom is also present with my knowledge and volition. It in-
cludes the element of morality. Ethical life [Sittlichkeit} must nec-
essarily be the ethical life of everyone; it exists in necessity as cus-
tom [Sitte]. Determinate ethical existence [das sittliche Dasein) is 
the state in general. 
End of the Introduction 
Berlin, 10 November 1818 
331 

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON 
HEGE:VS PHILOSOPHY 
OF RIGHT 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIALS 
Steinhauer, Kurt, comp. Hegel Bibliography: Background Material on the 
International Reception of Hegel within the Context of the History of 
Philosophy = Hegel Bibliographie: Materia/en zur Guchichte der in-
ternationalen Hegei-Rezeption und zur Philosophie-Guchichte. Munich, 
New York, London, Paris, 1980. 
Grunder, Karlfried. "Bibliographie zur politischen Theorie Hegels." In 
Joachim Ritter, Hegel und die franz&ische Revolution (Cologne and 
Opladen, 1957), pp. 81-112. 
EDITIONS AND OTHER 
PRIMARY MATERIALS 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. Naturrecht und Staatswissenschaft im 
Grundrisse: Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts. Berlin, 1821 (al-
ready published in 1820). 
Hegel's Philosophy of Right. Translated by T. M. Knox. Oxford, 
1942. 
Elements of the Philosophy of Right. Edited by Allen W. Wood. 
Translated by H. B. Nisbet. Cambridge, 1991. 
---:--·· Vorlesungen uber Rechtsphilosophie 1818-1831. Edited by 
Karl-Heinz Jlting. 4 vols. Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt, 1973-1974. 
---·· Philosophie des Rechts: Die Vorlesung von 1819120 in einer 
Nachschrift. Edited by Dieter Henrich. Frankfurt am Main, 1983. 
___ 
.. System der Sittlichkeit (1802-3). Edited by Georg Lasson. 2d 
ed. Leipzig, 1923. 
333 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
System of Ethical Life and First Philosophy of Spirit. Translated by 
H. S. Harris and T. M. Knox. Albany, 1979. 
--~·· "Ueber die wissenschaftlichen Behandlungsarten des Natur-
rechts." Kritisches Journal der Philosophie, 1802-3. See Gesammelte 
Werke 4:415-485. 
Natural Law. Trans1ated by T. M. Knox. Philadelphia, 1975. 
---·· Scbriften zur Politik und Rechtsphilosophie. Edited by Georg 
Lasson. 2d ed. Leipzig, 1923. 
Hegel's Political Writings. Translated by T. M. Knox with an Intro· 
ductory Essay by Z. A. Pek:zynski. Oxford, 1964. Contains "The 
German Constitution" (1799-1803); "Proceedings of the Estates 
Assembly in the Kingdom of Wiirttemberg, 1815-1816"; "The 
English Reform Bill" (1831). 
SECONDARY LITERATURE: 
NINETEENTH CENTURY 
Gans, Eduard. Natu"echt und Universalrechtsgeschichte (1832-33). Ed-
ited by Manfred Riedel. Stuttgart, 1981. 
Goschel, Carl Friedrich. Zerstreute Bliitter aus den Hand- und Hulfsacten 
eines }uristen. 3 parts. Erfurt, 1832-1837. 
Haym, Rudolf. Hegel und seine Zeit: Vorlesungen iiber Enstehung und 
Entwicklung, Wesen und Wert der Hegelschen Philosophie. Berlin and 
Leipzig, 1857. 2d ed. Edited by Hans Rosenberg. Leipzig. 1927. 
Kahle, Carl Moritz. Darstellung und Kritik der Hegelschen Rechtsphilos-
opbie. Berlin, 1845. 
Kastlin, Karl. Hegel in philosopbisber, politischer und nationaler B~e­
hung fiir das deutsche Volk. Tiibingen, 1870. 
Marx, Karl. Aus der Kritik der Hegelschen Rechtsphilosophie. See Karl 
Marx and Friedrich Engels, Werke, vol. 1 (Berlin, 1961), pp. 201-333. 
(Written in summer 1843; first published in 1927.) 
Critique of Hegel's "Philosophy of Right." Translated by Annette 
Jolin and Joseph O'Malley. Cambridge, 1970. 
__ _. "Zur Kritik der Hegel'schen Rechts-Philosophie." Deutsch-
Franzl)sische }ahrbucher, 1844. See Marx-Engels, Werke 1:378-391. 
"Toward the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law: Introduction." 
In Writings of the Young Marx on Philosophy and Society, trans-
lated and edited by Loyd D. Easton and Kurt H. Guddat, pp. 
249-264. Garden City, N.Y., 1967. 
Rosenkranz, Karl. Hegel als deutscher Nationalpbilosoph. Leipzig. 1870. 
See pp. 148-163. 
Schubart, Karl Ernst. Ober die Unvereinbarkeit der Hegelschen Staats-
334 

BIBLIOGllAPHY 
lehre mit dem obersten Lebens- und Entwicklungs-Princip des preus-
sischen Staates. Breslau, 1839. 
SECONDARY UTERATURE: 
TWENTIETH CENTURY 
Ahrweiler. Georg. Hegels Gesellschaftslehre. Darmstadt and Neuwied, 
1976. 
Angehrn, Emil. Freiheit und System bei Hegel. Berlin and New York. 
1977. 
Avineri, Shlomo. "The Discovery of Hegel's Early Lectures on the Phi-
losophy of Right." The Owl of Minerva 15 (1985): 199-208. 
---· Hegels Theorie des modernen Staates. Frankfurt am Main, 
1976. 
Hegel's Theory of the Modern State. Cambridge, 1972. 
Baum, Manfred. "Gemeinwohl und allgemeiner Wille in Hegels Rechts-
philosophie." Archiv fiir Geschichte der Philosophie 60 (1978): 175-
198. 
Baum, Manfred, and Kurt Rainer Meist. "Recht-Politik-Geschichte." 
In Hegel: Einfiihrung in seine Philosophie, ed. Otto POggeler. pp. 106-
126. Freiburg and Munich, 1977. 
Beyer, Wilhelm Raimund. Hegei-Der Triumph des neuen Rechts. Ham-
burg, 1981. 
Bodei, Remo; Roberto Racinaro; and Massimo Barale. Hegel e l'econo-
mia politica. Milan, 1975. 
Boning, Peter. Die Lehre vom Unrechtsbewusstsein in der Rechtsphilos-
ophie Hegels. Frankfurt am Main, 1978. 
Bourgeois, Bernard. La pensee politique de Hegel. Paris, 1969. 
Cullen, Bernard. Hegel's Social and Political Thought: An Introduction. 
Dublin, 1979. 
Flechtheim, Ossip K. Hegels Strafrechtstheorie. Briinn, 1936. 2d ed., Ber-
lin, 1975. 
Fleischmann, Eugene. La philosophie politique de Hegel sous forme d'un 
commentaire des fondements de Ia philosophk du droit. Paris, 1964. 
Fulda, Hans-Friedrich. Das Recht der Philosophie in Hegels Philosophk 
des Rechts. Frankfurt am Main, 1968. 
Heller, Hermann. Hegel und der nationale Machtstaatsgedanke in Deutsch-
land: Ein Beitrag zur politischen Geistesgeschichte. Leipzig and Berlin, 
1921. Reprint, Aalen, 1963. 
Henrich, Dieter, and Rolf-Peter Horstmann, eds. Hegels Philosophie des 
Rechts: Die Theorie der Rechtsformen und ihre Logik. Stuttgart, 1982. 
Hochevar, Rolf Konrad. Hegel und der preussische·Staat: Ein Kommentar 
zur Rechtsphilosophie von 1821. Munich, 1973. 
335 

BIBLJOGllAPHY 
---· Stiinde und Repriisentation beim jungen Hegel: Ein Beitrag %U 
seiner Staats· und Gesellscbaftslehre sowie %Ur Theorie der Repriisen· 
tation. Munich, 1968. 
Hyppolite, jean. Introduction a Ia philosophie de l'histoire de Hegel. Paris, 
1948. 
jaeschke, Walter. "Staat aus christlichem Prinzip und christlichct Staat: 
Zur Ambivalenz der Bcrufung auf das Christcntum in der Rechtsphi· 
losophie Hegels und der Restauration.• Der Staat 18 (1979): 349-374. 
Kainz, Howard P. Hegel's Philosophy of Right, with Marx's Commentt~ry. 
The Hague, 1974. 
Kaufmann, Walter. cd. Hegel's Political Philosophy. New York, 1970. 
Kelly, George Armstrong. Hegel's Retreat from Eleusis: Studies in Polit-
ical Thought. Princeton. 1978. 
Larcnz, Karl. Hegels Zurecbnungslehre und der Begriff der obiektiven Zu· 
rechnung: Bin Beitrag %UT Rechtsphilosophie des kritischen Idealismus 
und %Ur Lehre der •;uristischen Kausalitiit." Leipzig, 1927. 
l.Owith, Karl. Von Hegel l:U Nietuche: Der revolutioniire Bruch im Den· 
ken des neunzehnten ]ahrhunderts, Marx und Kierkegaard. Ziirich, 
1941. 2d ed., Stuttgart, 1950. 
From Hegel to Nietuche: The Revolution in Nineteenth-Century 
Thought. Translated by David E. Green. New York, 1964. 
Lucas, Hans-Christian, and Udo RameU. "Furcht vor der Zcnsur? Zur 
Entstchungs· und Druckgeschic:htc von Hegels Grundllnien der Philos-
ophic des Rcchts." Hegel-Studien 15 (1980): 63-93. 
Marcie, Rene. Hegel und das Rechtsdenken im deutscben Sprachraum. 
Salzburg, 1970. 
Marcuse, Herbert. Reason and Revolution: Hegel and the Rise of Social 
Theory. London, 1941. 2d ed., New York, 1954. 
von Martin, Alfred. Macht as Problem: Hegel und seine politische Wirk-
ung. Wiesbaden, 1976. 
Meinecke, Friedrich. "Hegel und die Anfangc des deutsehen Machtstaats· 
gcdankens im 19. Jahrhundert ... Zeitschrift fUr Politik 13 (1924): 197-
213. 
---·· Die Idee der Staatsriison in der neueren Geschicbte. Munich, 
1924. 3d cd., 1963. 
Meist, Kurt Rainer. "Altcnstcin und Gans: Einc friihc politische Option 
fiir Hegels Rechtsphilosophie." Hegel-Studien 14 (1979): 39-72. 
Miiller, Friedrich. Korporation und Assoziation: Eine Problemgescbichte 
der Vereinigungsfreiheit im tkutschen Vormiirz. Berlin, 1965. 
Nicolin, Friedheim. "Hegel iibcr konstitutionellc Monarchie: Ein Splitter 
aus der erstcn Rcchtsphilosophie-Vorlesung." Hegei·Studien 10 (1975): 
79-86. 
336 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Ottmann, Henning. "Hegels Rechtsphilosophie und das Problem der Ak-
kommodation: Zu Utings Hegelkritik und seiner Edition der Hegel-
scheu Vorlesungen tiber Rechtsphilosophie... Zeitscbrift fUr "hiloso-
phische Porschung 33 (1979): 227-243. 
1 · 
Pelczynski, Z. A., ed. Hegel's Political Philosophy: Problems and Perspec-
tives. Cambridge. 1971. 
__ _. Introduction to Hegel's Political Writings. Translated by T. M. 
Knox. Oxford, 1964. Pp. 3-137. 
Peperzak, Adrian. Philosophy and Politics: A Commentary on the Preface 
to Hegel's Philosophy of Right. Dordrecht, 1987. 
Piontkowski, Andrej Andreevich. Hegels Lehre iiber Staat und Recht und 
seine Stra(rechtstbeorie. Translated from Russian. Berlin, 1960. 
Planty-Bonjour, Guy, ed. Hegel et Ia philosopbie du droit. Paris, 1979. 
Popper, Karl R. The Open Society and Its Enemies. Vol. 2, The High Tide 
of Prophecy: Hegel, Marx, and the Aftermath. 3d ed. London, 1957. 
Rameil, Udo. "Sittliches Sein und Subjektivitit: Zur Genese des Begriffs 
der Sittlichkeit in Hegels Rechtsphilosophie." Hegel-Studien 16 (1981): 
123-162. 
Reyburn, Hugh Adam. The Ethical Theory of Hegel: A Study of the Phi-
losophy of Right. New York, 1968. 
Riedel, Manfred. Biirgerliche GeseUschaft und Staat: Grundproblem und 
Struktur der Hegelschen Rechtsphilosopbie. Neuwied and Berlin, 1970. 
__ ___.. Studien z;u Hegels Rechtsphilosophie. Frankfurt am Main, 1969. 
New ed., Stuttgart, 1982. 
__ _, ed. Materialien z;u Hegels Rechtsphilosophie. 2 vols. Frankfurt 
am Main, 1975. 
Ritter, Joachim. Hegel and the Prencb Revolution: Essays on the Philos-
ophy of Right. Translated by Richard Dien Wmfield. Cambridge, 1982. 
__ _. Metaphysilt. und Politik: Studien z;u Aristoteles und Hegel. 
Frankfurt am Main, 1969. 
Rosenzweig, Franz. Hegel und der Staat. 2 vols. Munich and Berlin, 
1920. Reprint, Aalen, 1962. 
Rothe, Klaus. Selbstsein und biirgerliche Gesellschaft: Hegels Theorie der 
konkreten Freiheit. Bonn, 1976. 
Scheit, Herbert. Geist und Gemeinde: Zum Verhilltnis von Religion und 
Politik bei Hegel. Munich and Salzburg, 1973. 
Schild, Wolfgang. "Die Aktualitit des Hegelschen Strafbegriffs." In Pbil-
osopbische Elemente der Tradition des politischen Denkens, edited by 
Erich Heintel, pp. 199-233. Vienna and Munich, 1979. 
Siep, Ludwig. Anerkennung als Prinz:ip der praktischen Philosophie: Un-
tersuchungen zu Hegels ]enaer Philosophie des Geistes. Frciburg and 
Munich, 1979. 
337 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Steinberger, Peter J. Logic and Politics: Hegel's Philosophy of Right. New 
Haven, 1988. 
Taylor, Charles. Hegel and Modern Society. Cambridge, 1979. 
von Trott zu Solz, Adam. Hegels Staatspbilosophie und das internationale 
Recht. GOttingen, 1932. Reprint, GOttingen, 1967. 
Verene, Donald Phillip, ed. Hegel's Social and Political Thought: The Phi-
losophy of Objective Spirit. Adantic Highlands, N.J., 1980. 
Wei!, Eric. Hegel et l'itat. Paris. 1950. 
338 

GLOSSARY 
The glossary contains a selection of frequendy used and/or tech-
nical terms, especially those posing problems in translation. It has 
served as a guide, not an inflexible rule. When more than one En-
glish word is given, the generally preferred terms are listed first, 
while terms following a semicolon may be suitable in certain con-
texts. "Cf." indicates rdated but distinguished German terms, 
which generally are translated by different English equivalents. Ad-
jectives are listed without endings. This glossary is indexed only 
on German terms; the index serves partially as an English-German 
glossary. 
Absicht 
allgemein 
Allgemeine 
Allgemeinheit 
Anerkanntsein 
anerkennen 
Anerkennen, 
Anerkennung 
Anschauung 
intention 
universal, general; common 
the universal; whole community 
(d. "Gemeinsame") 
universality 
(fact or state of) being recognized, recognized 
status 
to recognize, acknowledge (cf. "erkennen") 
teeognition 
intuition 
339 

an sich 
Arbeit 
aufheben 
Aufhebung 
iiussem Staatsrecht 
iiusserlich 
iussern 
Ausserung 
Beamte 
Bedeutung 
Bedurfnis(se) 
Begierde 
begreifen 
Begriff 
Behorde 
bei sich 
Benunung 
Beratung 
Berechrigung 
Besitz 
besonder 
Besonderheit 
bestehen 
Beste hen 
bestimmen 
bestimmt 
Bestimmtheit 
Bestimmung 
Bewusstsein 
Beziehung 
GLOSSARY 
in itself, implicit (cf. "in sich") 
labor, work 
to sublate, annul 
sublation, annulment 
international law 
external 
to utteJ; externalize (cf. "entiiussem," 
"veriussem") 
utterance, extemalization (cf. "Entiiusserung," 
"Veriusserung") 
official, civil servant 
signi&ance, meaning 
need, needs (cf. "Not") 
desire 
to conceive 
concept 
(administrative) authority 
with self, present to self, at home 
use, employment 
counsel 
justification, entitlement, authority 
possession(s) 
particular (cf. "panikulir") 
panicularity 
to subsist 
subsisting 
to determine, define 
determinate, definite 
determinateness, determinacy 
determination, definition; destination, vocation 
consciousness 
relation, connection, reference (cf. "Verhilmis") 
340 

bildlic:h 
Bildung 
Boden 
Biirger 
biirgerlic:h 
Biirgersc:haft 
Bursc:hensc:haft 
darstellen 
Darstellung 
Dasein 
Den ken 
Ehre 
Eigentum 
einfac:h 
Einzelheit 
einzeln 
Einzelne 
Element 
Empfindung 
entaussem 
Entiusserung 
Entfremdung 
Enuweiung 
erkennen 
Erkennen,Erkenntms 
ersc:heinen 
Ersc:heinung 
Erziehung 
Exisrenz 
GLOSSARY 
imasiJJative. figurative 
education, culture; formation, c:ultivation 
soil, ground, territory 
·, 
citizen, burgher 
civil, civic: 
commonalty 
(student) fraternity 
to present, portray 
presentation, portrayal, exposition 
(c:f, "Vorstellung") 
{determinate) existence {d. "Existenz,,. "Sein•) 
thinking, thought 
honor, dignity (cf. "Wiirde") 
ownership, property (c:f. "Verm()gen•) 
simple 
individuality, singularity (cf. "lndividualitit") 
single, individual 
{single) individual 
element (c:f. "Moment•) 
sensation, feeling (cf. "Gefiihl") 
to alienate, divest, externalize (cf. "aussern," 
"veriiussern") 
alienation, divestment, extemalization 
estrangement 
cleavage, rupture, division 
to recognize, to know (c:f. "anerkennen," 
"kennen") 
cognition, recognition, knowledge (c:f. "Wissen") 
to appear (d. "sc:heinen") 
appearance, phenomenon 
education, upbringing 
existence (followed by "Existenz" in brac:lcets; 
c:f. "Dasein ") 
341 

existieren 
Forderung 
forme II 
Freiheit 
fiir sich 
Fiirsichsein 
Fiirst 
Gattung 
gebildet 
Gebot 
Gcfiihl 
Gegensatz 
Gcgenstand 
Gcgensta.ndc (pl.) 
gegenstlindlich 
Geist 
Gemeinde 
gemeinsam 
Gcmeinsame 
Gemeinschaft 
Gemiit 
Gemutlichkeit 
Genossenschaft 
gerecht 
Gerechtigkeit 
Gericht 
Geschaft 
Gesellschaft 
Gesetz 
Gesetzbuch 
gesetzgebend 
GLOSSARY 
to exist; to become really existent (cf. "sein") 
requirement, demand 
(merely) formal 
freedom 
for (by, of) itself, on its own account, explicit 
being-for-self 
sovereign, prince 
species, genus 
educated, cultivated, refined 
precept, commandment 
feeling (cf. "Empfindung") 
antithesis, opposition, contrast 
object 
objects, affairs, matters 
objective 
spirit 
(local) community 
communal 
the communal, community 
community (cf. "Gcsellschaft") 
emotion, disposition; soul, heart 
(cf. "Gesinnung") 
congeniality 
association (cf. "Korporation") 
just 
justice (cf. "Recht") 
court (of law), law court, court of judgment 
business, occupation 
society (cf. "Gemeinschaft") 
law (cf. "Recht") 
legal code 
legis Ia ti ve 
342 

Gesetzgebung 
gesetzlich 
Gesinnung 
Gestalt 
Gestaltung 
Gewalt 
Gewalttiitigkeit 
Gewerbe 
Gewissen 
Gewohnheit 
Gliederung 
Grund, Griinde 
Grundsatz 
Grundverm()gen 
giiltig 
Giiltigkeit 
Gut 
Gute 
Handel 
handeln 
Handlung 
Ich 
Ideal, Idealitiit 
Idee 
ideell 
lndividualitiit 
inneres Staatsrecht 
in sich 
lnsichsein 
intellektuell 
GLOSSARY 
legislation 
legal 
disposition (d. "Gemiit") 
shape, figure, form 
configuration, formation 
force, powe~; violence (d. "Kraft," "Macht") 
violence 
trade, business, industry 
conscience 
habit, practice, custom (cf. "Sitte") 
articulation 
ground, reasons 
principle, maxim 
landed estate or property 
valid 
validity 
capital, goods, resources, property, wealth 
(d. "Kapital, .. "Vermogen") 
the good 
commerce 
to act 
action, act, transaction (d. "Titigkeit") 
(the) I, ego 
the ideal, ideality 
idea 
(merely) ideal 
individuality (d. "Einzelheit") 
constitutional law 
within itself, into self, inward, internal 
(d. "an sich ") 
being-within-self 
intellectual 
343 

Kammer 
Kapital 
kennen 
Korporation 
Kraft 
Lebendigkeit 
Lehre 
Macht 
Mensch( en) 
Menschheit 
Ministerium 
Mittel 
Mittelstand 
Moment 
moral 
Moralitit 
Nation 
Natutrecbt 
Naturzustand 
Nichtigkeit 
Not 
Notstaat 
Obrigkeit 
partikulii.r 
PobeJ 
Polizei 
Real 
Realitlit 
Recht 
recbdich 
Recbtspftege 
Rechrswissenschaft 
GLOSSARY 
house, chamber (of parliament) 
capital 
to know (cf. "erkennen," "wissen") 
corporation (d. "Genossenschaft") 
force, strength (d. "Gewalt," "Macht") 
vitality, life principle 
doctrine, teaching 
power (d. "Gewalt," "Kraft") 
human being(s), humans 
humanity 
council of ministerS, cabinet, ministry 
means, commodity 
middle class 
moment, element (cf. "Element") 
moral (cf. "sitdich") 
morality (d. "Sitdichkeit") 
nation (cf. "Volk") 
natural right, natural Jaw 
state (or condition) of nature 
nullity, nothingness 
need, necessity, want (cf. "Bediirfnis") . 
state based on need 
authority(ies) 
private, particular (d. "besonder") 
rabble 
police, public authority 
the real 
reality (cf. "Wilkli.c:hkeit") 
right, law, justice 
rightful, legal 
administration of justice 
science of right, jurisprudence 

reell 
Regierung 
Regierungsgewalt 
Reich 
Reichtum 
Richter 
Sache 
Schein, Scheinen 
scheinen 
schlecht 
schlechthinnig 
Schlechtigkeit 
Schmerz 
Schuld 
seiend (part., adj.) 
sein (verb) 
Sein (noun) 
selbstiindig 
Selbstiindigkeit 
setzen 
Sine 
sitclich 
Sitdichkeit 
Sollen 
Staat 
Staatsrat 
Staatswissenschaft 
Stand 
Stiinde (pl.) 
Standesehre 
Stiindeversammlung 
Subjekt 
GLOSSARY 
(merely) real 
government, executive 
executive power 
empire, realm 
wealth (cf. "Venn6gen") 
judge, magistrate 
matter, subject matter; thing, fact, cause 
semblance, show; seeming 
to seem (cf. "erscheinen") 
bad, wicked 
utter, simple 
wickedness 
anguish, sorrow, pain 
responsibility, obligation, guilt 
having being, subsisting 
to be; to exist, to occur (cf. "existieren") 
being (cf. "Wesen") 
self-sufficient, self-subsistent, independent 
independence, self-sufficiency 
to posit 
custom, ethics 
ethical (cf. "moral") 
ethical life, ethics (cf. "Moralitiit") 
obligation, "ought" 
state 
council of state 
political science 
(social) class, estate; status, standing 
estates (social group, parliamentary institution) 
esprit de corps 
estates assembly (parliament) 
subject 
345 

Tapferkeit 
Tat 
Titigkeit 
Teilung 
Trennung 
Trieb 
iiberhaupc 
Ungerechtigkeit 
Unrecht 
unrechtmissig 
Untertan 
unveriusserJich 
Urteil 
Veranstaltung 
Verantwortung 
veriiussern 
Veriusserung 
Verbrechen 
Verfassung 
Vergehen 
Verbalten 
Verhiltnis 
Verhiltnisse (pl.) 
Verletzung 
vermitteln 
Vermittlung 
Vermogen 
Vernunft 
verniinhig 
Verstand 
GLOSSARY 
valor. bravery, courage 
deed, act 
activity (cf. "Handlung," "W~rksamkeit") 
division 
separation, division 
drive, instinct 
generally, on the whole; altogether. after aU, in 
fact, etc. 
injustice 
wrong. wrongdoing. violation of right, injustice 
unlawful 
subject (of a state or sovereign) 
inalienable 
judgment 
arrangement 
accountability, responsibility 
to alienate (goods or property) (cf. "entaussern") 
alienation (of goods or property} 
crime 
constitution, system of government 
misdemeanor. offense (d. "Verletzung") 
conduct, attitude 
relationship, relation 
conditions, circumstances 
infringement, violation, offense (cf. "Vergehen .. ) 
to mediate 
mediation, means 
resource(s), means, estate, wealth; ability, 
capacity (d. "Gut," "Reichtum") 
reason 
rational 
understanding 

Vertrag 
Verwaltung 
Volle 
Vollcerrecht 
Volksgeist 
Volkstugenden 
vorhanden 
vorhanden sein 
vorstellen 
Vorstellung 
wahr 
wahrhaft(ig) 
Wahrheit 
Weltgeist 
Weltgericht 
Wert 
Wesen 
Wille 
Willkiir 
willkiirlich 
wirklich 
Wirklichkeit 
Wuksamkeit 
wissen 
Wissen 
Wissenschaft 
Wohl 
Wollen 
Wiirde 
Zeitgeist 
Zufilligkeit 
GLOSSAJlY 
contract 
administration, government 
people, nation (cf. "Nation") 
international law 
folic spirit, national spirit 
public virtues 
present, at hand, extant 
to be present, to be at hand, to exist (cf. "sein") 
to represent; to imagine, to envisage 
representation 
true 
true, genuin~, authentic 
truth 
world spirit 
(court of) world judgment 
value, worth 
essence, essential being, being (cf. "Sein") 
will 
arbitrariness, caprice, arbitrary will, free will, 
free choice 
arbitrary, capricious 
actual 
actuality (cf. "Realitit") 
activity, agency, efficacy (cf. "Tiitigkeit") 
to know (cf. "kennen") 
knowledge, knowing (cf. "Erkennen") 
(philosophical) science, scientific knowledge 
welfare 
volition, willing 
dignity (cf. "Ehre") 
spirit of the age 
contingency, chance 
347 

Zusammenhang 
Zustand 
Zwang 
Zwedc 
GLOSSARY 
connection, nexus, continuum, complex 
condition, state, situation 
coercion (c:f. •Gewalt•) 
purpose, end; goal, aim 
348 

I 
I 
INDEX 
Only names of historical persons are indexed. Concepts and subjecrs arc 
indexed on a selective basis when a brief or more sustained discussion of 
them occurs. When an entry is found in both text and footnote on a page, 
only the page number is referenced. The German for key concepts is given 
in parentheses. 
Abeken, Rudolf, 16 
Absolute idea, 328 
Absolute spirit, 61, 306 
Abstract right (abstraktu Recht), 
61-106; its basic imperative. 62-
63; and contract, 81-90; and 
possession/ownership, 63-80; 
spheres of, 63; and wrong, 90-
106 
Action (Handlung), 108-U'l 
Activity {Tiltigkeit), 172-115 
Actual, the {Wirk/iehe), and the 
rational, 9-10, 221 n.S3 
AgisiY,239 
Agricola, Gnaeus Julius, 164 
Agriculture, 11 
Alienation (Entihlssmmg. Verius-
serung), as divestment of prop-
erty, 66 n.1, 77-80 
Antisthenes, 164 n.2S 
Aristoctacy (as political system), 
243-245,311-312 
349 
Aristotle,11,32,244 
Art (Kunst), and the state, 294-296 
Associations (Gmossemcba{ten), 
electoral, 285-286 
Athenians, 311 
Balcunin, Mikhail Aleksandro-
vich,5 
Barbarism, 314 
Beccaria, Cesare, 99 
Bonaparte, Napoleon, 3, 11, 20, 
238 
.Brutus, 51, 241 
Burgher; See Citizen 
Cabinet {ministry) {Ministerium), 
251,255-260,263-269 
Caesar, Julius, 51, 248 
Capital (Gut), 15o-ts5, 112 
Carlsbad Decrees, 6, 23, 24 
Carove, Friedrich Wilhelm, 8, 21, 
46 

INDEX 
Castes, as class differences based on 
nature and/or privilege, 185-186 
Cato, 95 
Censorship, 6, 23 
Children, 155-159 
China, 309 
Christ (Jesus of Nazateth), 164 
Church, and state, 296 
Cicero, 247 
Citizen (Burger): as bourgeois, 137, 
161-162; as citoyen, 137 n.6, 
138 
Civil lawsuit, 91-92 
Civil society (burgerliche Gesell-
schaft}, 161-220; and adminis-
tration of justice (Re&htspflege), 
189-207; its citizens as private 
persons, 165; elements of politi-
cal economy, legal system, public 
authority, 166; and police or pub-
lic authority, 207-220; as related 
to family, 160; regulation of busi-
ness and commerce in, 213-217; 
as state based on need (Notstaat), 
135, 161-164; as system of 
needs, 166-189 
Class(es) (Stand, Stande), 178 n.38; 
agricultural (propertied), 17.9-
180, 282-284; business (manu-
facturing, commercial), 180-184; 
civil, professional, 184-185, 
265-26.9; difference or division 
of, 178-179, 185; esprit de corps 
(Standesehre) and teetitude in, 
186-187,236-237;fonnedinto 
corporations, 217-219; member-
ship in, 217-219; as related to 
the legislative power. 271-272; 
threefold division of substantive 
(agricultural), formal (business), 
universal (civil), 179 
Cleomenes III, 239 
Climate, 247 
Coercion (Zwang), 93-96 
Colonization, 217 
Communal, the (Gemeinsame), 
217-219,261-263,285 
350 
Congeniality (Gemiltlichkeit), 314 
Conscience (Gewissen), 122, 
124-126 
Constitution (system of government) 
(Ver(assung): factors in shaping, 
246-248; as foundation of the 
state, 240; and the national spirit 
(Volksgeist), 240-242; not a so-
cial contract, 240; as rationality 
and freedom of a people, 227; 
reforms in, 2, 11, 25; types of 
patriarchal, aristocratic, demo-
cratic, 242-246 
Constitutional law (inneres 
Staatsrecht), 226-296 
Contract (Vertrag), 81-90; classifi-
cation of, 85-86; definition of, 
81-83;ofexchange(Tausch),82, 
87-90; of gift (Schenltung), 82, 
86-87; performance of, 84-85; as 
sphere of abstract right, 63; stip-
ulation of, 83-84; of wages, 89 
Corporations (Korporationen), 12, 
217-219,224-225,261-263, 
274,285-286 
Counsel (Beratung), body of coun-
selors or council (beTatende 
Stelle), 250-251, 253,255-260, 
263-269 
Courage, estate of (Stand der Tap-
feTkeit), 298, 300 
Court (of law), 191-207 
Creuzer. Friedrich, 23 
Crime (Verbrechen), 96-105, 112-
114,193-195,211-212 
Criminal, 98-102, 193, 211-212 
Criminal law, 96 
Custom (Sitte), 304-305 
Cynics, 163-164,292 
Death, 312 
Deed (Tat), 110-111 
Democracy, 243-246, 249, 261-
262,310-313 
Deutsches Literaturarchiv, 8, 45 
Diogenes Laertius, 164 n.25 
Diogenes of Sinope, 163-164 

INDEX 
Disposition (Gesinnung), 109-114, 
118-120, 131-133 
Divorce,148-149 
Drive (Trieb), 169, 321, 327-328 
Education: of children, 155-159, 
295; as cultivation (Bilclung), 71, 
165,246-247,287-288,294-
295; as nurture (Enielnmg), 
155-159 
Election, 285-286 
Empire,246 
Encyclopedia of the PbilosopbictJJ 
Sciences (Hegel), 21-22 
En~and, 177,201,202,239,248, 
276-277,282,288,320-321 
Ephorate, 238-239 
Equality (Gleichheit), 66, 168-169 
Erdmann, Johann Eduard, 3 
Estate (economic resources) (Ver-
miigen), 150-155. See also 
Resources 
Estate (social class) (Stand), 178 
n.38. See also Qass(es) 
Estates (social groups, parliamen-
tary institution) (Stinde), 17-18, 
178 n.38. See also Estates 
assembly 
Estates assembly (St8ndeversamml-
ung), 272-296; cooperates with 
yet checks the sovereign and ex-
ecutive powers, 275-277, 292-
294; lower house of deputies 
elected by associations, 285-286; 
mediates particular and universal 
interests, 273-275, 277; members 
of, 277-279; political parties in, 
290-292; public sessions of, 
287-288; as representative of the 
people, 273-274; two houses of, 
280-282; upper house of the 
landowning class, 282-284 
Eternity, and time, 11 
Ethical life (Sittliehkeit), 129-315; 
and civil society, 167-220; death 
of, in Rome, 312; and family, 
138-167; flourishing of, in 
351 
Greece, 310-311; majorforms 
of family, civil society, state. 137; 
as mediation of subjective' and 
objective. 129-131; and re{Jgion, 
134-138; as second nature, 17-
18; and state, 220-315; as unity 
of abstract right and morality, 59, 
129-130 
Ethical substance. 130, 134-137 
Europe, political conditions in, 9, 
11-13 
Evil, 126-127 
Exchange (Tausch), 174-175 
Execution, 198 
Executive, power of the (Regier-
ungsgewalt), 260-269 
Existence: concrete, empirical, im-
mediace (&istenz), 54 n.1, 129-
131; determinate (Dasein), 54 
n.1, 54-55, 129-131, 327-328. 
Note: These terms occur with 
great frequency in the text 
Externalization (utterance) (Ausser-
ung), 65-66 
Family (Pamilie), 138-167; aspects 
of, 138; dissolution of, 159-160; 
education of children in, 155-
159; as ethical relationship, 139-
150; foundation of, 138; as natu-
ral, sexual unity, 139-141; prop-
erty or capital of, 150-155; as 
related to civil society, 160-161 
Feudalism, 75, 313-314 
Feuerbach, Paul Johann Anselm 
Ritter von, 101, 113 n.3 
Fichte. Johann Gottlieb, 67, 78, 84, 
127, 153, 212, 238, 239 n.62, 
325 
Fiefs, 74 
Form, imposition of (Formierung), 
67,70-72 
France,237-238,278 
Fraternities, student, 21 
Frederick U of Prussia, 207 
Freedom (Freiheit): as abstract iden-
tity and concrete realization, 

INDEX 
57-58; actualization of, 56, 328; 
guaranteed by separation of pow· 
ers, 232-234; history of, 11-13; 
must come to be, 221, 223, 227; 
and necessity, 322; and owner· 
ship, 75, 78; of press and speech, 
288-290; and reciprocal recogni· 
tion, 80; and right, 52; as self-
conscious, the highest thing on 
eanh, 329; and the state, 220-
221. See also Will 
French Revolution, 2-3, 11-13, 75, 
83 
Gaius, 66 n.2 
Gans, Eduard, 30 
Geography, 247-248 
Germanic (germanisch) realm of 
world history, 308 n.92, 313-315 
Germany: federal union of, 299; 
political conditions in, 1-3, 7, 13, 
16 
God: as a Beyond, 313; as free, pure 
spirit, 56, 61; and reason, 319-
320; as substance, 313 
Good (Gute), 122-124 
Greek realm of world history, 310-
311 
Hanseatic League, 218, 237 
Happiness, 117 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich: 
death of, 26; development of his 
practical philosophy, 8-26, 41; 
education of, 13-14; in Frank· 
fun, 14, 15; in Heidelberg, 21-
23; in Jena, 16; his move from 
Heidelberg to Berlin, 8, 24; in 
Nuremberg, 19-20; political 
views of, 2-5, 13-15,20-21, 25; 
role of experience and context in 
shaping his thought, 42-43; in 
Switzerland, 14; in Tiibingen, 
13-14 
Heine, Heinrich, 6, 9 
Heineccius, J. G., 66 n.2 
Hobbes, Thomas, 321 
352 
Holderlin, Friedrich, 5, 14, 15 
Homeyer, C. G., 319-320 n.1 
Hugo, Gustav Ritter von, 29 
Human being(s) (Mensch, ·en): 
cannot be possessed, owned, di-
vested, 70, 73, 79-80; as concrete 
totality of energies and needs, 
162-163; deadening of, in facto· 
ries, 177; diversity of, 247; due 
respect as persons, 62; as free be· 
ings, 61, 64, 321; right to life of, 
208-210; vocation of, as absolute 
freedom, 325 
Hunting, 68, 70-71, 179 
Hypocrisy, 125, 127 
Ideal (idee/, ideal), S4 
India, 309 
Individual(s) (Einzelne, Individ-
uum), 61-62, 74-75, 163; rights 
of, 12-13, 17, 163,225,329-
330; and the state, 223-225, 
229-230,233-236,273-274, 
299-300,329 
Inheritance, 153-155 
Intention (Absicht), 118-120 
International law (iiussere Staats-
recht), 297-305 
Inwardness (Innerlichkeit), 313-
314 
Islam (Muhammadanism), 310 
James ll of England, 254 
Jewish people, 161, 298, 313 
Joseph ll of Austria, 271, 302 
Judge (Richter), 91, 191, 203, 
205-207 
Justice (Gerechtigkeit), 330; admin· 
istration of (Rechtspflege), 189-
207. See also Right 
Justinian, 66 n.2 
Juvenal, 154, 163, 172 
Kant, Immanuel, 30, 32-33, 124, 
147, 148 n.13, 156, 232, 303 
Kobbe,Theodorvon,21 

INDEX 
Kotzebue, August Friedrich Ferdi-
nand von, 24 
Labor (Arbeit): alienation of, 89; 
division of, 175-177; factory, 
175-177; as provision of means, 
174 
Laertius, Diogenes, 97 n.10 
Law (Gesetz): and custom, 150; 
equity in, 200-202; as legal sys-
tem, 189-207; originates from 
practice of the courts, 190-192; 
and right, 56, 189-190. See also 
Abstract right; Positive right; 
Roman law 
Legislative power (gesetzgebende 
Gewa/t), 269-296 
Legislature. See Estates assembly 
Libel, 289-290 
Life, 15, 121 __ 
Loan: as gift (Verleihen), 86; on 
interest (Anleihen), 89 
London,212 
Louis XV of France, 259-260 
Louis XVIII of France, 240 
Love: between brothers and sisters, 
160; sexual and conjugal, 141-
143 
Luxury, 171-172 
Lycurgus, 239 
Majority, 281 
Man (husband) (Mann), 144-145, 
150-152 
Marking (Bezeichnung), 67,72 
Marriage, 141-149; definition of, 
145-146; different roles of man 
and woman in, 144-145; as 
monogamous, 148-149;nota 
civil contract, 146-147 
Marx, Karl, 1-2, 5 
Massenbach, Christian von, 38, 
236,288 
Maxim, 110, 113, 120 
Mediation (of needs), 188-189 
Middle Class (Mittelstand), 13, 
267-269,315 
353 
Miltiades, 292 
Monarch (sovereign, prince) (FUrst. 
Monarch), 250-260; contingent 
element in, 252-255; couns'elors 
(cabinet ministers) of, 255-260; 
divine right of, 254; limited pow-
ers of, 251-253, 255 
Monarchy (Monarchie): absolute, 
243-246; constitutional, 18, 
249-260,314-315 
Money (Geld), 87-88, 183 
Montesquieu, Charles Louis de 
Secondat, Baron de, 14, 148 
n.13, 157, 160, 244-245, 311 
Morality (Moralitiit), 107-128; and 
abstract right, 57, 58-59, 105-
106; as actions and dispositions, 
108-115; aspects of, 107-108; 
concerned with action of individ-
ual subjects, 107; and ethical life, 
129; as good and conscience, 
123-128; as reflection of free 
subject into itself, 129; as subjec-
tive purposes, 115-123 
Moser. Johann Jakob, 12, 225 
Murder, 97-98 
Nation (Nation): as determinate 
natural existence of a people, 
297-298; and state, 298 
National or folk spirit (Volksgeist), 
240-242,297,306,308,312 
Natural right (Naturrecht): coupled 
~ith political science, 28; defini-
tion of, 51-52; and nature, 322; 
as philosophical doctrine of right, 
52; and positive right, 319 
Natural Right and Political Science 
(Heidelberg lectures), 6-8, 23; 
description of manuscript of, 45-
47; major parts of, 26-27; part I, 
editorial analysis of, 27-31; part 
II, editorial analysis of, 31-33; 
part III, editorial analysis of, 
33-41. See also Philosophy of 
Right 
Nature (Natur), 17, 127; ambiguity 

INDEX 
of the term, 52, 321-322; condi-
tion or state of {Natun;ustand), 
52-53,297, 321-322; as God's 
mirror, 325 
Need(s) (Not, Bedurfnis), 161 n.23; 
means of satisyfing, 170-171; 
proliferation of, 171-173; system 
of (System des Bedurfnisses), 
166-189 
Nobility, 225-226, 267, 283-284 
Nomadism, 179 
Nordic principle, 313 
North America, 248 
Novalis (Friedrich von Hardenberg), 
127 
Numa, 312 
Oath, 193 
Officials (Beamten): executive, 255-
260, 263-269; local, 262-263 
Oriental realm of world history, 
308-310 
Ownership (Eigentum): forms of, 
73-74; and freedom, 75, 78; pri-
vate, 75; as property taken essen-
tially into will, 72-73; and recog-
nition, 80; requires duration in 
time, 75-76; as sphere of abstract 
right, 63-81 
Parents, 155-159 
Parliament. See Estates assembly 
Parties, political, 290-292 
Patriarchy (as political system), 
242-243,308-309 
Patriotism, 234-236 
Peace, 300-303 
Peace of Westphalia, 270 
People (Yolk): definition of, 227; in-
dependence of, 298-300; spirit of 
(Volksgeist), 240-242, 297, 306, 
308,312 
Persia, 309 
Persius, 163, 172 
Person, 61-64 
354 
Personality, 61-62 
Pestalozzi, Johann Heinrich, 158-
159 
Philosophy of Right: Berlin lectures 
on (1818-1819), 7-8, 23; Berlin 
lectures on (1819-1820), 23; 
evaluations of, 5-6; Heidelberg 
lectures on (1817-1818), 6-8, 
23 (see also Natural Right and 
Political Science); limitations in 
Hegel's conception of, 42-43; 
publication of, 4, 23-24; its rela-
tion to the Hegelian system, 41-
42; its relation to the Science of 
Logic, 41 
Pin, William, 276,290 
Plato, 166 n.29, 186-187, 190, 
265,311,330 
Plutarch, 97 n.lO 
Police, 211-213. See also Public 
authority 
Political economy (Staatsokonomie), 
as system of needs, 166-189 
Political science (Staatswissen-
schaft), coupled with natural 
right, 28 
Poor, provision for, 209-211 
Positive right (positives Recht), 51-
52,56,320 
Possession (Besitz): of external 
things, 64-66; and ownership, 
72-73; as sphere of abstract 
right, 63-81; taking or seizing 
(Besitzergreifung), 66-72 
Poverty, 183, 209 n.48, 210-211 
Prescription (Verjiihrung), 76-77 
Press, freedom of, 288-290 
Privileges, 12 
Profit, 183-184 
Property. See Ownership; Possession 
Prussia, 16, 24 
Public authority (Polizei), 166-167, 
207-220 
Puchta, Georg Friedrich, 30 
Punishment (Strafe), 100-104, 195-
200 
Purpose (Zweck), 109, 115 

INDEX 
Quakers, 164, 248, 292 
Rational, the (Vernunftige), must 
happen, come to be, 9-10, 221, 
211 n.53, 242, 247 
Reason, and the state, 296, 315 
Recognition (Anerkennung): mu-
tual, 224; and ownership, 80; re-
ciprocal, 80-81; status of being 
recognized (Anerkanntsein), 92, 
105-106, 169, 298, 301; struggle 
for, 224, 301 
Rehberg, August Wilhelm, 78 
Religion: as basis of freedom and 
equality, 15; and ethical life, 
134-138; freedom of, 314-315; 
history of, 19; and state, 14-15, 
294-296 
Rental (Vermietung), 88-89 
Representation, system of, 2-3. See 
also Estates assembly 
Resources (Vermogen): inequality 
of, 177-178; as qualification for 
membership in the estates assem-
bly, 278-279, 282-284 
Retribution (Wiedervergeltung), 
102-104, 194-196 
Revenge (Rache), 101, 104-105, 
195-196 
Richelieu, Armand Jean du Plessis, 
Cardinal de, 270 
Right (Recht): abstract, 61-106; 
concept of, 56; as ethical life, 
129-315; and freedom, 52, 56, 
329; and law, 56, 189-190; as 
morality, 57, 58-59, 105-106, 
107-128; principle of mutual 
recognition, 80, 105; strict, 95-
96; three spheres of, 58-59, 330-
331 
Rights, inalienable, inprescriptible, 
77-78 
Robespierre, Maximilien Marie 
Isidor de, 238 
Roman law, 29, 87, 154, 156, 191 
Roman realm of world history, 
311-312 
355 
Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 1_4, 31, 99, 
164, 240, 303 nn.88, 89 
Ruge, Arnold, 5 
Saint-Pierre, Charles !renee Castel 
de, 303 nn.88, 89 
Sand, Karl Ludwig, 24 
Savigny, Friedrich Carl von, 29-30, 
76 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph, 
16 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Fried-
rich, 10, 307 
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Daniel 
Ernst, 40 
Schulze, Johannes, 24, 30 
Science (Wissenschaft), and the 
state, 294-296, 315 
Seizure (taking possession), 67-69 
Separation of powers: checks and 
balances provided by, 292-294; 
as guarantee of freedom, 232-
234; joined in an actual unity, 
237-239 
Sexuality, 139-145 
Shaming (disgrace), 197 
Slavery, as absolute crime, 97-98 
Smith, Adam, 176 n.35 
Socrates, 311, 330 
Solon, 240 
Sophocles, 134 n.3, 142 n.8 
Sovereign, power of the (fiirstliche 
Gewalt), 250-260. See also 
Monarch 
Spinoza, Benedictus de, 127 
Spirit: of the age (Zeitgeist), 307; 
and the state, 295-296 
State (Staat), 220-315; absolute 
essence of, attained in art, reli-
gion, and science, 294-295; as 
actuality of ethical spirit, 221-
223; based on need (Notstaat), 
135, 161-164, 220; and church, 
296; and constitutional law, 
226-296; as determinate ethical 
existence, 331; development of, 
224-225; and the divine, 223-

INDEX 
224, 242-243; education as re-
sponsibility of, 294-295; its ex-
ternal and internal necessity, 
227-228; founding of, 223, 224, 
239; and freedom, 220-221; as 
freely emergent, actual spirit, 
228-231, 295-296; and individu-
als, 223-225, 229-230, 273-274, 
299-300; and international law, 
226, 297-306; league of states, 
303-304; and nation, 298; offices 
of, 89-90; powers of, legislative, 
executive, sovereign, 231-233; 
powers of, separate but unified, 
232-239; and reason, 296, 315; 
as related to family and civil soci-
ety, 220-221; relations between 
states, a struggle for recognition, 
297-305; size of, 247-248; not a 
social contract, 82-83, 240; and 
world history, 306-315 
Stein, Lorenz von, 3 
Steuan, James, 15 
Stobaios, Johannes, 97 n.10 
Stoics, 97 
Subject, 107-109 
Subjectivity, 123-127, 189 
Suvarov, Aleksandr Vasilevich, 305 
System of Ethical Life (Hegel), 35 
Tacitus, 164 
Taxes, 293-294 
Testamentary will (Testament), 
86-87 
Thucydides, 246 
Timing (waiting for the proper 
time), 271 
Tools, 174-175 
Tonure, 194 
Tragedy, in history, 306-308 
Treaties, 301-302 
Trial by jury, 203-205 
Truth (Wahrheit), 326 
Tiibingen, University of, 13 
Universities, 296 
Usucapion (Ersitzung), 76 
356 
Volney, Constantin Fran~ois de 
Chasseb«uf, 9 
Voltaire, Fran~ois Marie Arouet, 
164n.27 
Waldeck und Pyrmont, Georg Graf 
zu, 288 
Wannenmann, Peter, 7-8, 45-47, 
315, 319-320 n.1, 325 n.9 
War: limited and total, 304-305; 
necessary because nations relate 
to each other in a natural state, 
297, 299, 300, 303-304; status 
of rights in, 304-305 
Wealth, 311 
Welfare (Wohl), 115-118 
Wieland, Christoph Martin, 143 
Will (Wille): as arbitrary will 
(Willkur), 55, 81, 90-93, 254, 
312, 325-326; at home with it-
self (bei sich), 324; as existing de-
terminately, 327-328; as formal, 
57-58, 329; as free will (freie 
Wille), 53-55, 61, 81, 189,319, 
322, 324-326; as individuality, 
324; as objective, 327; purpose 
of, 327; as rational, 319-320; as 
subjective, 326-327; as unity of 
indeterminacy and determinacy, 
53-54,323 
Woman (wife) (Weib), 144-145, 
152 
World history (Weltgeschichte), 
306-315; as a court of world 
judgment (Weltgericht), 10, 306-
308; as divine tragedy, 306-308; 
epochs of, as stages of conscious-
ness, 307-308; four world-
historical realms of-Oriental, 
Greek, Roman, Germanic, 9-10, 
308-315 
World spirit (Weltgeist), 306-308 
Wrong (Unrecht), 90-106 

