
GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH HEGEL
Heidelberg Writings
The purpose of the Cambridge Hegel Translations is to offer trans-
lations of the best modern German editions of Hegel’s work in a
uniform format suitable for Hegel scholars, together with philosoph-
ical introductions and full editorial apparatus.
This work brings together, for the ﬁrst time in English translation,
Hegel’s journal publications from his years in Heidelberg (–),
writings which have been previously either untranslated or only par-
tially translated into English. The Heidelberg years marked Hegel’s
return to university teaching and represented an important transi-
tion in his life and thought. The translated texts include his impor-
tant reassessment of the works of the philosopher F. H. Jacobi, whose
engagement with Spinozism, especially, was of decisive signiﬁcance for
the philosophical development of German Idealism. They also include
his most inﬂuential writing about contemporary political events, his
essay on the constitutional assembly in his native W¨urttemberg, which
was written against the background of the dramatic political and social
changes occurring in post-Napoleonic Germany. The translators have
provided an introduction and notes that offer a scholarly commentary
on the philosophical and political background of Hegel’s Heidelberg
writings.
brady bowman is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Pennsylvania
State University.
allen speight is Associate Professor of Philosophy at Boston
University.

CAMBRIDGE HEGEL TRANSLATIONS
General editor: Michael Baur
Heidelberg Writings: Journal Publications
Edited and translated by Brady Bowman and Allen Speight

GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH
HEGEL
Heidelberg Writings
Journal Publications
translated and edited by
BRADY BOWMAN
Pennsylvania State University
ALLEN SPEIGHT
Boston University

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore,
São Paulo, Delhi, Dubai, Tokyo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
First published in print format
ISBN-13    978-0-521-83300-4
ISBN-13
978-0-511-59561-5
© Allen Speight and Brady Bowman 2009
2009
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521833004
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the 
provision of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part
may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy 
of urls for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, 
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, 
accurate or appropriate.
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
eBook (EBL)
Hardback

Contents
Acknowledgments
page vi
Introduction
vii
Translators’ note
xxi
heidelberg writings: journal publications

Review, Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III

Review, Proceedings of the Estates Assembly of the Kingdom of
W¨urttemberg, 1815–1816 (33 sections)

Appendix: Excerpts from letters by Hegel, Jacobi, and Jean Paul
concerning Hegel’s review of Jacobi’s works

Further reading

Glossary of translated terms

German to English

English to German

Index

v

Acknowledgments
The translators wish to thank a number of individuals who have been of
help in the preparation of this volume. We are grateful to the late Terry
Moore of Cambridge University Press for his interest in commissioning
this volume and to Hilary Gaskin and Beatrice Rehl for supporting its
completion. Professor Walter Jaeschke of the Hegel-Archiv of the Ruhr
University Bochum and Professor Christoph Jamme of the University of
L¨uneburg both gave us important early suggestions about research sources;
PD Dr. Klaus Ries of the history department at the University of Jena
was helpful with placing the Estates Assembly’s proceedings in the context
of German constitutional history in the period from the creation of the
Confederation of the Rhine until the Carlsbad Decrees, and also helped
elucidate textual details that otherwise would have remained obscure; Pro-
fessor Gerhard Lingelbach, professor of the history of law at the University
of Jena, was helpful with clarifying some older legal terminology; Falk
Bornm¨uller compiled most of the biographical data on the members of the
Estates Assembly –and other historical persons mentioned in the text,
as well as helping research terms associated with older legal and political
institutions; Dr. Matthias Perkams was helpful with the translation of the
medieval Latin text quoted in Hegel’s Estates essay; and Dr. Ralf Beuthan
regularly gave feedback on the interpretation of particularly idiosyncratic
Hegelian formulations. Thanks also go to Toby Svoboda (Penn State), who
compiled the index, and to Chris Jackson, our CUP copy-editor.
The translation was much improved by the constructive comments of
Michael Baur and an anonymous reviewer for Cambridge University Press.
Hallie Speight’s proofreading and stylistic suggestions were invaluable in
the ﬁnal stages of editing.
Brady Bowman’s work on the volume was carried out in the framework
of the collaborative research center (Sonderforschungsbereich) at the
University of Jena, Ereignis Weimar-Jena: Kultur um 1800.
vi

Introduction
This work brings together, for the ﬁrst time in English translation, Hegel’s
journal publications from his years in Heidelberg (–), writings which
have been previously either untranslated or only partially translated into
English. The two years Hegel taught at the University of Heidelberg mark
an unusually important transition in his life and thought. Following the
closing of the University of Jena in the wake of Napoleon’s famous vic-
tory at the Battle of Jena, Hegel was unable to ﬁnd a university teaching
position. After a decade in which he worked brieﬂy as a newspaper editor
and then as a gymnasium rector, Hegel returned to a university teaching
position as Professor of Philosophy at Heidelberg in . During his two
years at Heidelberg, before he left to take up his ﬁnal academic position
in Berlin, Hegel brought to fruition a number of projects that characterize
the mature phase of his work: he published the ﬁrst version of his mature
philosophical system, the Encyclopedia; served as editor of a journal, the
Heidelberger Jahrb¨ucher der Literatur (Heidelberg Yearbooks), which pub-
lished two important contributions of his own; and began to give the ﬁrst
public lectures in which his developed social and political philosophy was
on display.
The move to Heidelberg marked not only an important milestone for
Hegel personally, but also came – as Hegel himself articulated it in this
period – during a crucial generational shift in the larger political and philo-
sophical climate in Germany and Europe. Hegel’s generation, which had
witnessed the beginning of the French Revolution twenty-ﬁve years before,
had seen in the intervening years the swift overthrow of old philosophi-
cal systems as well as political upheavals stemming from Napoleon’s rise
and fall. This post-Napoleonic period, characterized by movements toward
both restoration and reform, proved to be an all-too-brief moment in the
larger trajectory of pre-Germany: in a series of events partly trig-
gered by a famous politically motivated murder and largely manipulated
by Metternich and forces of political reaction, a very different political
vii

viii
Introduction
climate set in.Hegel’s writings during the years he spent at Heidelberg
reﬂect the tensions involved in this period of German intellectual and
political history and show at its most engaged his famous attention to the
universal signiﬁcance of concrete events.
An important part of Hegel’s intellectual engagement during those two
years at Heidelberg was his role as editor of the Heidelberg Yearbooks. Even
before coming to Heidelberg, Hegel had had a relation with the Yearbooks,
having been privy to the plans of its organizers at a very early date and
having forwarded several ideas for reviews to the editors.The project of
the Yearbooks had begun, during a reform of Heidelberg University, with
the intention of giving the university a distinctive voice in comparison
with the journals associated with other universities. As that project had
developed, their character had indeed taken on a distinctiveness associated
with Heidelberg: against the rationalistic intentions of early proposals by
the poet and Homer translator Johann Heinrich Voss to bring the Jena
and Halle versions of the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung to Heidelberg, the
editorial board which came to run the Yearbooks gave them a romantic
and idealist stamp.The members of that board included, at one time or
another, the historian of religion Georg Friedrich Creuzer (who devoted
an initial issue to the importance of Neoplatonism for interpreting ancient
mythology), the philologist August Boeckh, the theologian Karl Daub, the
jurist Anton Friedrich Justus Thibaut, and the philosopher (and rival of
Hegel’s) Jakob Friedrich Fries; reviewers included Jean Paul and Friedrich
The March murder of the reactionary German poet (and Tsarist agent) August von Kotzebue
by Karl Sand, a radical student associated with the nationalist Burschenschaften movement, touched
off a wave of political reaction leading to the famous Carlsbad Decrees, which ushered in new
restrictions on academic and press freedom, among other things. For the importance of these events
in the context of Hegel’s emerging political and social thought, see Terry Pinkard, Hegel: A Biography
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
Hegel had been told by Karl Wilhelm Gottlob von Kastner in November about the efforts to
get the Yearbooks underway, and, early in , as the faculty of the University of Jena ﬂed to other
academic (and non-academic) opportunities, Hegel’s botanist friend Franz Josef Schelver had also
encouraged him to apply to come to Heidelberg and participate in the founding of the Yearbooks.
The suggestions which Hegel had forwarded to the editors for works to be reviewed (including
Jacobi’s and Schelling’s addresses to the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Fichte’s Address to the
German Nation) had, however, not eventuated in any reviews being actually assigned to him in
the years before he arrived in Heidelberg. Two of Hegel’s own writings had been reviewed in the
Yearbooks prior to his arrival: the Phenomenology of Spirit by his student Karl Friedrich Bachmann
and the Science of Logic by his rival Jakob Friedrich Fries. (See Hegel: The Letters, trans. Clark Butler
and Christiane Seiler [Bloomington: Indiana University Press, ], pp. –.)
On romanticism and idealism at Heidelberg, cf. Otto P¨oggeler, “Die Heidelberger Jahrb¨ucher im
wissenschaftlichen Streitgespr¨ach,” in Heidelberg im s¨akularen Umbruch. Traditionsbewusstsein und
Kulturpolitik um 1800, ed. Friedrich Strack (Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, ), pp. –, and Hans-
Georg Gadamer, “Hegel und die Heidelberger Romantik,” in Gadamer, Hegels Dialektik. Sechs
hermeneutische Studien (T¨ubingen: J. C. B. Mohr, ), pp. –.

Introduction
ix
Schlegel (both of whom wrote famous reviews of works of Fichte for the
Yearbooks), Isaak von Sinclair, A. W. Schlegel, and Achim von Arnim.
When Hegel arrived in Heidelberg in the fall of , he took over the
editing of a number of areas, including theology, that had been handled
previously by Fries; he became (with Thibaut and the historian Wilken)
part of the triumvirate making ultimate editorial decisions.His own
published contributions to the Yearbooks both concerned important gen-
erational shifts – the ﬁrst a re-assessment of a “noble elder” who was central
to the philosophical climate of the generation in which Hegel had come
of age, and the second a signiﬁcant political turn in the development of
post-Napoleonic Germany. As it turned out, both also entailed signiﬁcant
milestones in Hegel’s own personal relationships – the ﬁrst a consumma-
tion of a reconciliation between Hegel and that “elder” (who had been
sharply criticized in Hegel’s earlier work) and the second a complete break
with an old friend.
The ﬁrst of Hegel’s two writings to appear in the Yearbooks, his review
of the collected works of the philosopher F. H. Jacobi, has never been
translated into English.The importance of Jacobi for the develop-
ment of German Idealism can hardly be overstated: for Schelling, Hegel,
and H¨olderlin – the generation that came philosophically of age in the
s – the interpretation of the Kantian critical philosophy was inﬂected
in an important way by their encounter with Jacobi, and particularly
by Jacobi’s engagement with Spinozism.Although contemporary inter-
est from both German- and English-speaking scholarship in the relation
See P¨oggeler, “Die Heidelberger Jahrb¨ucher im wissenschaftlichen Streitgespr¨ach,” p. .
Hegel’s reconciliation with Jacobi is discussed in the section below. The break connected with the
W¨urttemberg Estates essay concerned the theologian Heinrich Eberhard Gottlob Paulus, whose
essay about the same topic had been submitted to the Yearbooks and rejected by Hegel and the
other editors as “too long”; Hegel’s own publication of what turned out to be an even longer review
concerning the same issue did not of course help matters. See P¨oggeler, “Die Heidelberger Jahrb¨ucher
im wissenschaftlichen Streitgespr¨ach,” pp. ff.
There is a translation of the review into French: Andre Droz, Rezension des oeuvres de F. H. Jacobi
(Paris: Vrin, ).
Like Schelling and H¨olderlin, Hegel read Jacobi’s book On Spinoza’s Doctrines in Letters to Herr Moses
Mendelssohn, as well as other writings of Jacobi’s, while still a student in the seminary at T¨ubingen.
On the importance of this work and the pantheism controversy for German Idealism see, among
other recent accounts, Frederick Beiser, The Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, ), pp. –; Dieter Henrich, Between Kant and
Hegel: Lectures on German Idealism, ed. David Pacini (Harvard: Harvard University Press, ),
pp. –; Paul W. Franks, All or Nothing: Systematicity, Transcendental Arguments, and Skepti-
cism in German Idealism (Harvard: Harvard University Press, ), pp. –; and Terry Pinkard,
German Philosophy 1760–1860: The Legacy of Idealism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ),
pp. –.

x
Introduction
between Hegel and Jacobi has been strong, Hegel’s important review has
remained untranslated.
The second writing has never been fully translated into English but is
without rival as the most inﬂuential piece of political journalism Hegel
ever wrote.In fact, of the ﬁve striking writings on speciﬁc contemporary
political issues and events that span his career – from his ﬁrst publication
in to his last in – The W¨urttemberg Estates is the only piece
that was fully published under Hegel’s name in his lifetime.Hegel was
a W¨urttemberg native and had been drawn, since an earlier unpublished
essay in , to write about the political events of his homeland. The
convening of the W¨urttemberg Estates in for the purpose of ratifying
a new constitution aroused Hegel’s political interest not merely as a chapter
in the particular history of W¨urttemberg but rather more broadly (as it
turned out) as an important moment in the development of European
and German constitutionalism during the post-Napoleonic era. Hegel’s
take on the political and constitutional issues surrounding The Estates
has been widely debated, but it has been a genuinely underestimated
document for the construal of his political and social philosophy, upon
which the present translation and critical commentary hopes to shed some
light.
the jacobi review
Hegel’s early published engagement with Jacobi’s works had been distinc-
tively critical. In his Jena essay on Faith and Knowledge (), Hegel directs
a searching and frequently harsh critique at the assumptions of subjectivity
and immediacy which he took to underlie Jacobi’s philosophical position.
George di Giovanni recently published, for example, an almost -page volume translating many
of Jacobi’s works for the ﬁrst time into English; his introduction to that volume ends in fact with
a brief discussion of Hegel’s review: The Main Philosophical Writings and the Novel “Allwill,” trans.
George di Giovanni (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, ), pp. –.
The existing translation of the Estates essay by T. M. Knox is only a partial translation of approx-
imately of the pages of text in Lasson’s German edition (Hegel’s Political Writings, trans.
T. M. Knox with an introductory essay by Z. A. Pelczynski [Oxford: Clarendon Press, ]).
Of the ﬁve political writings Hegel devoted to speciﬁc contemporary issues – the Conﬁdential Letters
on the Previous Constitutional Relation of Wadtland to the City of Berne (), the essay On the Recent
Domestic Affairs of W¨urttemberg (), the German Constitution (–), The W¨urttemberg
Estates (), and The English Reform Bill () – the ﬁrst was an anonymously published translation
of an essay written by another author, the second and third were never published, and the ﬁfth
was partially suppressed by the Prussian king before Hegel’s death. Translations of three of the
other four essays can be found in G. W. F. Hegel: Political Writings, ed. H. B. Nisbet and Laurence
Dickey (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ) and in Knox and Pelczynski, Hegel’s Political
Writings.

Introduction
xi
Although Hegel’s published work in the intervening years makes scant
or oblique reference to Jacobi,there was behind the scenes a substan-
tial effort, particularly under the auspices of Immanuel Niethammer, a
common friend of both men, to effect a personal reconciliation of some
sort.
The roots of that reconciliation, as Jaeschke has observed, may have had
initially more to do with political, professional, and personal factors than
with philosophical ones.Jacobi and Niethammer had become comrades-
in-arms in their efforts to reform higher education in Bavaria, Jacobi serving
as president of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Niethammer as
Bavaria’s central commissioner of education. The attacks on Jacobi – who,
like both Niethammer and Hegel, was non-Bavarian and Protestant –
became an issue about which Hegel could express some alliance with
Jacobi, in spite of his harsh early critique of Jacobi’s work.Hegel’s frequent
correspondence with Niethammer during this period – about, among other
things, the possibilities of a position in Bavarian higher education for the
underemployed Bamberg newspaper editor– shows an increasing sense of
support for Jacobi’s position. (By the end of Hegel claims, in response
to an attack on Jacobi’s address to the Bavarian Academy, that he “belonged
to Jacobi’s party in advance.”)In , when the two men actually met
Jacobi seems clearly to be on Hegel’s mind in important sections of the Phenomenology of Spirit
() on sense certainty and conscience, but he is not explicitly mentioned there; the ﬁrst references
in Hegel’s Science of Logic come in the Begriffslogik; the discussion of Jacobi in the third remark
to “Becoming” is part of Hegel’s reworking of the text in Berlin (Walter Jaeschke, Hegel Handbuch.
Leben-Werk-Wirkung [Stuttgart/Weimar: J. B. Metzler, ], p. ).
Pinkard, Hegel: A Biography, pp. –, –; Jaeschke, Hegel Handbuch, pp. –, –.
The poet Jean Paul Richter, a close friend of Jacobi’s, also plays an important role here: Hegel had
made a favorable impression on him when the two met in Bamberg in July of .
Jaeschke, Hegel Handbuch, p. .
Hegel certainly recognized the delicacy of his situation: in a letter to Niethammer on May ,
, about apparent prospects for a job that would need Jacobi’s approval, he says: “You are, to be
sure, kind enough to keep up courage for me, but at the same time the condition at once seems
to be added sine qua non that I should become reconciled with Jacobi, that from my side I must
do something or other which – however delicate the turnabout might be – could only, I fear, be a
‘Father, forgive me!’ [pater peccavi!] You know that you can command me unconditionally; but I
am convinced you will spare me of this. You yourself say that Jacobi’s relationship to me is more [a
matter of] pain than opinion. If it were only a matter of opinion, some alteration would be possible.
But the pain would be hard to alter – without transferring it to me instead, without receiving coals
of ﬁre upon my head, which I would even help to heap on myself” (Hegel: The Letters, p. ).
Hegel remained in the newspaper position until late , when Niethammer secured for him an
appointment as rector of the Nuremberg gymnasium.
From Hegel’s letter to Niethammer of December , , which discusses Karl Rottmanner’s
Critique of F. H. Jacobi’s Essay on Learned Societies (Hegel: The Letters, p. ). In a letter to Karl
Joseph Windischmann (December , ), Schelling by contrast applauded Rottmanner’s attack,
a fact which may be interpreted as a further symptom of the increasing philosophical and political
distance between Schelling and Hegel.

xii
Introduction
during a visit by Jacobi to Nuremberg, there was a great deal of apparent
good will on both sides.Hegel repaid the visit with a trip to see Jacobi
in Munich in , the two men exchanged recent books,and Jacobi was
even supposed to become godparent to an expected child of Hegel and his
wife.
Hegel’s arrival in Heidelberg in thus appears to mark an occasion on
which he could make public the turn in his relation to Jacobi. The personal
change, as Pinkard has noted, coincided with a shift in Hegel’s own status
within the philosophical profession: with the publication of both volumes
of the Science of Logic behind him, as well as the imminent completion of the
Heidelberg version of his philosophical system as a whole, the Encyclopedia,
Hegel could view Jacobi’s works from a perspective that was no longer that
of a critical rival but rather that of an established philosopher reviewing
the work of a precursor.What emerges is not only an extended review
of a volume of Jacobi’s collected works, but something of a reassessment
on Hegel’s part – one which involves, in tone, content, and presentation,
a signiﬁcantly different attitude toward Jacobi.
The volume of Jacobi’s collected works which Hegel reviews is the third
in that series – the last, as it turned out, that would be edited by the aging
Jacobi himself. The four Jacobian texts included in the volume concern
Jacobi’s critique of Kant (the essay On Critical Philosophy’s Attempt to
Bring Reason to Understanding and to Transform Philosophy as Such), his
contribution to the so-called “atheism dispute” over Fichte’s departure from
Jena (the famous public Letter to Fichte), and his contribution as well to the
so-called “dispute on divine things” that featured a disagreement between
Jacobi and Schelling (the two essays On Divine Things and Their Revelation
and On a Prophecy by Lichtenberg).
Hegel’s review does not simply take these writings up in order of pub-
lication, but instead places them as a group in the context of an Hegelian
construal of the importance of Jacobi’s work as a whole for the history of
philosophy. As Hegel sees it, this construal requires the consideration of a
text not included in the volume itself, but which had been of unusually
decisive importance to Hegel’s own generation: the Doctrine of Spinoza in
Jean Paul observed about the reconciliation that it was impossible not to love Jacobi “and indeed his
philosophical enemy Hegel loves him now.” Hegel wrote Niethammer in July of with thanks
for his help in the reconciliation, noting Jacobi’s “kind disposition toward me” (Jaeschke, Hegel
Handbuch, p. ).
Hegel sent Jacobi the second volume of his Science of Logic, and Jacobi sent Hegel the second
volume of his collected works (the volume preceding the one which Hegel reviews in the Heidelberg
Yearbooks).
Hegel’s wife Marie miscarried, however, at the end of .
Pinkard, Hegel: A Biography, pp. , .

Introduction
xiii
Letters to Moses Mendelssohn. With this essay as its central point of depar-
ture, Hegel’s review is thus thematically organized into roughly four parts
that reﬂect Jacobi’s philosophical engagement, respectively, with Spinoza,
Kant, Fichte, and Schelling, while a coda takes up what Hegel ﬁnds dis-
tinctive about Jacobi’s philosophical style.
(i) Spinoza: “Every consistent system of philosophy must in the end
lead to Spinozism” had been the well-known claim of Jacobi’s Doctrine of
Spinoza in Letters to Moses Mendelssohn, published originally in and in
a second edition in . Jacobi had intended his work as a warning against
the deterministic, mechanistic, and consequently nihilistic trajectory of all
modern, i.e., Spinozist, philosophy, but it had had, on many in Hegel’s
generation, an opposite effect – rather of leading them to a more serious
study of the philosopher whose view of substance had been famously
captured by the phrase Jacobi attributed to Lessing: hen kai pan (“one and
all”), words that H¨olderlin inscribed as a sort of watchword in Hegel’s
Stammbuch during their days in the T¨ubingen seminary.
Hegel’s review does not focus on the historical details of the so-called
“pantheist” controversy that followed upon the publication of Jacobi’s
book, but rather on the importance he sees Jacobi’s appeal to Spinoza as
having within the broader perspective of the history of modern philoso-
phy. According to Hegel, both the French and German Enlightenments
had moved from a critical encounter with givenness in the natural and
social worlds to the positing of abstract determinations (such as “force”
or “totality”) in which, however, thought was equally unable to “possess
itself.” Against the sterility of the metaphysics which resulted, it was the
achievement of Spinoza, according to Jacobi, to show that the “only rela-
tion in which . . . [such] determinations of knowledge attain their truth”
was the “unwavering and inﬁnite contemplation and knowledge of the one
substantial being,” or Spinoza’s substance.
For a correct construal of this “Spinozism in possession of which we ﬁnd
Jacobi,”everything depends, says Hegel, on understanding the notion of
On the paradoxical effect of Jacobi’s Spinoza book on Hegel’s generation, see, for example, Frederick
Beiser, German Idealism: The Struggle against Subjectivism, 1781–1801 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, ), pp. –and Henrich, Between Kant and Hegel, pp. –. On the
signiﬁcance of H¨olderlin’s inscription for the two friends, see H. S. Harris, Hegel’s Development:
Toward the Sunlight 1770–1801 (Oxford: Clarendon Press, ), pp. –.
Hegel’s claim here about “the Spinozism in possession of which we ﬁnd Jacobi” is interesting,
given the harsh Jacobian criticism of Spinoza that Hegel had acknowledged already in Faith and
Knowledge. As Rolf-Peter Horstmann has suggested, this appeal bears remarkable similarity to
that of the Schelling, who stressed the common interest of Jacobi and Spinoza in seeking
to integrate the role of the unconditional in their respective philosophical approaches. Rolf-Peter
Horstmann, Die Grenzen der Vernunft. Eine Untersuchung zu Zielen und Motiven des Deutschen
Idealismus (Frankfurt: Anton Hain, ), p. , n. .

xiv
Introduction
negativity at work. Spinoza’s substance implies the determinateness of ﬁnite
things – as in the phrase which Hegel follows Jacobi in ascribing to Spinoza,
omnis determinatio est negatio. But negation in this sense, as Hegel credits
Jacobi with seeing, “fails to be seen as internal to substance” because there
is no comprehension within that substance of the very work of negation.
Jacobi’s demand that God be not merely substance but “spirit,” which
is both “free and a person [pers¨onlich],” thus presages, on Hegel’s view,
his own distinction between substance and spirit: “the difference between
determining the Absolute as substance and determining it as Spirit boils
down to the question whether thought [das Denken], having annihilated its
ﬁnitudes and mediations, negated its negations and thus comprehended the
One Absolute, is conscious of what it has actually achieved in its cognition
of absolute substance, or whether it lacks such consciousness.”
Although Hegel goes on to criticize Jacobi’s notion of spirit for a fur-
ther problem of immediacy – i.e., for staying put in the immediacy of
intuition – he nonetheless makes the implicit concept of Spirit he ﬁnds in
Jacobi into the organizing concept of the review and thus the key point of
his assessment of Jacobi’s importance for the history of philosophy. For it
is “chieﬂy against the conception of Spirit as Jacobi ﬁnds it in his vision of
reason that he measures the philosophical systems which are his subjects in
the writings contained in the present volume” – i.e., those of Kant, Fichte,
and Schelling.
(ii) Kant: Hegel credits Jacobi and Kant in the review with a shared
achievement for the state of contemporary philosophy as a whole: they
“put an end to the metaphysics of the old school” of Leibniz and Wolff
and thus “established the necessity of a complete revision of logic.” When
Hegel turns to an account of the criticism which Jacobi ultimately directed
at the Kantian categories of space, time, identity, and difference, he praises
Jacobi for undertaking it, at least in part, “in accord with true method,
that is, dialectically.” But while Jacobi shows the contingent character of
Kantian categories, he nonetheless “fails to give Kant the inﬁnite credit
due him for having seen that the freedom of the Spirit is the fundamental
principle” of both theoretical and practical philosophy.
(iii) Fichte: As Jaeschke has observed, Hegel’s discussion in the review of
Jacobi’s famous Letter to Fichte focuses not so much on the issues of the
atheism dispute surrounding the publication of that letter as on Jacobi’s
critique of the one-sidedness of the Fichtean approach, particularly, to
morality.Hegel compares Jacobi’s criticism of Fichte’s rationalist moral
Jaeschke, Hegel Handbuch, p. .

Introduction
xv
principle to Aristotle’s criticism of the Socratic attempt to “make the virtues
into knowledge”: “in the realm of the practical, universals articulate only
what ought to be, and Aristotle (like Jacobi) ﬁnds this insufﬁcient to account
for the manner of the existence of the universal and the possibility of such
existence.” Yet, Hegel claims, Aristotle’s appeal to “drives and character” –
and moreover to the situating of an individual’s ethical life within the
context of the life of the polis – is to be distinguished as more richly
concrete than Jacobi’s appeal to the “mere heart.” While Hegel thus praises
(as he had earlier in Faith and Knowledge) the “ﬁne passage” in which
Jacobi insists upon the importance of individual moral decision when it
must oppose the weight of conventional norms, he nonetheless ends the
section on Jacobi’s view of Fichte with a criticism of the temptation to
romanticism.
(iv) Schelling: The ﬁnal section on the controversy over “divine things”
with Schelling gives the shortest discussion of any of the texts covered in
the review. While there may have been some intentional reasons for Hegel’s
brevity here in discussing the dispute between Schelling and Jacobi,Hegel
claims that it is “without doubt still sufﬁciently present in public memory
that it would be superﬂuous to spend much time on it here.” Following
two short paragraphs that concern the relation of the human spirit to God
and the difﬁculties of the Schellingian project in the philosophy of nature,
Hegel segues to a discussion of the distinctiveness of Jacobi’s philosophical
style – the particular ´esprit (das Geistreiche, a term close to untranslatable in
English) that makes use of a wealth of images and “simple juxtapositions.”
However much such ´esprit may probe contradictions inherent in the claims
of the understanding, it is, on Hegel’s view, still “a kind of surrogate for
methodically developed thought.”
What, in the end, did Hegel’s review of Jacobi achieve? First of all,
the developing reconciliation between the two men was clearly sealed –
and Jacobi, who had earlier evinced an extraordinary charitability toward
Fichte’s and Schelling’s quite different philosophical construals of his own
work, reacted with similar openness to Hegel’s account here.While
Jaeschke (ibid., p. ) suggests that the brief treatment may have arisen from Hegel’s awkward
position – between a developing friendship with Jacobi on the one hand and a philosophical stance
on the issues in the dispute that actually may have come closer to Schelling’s position, despite
the distance that had developed between the two former Jena colleagues in the years since the
publication of the Phenomenology of Spirit.
Jacobi acknowledged that Hegel’s work had “on the whole pleased me very much” (F. H. Jacobi
to Jean Paul [Munich, ..], G¨unther Nicolin, ed., Hegel in Berichten seiner Zeitgenossen
[Hamburg: Meiner, ], p. ). Regarding Hegel’s criticism, Jacobi said in a letter to his friend
Johann Neeb, “He may well be right” (F. H. Jacobi to Johann Neeb [Munich, ..], ibid.,

xvi
Introduction
Hegel’s Jacobi review certainly heralds a shift in tone in his treatment
of Jacobi, there are also more importantly elements of a new philosophi-
cal contextualization of Jacobi’s work that will be present in Hegel’s later
treatments of Jacobi in the Encyclopedia Logic, the Science of Logic, and the
History of Philosophy.
the review of the w¨urttemberg estates proceedings
Hegel was born – as Terry Pinkard puts it in his recent biography –
not in Germany, but in W¨urttemberg. The experience of “Germanness”
for Hegel’s generation was one which continually oscillated between the
local appeal of the speciﬁc area in which one grew up (the large number
of principalities, duchies, and free cities which composed the German-
speaking realm) and the aspirations – ﬁred not only by the principles of
the French Revolution but by the collapse of the Holy Roman “Empire” of
the German Nation – to a more universal political life. While Hegel’s life
introduced him to a wide variety of German-speaking cities (from Swiss
Berne to Bavarian Nuremberg to Prussian Berlin), it also provided in its
experiences a distinct focus for his interest in the development of universal
and rational political institutions. Hegel’s interest at once in the speciﬁcity
and the broader meaning of political institutions gave him an unusually
careful eye – certainly in comparison with the rest of his German Idealist
contemporaries – for the ﬁne nuance of signiﬁcant administrative detail.
(One can indeed occasionally see in Hegel perhaps some inheritance from
his father, who had been a secretary to the revenue ofﬁce at the court of
the duke of W¨urttemberg – for example, in the aspiration of the young
philosopher, abroad in Switzerland for the ﬁrst time, to “work through
the ﬁnancial constitution of Berne to the smallest detail, even to highway
funding [Chausseegeld].”)
p. ). Reacting in to Fichte’s and Schelling’s citations of him, Jacobi had said in a letter to
Baggesen that it was possible that “these men have understood me better than I have myself.” The
relevant portions of these letters, along with part of an important contemporary letter of Hegel’s
concerning the Jacobi review, are translated below in the Appendix (pp. –).
The and editions of the Encyclopedia Logic follow Hegel’s review in placing Jacobi’s
philosophical position not, as in the earlier Faith and Knowledge essay, with Hume and Locke, but
rather with Descartes, who did not come up for discussion in Faith and Knowledge at all. The Berlin
Lectures on the History of Philosophy begin, as does the review, by locating Jacobi in the context of
a reaction to French Enlightenment philosophy and contemporary German metaphysics. The 
Science of Logic, as Jaeschke points out (Hegel Handbuch, p. ), also follows the lines of Jacobi’s
Kant criticism as discussed in the review (Science of Logic, trans. A. V. Miller [Atlantic Highlands,
NJ: Humanities Press International, ], pp. –).
Karl Rosenkranz, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegels Leben (Berlin: Duncker and Humblot, ),
p. .

Introduction
xvii
While such smaller details are part of what Hegel must contend with in
the Estates essay, there are clearly larger issues on his mind. For the essay
is one of the important documents in the explicit development of Hegel’s
mature social and political philosophy – a development which can in many
respects be dated to Hegel’s time at Heidelberg, where he lectured on the
philosophy of right for the ﬁrst time, but a development which itself takes
place against the background of an unusually pregnant moment in Euro-
pean political and constitutional history. In the wake of Napoleon’s defeat
and the Congress of Vienna, a number of new political rearrangements
emerged in Europe.In Germany, the old empire had been replaced with
thirty-nine “sovereign principalities and free cities of Germany” within
a loose confederation, including the Kingdom of W¨urttemberg, which,
because of its strategic position in the Napoleonic wars, had not only risen
in stature from its former status as a duchy, but had more than doubled in
size.
Above all, however, this post-Napoleonic era was a time ripe for new
attempts at constitution-making: Louis XVIII had just given the French a
new Charte Constitutionelle in , and the Acts of Confederation emerging
from the Congress of Vienna would specify that the new realms incorpo-
rated under those acts each provide for their citizens “estates constitutions”
(landst¨andische Verfassungen).With an eye on both of these developments,
W¨urttemberg’s King Friedrich I presented his country’s Estates Assembly a
new constitution in March . This overture was initially rejected by the
Estates, which argued for a return to its “old” rights under the constitution
which Friedrich had declared null in on the eve of the collapse of the
remaining “institutions” of the Holy Roman Empire.
This contretemps between king and Estates over the outlines of a new
constitution – the central dramatic event analyzed in the Estates essay –
presents a number of questions for the political theorist and the historian
of ideas. Both the notions of an “Estates” and of a constitution appear,
in fact, to be part of a larger set of terms in the political vocabulary of
post-Napoleonic Europe which are shifting and under conﬂictual pressure.
On these developments more generally, see James Sheehan, German History: 1770–1866 (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, ) and Thomas Nipperdey, Germany from Napoleon to Bismarck:
1800–1866 (Dublin: Gill and Macmillan, ).
See footnote on p. .
Article of the Acts of the German Confederation stipulated that every member state have a
constitution providing for an assembly of the Estates (landst¨andische Verfassung). On the contem-
porary interpretation of this important phrase – and the distinction made between it and the
notion of an explicitly representative (repr¨asentative) constitution – see Rolf K. Hoˇcevar, St¨ande und
Repr¨asentation beim jungen Hegel. Ein Beitrag zu seiner Staats- und Gesellschaftslehre sowie zur Theorie
der Repr¨asentation (Munich: C. H. Beck, ).

xviii
Introduction
King Friedrich’s constitution was the ﬁrst to be proposed within the new
German states that were represented at the Congress of Vienna; his consti-
tution involved rationalistic and representative elements that had not pre-
viously been seen in the existing political frameworks in German-speaking
lands.Even prior to the Estates Assembly, however, W¨urttemberg
had had a constitutional history which in many ways set it apart from
the political structure of other German realms – a fact acknowledged
in the famous remark of the English statesman Charles James Fox that
“there were only two constitutions in Europe, the British constitution,
and that of W¨urttemberg.”Perhaps the most distinctive element of the
W¨urttembergian constitution in this regard was the status of the Landtag
(Estates Assembly or Parliament), which not only had acquired signiﬁcant
political powers in relation to the ruling duke but was also almost entirely
dominated by an urban class of burghers. The role of the W¨urttemberg Par-
liament was rooted in the Treaty of T¨ubingen, signed on July , , which
had granted the Estates basic civil rights and liberties, a say in decisions
concerning war and peace as well as in major legislation, and – crucially –
the administration of public ﬁnances. In return, the Estates had agreed
to take on the responsibility of repaying the duke’s foreign debts and to
submit to taxation as necessary to supply the needs of the state. Effectively,
this treaty was W¨urttemberg’s constitution, and talk of the “old law” or the
“old constitution” invariably refers to the Treaty of T¨ubingen which had
made W¨urttemberg’s Estates the most powerful in Germany.
While the term “estates” suggests a body broadly representative of
the interests within the feudal state– i.e., those of nobility, peasants,
church, and bourgeoisie (the burgher class) – the W¨urttemberg Estates
See Hartwig Brandt, Parlamentarismus in W¨urttemberg 1819–1870. Anatomie eines deutschen Land-
tags (D¨usseldorf: Droste, ), p. . The “ﬁrstness” of W¨urttemberg’s constitutional proposal
is not without some historical irony, as Rolf Grawert points out, given the length of time it
ultimately took W¨urttemberg, in comparison with other realms of the German Confederation,
to approve it (Grawert, “Der w¨urttembergische Verfassungsstreit –,” in “O F¨urstin, der
Heimath! Gl¨ukliches Stutgard.” Politik, Kultur und Gesellschaft im deutschen S¨udwesten um 1800,
ed. Otto P¨oggeler and Christoph Jamme [Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, ], p. ).
Fox’s remark is cited in a review of the Proceedings of the W¨urttemberg Assembly for the Edin-
burgh Review by a contemporary of Hegel’s: “Verhandlungen in der Versammlung der Landst¨ande
des K¨onigreichs W¨urtemberg,” in Edinburgh Review ,(February ): . For a broader
comparison of the emergence of parliamentary government in German political history, see F. L.
Carsten, Princes and Parliaments in Germany: From the Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Century (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, ).
Pelczynski comments that both the notion of “estates” (die St¨ande) as the corporate entities within
a state and that of the “Estates” as the parliamentary forum of the various parts of a state are words
at some distance from active political vocabulary in English, whereas Stand and St¨ande have had a
somewhat longer life in German (Hegel’s Political Writings [Oxford: Clarendon Press, ], p. ).

Introduction
xix
Assembly was almost entirely made up of burghers. From the Treaty of
T¨ubingen on, the nobility had refused to participate in the Assembly on the
grounds that they had an “immediate” legal status (Reichsunmmitelbarkeit)
within the larger German Empire and stood under no intermediate author-
ity;the peasants, despite early attempts to press for representation, had
been effectively excluded,and the prelates had become, through inter-
marriage and co-optation, effectively side-lined as a separate “estate.”
The representativeness and effectiveness of the Estates Assembly in the
years between the Treaty of T¨ubingen and had been blunted on two
sides. On the one hand, a so-called “committee” that putatively was to meet
only between adjournments of the Assembly came instead to be a political
entity in its own right and was almost entirely dominated by a ruling class
of burgher families (the W¨urttemberg replacement for politically active
nobles):during the eighteenth century, the Assembly as a whole met only
four times, as the committee controlled important political and ﬁnancial
issues within the duchy.On the other hand, there was an ongoing battle
between Assembly and dukes, and the latter occasionally got the decisive
grip on power: Friedrich shut down the Assembly in , and it did not
meet again until he convened it for the constitutional process in .
Within this power structure, there were clearly competing views of what
a constitution was and what the political machinery in constitution-making
exactly involved.On the one hand, the king’s motives in proposing the
constitution were clearly mixed. Friedrich had been the last to join the
German Confederation but was the ﬁrst to draft a constitution. While
The nobles had declared in that they were “kein Staind in der Wirtemberg Landschaft” but
instead “frey Edelleut” (free nobles). Cited in James Allen Vann, The Making of a State: W¨urttemberg
1593–1793 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, ), p. .
The “Poor Conrad” uprising, for example, had failed to produce a peasant representation in
the Assembly. Despite the lack of political representation, the peasants still had some signiﬁcant
rights in W¨urttemberg in contrast with other German states: Carsten cites, for example, the right
of peasants to leave the state freely, and the general disintegration of the manorial system and duties
associated with serfdom (Carsten, Princes and Parliaments in Germany, pp. –).
On the history of the W¨urttemberg estates, see Brandt, Parlamentarismus in W¨urttemberg 1819–
1870; Carsten, Princes and Parliaments in Germany; Vann, The Making of a State; Walter Grube, Der
Stuttgarter Landtag 1457–1957 (Stuttgart: E. Klett, ).
There were actually two committees, the inner and outer committees, with eight and sixteen
members respectively.
It was only the duke’s need for emergency funds during the Napoleonic wars that forced the
re-convening of the Estates in , since the committee itself could not approve the emergency
outlays required.
On Friedrich’s closing of the Assembly, Napoleon was said to have exclaimed: “I have made your
master a sovereign, not a despot!” (see Hegel’s letter to Niethammer citing this remark in August of
: Hegel: The Letters, p. ).
See Grawert, “Der w¨urttembergische Verfassungsstreit –,” pp. ff.

xx
Introduction
he had autocratically closed the Estates in , he now had a political
interest in subduing the newly “mediatized” nobles in his land; and, given
the concern with constitution-making emerging from the Congress of
Vienna, taking the initiative might ensure the ﬁnal product would be more
to his liking than something that might be imposed from outside. On
the other hand, the burghers of the Estates were trying to reclaim the
“good, old right” that had been suspended, yet – as Hegel never tires of
pointing out – they started to give the appearance of oligarchs simply
trying to hold on to their privileges. Besides king and Estates, there were
other movements afoot as well. The Estates received numerous petitions
from towns and citizens (Volksadressen) demanding that the king grant the
people a constitution rooted in the Estates, and there was signiﬁcant interest
outside W¨urttemberg from German intellectuals (including G¨orres, Stein,
Fries, and Kotzebue) who favored the Estates’ cause. Finally, there emerged
as well a “moderate” group between the two positions (taken especially by
the publisher Johann Friedrich Cotta and T¨ubingen University Curator
August von Wangenheim).
The constitutional debate that emerged – if it can be properly so
called – lasted four years and fell into three distinct phases.Friedrich I ini-
tiated the ﬁrst phase with his presentation of a draft of the constitution
to the newly convened Estates Assembly; Hartwig Brandt characterizes this
phase as a long-drawn-out stalemate that persisted until Friedrich’s death
in October of . A second phase beginning with his more liberal succes-
sor, Wilhelm I, fell in the year : Wilhelm proposed in March of 
another draft version of the constitution that had been much inﬂuenced by
the proposals of T¨ubingen chancellor Wangenheim, whom Wilhelm had
now made minister of state.After an ultimatum from Wilhelm to vote
For an analysis of these three phases, see especially Brandt, Parlamentarismus in W¨urttemberg 1819–
1870 and Joachim Gerner, Vorgeschichte und Entstehung der w¨urttembergischen Verfassung im Spiegel
der Quellen (1815–1819) (Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, ).
Wangenheim’s anonymously published The Idea of a State Constitution in its Application to
W¨urttemberg’s Old Estates Constitution and a Proposal for its Renewal (Die Idee der Staatsverfassung
in ihrer Anwendung auf W¨urttembergs alte Landesverfassung und den Entwurf zu deren Erneuerung)
had suggested, among other things, a bicameral estates, as opposed to the unicameral situation
envisioned by Friedrich. Wangenheim and his constitutional proposal play an important role in the
assessment of Hegel’s stance during the second phase of the process, since it was alleged by Rudolf
Haym that Hegel had written his review of the Proceedings to gain inﬂuence with Wangenheim
for an appointment to his old position at T¨ubingen. Haym, however, later recanted this story. On
Wangenheim’s proposal, see Dieter Wyduckel, “Die Idee des Dritten Deutschlands im Vorm¨arz. Ein
Beitrag zur trialistischen Verfassungskonzeption des Freiherrn von Wangenheim,” in “O F¨urstin, der
Heimath! Gl¨ukliches Stutgard,” pp. –. For an analysis of the Haym charge, see especially Franz
Rosenzweig (Hegel und der Staat [Munich and Berlin: Oldenbourg, ], vol. II, pp. –), who
ﬁnds also important textual grounds – including the rather circumscribed mention of bicamerality
that appears in the Proceedings essay below – for casting doubt on Haym’s claim.

Introduction
xxi
on the new proposal, the Estates voted it down on June , by a margin
of –. The third and ﬁnal phase, following Wangenheim’s departure,
was dominated by the conservative minister Theodor Eugen Maucler and
culminated in the ratiﬁcation of the constitution on September , ,
in the wake of the adoption of the Carlsbad Decrees.
Hegel’s essay on the W¨urttemberg Estates was written and published
during the second phase of this dispute,but limits itself almost exclusively
to discussing the published Proceedings concerned with the events of –
. In his review of those Proceedings, Hegel sees that what is at issue is
the inheritance of a generation of political experience in the wake of the
French Revolution: these twenty-ﬁve years, Hegel says, are “perhaps the
richest that world history has had,” years which “teach us the most, because
our world and our ideas belong to them.”
The central philosophical concern for political philosophy and constitu-
tional law emerging from this period is, for Hegel, the notion of the rational
justiﬁcation of institutions and governmental structures. The desire of the
Estates to return to their old rights is, however, rooted in a “positive”
conception of right (following his earlier writings, Hegel means here by
“positive” a notion of right as what happens to be posited by authorities
in a given historical or political situation). But if the members of the old
Estates see things in a “positive” light that takes no account of the rational
import of the French Revolution, theorists who would wish to construe
political matters in the overly “abstract” French terms of “pure number and
quanta of wealth” employ “atomistic principles” which are, in science as in
politics, “death for every rational concept, articulation and liveliness.”
The notion of an “articulated” or “organic” rather than atomistic rela-
tionship at the heart of the citizen’s relation to the state implies as well
that the terms of a contractual relation between ruler and people are
equally off the mark. In an argument which links closely to the stance
Hegel will take on Hobbes, Rousseau, and the contract tradition in the
Philosophy of Right, Hegel holds that what is at issue in acts of constitution-
making is a notion of the relation of citizen to state which cannot be
understood in terms of a contract between a ruler and the people. This
relationship demands instead philosophical consideration of a notion of the
The essay was originally published in two installments in the Heidelberg Yearbooks: the issue of
November and the continuation in the December issue (which did not actually appear
until January ).
G. W. F. Hegel, Gesammelte Werke (GW), vol. XV, Schriften und Entw¨urfe I (1817–1825), ed. Friedrich
Hogemann and Christoph Jamme (Hamburg: Meiner, ), pp. –.
Ibid., p. . As examples of such “atomistic principles,” Hegel mentions age and property
qualiﬁcations for voting.

xxii
Introduction
political – deﬁned, as Hegel presents it here, as a set of obligations which
extend beyond those of merely private interests.
Hegel begins his account with a description of the opening of the
Estates Assembly by the king, followed by a characterization of the rigid
political stance taken by members of the Assembly advocating the “good,
old right,” the stultifying style of verbatim speech-reading, and lack of
actual political dialogue among members. Hegel also devotes a signiﬁcant
section of the review to a consideration of the various abuses of existing
administrative arrangements in W¨urttemberg (including the notorious
network of “notaries” whose interests are defended by many of the Estates
members).
The review does not offer a chronological analysis or account of the
proceedings, even of the limited phase of them that Hegel discusses (as
Rosenzweig remarks, Hegel seems to focus unduly on the ﬁrst few days
of the Assembly). And, although the essay was once called “one of the
best pamphlets that came from a German pen,”it is rather the polem-
ical sharpness and apparent one-sidedness that most readers have in fact
noticed. Rudolf Haym called it “Asiatically eloquent,” a “servile and syco-
phantic defense of the government line.”Fries, one of Hegel’s bitterest
rivals, describes the essay as one phase of an accommodationism that
characterized Hegel’s relations with whatever regime was in power at the
moment.Even Hegel’s close friend Niethammer told him that he had
“cleverly supported a dubious cause.”
Hegel’s not entirely unfair attack on the Estates ignores some legiti-
mate complaints on their part which Hegel himself in earlier contexts had
endorsed – for example, the Estates’ criticism of Friedrich’s autocratic dis-
solution of its meetings.But Hegel’s philosophical aim is, he says, not to
give a concrete description of this particular Estates but rather – in a wider
public compass – to show the concept or Begriff of an Estates Assembly.
That concept, Hegel holds, concerns precisely the educative function that
he wishes to elucidate for the public by means of the essay: an education
M. Lenz, Geschichte der k¨oniglichen Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universit¨at zu Berlin (Halle: Waisenhaus,
–), p. , cited in Pelczynski.
Rudolf Haym, Hegel und seine Zeit. Vorlesungen ¨uber Entstehung und Entwicklung, Wesen und Werth
der Hegel’schen Philosophie (Hildesheim: Olms, [Berlin: Rudolf Gaertner, ]), p. .
See the letter from Fries to L. R¨odiger on January , : “Hegel’s metaphysical mushroom did
not spring up in the gardens of science, anyway, but on the dung-heap of servility. Until his
metaphysics was French, then it became royal W¨urttembergian, and now it is kissing von Kamptz’
whip . . .” (Nicolin, ed., Hegel in Berichten seiner Zeitgenossen, p. ). [Our translation.]
Hegel, Briefe von und an Hegel, ed. Johannes Hoffmeister (Hamburg: Meiner, ), vol. II, p. .
See his approving remark on Napoleon’s complaint about Friedrich’s dissolution of the Assembly.

Introduction
xxiii
both of the government concerning the people’s needs and an education
of the people themselves about what their genuine political needs and
will are.
Seen from this perspective, the review essay gives an interesting window
onto the development of Hegel’s political thought, in that the articulation
of his stance on the shaping of the W¨urttemberg constitution appears to
contribute to the increasingly concrete character of his “ofﬁcial” philosoph-
ical teaching concerning political institutions. As the editors of the Hegel
Archive edition of the Heidelberg writings note, the essay was written
in the fall of , exactly between the publication of the ﬁrst edition of
the Encyclopedia (summer semester ), with its relatively sparse section
on political institutions in the “Objective Spirit” section, and the richer
account of political institutions in the lectures on the philosophy of right
which Hegel began giving in the winter semester –.
One of the most prominent philosophical concerns at issue between the
sparse Encyclopedia account of political philosophy and Hegel’s Philosophy
of Right is the emergence of Hegel’s articulation of the difference between
civil society and the state. Rolf-Peter Horstmann has suggested that it may
have been exactly the (negative) public reaction to Hegel’s review essay
that prompted him to formulate more clearly his position regarding the
relation between civil society and the state.There are in fact a number
of concerns that Hegel appears to be developing simultaneously between
the review essay and the new lectures on the philosophy of right: (a) the
explanation of the Assembly as a “mediating” body (Vermittlung) between
ruler and people;(b) the role of the Assembly for the political education
(Erziehung) of the people;(c) the difﬁculty of “permanence” in a con-
stitution and the importance of the monarch establishing the constitution
from “outside,” as it were (as the ancient ﬁgures Solon, Moses, and Lycur-
gus presented fundamental laws to people from whom they had a certain
For a comparison of the institutional analysis of the “Proceedings” essay with the philosoph-
ical stance Hegel takes in the Heidelberg lectures on the philosophy of right, see Christoph
Jamme, “Die Erziehung der St¨ande durch sich selbst: Hegels Konzeption der neust¨andisch-
b¨urgerlichen Repr¨asentation in Heidelberg /,” in Hegels Rechtsphilosophie im Zusammenhang
der europ¨aischen Verfassungsgeschichte, ed. Hans-Christian Lucas and Otto P¨oggeler (Stuttgart-Bad
Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, ), pp. –.
Rolf-Peter Horstmann, “The Role of Civil Society in Hegel’s Political Philosophy,” in Hegel on
Ethics and Politics, ed. Robert Pippin and Otfried H¨offe (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
), pp. –.
GW vol. XV, Schriften und Entw¨urfe I (1817–1825), p. ; compare Vorlesungen ¨uber Naturrecht und
Staatswissenschaft. Heidelberg 1817/18 mit Nachtr¨agen aus der Vorlesung 1818/19. Nachgeschrieben von
P. Wannenmann, ed. C. Becker et al. (Hamburg: Meiner, ), §§–.
GW vol. XV, pp. , ; cf. Vorlesungen, §.

xxiv
Introduction
distance);and (d) the role of opposition in Parliament (especially in
relation to the English system).
The Estates essay thus opens an intriguing window on to Hegel’s emerg-
ing concrete political philosophy in the years prior to the publication of the
Philosophy of Right. As is well known, Hegel’s articulation of his political
philosophy at Berlin came to be complicated by the repressive measures of
the period of the Carlsbad Decrees shortly after he moved to Berlin. A letter
from Hegel in Berlin back to his Heidelberg colleague Creuzer captures
well how the political tone of things had changed from the somewhat more
optimistic vein of the Estates essay’s praise of what the twenty-ﬁve years
since the French Revolution had wrought:
I am about to be ﬁfty years old, and I have spent thirty of these ﬁfty years in these
ever-unrestful times of hope and fear. I had hoped that for once we might be done
with it. Now I must confess that things with us remain as ever; indeed, in one’s
darker hours it even seems that they are going to get worse.
It is difﬁcult not to look back from this somewhat grayer perspective
when assessing the political contribution of the Estates essay. While the
essay’s re-publication at government expensegave it a far wider inﬂuence
than anything else Hegel ever wrote about contemporary events, it also lent
particular currency to the charges of Hegelian accommodationism (even
though Hegel’s brief on behalf of the king’s constitution clearly had not
been uncritical).Rosenzweig’s account of the new political situation in
W¨urttemberg after , however, notices that both parties which emerged
at that time – both the “liberal party” of ofﬁcials and the educated classes,
as well as the more leftist, so-called B¨urgerfreunde party – recognized a truth
that was central to Hegel’s analysis of the constitutional situation: that the
days of the positive claims of the “old right” were over.
Ibid., p. ; cf. Vorlesungen, §A.
Ibid., p. ; cf. Vorlesungen, §.
Letter of October , (Hegel: The Letters, p. ).
The essay was republished in the W¨urttembergischer Volksfreund (see GW vol. XV.–).
Jamme’s essay stresses three aspects of Hegel’s criticism of the king’s proposal that each link to larger
elements of the emerging Philosophy of Right: the insistence that state ofﬁcials not be left out of
the Assembly, the criticism of the “atomism” of voting rights connected merely to age or property
qualiﬁcations, and the criticism of the tax-approval right demanded by the Estates (see Jamme, “Die
Erziehung der St¨ande durch sich selbst”).
Rosenzweig, Hegel und der Staat, vol. II, pp. –.

Translators’ note
We have used the corrected text of the Jacobi review and the Estates essay
in volume XV of the critical edition of Hegel’s collected works produced
by the Hegel-Kommission of the Rheinisch-Westf¨alischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften and the Hegel-Archiv at the Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum
(Schriften und Entw¨urfe I: 1817–1825, ed. Friedrich Hogemann and
Christoph Jamme).The marginal numbering in our translation refers
to the pagination of this edition. The (few) lettered footnotes in the trans-
lations are Hegel’s own, while numbered footnotes are ours. In the Estates
essay, Hegel cites page numbers of the ofﬁcial Proceedings of the Estates
meetings in parentheses in the body of the main text; we have chosen to
put these references in the numbered footnoting sequence.
In the numbered footnotes, we refer in the majority of cases to standard
English translations of Hegel’s and Jacobi’s works, occasionally modifying
them. As there is currently no complete translation of Jacobi’s major works,
however, we frequently make reference to the standard German edition by
Klaus Hammacher, Walter Jaeschke et al. In the case of Hegel’s works in
German, preferential treatment is given to the critical edition. In the few
instances in which Hegelian texts have yet to appear in this edition, we refer
to the widely used edition revised by Eva Moldenhauer and Klaus Markus
Michel (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, /). While neither of the
two Heidelberg texts presents the sort of technical challenges familiar
to the translators of, say, the Science of Logic or the Phenomenology of
Spirit, Hegel’s more “public” journal style still requires some editorial
decisions for translators. The ﬁrst of the issues concerns the rather long,
unbroken expository style Hegel seems to prefer here: neither text features
(Hamburg: Meiner, ), pp. –. We are grateful to Felix Meiner Verlag for permission to consult
their critical edition in the preparation of our translation. There were a number of mostly slight
corrections to the text of this edition, which are printed in volume XVI, Schriften und Entw¨urfe
II: 1826–1831, ed. Friedrich Hogemann with the assistance of Christoph Jamme (Hamburg: Meiner,
), p. .
xxv

xxvi
Translators’ note
basic divisions or subject headings of any sort, and Hegel tends toward
what are, for contemporary English (or for that matter, German) readers,
rather long sentences and paragraphs. Hegel does break up sentences at
places with semi-colons, and his long paragraphs are likewise punctuated
by occasional end-of-sentence dashes within those paragraphs to suggest
points of transition (the longer paragraphs thus often have two, three, or
more indicated sub-divisions).
In our translation, we have attempted to indicate the most basic subject-
matter shifts in Hegel’s texts as a whole with the insertion of bracketed head-
ings and sub-headings. We have tried where possible to preserve Hegel’s
sentence and paragraph structure, but since the mid-sentence semi-colons
and the mid-paragraph dashes often correspond, respectively, in today’s
usage to periods and paragraph breaks, we have often divided the larger
sentences and paragraphs at just those points. These correlations are, of
course, rough and ready and hence do not allow for mechanical substitu-
tion. In no case, however, have we inserted a paragraph break where there
is no dash or paragraph break in the original.
We do not keep to Hegel’s practice of italicizing text both for emphasis
and to indicate indirect speech. Clear cases of indirect speech are indicated
by quotation marks, and, in keeping with contemporary stylistic sensibility,
we have not always reproduced Hegel’s italicized emphases.
The other main set of translational difﬁculties connected with these
texts concerns Hegel’s use of terms. Though both texts are remarkable
for presenting a far less technical mode of philosophical argument than
many other Hegelian works, the reader will nevertheless encounter frequent
instances of Hegel’s “speculative” terminology. In rendering technical terms
into English, we have adopted the principles formulated by Terry Pinkard
in the preface to his forthcoming translation of The Phenomenology of Spirit,
and for a reasoned account of these principles the reader is directed to that
volume.
Several remarks may nonetheless be in order here. Perhaps the most
distinctive conception in Hegel’s philosophy is what he calls “Geist.” Like
the French ´esprit, German Geist has a number of distinct meanings not
directly associated with the English word “mind,” so that the latter is
often (and especially in Hegelian contexts) a poor equivalent of the Ger-
man term. Frequently, “spirit” would serve as a better translation, as when
Hegel speaks of the “great spirit [großer Geist] of the Cartesian cogito ergo
sum” in his review of Jacobi. There Geist is used in a sense similar to the
French ´esprit de corps or our “spirit of the age.” Geist in the further sense of

Translators’ note
xxvii
intelligence or wit (ingenium) is a virtue that Hegel repeatedly and emphati-
cally attributes to Jacobi; he even goes into some detail in appraising the uses
and general value of what he refers to as “das Geistreiche der Philosophie,” a
kind of philosophical ´esprit he sees as the distinguishing feature of Jacobi’s
philosophical style. That Hegel’s nominalization of the adjective geist-
reich, which in most contexts would appropriately be rendered as “witty,”
“inventive,” or “intelligent,” resists translation is not only due to its reso-
nance with Hegel’s more technical use of the term Geist. For one thing, the
term “wit” has almost entirely lost its association with the Latin ingenium
as the faculty of discovering (inventio) subtle similarities and connections
between disparate things and creating incisive, suggestive, or especially
vivid expressions of thought, while the etymologically more closely related
“ingenuity” has taken on a too narrowly instrumental sense, and “genius”
is both too vague and too emphatically positive to allow of the kind of crit-
ical analysis to which Hegel subjects what is geistreich in philosophy. Like
the German Witz, “wit” nowadays refers almost exclusively to the brilliant
but superﬁcial quality typical of so-called witticisms.Thus, depending on
the context, we have translated Geist variously as either “mind” or “spirit,”
geistlos as “spiritless,” and das Geistreiche as ´esprit. In contexts which made
a different translation desirable, the German word Geist or its cognate is
supplied in a footnote.
The verb “sublate” (and its cognates, e.g., “sublation”) is a term of art
introduced by James Hutchison Stirling in his work The Secret of
Hegel in order to have an equivalent for Hegel’s term aufheben. The term
appears to have been in common use in English-language textbooks of logic
in the nineteenth centuryand is formed from sublatum, the past participle
of the Latin verb tollere. Apart from its semantic aptness, Stirling’s choice of
sublatum as the root from which to form the English term of art may have
been motivated by Hegel’s own observation in a scholium to the section of
Cf. Kant’s remarks on the terms Witz, Geist, ´esprit, and genius in his Anthropology from a Pragmatic
Point of View, trans. and ed. Robert B. Louden (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ),
§§and –.
The Secret of Hegel: Being the Hegelian System in Origin, Principle, Form and Matter (Edinburgh:
Oliver and Boyd, nd ed., . Reprint: Dubuque, Iowa: William C. Brown, ), pp. ff.
Cf. Sir William Hamilton, Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, ed. H. L. Mansel and J. Veitch (Boston:
Gould and Lincoln, ), vol. , Lecture XVII, p. : “If the essential character of the Disjunctive
Syllogism consists in this – that the afﬁrmation or negation, or, what is a better expression, the
position or sublation, of one or other of two contradictory attributes follows from the subsumption
of the opposite; – there is necessarily implied in the disjunctive process, that, when of two opposite
predicates one is posited or afﬁrmed, the other is sublated or denied; and that, when the one is
sublated or denied, the other is posited or afﬁrmed.”

xxviii
Translators’ note
the Logic entitled “Aufheben des Werdens” that the ambiguity of aufheben
bears strong afﬁnity to that of the Latin tollere, although he remarks that
“the double meaning of the Latin tollere (which the Ciceronian wit –
tollendum esse Octavium – has made notorious) is more circumscribed [sc.
than that of the German expression], its afﬁrmative character amounting
only to a lifting-up.”Hence although “sublation” will sound a good deal
stranger to English ears than Hegel’s term Aufhebung does to German ones,
both its long standing as a favored English equivalent and its etymology,
which links it to a term Hegel himself viewed as close in meaning to
Aufhebung, led us to retain it in this translation. It should be noted that
although Hegel consciously plays on the “double meaning” of the term,
he does not always use aufheben in its full technical sense and that it is
sometimes debatable whether he means to include both its usual senses or
whether he intends it to be taken in the sense of negation (abolishment,
annulment, or revocation) only. In cases in which Hegel arguably uses the
term only in this one sense, it has been translated accordingly and the
German term has been supplied in a note.
Hegel explicitly distinguishes his use of the term Begriff (“concept”)
from its more ordinary use.We have departed from the older custom of
translating Begriff as “notion” (which stressed its relation to the scholastic
term notio), adopting “concept” as the translation for Hegel’s technical
term. Due to the speciﬁc technical meaning Hegel gives to this term,
however, it would seem misleading and inappropriate to render Hegel’s
frequent use of begrifﬂos as “non-conceptual.” In analogy to the translation
“spiritless” for geistlos, we render begrifﬂos as “concept-less.”
The speciﬁc political and legal vocabulary employed in the Estates essay
presents difﬁculties of a different kind. Hegel’s review of the Proceedings
draws on a wide variety of often archaic terms for governmental func-
tions and legal and economic relationships which have few or no equiva-
lents in contemporary parliamentary or administrative practice. The famil-
iarly named Schreiberei-Institut is not (as one might otherwise guess) an
authors’ guild but an oppressive layer of local ofﬁcialdom; we have trans-
lated Schreiber consistently as “notary,” indicating a particular class (or
actually caste) of ofﬁcials whose approval was needed for the most diverse
Translated in The Secret of Hegel, p. . Thus Stirling himself was clearly familiar with the passage,
and since he also seems to consider “resolution” a possible equivalent for Aufhebung, he certainly did
settle on “sublation” in the light of other alternatives.
For a concise exposition of Hegel’s speculative notion of the concept and its difference from what are
ordinarily referred to as concepts, see the initial section of the “Subjective Logic” in Hegel’s Science
of Logic.

Translators’ note
xxix
transactions. In some cases we resorted to (usually periphrastic) descriptive
equivalents, translating, for example, the difﬁcult term Virilstimmf¨uhrer as
“non-elected member.” Throughout the text of the Estates essay, footnotes
provide glosses on historical terminology and supply background informa-
tion on the relevant institutions where necessary. For an overview of terms
and their translations, the reader may refer to the Glossary (pp. –).


Heidelberg Writings:
Journal Publications


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume , Leipzig: Gerhard
Fleischer, . pp. + xxvi
The reviewer is pleased that a new volume of Jacobi’s collected works has
7
appeared so soon after the last, and wishes both that noble elder and his
readers all the best for the uninterrupted continuation of their publication.
This third volume contains four writings which, in the words of the preface,
“to a certain extent originated simultaneously and are but divergent parts
of a single whole that recapitulates itself differently in each of them.”
They are: () Jacobi’s Letter to Fichte, ﬁrst published in ; () an essay
which ﬁrst appeared in Reinhold’s Contributions (no. , ), with the
title On Critical Philosophy’s Attempt to Bring Reason to Understanding and
to Transform Philosophy as Such;() On a Prophecy by Lichtenberg,ﬁrst
printed in ; and () the text On Divine Things and their Revelation,
with a foreword written for this new edition. An interesting appendix of
twenty-three letters to Johann M¨uller, Georg Forster, Herder, Kant (among
them one from Kant to Jacobi), Privy Councillor Schlosser, J. G. Jacobi,
and several unnamed recipients concludes the volume.
¨Uber das Unternehmen des Kriticismus, die Vernunft zu Verstande zu bringen und der Philosophie
¨uberhaupt eine neue Ansicht zu geben. Jacobi’s lengthy essay appeared in the periodical Beytr¨age zur
Leichteren ¨Ubersicht des Zustandes der Philosophie beym Anfange des 19. Jahrhunderts [Contributions to
a Simpler Overview of the Situation of Philosophy at the Beginning of the 19th Century], edited by the
philosopher Karl Leonhard Reinhold (–). Jacobi’s title contains a play on the words Vernunft
(reason) and Verstand (understanding). “To bring someone to understanding” (zum Verstand bringen)
means to bring him to his senses.
¨Uber eine Weissagung Lichtenbergs.
Von den g¨ottlichen Dingen und ihrer Offenbarung.
Johann Friedrich M¨uller (–) was a painter and poet. Jacobi and Goethe had made his
acquaintance together in . Georg Forster (–) was a natural historian, ethnologist, and
essayist who accompanied James Cook on his circumnavigation of the globe between and
. He was a founding member of the short-lived Mainz Republic (), and his revolutionary
sympathies took him to Paris in , where he died of pneumonia in . Johann Georg Schlosser
(–) was a prominent intellectual, long-standing member of Jacobi’s circle, and Goethe’s
brother-in-law. He was well known both for his numerous translations of classical Greek works of



Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
[spinoza]
One might have wished that in the order of publication of these collected
works Jacobi’s earlier Letters on the Doctrine of Spinozahad preceded the
treatises contained in the present volume, for these Letters respond to an
historical interest that is older and prior to the forms of philosophy dealt
with by these treatises, namely the metaphysics of Leibniz and Wolff,
which at the time of the Letters was at its last breath. That metaphysics
was a common point of departure for both Jacobi’s philosophy and the
philosophy of Kant which Jacobi was later to oppose. The Letters also offer
a more extensive and reasoned presentation of Jacobi’s views on the vacuity
of claims to scientiﬁc knowledge of the divine. These views are also at the
fore of the present writings, not only as limited to the philosophical systems
8
dealt with there, but in their full generality. Yet despite the spiritedness
and warmth that attend them, they still leave much to be desired by those
who, when it comes to truth, are in the habit of demanding reasons.
The prior publication of the Letters might have been viewed as a sign
of more respect for this habit than was the publication of the dialogue
David Hume on Faithin the second volume in the series. – How Jacobi
confronts the philosophies dealt with in the present volume, an attitude
which this review must convey, will gain in clarity and perspicuity if we
ﬁrst remember how Jacobi immersed his mind in the study of Spinozism
and how he had thereby established the position at which, already fully
matured, he encountered Kant’s philosophy upon its original publication.
In order to clarify that, however, we must ﬁrst recall a few things about the
state of philosophy in those days.
The great spirit of the Cartesian cogito ergo sum had consisted in knowing
that thoughtis the ground of being and in comprehending the various
literature and philosophy and for his outspoken criticism of the Enlightenment. His work Platos
Briefe [Plato’s Letters] () provoked Kant’s critical response in the essay On a Newly Arisen Superior
Tone in Philosophy (). Johann Georg Jacobi (–) was Friedrich Heinrich’s older brother,
a prominent poet in the anacreontic style popular in eighteenth-century Germany, and professor of
beaux-arts in Freiburg.
Jacobi’s ¨Uber die Lehre des Spinoza in Briefen an den Herrn Moses Mendelssohn (Breslau: Gottl. L¨owe,
), with an important second edition in . An English version of the edition with excerpts
from the edition can be found in Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi: The Main Philosophical Writings and
the Novel “Allwill,” trans. George di Giovanni (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, ).
In the following, this text is cited as Jacobi: Main Philosophical Writings.
Geist.
David Hume ¨uber den Glauben, oder Idealismus und Realismus. Ein Gespr¨ach (Breslau: Gottl. L¨owe,
).
The English word “thought” is used to translate two different words in German. On the one hand,
it renders the gerund das Denken (“thinking”). In the present context, on the other hand, the same

[Spinoza]

forms of being only in and through that ground. But French philosophy
had given up that spirit and embarked instead on the opposite pathway of
Lockeanism, seeking to derive thought from the immediate givens of the
world of appearance. To the extent that the need still remained for a universal
ground in this world of appearance, its fundamental essence was declared
to be a conceptless universality, namely an indeterminate nature or rather a
nature onto which a few barren determinations of reﬂection such as total-
ity, forces, composition, and similar forms of externality and mechanism
were superﬁcially tacked. German culture had essentially taken the same
direction. In every quarter, the Enlightenment had eroded the traditions
of venerable doctrine and mores, the passively received and immediately
given content of a world charged through with the divine; it abandoned
and rejected these so-called posits on the grounds that self-consciousness
was not to be found in them or (what comes to the same) because self-
consciousness could not ﬁnd them within itself.What remained was the
caput mortuumof an abstract, empty entity that cannot be comprehended,
i.e., an entity in which thinkingis not present to itself. That which is
being in and for itself had thus been reduced to nothingness, for what self-
consciousness found in itself were ﬁnite purposes and the things related to
such purposes by utility.There were some for whom their religious feeling
was sufﬁcient to counteract this contagion; they attributed the theoretical
results to mistakes in cognitionand sought to support and save the truth,
as it were, by correcting and improving the cognition of it.Jacobi, on the
9
contrary, did not counter with just the certitude of his soul. Rather than
term renders the German word Gedanke. Hegel uses the term Gedanke both in the usual sense and
in a special sense closely related to his technical use of the term Begriff (“concept”).
Hegel’s term das Positive most frequently refers to what has been merely posited, i.e., posited from
a source external to the consciousness of those who accept it as binding and valid. Hegel offers a
critical analysis of the Enlightenment’s struggle against the merely positive in the Phenomenology of
Spirit (trans. Terry Pinkard [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming], §§–).
Todtenkopf (“skull”) is the literal German translation of the alchemical term of art caput mortuum,
which designated the chemical residue that remained after a distillation or sublimation in the process
of which everything of value had been removed from the substance that was left over. Hegel himself
generally uses the Latin term; in fact, this use of a German equivalent is the only instance in all
his published writings. Cf. §of the Encyclopedia, where in a similar vein he characterizes Kant’s
thing-in-itself as a caput mortuum.
Das Denken.
Hegel presents his views on the historical conﬂict between the Enlightenment and the religious
tradition and the ascendance of the category of utility in more detail in the Phenomenology of Spirit,
§§–and .
Here and throughout the text, the English expression “cognition” serves to render the German terms
Erkennen and Erkenntnis.
Hegel may be referring to a stream of thought represented by Christian August Crusius (–,
professor of philosophy and theology in Leipzig) in the middle of the eighteenth century. In his
Entwurf der notwendigen Vernunftwahrheiten (: An Outline of Necessary Truths of Reason) and


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
lingering with the barren remains in which metaphysics was eking out its
wan existence and nourishing its stale hopes, his deeply thorough mind
conceived philosophy in its relation to the sources of knowledge and delved
down to their undiluted purity. Philosophical endeavors may slave away at
the analysis, distinction, and recombination of metaphysical topics, invent-
ing new logical possibilities and refuting others. Yet if their foundation does
not lie in the inﬁnite intuitionand cognition of the one substantial being
that is Spinozism and in whose possession we ﬁnd Jacobi – if that Spinozism
is not the standard by which they measure every further determination –
then the only relation linking the determinations of cognition to truth will
be missing. Spinoza expresses that relation when he says that all things
must be contemplated sub specie aeternitatis. Because the purity of this
intuition was present in Jacobi, he made his appearance in the time of the
metaphysics of the older schoolwith such exceptional superiority, while
others still took the interest of knowledge to lie in a few barren, conceptless
determinations of understanding such as existence, possibility, concept,
and so on. It makes no difference that God was supposed to be the object
and goal of such determinations, for it is those determinations themselves
which form the content of cognition when we seek to understand God by
their means. Outside and apart from such ﬁnite content, the idea of God
itself remains nothing more than a mere representationor sentiment, the
inﬁnite character of which remains external to the cognition. The ﬁnitude
Weg zur Gewißheit und Zuverl¨assigkeit der menschlichen Erkenntnis (: The Path to Certainty and
Reliability of Human Knowledge), Crusius took issue with the logic, metaphysics, and philosophical
theology of Leibniz and Wolff. Hegel could also be thinking here of the Jewish rationalist thinker
Moses Mendelssohn (–), who was intimately involved in the original controversy on Lessing’s
alleged Spinozism. It is noteworthy that Mendelssohn criticized Jacobi for his ﬁdeist conception
of intuition (cf. Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, Werke, vol. I,, ed. Klaus Hammacher and Irmgard-
Maria Piske [Hamburg: Meiner, ], p. ). Hegel brieﬂy discusses Crusius and Mendelssohn
in his Lectures on the History of Philosophy (Werke, ed. Eva Moldenhauer and Karl Markus Michel
[Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, ], vol. XX, pp. ff.).
“Intuition” renders Anschauung. In the few passages which seem to call for a rendering of Anschauung
different from “intuition,” the German word will be indicated in a footnote. In the passage at hand,
Hegel may be referring to Spinoza’s scientia intuitiva and the contemplation of things sub specie
aeternitatis (cf. Baruch de Spinoza, Ethica, part , prop. –, esp. , corollary ).
When Hegel speaks of the “metaphysics of the older school” (vormalige Metaphysik) he is invariably
referring to the methods, concerns, and doctrines of the Leibniz–Wolff school of philosophy that
dominated German thought well into the latter years of the eighteenth century. Cf. Encyclopedia,
§.
Kant gave the German word Vorstellung a technical meaning equivalent to the Latin term reprae-
sentatio (cf. Critique of Pure Reason, ibid., pp. f. = B ). Although in Hegel’s philosophical
psychology the term takes on a highly speciﬁc meaning somewhat different from its meaning in
Kant (cf. Encyclopedia, §§–), he most frequently uses it with pejorative connotations in con-
tradistinction to the properly speculative conception of a category or determination of thought,
speaking of “mere representations” (bloße Vorstellungen).

[Spinoza]

of such content, however, and thus also of the subjective grappling it occa-
sions, is consumed in the one absolute. Spirit only achieves the absolute and
becomes consciousness of reason,however, by recognizing its limitations
as illusory, as mere forms of appearance, and thus consigning them to the
abyss. – Jacobi had achieved this highest intuition not only in the form of
feeling and mere representation, the form at which mere religiosity halts;
he achieved it on the higher path of thought and recognized with Spinoza
that this visionis the ultimate and true result of all thinking, and that
every consistent system of philosophy must in the end lead to Spinozism.
A substantial difference enters in at this point, however, in that the one
absolute substance must be considered merely an initial form of the neces-
sary result and that it is necessary to go beyond this form. The unshakeable
feeling was manifest in Jacobi that in this initial immediacy the truth could
not sufﬁce for spirit, which is not something immediate, and hence that
the truth had not yet been grasped as absolute spirit. The object as taken
by sensuous consciousness is the believed beingof ﬁnite things. As con-
sciousness progresses toward Reason, however, it comes to reject the truth
of immediate sensuous belief. Being, raised to inﬁnity, is the pure abstraction
10
of thinking, and this thinking of pure being is not sensuous intuition but
rather intellectual intuition or the intuition of reason.Since, however, in
its immediacy inﬁnite being is only something abstract, unmoving, and
non-spiritual, we ﬁnd that what is free, i.e., self-determining, is missing
in that abyss into which all determinateness has been cast and destroyed.
Hegel distinguishes between subjective and objective reason (cf. Encyclopedia, §§, and the
introduction to the Science of Logic, GW, vol. XXI, p. ). In the present passage, the phrase
“consciousness of reason” is therefore importantly ambiguous and can be read as referring both to
(subjective) consciousness of (objective) reason and to objective reason’s own realized consciousness
as speculative philosophy.
Anschauung.
“Lessing: . . . There is no other philosophy than the philosophy of Spinoza. I: That might be true.
For the determinist, if he wants to be consistent, must become a fatalist: the rest then follows by
itself” (“Concerning the Doctrine of Spinoza in Letters to Herr Moses Mendelssohn,” in Jacobi:
Main Philosophical Writings, p. ).
Geglaubtes Seyn.
Vernunftanschauung. Jacobi had introduced this term to characterize his own rational intuitionism
in the preface to the dialogue David Hume on Belief in the second volume of his collected writings, a
preface he describes as an introduction to his complete writings (Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, Werke,
ed. Friedrich Roth and Friedrich K¨oppen [Fleischer: Leipzig, ], vol. II, pp. –). There (p. )
Jacobi writes, “This above all must be borne in mind: Just as there is sensible intuition, intuition
by means of the senses, there is also such a thing as rational intuition by means of reason. Both
stand over against each other as proper sources of knowledge and neither one can be derived from
the other . . . For the same reason, no demonstration can be valid against rational intuition or the
intuition of reason, a faculty which enables us to know supersensible objects [jenseitige Gegenst¨ande],
i.e., a faculty which renders certain their existence and truth.” [Our translation.] In the rest of the
text, we translate Vernunftanschauung as “rational intuition.”


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
Immediately and for itself, freedom is personality as the inﬁnite point of
determination in and for itself. The one unalloyed substance, however, or
pure intuition (which is the same as abstract thinking) represents only one
side of freedom, namely the side on which it has only just arrived at the
simple element of universality and left the two ﬁnitudes of being and con-
sciousness behind it, without, however, positing self-determination and
personality within that element. For it is to no avail that in absolute sub-
stance Thought, the ground of freedom and personality, is just as much an
attribute as Being or extension; since substance is the undifferentiated and
undifferentiable unity of both, their fundamental determination remains
immediacy or being. Such being, however, contains no transition from itself
to an understanding or to anything singular. An even more obvious require-
ment would be to demonstrate some transition from the absolute unity
to the divine attributes, for it has merely been assumed that there are such
attributes, just as the existence of a ﬁnite understanding or imagination and
of particular, ﬁnite things was assumed.Their being is constantly being
revoked as something untrue and immersed in the inﬁnity of substance,
yet despite this recognition of their negativity they retain the status of a
given point of departure. Conversely, absolute substance is not understood
as the point of departure for distinctions, particularization, individuation,
or whatever form distinctions may take, be it as attributes and modes,
as being and thought, understanding, imagination or what have you.
And hence everything is merely submerged and perishes in a substance
which remains motionless within itself and out of which nothing ever
resurfaces.
Upon reﬂection, however, it is not hard to discover the internal principle
of separation in substance itself, for we need only reﬂect upon that which is
so to speak in fact contained within substance. For since substance has been
deﬁned as the truth of the particular things that are sublated and extin-
guished in it, absolute negativity has effectively already been posited as its
determination, and absolute negativity is itself the source of freedom.–
Everything depends here on a correct understanding of the status and
signiﬁcance of negativity. If it is taken only to be the determinateness of
Cf. Ethics, part , def. & and prop. , schol., part , prop. , , and , schol.; cf. also Letter to
G. H. Schuller from July , . Spinoza’s assumption of a ﬁnite understanding is evident in the
wording of part i, def. : “By attribute, I mean that which the intellect perceives as constituting the
essence of substance” (Benedict de Spinoza: On the Improvement of the Understanding, The Ethics,
Correspondence, trans. R. H. M. Elwes [New York: Dover, ], p. ).
Cf. Hegel’s exposition of the concept of spirit (Begriff des Geistes) in the Encyclopedia, §, where
the connection between freedom and absolute negativity is spelled out in greater detail.

[Spinoza]

ﬁnite things (omnis determinatio est negatio),then we are already thinking
of it outside of absolute substance and have allowed ﬁnite things to fall
outside of it; our imagination maintains them outside of absolute substance.
Conceived of this way, however, negation fails to be seen as internal to the
11
inﬁnite or internal to substance, which is supposed rather to be the sub-
lated being of ﬁnite things. – Yet the manner in which negation is internal
to substance has in fact thus already been said, and systematic progress in
philosophical reﬂection really consists in nothing other than knowing what
one has already said oneself. Substance, namely, is supposed to be the sub-
lation of the ﬁnite, and that is just to say that it is the negation of negation,
since it is precisely negation which we took to be deﬁnitive of the ﬁnite.
And as the negation of negation, substance is absolute afﬁrmation, and just
as immediately it is freedom and self-determination. – Thus the difference
between determining the absolute as substance and determining it as spirit
boils down to the question whether thinking, having annihilated its ﬁni-
tudes and mediations, negated its negations, and thus comprehended the
one absolute, is conscious of what it has actually achieved in its cognition
of absolute substance, or whether it lacks such consciousness.
In his innermost, Jacobi had made just this transition from absolute
substance to absolute spirit and had proclaimed with an irresistible feeling
of certainty, “God is spirit, the absolute is free and has the nature of a person.” –
In terms of philosophical insight, it was of the utmost signiﬁcance that
Jacobi brought out the moment of immediacy in our knowledge of God
so distinctly and emphatically. God is not a dead god, but a living one;
indeed, he is more than merely a living God, he is spirit and eternal love,
and this only because his being is not abstract being, but an internal
movement of self-differentiation, and because he is cognition of himself
in the person differentiated from himself. His essence is the immediate,
i.e., determinately existing unity,only insofar as the eternal mediation
eternally returns to unity, and this returning is itself that unity, the unity of
life, feeling of self, personhood, and self-knowledge. – Thus Jacobi claimed
that reason, as that which is supernatural and divine in man and which is
aware of God, is intuition, and hence that, since as life and spirit reason is
Although Hegel attributes this principle to Spinoza, it does not occur literally in the cited form in
his writings. (Cf. Spinoza’s letter to Jarig Jellis of June , , in Benedict de Spinoza, p. .) Hegel
presumably models his formulation on Jacobi’s use of the principle in the Briefe ¨uber die Lehre des
Spinoza (edition), p. : “XII. Determinatio est negatio, seu determinatio ad rem juxta suum esse
non pertinet. Therefore particular things, to the extent that they exist only in a certain determined
manner, are non-entia; and that undetermined, inﬁnite being [Wesen] is the only true ens reale, hoc
est, est omne esse, & praeter quod nullum datur esse.” [Our translation.]
Seiende Einheit.


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
essentially mediation, it could only be immediate knowledge by sublating
that mediation. Only an inert, sensuous thing has its immediacy otherwise
than by mediating itself with itself.
However, in Jacobi’s thought the transition from mediation to immedi-
acy has more the character of an external rejection and dismissal of medi-
ation. To this extent, it is reﬂective consciousness itself which, isolated
from the intuition of reason, isolates the mediating movement of cogni-
tion from that intuition. Indeed, he goes so far as to declare the movement
of cognition to be an obstacle to such intuition and ruinous of it. Here
we must distinguish between two acts. First there is ﬁnite cognition itself,
which is concerned exclusively with objects and forms which do not exist
in and for themselves, but are conditioned and grounded by something
12
other than themselves. The very character of such cognition thus consists
in mediation. The second type of cognition is the reﬂection just referred
to, which recognizes both the ﬁrst, subjective mode of cognition itself and
its objects as not absolute. Thus on the one hand this second mode of
cognition is itself mediated, for it essentially refers to the ﬁrst mode of
cognition, having it as its presupposition and object. On the other hand,
though, it is the sublation of that ﬁrst mode of cognition. Therefore, as was
stated above, it is a mediation which is itself the sublation of mediation,
or in other words it is a sublation of mediation only to the extent that it
is itself mediation. As the sublation of mediation, cognition is immediate
cognition. If cognition does not understand its immediacy in this way, it
fails to grasp that this is the only sense in which it is the immediacy of
reason, and not that of a rock. For natural consciousness, knowledge of God
may well appear as merely immediate knowledge, and natural conscious-
ness may see no difference between the immediacy with which it is aware
of spirit and the immediacy of its perception of a rock. But the business of
philosophical knowledge is to recognize in what the activity of natural con-
sciousness truly consists, to recognize that its immediacy is a living, spiritual
immediacy that only arises within a self-sublating process of mediation.
This insight is precisely what natural consciousness lacks, just as, being an
animate, organic entity, it digests without possessing the least knowledge of
physiology.
Apparently it was cognition of God in the form once known as the
proofs of God’s existence which led Jacobi to believe that the idea behind
them was that consciousness could not count as knowledge of God without
ﬁrst having formally worked through the chain of inferences, concepts, and
implications contained in those proofs – which is like telling a man that he
could not digest, walk, see, or hear without ﬁrst having studied anatomy

[Spinoza]

and physiology.A closely related misunderstanding is that the mediating
process of cognition makes knowledge of God and God’s being itself into
something dependent, something whose ground lies in something other
than itself.This apparent disproportion vanishes, however, as soon as we
examine the matter itself. For since God is the result, the mediation in
question immediately reveals itself to be a mediation which sublates itself
in that result. What is last is seen to be that which is ﬁrst; the end is the
purpose; and when we discover it to be that purpose, indeed the absolute
purpose, we recognize the product as the immediate ﬁrst mover.This
progression toward a result is thus at the same time a returning into itself,
a repelling that is in itself its own self-repelling.It is what was described
above as the true nature of spirit, i.e., of the active ﬁnal purpose that creates
13
itself. If spirit were immediate being without effective activity, it would not
be spirit, indeed it would not even be life.And if it were not purpose
and purposive activity, then spirit would not discover in its product that
its activity consists wholly in its own merging with itself, a mediation that
mediates its own determination in immediacy.
Jacobi denies the possibility of proving God’s existence and insists that the very attempt leads to
fatalism and moreover involves the absurdity of making God, the unconditioned, into a conditional
entity (cf. Briefe ¨uber die Lehre des Spinoza, p. and the seventh supplement [Beilage VII],
pp. –; Jacobi: Main Philosophical Writings, pp. –). Hegel’s disagreement with Jacobi
over this question ran deep. In the summer of and again in the fall of , Hegel was busy
preparing a manuscript on the proofs of the existence of God. As Jaeschke notes, the reﬂections in
Hegel’s manuscript revolve around a detailed critique of Jacobi’s position on the idea of a rational
demonstration of God’s existence, while Kant – prominently associated with the philosophical
demise of such attempts – is not even mentioned by name (cf. Walter Jaeschke, Hegel-Handbuch.
Leben-Werk-Wirkung [Stuttgart/Weimar: J. B. Metzler, ], p. ). Hegel’s analogical reference
to physiology and digestion is paralleled in the preface to the ﬁrst edition of the Science of Logic
(GW, vol. XI, p. ) and in §of the Encyclopedia.
Cf. Jacobi, Werke, vol. I,, p. .
This is a compact re-statement of the idea Hegel articulated in the Phenomenology of Spirit that “the
true is the whole” (Phenomenology of Spirit, §).
Hegel’s highly emphatic metaphor of a Gegenstoß gegen sich is nearly impossible to translate, nor can
any literal interpretation be given for it without entering into the complexities of Hegel’s concept of
absolute negativity, the paradoxical nature of which the metaphor forcefully conveys. The metaphor
is prominent in central passages of Hegel’s Science of Logic; cf. esp. “Das Wesen als Reﬂexion in
sich,” the initial chapter of the Doctrine of Essence (GW, vol. XI, pp. , ; cf. also p. ).
The Science of Logic culminates in Hegel’s exposition of what he refers to as the idea (die Idee), which
Hegel associates with the Aristotelian conception of the divine as no¯esis no¯ese¯os (cf. Encyclopedia,
§). The idea itself develops through three stages, the ﬁrst of which Hegel refers to as life.
(The other two are knowledge and the absolute idea, respectively.) Life Hegel characterizes as “the
concept inasfar as it at once distinguishes itself simply in itself from its objectivity and pervades
that objectivity and, being an end in itself, ﬁnds and posits in that objectivity its own means, all
the while remaining immanent within that means as the self-identical purpose realized in it” (GW,
vol. XII, p. ). [Our translation.] The gist of this description is that living beings use their own
bodies as a means to continuing their physical existence, so that in the case of life means and ends
coincide. As Hegel will go on to suggest in the main text, the ultimate signiﬁcance of scientiﬁc and
philosophical inquiry is a conscious form of this same structure.


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
Now since Jacobi dismisses the mediation inherent in cognition and fails
to see how it restitutes itself as the essential moment within the nature of
spirit itself, his consciousness of absolute spirit remains ﬁxated in the form
of immediate, merely substantial knowledge. The sole content of Spinoza’s
simple, fundamental intuition is substantiality. Now if the intuition of
the absolute knows itself to be intellectual, i.e., cognitive intuition, and
if furthermore its object is no longer substance in its motionless rigidity,
but spirit, then it would also be necessary that knowledge dispense with
the leftover form of substantiality, namely the form of immediacy. For it
is precisely life and cognitive movement within itself by which alone
absolute spirit differs from absolute substance, and knowledge of spirit is
itself something spiritual, something intellectual.
The conception of spirit Jacobi ﬁnds in his intuition of reason is the
standard against which he measures the philosophical systems which form
the subject matter of the present volume of essays. Jacobi urges not only
the content, but also the substantial formof his rational intuition against
those philosophies. Kantian and Fichtean philosophy and the philosophy
of natureare the systems he examines, and the basic character of his
treatment should be clear from the foregoing.
The texts themselves are well known to the reading public, but the
passion of the times in which they were ﬁrst published has passed away.
Thus we can be brief in our consideration of their main points, conﬁning
ourselves to the essentials, and we need not worry about stirring up con-
troversy. Neither the publication of this collection nor its close study will
seem superﬂuous simply because some of the philosophies it deals with now
belong to the past, and I regret to hear Jacobi himself speak in that tone
(p. ),saying that it is well known how quickly philosophical systems
have changed in Germany in the past twenty-ﬁve years. For this is usually
the talk of people who seek to justify their contempt of philosophy and
even think themselves quite clever in pointing out that since such systems
contradict each other so blatantly and change so frequently it is plain good
sense to ignore them, especially since the whole point is supposed to be to
ﬁnd everlasting truth, which is hardly to be discovered in so transient a thing
Wissende Bewegung in sich.
“Substantial form” is a term of art referring to the form something has to the extent that it is
understood to be substantial, i.e., neither dependent on nor mediated by anything outside itself
for its determinate existence. Thus substantiality is another way of saying immediacy, and the
“substantial form” of Jacobi’s intuition is the form of immediacy.
The term “philosophy of nature” refers unambiguously to Schelling’s philosophy.
See Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, Werke, vol. III, ed. Walter Jaeschke (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag,
), p. .

[Kant]

as a philosophical system.– What has indeed proven to be transitory are
14
the various endeavors that leave the philosophy out of philosophizing.Yet
even such transitoriness can seem eternal, the ﬂux itself seem perennial. –
Jacobi’s claim that science is incapable of comprehending the divine is not
entirely innocent of having provided ignorance and lack of spirit with a
convenient pillow upon which to rest their conscience and even of hav-
ing given them occasion for arrogance. Similarly, Kantian philosophy ﬁrst
reduced the object to a problematic something and then, in Jacobi’s own
witty phrase (p. ),recompensed it with an otium cum dignitatein its
status as a thing-in-itself.
[kant]
Kantian philosophy is the main subject of the second treatise, whose title
was given above. The other treatises, especially the third, also return to it
frequently. Since it comes ﬁrst, I would like to deal with it and Jacobi’s
polemic against it ﬁrst and brieﬂy explain why the Kantian doctrines were
bound to appear very inadequate when compared with Jacobi’s great con-
viction that the absolute must be conceived as spirit. For the highest thing in
Kant’s philosophy that can be found by theoretical means, i.e., by cognition
of that which is, is in general mere appearance. Upon analysis, the essential
constituents of appearance resolve into three determinations. First, there is
the thing-in-itself which is exhaustively determined as being the conceptless
thing-in-itself just mentioned; secondly, the I of self-consciousness insofar
as it originates connections, remaining, however, all the while conditioned
by a given manifold and producing only ﬁnite connections among ﬁnite
things; and ﬁnally, as the other extreme term corresponding to the thing-in-
itself, the I as pure unity. Insofar as the I consists in that ﬁnite activity, Kant
refers to it as the “understanding,” whereas “reason” is his term for the I
qua pure unity.Thus we ﬁnd the cognition of that which is represented as
Prominent examples are the self-styled skeptic Gottlob Ernst Schulze (Kritik der theoretischen Philoso-
phie, vols. [Hamburg, ], esp. vol. , pp. ff.) and his disciple J. F. E. Kirsten, Hegel’s colleague
in Jena, who propagated Schulze’s skepticism in lectures (Grundz¨uge des neuesten Skepticismus [Jena,
], preface).
Hegel might be thinking here of Karl Leonhard Reinhold: cf. Differenzschrift, GW vol. IV, p. ;
Bouterwek review, GW vol. IV, p. ; Science of Logic, GW vol. XI, p. .
See Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, Werke, vol. II,, ed. Walter Jaeschke and Irmgard-Maria Piske with
the assistance of Catia Goretzki (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag, ), p. .
Literally, “leisure with dignity.” Cf. Cicero, De oratore, I, , .
Hegel elaborates on this (basically Fichtean) identiﬁcation of Kantian reason with the pure I in
Encyclopedia, §.


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
a syllogism,the two extreme terms of which, namely the thing-in-itself and
the pure unity of self-consciousness, are abstract universals. When ﬁxated
as such, these extreme terms thoroughly lack the nature of spirit. Simi-
larly, while the syllogism’s middle term is indeed concrete, it nevertheless
consists merely in the external coming together and bringing together of
ingredients which remain essentially external to one another. This makes
it impossible to discover spirit either insofar as it is certain that it is itself
identical with the true or insofar as it is certain of something other than
itself as the true.When it comes to knowledge of that which ought to be,
i.e., practical knowledge, the same formal unity of self-consciousness that
made up the one extreme term of the previous syllogism serves again as the
principle which is supposed to constitute duty and the Good. Opposed to
15
this principle is the manifold of Nature, which forms the other extreme,
and the concrete, universal unity of these extremes remains forever beyond
human ken. Inner certainty of self and externally given reality are main-
tained as existing in radical separation and independence; consequently,
the unity of that which is and that which ought to be, of existenceand
the concept, can emerge only as a perennial postulate, not as true being.
For the same reason, Kant’s practical philosophy does not have spirit as its
ﬁnal result, and hence (as we explained above) spirit does not serve as the
primary basis and truth of his practical philosophy.
Now, Jacobi did not merely assume his standard as valid and then apply
it to Kant’s philosophy, but treated it rather in accord with true method,
namely dialectically. It was Kant’s own determination of the form in which
the problem of philosophy was supposed to be formulated and solved that
supplied the ammunition. Kant posed the question, “How are synthetic
a priori judgments possible?”,instead of making the necessity of such
judgments the object of philosophy. Kant shared this formulation of the
problem with the metaphysicians of his time, who thought that they had to
begin by demonstrating a concept’s possibility (including for example that
The English word “syllogism” translates the German Schluß. The German expression connotes
ideas of conjoining and merging more immediately than the Greek term syllogismos, connotations
frequently played on by Hegel (cf. Encyclopedia, §). Hegel develops his theory of the syllogism
in self-conscious distance from traditional formal logic, giving it a metaphysical import that is only
“imitated” by the formal syllogism (cf. Science of Logic, GW vol. XII, pp. –, and Encyclopedia,
§§–).
Hegel’s remark is a condensed formulation of a criticism of Kant he formulates in “The Idea of
Cognition” (section , chapter of the Doctrine of the Concept in the Science of Logic).
In Hegelian terminology, “existence” (Dasein) is a technical term within the “doctrine of being”
distinct from the terms Existenz and Wirklichkeit (actuality), which are treated of in the Doctrine of
Essence (GW, vol. XI).
See Critique of Pure Reason, ibid., p. = B .

[Kant]

of the concept of God).Now when taken thus in isolation from actuality
and necessity, possibility is a mere abstraction, and as such it is grounded
in abstract identity, the formal unity of the understanding. Jacobi takes
up this form, and thus holds space ﬁxed as one thing, time as one thing,
consciousness as one thing; he holds the pure synthesis of the latter, the
synthesis in itself, independent of thesis and antithesis, i.e., as a thoroughly
abstract copula is, is, is, without beginning or end; he holds them ﬁxed
in the dry understanding where they occur, and he then rightly questions
how the possibility of tying a knot might be found there. Indeed, if white
is only white, and black only black, then it is impossible that gray or any
other color should come into or continue in existence. – Jacobi rightly
goes on to portray such abstractions as empty entia rationis, as ghosts and
sorcerer’s smoke.
Now Jacobi does not go beyond regarding the vacuity of abstract space,
abstract time, abstract identity, and abstract diversityas his own reﬂection
and as external to those abstractions themselves. This is quite consistent,
insofar as the dialectic is here directed only against Kant’s presentation and
aims merely to demonstrate its abstract nothingness; the objective dialectic
of such abstractions, however, would have consisted in their immanent
vacuity and would have led to the necessity of the concrete, the necessity
of the here merely so-called synthetic a priori. Jacobi would then have
16
demonstrated the untruth of those entia rationis, and his proof of the
impossibility of the concrete, conducted on the assumption of their valid-
ity, would have turned into a proof of the opposite, the necessity of the
concrete. – Now the concrete in its various forms as imagination, judging,
and the apperception of self-consciousness is also treated of in its relation
to those abstractions. Since those abstractions have been ﬁxated as indepen-
dent entities, the result is that both those abstractions and the forms of
the concrete are maintained in their abstract difference and form a ﬁxed
substrate for each other instead of sublating themselves dialectically. Thus
Cf. Leibniz, ¨Uber die universale Synthese und Analyse oder ¨Uber die Kunst des Aufﬁndens und Beurteilens
(Lat. De synthesi et analysi universali seu arte inveniendi et judicandi, in Philosophische Schriften,
vol. IV, ed. Herbert Herring (= Schriften zur Logik und zur philosophischen Grundlegung von
Mathematik und Naturwissenschaft) (Frankfurt am Main: Insel Verlag, ), pp. –. In his
Letters on the Doctrine of Spinoza (Jacobi: Main Philosophical Writings, pp. ff.), Jacobi formulates
similar criticisms of the demand that the possibility of every concept be demonstrated. On the
importance of Jacobi’s Spinoza-interpretation for German Idealist conceptions of modality and the
idea of intellectual intuition, see Dieter Henrich, Der Grund im Bewußtsein. Untersuchungen zu
H¨olderlins Denken in Jena (Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, ), pp. ff.
“Diversity” here renders Verschiedenheit. In the Doctrine of Essence (GW vol. XI, pp. –),
Hegel distinguishes between two forms of difference, Unterschied (difference) and Verschiedenheit
(diversity).


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
reason comes to rest upon the understanding, the understanding upon
the imagination, imagination upon sensibility, and sensibility itself in turn
upon imagination. – It is, however, arguable that Kant’s own conception
of the relation in which those powers stand to each other is more exactly
expressed in terms of conditioning and being conditioned by each other.
More importantly, however, we must not overlook that in his treatment
of the Kantian critique of reason Jacobi fails to call attention to the inﬁnite
credit due to this critique for recognizing that the freedom of spirit is also
the fundamental principle in the theoretical side of reason. This principle –
albeit in an abstract form – is implicit in the idea of an original synthetic
apperception of self-consciousness,the essence of which is to strive for
self-determination in cognition. Though this theoretical freedom is abstract,
yet it is no more abstract than moral freedom, of which Jacobi (p. )says
that it is the faculty of man, “which makes his life his own and makes man
conscious of a power for goodthat surmounts all resistance, but which
is partly conditioned by the presence of such resistance and partly fails to
realize itself fully, remaining only an approximation and striving.” Jacobi
does touch upon theoretical freedom when he says (p. )that an original
synthesis would be an originary act of determination, but this concept is
not to be gotten rid of by noting that an originary act of determination
would be tantamount to creation ex nihilo. This implication or rather this
expression, “creation ex nihilo,” is ill-suited for discrediting the notion of
freedom in the realm of the theoretical, for the same argument would do
away with moral freedom as well.
For the rest, though, the narrative manner of Kant (whose own main
concern was only to establish the basis of universality and necessity in cog-
nition) gives just cause to assume that the materials of his story of thought,
feeling, time and space, imagination, understanding, and ﬁnally reason are
quite as contingent in respect to each other as their coincidence in a mere
story would make them appear. Thus, since they are ﬁxated as abstract
substrates, we are entitled to point out the contradiction involved in bring-
17
ing them together and positing them as a unity. Jacobi’s critique brings out
both the lack of insight into spirit inherent in Kant’s apprehension of the
faculties and the general deﬁciency of an account which neither demon-
strates the necessity of those mental activitiesin their determinateness nor
accounts for their concreteness.These criticisms grow yet more important
Cf. Critique of Pure Reason, ibid., p. = B .
See Jacobi, Werke, vol. III, p. .
Kraft zum Guten.
See Jacobi, Werke, vol. II,, pp. f.
T¨atigkeiten des Geistes.
This is a recurring point in Hegel’s Kant critique. Cf. Lectures on the History of Philosophy, in Werke,
vol. XX, p. , and in a similar vein §of the Encyclopedia and Hegel’s note to that section.

[Kant]

in view of the fact that even Jacobi’s friends claim that it would actually
improve the Critical Philosophy if the study of the cognitive mindwere
made the subject of an anthropology – a mere narration of facts that are
supposed to be found in consciousness, so that knowledge would consist
in nothing more than an analysis of those facts.Thus, as though it were
the only legitimate course, they deliberately give up on comprehending the
activities of the mind in their necessity, since in Kant it is rather the lack
of necessity, the contingency and externality that characterize the determina-
tions of the mind and their relation to each other. Yet it is precisely this
lack which gave Jacobi the basis for his dialectic against the synthesis of
faculties and against the false, ﬁnite relations which arise when we assume
that the activities of the mind are external to each other.
At this point we should brieﬂy mention how Jacobi sees the deﬁciency
of the Kantian theory of practical reason. The ideas of God, freedom, and
immortality are indemonstrable for theoretical reason, which is to say that
its proper objects are unknowable. Theoretical reason aims at that which
is, and knowledge of that which is requires the faculty of understanding,
which in turn requires experience or rather the perception of temporal
and spatial things and materials taken from sensation in order to apply its
categories to them. Such cognitions get no further than appearances. God,
freedom, and immortality, however, do not fall within such experience
and within the world of appearance. Practical reason then postulates these
ideas, which are theoretically indemonstrable. Their subjectivity need not
be postulated, for as ideas they are subjective; their objectivity, rather, is
the aspect which belongs to theoretical reason. To rebuke practical reason
for this one-sidedness is of the utmost importance, especially since it has
become a widespread prejudice that everything of truth is to be found in
“Study of the cognitive mind” serves here to translate Hegel’s phrase “Erkenntniß des erkennenden
Geistes.”
Cf. Gottlob Ernst Schulze (Kritik der theoretischen Philosophie, esp. vol. , pp. ff.); Wilhelm
Traugott Krug, Entwurf eines neuen Organons der Philosophie oder Versuch ¨uber die Prinzipien der
philosophischen Erkenntnis (Meissen und L¨ubben, [reprinted in the series Aetas Kantiana,
Brussels, ], esp. §, pp. –); Friedrich Bouterwek, Idee einer Apodiktik. Ein Beytrag zur
menschlichen Selbstverst¨andigung und zur Entscheidung des Streits ¨uber Metaphysik, kritische Philoso-
phie und Skepticismus (Halle, ). All of these philosophers stressed their afﬁnities with Jacobi’s
thought. K¨oppen, the editor of volumes IV–VI of Jacobi’s works, was also a close personal friend.
Jacob Friedrich Fries (–) deserves special mention. He consistently sided with Jacobi against
Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel throughout his career (cf. for example his polemical pamphlet from
entitled On German Philosophy, Culture and Art: A Vote for Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi against
F. W. J. Schelling). Fries was also the most systematic and productive proponent of treating epis-
temology as a branch of anthropology and empirical psychology. See his Neue Kritik der Vernunft
(), which he later worked out in greater systematic detail in his Neue oder anthropologische Kritik
der Vernunft ().


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
the practical sphere, in the heart’s striving alone, while thought, knowledge,
theoretical reason are held to be dispensable, indeed detrimental and even
dangerous. The awareness that God is, that freedom is, that immortality
is, is something quite different from the postulate that these ideas merely
ought to be. The theoretical side of reason forms the complement to that
“ought,” and the foundation of the practical is only complete when the
conviction is present that the rational is as it ought to be. The mere “ought”
by itself, the subjective concept without objectivity, is devoid of spirit, just
18
as mere being without the concept, without its own “ought” to which it must
conform, is an empty illusion.
[ﬁchte]
We now turn to the Letter to Fichte. The inadequacies of Fichte’s philosophy
that Jacobi demonstrates in this essay, the ﬁrst in the volume, are essentially
the same as those he criticized in Kant’s philosophy. As is well known,
Fichte’s system raised Kant’s to a higher level of abstraction and developed
it with greater logical consistency. It is an attempt to give a systematic
account of the necessary relations among the categories, the determinations
of thought both in the theoretical and in the practical sphere.Whereas
in Kant, the cognition of the so-called faculties of the soul results in
the object dwindling as it were over the course of the Critique to an
unknown and unknowable thing-in-itself, falling outside the bounds of
the understanding and hence of reason, too, in Fichte the pure unity of the
I with itself presents itself immediately and from the very outset, as does
the equally abstract thing-in-itself, the non-I, in its opposition to the I.
The further development of the forms taken on by the determination of the
one by the other is consistently carried out on the basis of their opposition,
such that every new form presents a richer synthesis of the opposition but
nevertheless fails to overcome it. The resulting resolutions thus continue in
their status as relations and ﬁnite forms, whose ultimate resolution is deferred
to the practical realm – where, however, it also fails to be achieved, ending
in a one-sided “ought” and a striving that remains vitiated by a beyond.
As a moment, Fichte’s principle is of inﬁnite importance both in terms of its
content and in terms of its form, which raised Kant’s principle to so high
Cf. Encyclopedia, §.
Cf. the ﬁrst three basic principles in Fichte, Foundations of the Entire Science of Knowledge (The
Science of Knowledge, with the First and Second Introductions, trans. and ed. Peter Heath and John
Lachs [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ], sect. –).
Cf. Fichte, Foundations of the Entire Science of Knowledge, ibid., sect. .

[Fichte]

a level of abstraction. Even so, his principle fails to capture concrete spirit
precisely because Fichte understands it as an absolute principle in spite of
its one-sidedness and refuses to reduce it to a mere moment.
As opposed to the way in which he treated the philosophy of Kant, Jacobi
did not treat Fichte’s philosophy dialectically, even though its scientiﬁc form
would have made it more susceptible to such a treatment. For when Fichte
begins with I = I as the ﬁrst absolute principle of his philosophy, he follows
up immediately with the second, namely that the I is absolutely opposed by
a non-I, and states that in terms of its form as an opposite principle it too
is unconditioned. These two unconditionals are self-identical abstractions
of the same kind as abstract space and abstract time or the abstract “is” in
Kant. Against Fichte’s third principle, which contains the synthesis of those
abstractions, one could urge the same impossibility that was urged against
the Kantian synthesis. Jacobi is here content to oppose his unwavering
intuition of the absolute as concrete, i.e., the spiritual, to the abstraction
19
of an ego which does not cease to be an abstraction even after its synthesis.
This is the basis on which he rejects Fichtean subjectivity as one-sided. On
p. Jacobi refers to the “moral principle of reason” (which is actually the
principle of reason in a form degraded to the level of the understanding,
i.e., to the abstract agreement of the human being with himself) and rightly
characterizes it as dreary, desolate, and void, contrasting it with the faculty
of non-empty ideas, concrete reason, which he refers to by a popular term,
calling it the “heart.”
This is basically the same thing Aristotle criticized about the moral prin-
ciple (. ε. ).For he says that the ﬁrst teacher of morals, Socrates,
made the virtues into knowledge, 	
. Goodness and beauty are the
practical idea only insofar as they are universals. But that is impossible, he
added, for all knowledge is bound up with a reason (), and reasons
belong to the cognitive side of the mind; and so it befalls Socrates that
he negatesthe a-logical side of the soul, which consists in the passion
and the character (	  ).– In the realm of the practical, uni-
versals articulate only what ought to be, and Aristotle (like Jacobi) ﬁnds
this insufﬁcient to account for the manner of the existence of the universal
and the possibility of such existence. Aristotle’s passion and character mean
something far more deﬁnite than the mere heart, however. It has always
been deemed the work of the wisest men not only to be familiar with the
universal as such, i.e., the abstract laws, but also to have insight into the
See Jacobi, Werke, vol. II,, p. .
Magna Moralia, a –.
Aufheben.
Magna Moralia, a .


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
unconscious side, that is, the passions, habits, and customs, and to discover
ways to regulate this side. It is by way of such regulation that the abstract
side comes to have a natural reality among a particular people, for it is in
the form of custom that the law has its existing validityfor the individ-
ual. In this way the law is given both as the individual’s own drive and
in respect to as yet undetermined, undirected passions. The morality of a
more highly cultivated character requires an even more universal cognition:
not merely awareness of what ought to be in the form of a particular people,
but knowledge of it in the form of being, in the form of what appears as
nature, world, and history. Similarly, Kant’s formulation of the practical
principle was shown above to be one-sided to the extent that it abstracts
from the theoretical moment and thus remains subjective.
It may seem as though Aristotle’s censure is directed at precisely the
opposite and that he intends to criticize Socrates for making virtue into
a kind of knowledge, i.e., for making the moral principle into something
theoretical. In the ﬁrst place, however, Aristotle does not criticize attempts
to grasp and formulate what is universal in morals, i.e., the good. On
the contrary, later in the work he ﬁnds the contemplation of the good
to be necessary, though he distinguishes such contemplation from the
investigation of virtue. Jacobi differs from this point of view in that he
rejects this form of the good and any theory of duties, referring us instead
to the heart. – Now, the immanent purpose of self-consciousness is the
20
good, and the being of the good is a being in and for itself. To this extent it
is something theoretical. But it becomes one-sided when it is ﬁxated in the
form of universality in isolation from the concrete idea. The content of the
good, on the other hand, is that which ought to be, and thus it is posited as
subjective purpose. The other side of this is reality, the properly theoretical
moment, and we ﬁnd it as something non-rational, as external, corporeal
nature and equally as inner nature, feelings, passions, habits, customs.
Knowledge of this nature preserves its form of non-rationality to the extent
that it lacks the concept of how this nature ought to be and does not
recognize absolute purpose within nature, i.e., does not recognize nature
as the mere realization and manifestation of that purpose. In the same way,
the good remains without spirit and fails to rise above the standpoint of
existence(namely mere striving) as long as it is not complemented by a
view of reality.
Seiende G¨ultigkeit.
“Existence” here renders the term Dasein. In the ﬁrst volume of the Science of Logic, Hegel situates
Fichtean “striving” within his treatment of Dasein and sees it as a form of “bad inﬁnity.” See GW,
vol. XXI, pp. –and –.

[Fichte]

There is, however, a further sense in which Jacobi contrasts the heart
with the good-in-itself and the true-in-itself. He says (p. )that he is
not acquainted with it and has but a vague intimation of what it could
be. He expresses his indignation when someone tries to force upon him
a will that wills nothing, this empty husk of self-sufﬁciencyand freedom
in a sphere of absolute indeterminacy, and to convince him that that is the
good-in-itself. In the ﬁne passage following the one just cited, Jacobi ﬁnds
even more solemn words:
Yea, I am the atheist and the Godless one, who, against the will that wills nothing,
will tell lies, just as Desdemona did when she lay dying; the one that will lie and
defraud, just as Pylades did when he disguised himself for Orestes; will murder,
as Timoleon did; or break law and oath, like Epaminondas, or John de Witt;
commit suicide like Otho, perpetrate sacrilege like David – yea, I would pluck
ears of wheat on the Sabbath just because I have hunger, and the law is made for
man, not the man for the law . . . I know, with the most sacred certainty that I have
in me, that the privilegium aggratiandi for such crimes against the pure letter of
the absolutely universal law of reason is man’s true right of majesty, the seal of his
worth, of his divine nature.
The absoluteness of which self-consciousness is aware within in itself
cannot be expressed more warmly or nobly than in those words. Yet why
do the majesty, dignity, and divinity of self-consciousness appear here as
opposed to reason? Is it not otherwise Jacobi’s frequently stated and express
opinion that reason is the supernatural, the divine in man, and that it is
God’s revelation? – Here, however, what is divine is opposed merely to
the law of reason, the letter of the law, and, in the examples cited, to the
laws with determinate content which raise that determinate content to the
status of something absolute – determinate laws which absolutely prohibit
See Jacobi, Werke, vol. II,, p. .
Selbst¨andigkeit.
Hegel quotes here directly a (slightly abbreviated) version of Jacobi’s famous claim in his Letter
to Fichte (Werke, vol. III, p. ). We have used here (in correspondingly abbreviated and slightly
modiﬁed form) the translation of this passage by di Giovanni in Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi: The Main
Philosophical Writings and the Novel “Allwill,” p. . The allusions are to Shakespeare, Othello, act
, scene , where Desdemona lies with her dying breath to divert suspicion from her murderer,
Othello; Aeschylus, Libation Bearers, in which Pylades disguises himself to aid Orestes in his
matricidal revenge (but see also Goethe’s Iphigenie, act , lines –). Timoleon’s fratricide of his
tyrannical brother is recounted in Plutarch’s Lives (trans. Dryden [New York: Modern Library], pp.
–), as is Epaminondas’ public censure for having retained command of an army beyond his
term (cf. Jacobi, Woldemar, in Werke, vol. V, ed. J. F. K¨oppen and C. J. F. Roth [Leipzig: Gerhard
Fleischer, ], pp. –) and Otho’s suicide (Lives, p. ); Johan de Witt was a Dutch political
leader who faced down opposition from the Orangeist party. Samuel I, :, recounts how David
eats the consecrated bread in the temple, an episode referred to in the Gospels of Matthew (:f.),
Mark (:f.), and Luke (:f.), all of which recount how Christ’s disciples plucked corn on the
Sabbath. Jacobi’s words “The law is made for man, not man for the law” echo Christ’s words in
Mark :.


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
lying, deceit, murder, perjury, and transgression, suicide, sacrilege, and
21
the breaking of the Sabbath. I shall do such, says Jacobi, justiﬁed by the
majesty inherent in humankind. – Does he not here give expression to an
absolute will that wills nothing, i.e., no determinate law, no determinate uni-
versal – self-sufﬁciency and freedom in a sphere of absolute indeterminacy?
The actions of Desdemona, Pylades, Timoleon etc. are externally concrete
realities, but their interior is the will, the internally concrete which only
achieves this sovereignty and majesty by virtue of the inﬁnite powerof
abstracting from all that is determinate. That will becomes self-sufﬁciency
and freedom only to the extent that it recognizes itself as the absolutely
indeterminate, the universal, the good-in-itself, and thus constitutes itself
as absolute indeterminacy, though at the same time and for that very reason
it is determined only by itself and is concrete action. – Furthermore, as
important as it is for the will to be recognized as such omnipotent, purely
universal negativity in relation to the determinate, it is equally important
to recognize and acknowledge the will in its particularization, i.e., rights,
duties, and laws. They make up the content of the ethical or moral sphere.
Though Jacobi merely appeals to the indeterminate side of the majesty
of personhood and speaks of it merely on the basis of the certainty he
ﬁnds within himself, to a certain extent that appeal has the same basis
and results in a dialectic which brings to consciousness the limitations of
determinate rights, duties, and moral or religious commandments. At the
same time, however, it is equally important not to leave the recognition of
these limitations to the heart alone. As we remarked before, Jacobi’s appeal
is not directed against the good-in-itself, i.e., not against the will as it is
after having sublated all particularity in the pure self-consciousness of its
essentiality. And if Jacobi’s appeal is directed against determinate insights
into the ﬁnitude of determinate laws, rights, and duties, then we hardly
need spell out where that would lead, just as we need not justify any deter-
minate insight of the kind, since it is an insight into something that is itself
determinate, e.g., a right, a duty, or a law.
Neither, however, can the appeal be directed against these determinations
themselves. For even if the dialectic manifests their limitations and hence
their conditioned nature and ﬁnitude, thus recognizing their subordination
to something higher, we must nevertheless acknowledge the sphere within
which they possess positive validity. Philosophy must both demonstrate
the necessity and validity of ethical determinations and uncover the higher
ground upon which they are founded and which for that very reason has
power and majesty over them. – Indeed, one might even desire to make
Kraft.

[Schelling’s philosophy of nature]

the consciousness of such majesty the locus of science or the inner sanctum
22
of religion and thus exclude it from popular treatments in which appeals
to emotion and the inner certainty of individual subjects are permitted –
especially when one considers how easily romanticism makes inroads into
ethical life, how much more inclined people are to be generous than to be
lawful, to act nobly rather than morally, and that in permitting themselves to
act against the letter of the law they more often than not absolve themselves
from the law itself rather than just from its letter. Besides, the actions that
appeal to divine majesty in absolving themselves from the law and which
Jacobi cites as positive examples are themselves conditioned – conditioned
by a particular character and temperament and above all by situation and
circumstances. – And what circumstances those are! Embroilment in crass
misfortunes, rare and extraordinary distress into which individuals ﬁnd
themselves plunged. Freedom would be in a sorry state if it could only
prove its majesty and achieve reality in extraordinary cases of dreadful
conﬂict and in extraordinary individuals. The ancients, by contrast, saw
the highest form of ethical life in the life of a well-ordered state. – Of such
a life it could well be said that there man was indeed made for the sake
of the law and not the law for the sake of man. The well-known adage to
the opposite effect, quoted above, contains a lofty truth when it refers to
positive, i.e., merely statutory, law. But taking the moral law universally,
it is truer to say that man was made for its sake, for if one goes so far
as to separate man and law and oppose them to each other, then there is
nothing left over for man except his bare particularity, sensuous purposes of
desire, and these cannot be considered to be more than means in relation to
the law.
[schelling’s philosophy of nature. remarks on jacobi’s
philosophical style]
We turn now to the treatise On Divine Things. Its original publication is
without doubt still sufﬁciently present in public memory that it would be
superﬂuous to spend much time on it here.– The ﬁrst part is concerned
to show that positivity in religion becomes one-sided when it remains a
On Divine Things appeared in , occasioned in large part by the explicit contradiction of Jacobi’s
Spinoza interpretation in Schelling’s Philosophical Investigations into the Essence of Human Freedom
and Matters Connected Therewith (). The ensuing controversy and the exchanges that led up to
it are documented in Walter Jaeschke, ed., Der Streit um die g¨ottlichen Dinge (1799–1812) (Hamburg:
Meiner, ). For Jacobi’s contributions, see Jacobi, Werke, vol. III. Jaeschke also supplies useful
background information on personal constellations between Hegel, Schelling, and Jacobi that might
account for why this section of the review is so brief and relatively circumspect in its formulations
(see his Hegel-Handbuch, pp. f.).


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
mere external attitude, thus representing the relation of the human being
in a way that fails to capture it as a relation of spirit. In a ﬁne passage,
Jacobi insists on the necessity of the subjective moment, underscoring (as
he expresses it on p. )that sight does not arise from the things seen,
nor hearingfrom that which is heard, nor the self from the other, just as
on the other hand sight, taken by itself, sees nothing, hearing hears nothing,
and the self, ﬁnally, does not become aware of itself by itself, but that we
must learn of our existence from an other – and that in humans the spirit
alone is evidence of God.
The other part of the treatise concerns the philosophy of nature. The
basic idea of this philosophy is distinct from the abstractions and one-
23
sidedness that form the basis of the systems considered so far, for it consists
in the concrete, in spirit itself. Thus in this case it is no longer a question
of contrasting such abstractions with the intuition of spirit or of demon-
strating a contradiction – a task easily achieved, since contradiction lies
in the nature of the concrete. It would be a vain and fruitless labor to try
to untangle the misapprehensions that occurred in the controversy. I will
limit myself to two remarks. First, it is obvious from the philosophy of
nature’s own repeated attempts to ﬁnd a proper scientiﬁc form that even
its proponents are still not satisﬁed. None of the series of systematic expo-
sitions completely exhausts its content, for each one of them has broken
off unﬁnished at some more or less advanced point. Both these circum-
stances expose to the polemicist weak points for an advantageous attack.
As long as the scientiﬁc form has not gained a determinate and secure
method, the relation of nature to spirit will retain an aspect of immediacy
exposing it to well-founded dialectical attack. Furthermore, only a com-
pleted execution will be able to transﬁgure that relation into its truth,
stripping away all the imperfect relations in which it appears before its
completion.
Secondly, however, Jacobi’s dialectic depends less on the content of his
position than on the persistent form in which he asserts that position. It is
this form that I will seek to describe in more detail. Its distinctive character
lies in its opposition to conceptual development, proof, and methodical
thought. Presented in a manner bare of these forms of cognition by which
we show an idea to be necessary, Jacobi’s ideas have the value of mere
assurances only: emotion, intimation, immediacy of consciousness, intellectual
See Jacobi, Werke, vol. III, p. .
Jacobi employs here not the more usual word h¨oren (to hear), but the term vernehmen, which forms
the root of Vernunft (reason).

[Schelling’s philosophy of nature]

intuition, belief,the irresistible certainty of his ideas are offered as the
basis of their truth. What rescues this offering of assurances and the mere
appeal to such foundations from inanity is Jacobi’s noble spirit, the deep
soul and the broad cultivation of this admirable and loving individual. In
these surroundings, his ideas emerge with feeling, often with deep clarity
of late, and always with ´esprit.
Esprit is a kind of surrogate for methodically cultivated thought and for
the reason progressing in it. Far superior to the understanding, the soul
of Jacobi’s ´esprit is the idea, for it grasps the antithesis in which the idea
lies. But since ´esprit brings to consciousness neither the abstract thought
of the idea nor the dialectical transition in concepts, it has as its material
only concrete representations and thoughts of the form of understanding,
and is a struggle to make that which is higher reﬂect in that material. This
24
seeming appearance of the higher in the element of understanding and in
representations as has been forcibly effected by the mind in such a material
is melded with the gentle charm that makes twilight so seductive to us.
Thus in all the writings collected here we encounter a wealth of ingenious
expressions and images in which Jacobi’s profundity emerges in its clarity
and naivet´e – often quite simple juxtapositions that intimate a richness of
meaning, individual passages that in themselves are universally signiﬁcant
aphorisms. The merit of such sudden inspirations and suggestive conceits is
not only undeniable; we may safely abandon ourselves to their enjoyment,
since their sense and imagery are there to stimulate thought and what is
spiritual. Nor must we let Jacobi’s occasional exaggerations of his insights
and their consequences spoil our enjoyment of them, for he is only striving
for clarity and it is his right to carry himself to such extremes; for the form
and manner of his utterances are only a means, and their seeming violence
is itself just one of those means.
Jacobi’s style is only distracting when it comes to speculative matters
and then especially when Jacobi uses it to polemical ends. For though
the speculative is the inner, hidden, motivating force behind philosoph-
ical ´esprit, the speculative as such reveals itself fully only in the form of
the concept. If the glow of the idea is what makes the twilight of ´esprit
German Glauben has two meanings, “belief” and “(religious) faith,” and Jacobi plays on both. He
also uses the term in a more technical sense, namely that of an immediate certainty that is in principle
not susceptible of proof. All these meanings are in play at the locus classicus for Jacobi’s understanding
of the term in Werke, vol. I,, p. . Cf. David Hume ¨uber den Glauben, passim.
In the following, ´esprit and phrases containing it always translate either the adjective geistreich or its
substantive form, das Geistreiche. Where, for stylistic or more narrowly linguistic reasons, a more
viable term or phrase has been substituted for ´esprit, the German is included in a note. On the
connotations of the term geistreich, see the note on translation prefacing this volume.


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
so sweet, it forfeits this merit when the light of reason itself shines forth,
leaving only darkness to distinguish twilight from it. Though elsewhere
we readily permit Jacobi his disjointedness, leaps, bold expressions, intel-
lectual acuity, and his exaggerations and persistence, his use of sensu-
ous images, and appeals to emotion and common sense, here they are
inappropriate. – It is plain from their outward form that the treatises
contained in this volume, too, were prompted less by methodical and
doctrinal concerns than by chance occasions; in the individual forewords,
Jacobi explains how they came to have that form, telling what prompted
him in each case to write them, how his work on them was often inter-
rupted, and how his original intention changed over the course of time
and the progress of the work. Thus, he himself conﬁrms their character as
contingent outpourings or rather as an intermediate genre more akin to
the epistle than to the treatise.
The peculiar thing about Jacobi, though, is that the contingency of
the form and the predominance of ´esprit are not merely the natural and
unselfconscious character of his spirit, but that he makes the positive
and polemical claim that speculative knowledge, conceptual cognition
25
is impossible – nay, worse than impossible, for we ﬁnd him saying for
example that a God that could be known demonstratively would not be God,
that man is as unfathomable to himself as God’s essence is, since otherwise
man would have to possess a superdivine faculty and would have been able
to invent God, and so on. It is hardly deniable that Jacobi’s and Kant’s
common achievement was to have put an end to the metaphysics of the
older school and thus to have established the necessity of a complete revi-
sion of logic. Jacobi thus initiated a new era in German philosophy and
(since outside of Germany philosophy has degenerated to the point of
extinction) in the history of philosophy as a whole. However, his contribu-
tion to knowledge goes no further than that, for whereas Kant cemented
his negative result in opposition to the ﬁnite forms of knowledge, Jacobi
cemented it against knowledge in and for itself. He abstained from taking
the further step of replacing the understanding by reason and spirit as the
soul of cognition, and having cognition born again in reason and spirit and
baptized in the spirit after having before been baptized in the water of the
understanding.– Jacobi’s assurances on the matter can only be countered
Here there is a difﬁcult-to-translate play on the German terms scheinen and leuchten. When Hegel
says that the idea “scheint” in philosophical ´esprit, he is playing on the double meaning of Schein as
illumination and illusion or (mere) appearance. Leuchten is synonymous with the ﬁrst meaning of
scheinen but carries none of its potentially negative secondary meanings.
begreifendes Erkennen.
Cf. Matthew :.

[Schelling’s philosophy of nature]

by opposite assurances, his authorities by other authorities such as the
authority of Christianity, for which knowing God is the highest goal, or
Delphic Apollo’s injunction to self-knowledge, i.e., knowledge of the abso-
lute nature of self-consciousness.
The crucial point in the matter was indicated above, but to argue against
´esprit polemically and dialectically would be clumsy and inappropriate. In
one respect, ´esprit is already on its side given to misunderstanding. Since
the character of contingency is inseparable from the form of ´esprit, it is
free to seize upon any given aspect of a philosophical system and urge some
point of view or other against it. For example, Jacobi’s dialectical criticism
is admittedly justiﬁed when directed against the barren abstractions that
compete with the idea of the original-synthetic within Kant’s system, for
that idea is the element in Kant’s philosophy that is of a properly spiritual
nature, despite being bound up with those abstractions in a thoroughly
non-spiritual fashion. However, Jacobi might as easily have mobilized this
very idea of the original-synthetic against those abstractions. Had he done
so, he could have demonstrated the untruth of abstraction by insisting on
the synthetic, or even better, he could have derived the truth of the latter
from the untruth of the former, instead of showing how ill-founded the
26
synthetic is by harping on the abstractions.
Since, however, ´esprit knows its apprehension and possession of the true
only as an immediate consciousness, and therefore dogmatically excludes
the concept, it inevitably fails to recognize itself and its own intuition
either in form or content when they are enclosed in expressions and shapes
different from its own, even when they contain the very same content and
material results and differ only by having thinking and the concept as their
soul. For example, it is not hard to discover something higher than mere
rigid being and non-spiritual necessity even in Spinoza’s ﬁrst deﬁnitions, in
the very notion of a causa sui and in its deﬁnition as that whose nature can
only be conceived as existing, or in the deﬁnition of substance as that which
exists in itself and can be conceived through itself, i.e., whose concept does
not require the concept of any other thing.For these deﬁnitions contain
the pure concept of freedom, of thinking as it is in its being-for-itself, of
spirit, just as much as the concept of the subject-object contains them.
Of course, one must not think of the causa sui as having originated in
mechanical fashion, as Jacobi understands it on p. of the Spinoza
Letters, where he says that, in order to save the principle “Everything has
a cause,” Spinoza superﬁcially sheered off external causes and effects from
Spinoza, Ethics, part , deﬁnitions and .
See Jacobi, Werke, vol. I,, p. .


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
God and made God himself into his own cause and his own effect merely
in order to be able to subsume him under that principle. In that case, the
concept of a causa sui would in effect be nothing but a superﬁcial dressing
and not a thought in and for itself.
Speaking of the notion of cause, we may mention in passing that, con-
sidering Jacobi’s aversion to concepts and conceptual determinations, it
might seem inconsistent of him to attach so much importance to the claim
that God must not be thought of as the ground of the world, but rather as
its cause. In popular contexts or as a temporary stop-gap in philosophical
ones, it may be deemed legitimate to call on such relations as determi-
nations of God’s nature or of his relation to the world; perhaps the one
concept may even have a slight advantage over the other in certain respects.
Both, however, are mere determinations of the understanding, ﬁnite relations
(cf. p. )and thus incapable of expressing the concept of spirit. In this
respect, causa sui is the concept that is richer in spirit,since it expresses
both the causal relation and the self-repelling within it, as well as the sub-
lation of its ﬁnitude. The point is not that it does not exist at all, but that
it is at the same time this movement of sublating itself. Similarly, when
God is thought of as a self-determining ground, it is essential that he be
27
thought of as eternally sublating that relation.
Determinations such as these and especially the more obscure determi-
nations expressed in mere prepositions like outside myself, over or above
myself, etc., are ill-suited to preventing misunderstandings; their effect has
rather been to occasion and multiply them. For the otherwise predomi-
nant idea of spirit is repugnant to the mere understanding expressed in
those determinations (and which, moreover, the prepositions express very
imperfectly). However, when the emphasis is placed on them, as though
they truly expressed the intended opposition, that is enough to justify
criticism, the more so as other passages necessarily contradict the one side
of the opposition. Often the very side that is supposed to be afﬁrmed
is itself bound up with and suggests the side that corrects and sublates
it. Thus Jacobi claims throughout that it is the supernatural within man
which reveals God (p. ),the supreme being within him, and that this
bears witness to a supreme being without him; it is the spirit within him
which alone bears witness to God (p. ).This majesty within man is
also referred to as man’s divine nature, as cited above. – Now this is as
much as to say that God is not outside me, for what could that divinity
See Jacobi, Werke, vol. III, p. .
Geistreicher.
See Jacobi, Werke, vol. III, p. .
Ibid., p. .

[Schelling’s philosophy of nature]

within me be if it were God-forsaken? It would not even amount to “das
Gott,”as Jacobi suggestivelyrefers to the unconscious god of nature,
nor could it be something evil, since it supposed to be God’s holy witness.
Nor again will the main thesis of the Letter to Fichte appear consistent
with the idea of spirit as an inward evidence of God’s existence, for there
(p. )Jacobi expresses himself thus: “Either God exists, and is outside of
me, a living being with an enduring existence,or I am God. There is no third
alternative.” This strict dichotomy clearly contradicts everything else Jacobi
says, above all what he says about Christianity in a beautiful image that
expresses the manifest tendency of the treatise Of Divine Things, namely
“to demonstrate in every possible way that the religiously minded pure
idealist and the religiously minded pure materialist are but the two cups of
the oyster-shell that hold the pearl of Christianity.” Jacobi’s Either-Or and
his tertium non datur assume the validity of the principium exclusi tertii. Yet
this is a principle of one-sided understanding belonging to traditional logic,
which in this highest principle, as well as in all other regards, constituted
the epistemological law of the old metaphysics – a law of thought whose
explicit rejection is one of Jacobi’s main ideas and, as we’ve said, one of his
main contributions.
Jacobi’s spirit and basic intuition are so remote from such determinations
of the barren understanding that his use of them to determine the nature
28
of God would inevitably provoke misunderstandings if we were to take
them more seriously than is consonant with the depth of Jacobi’s mind
and the many other ingenious expressions we have of it. – In the general
preface to the volume and in the foreword to the treatise Of Divine Things,
Jacobi goes into some of the misunderstandings that have befallen him,
for instance concerning his Christianity. Throughout these philosophical
proceedings we encounter many remarks on personality. In his Letter to
Fichte, for example, Jacobi says (p. )that he does not hold him to be
an atheist or a godless man personally, although he nevertheless sees no way
around qualifying his teaching as atheistic, just like that of Spinoza. He
testiﬁes to the latter’s character in a similar vein and cites the ﬁne passage
where he calls out to him thus: “May you be blessed, O great, nay holy
Benedictus! No matter how you philosophized on the nature of the supreme
Untranslatable play on words. The grammatical gender of the German substantive Gott is masculine;
hence the grammatically correct deﬁnite article (in the nominative case) is “der.” By employing the
neuter deﬁnite article “das,” Jacobi suggests that the Spinozist “god of nature” (deus sive natura –
cf. Spinoza, Ethics, part , preface) is an inanimate god, which he implicitly contrasts with the
“living God” of Christianity and of his own philosophical theology.
Geistreich.
See Jacobi, Werke, vol. II,, p. .
f¨ur sich bestehendes Wesen.
Sinn.
See Jacobi, Werke, vol. II,, p. .


Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi’s Works, Volume III
being and erred in words, his truth was in your soul and his love was
your life.”This deeply felt and sincere homage is paid to a noble, much
maligned shade. Public statements on the personal convictions and religion
of a contemporary individual, on the other hand, are a different matter,
and it is strange that Jacobi should issue them. Given Jacobi’s manner of
expressing his opinions about the highest ideas, it is not surprising that he
should slip from discussion of ideas to the person whose ideas they are.
And thus I too, without further vain attempt to prevent misunderstanding,
will conclude this review with the expression of a feeling that most readers
of Jacobi’s writings will share, the feeling of having, through the study of
these writings, conversed with a loving and noble spirit and to have been
stimulated variously, deeply, instructively, and suggestively.
[Footnote in the original:]Here of course is the place to mention the
welcome addition of twenty-three letters that present Jacobi at his most
distinctive as a loving, thoughtful, and serene personality. They will hardly
require further recommendation to our readers. I shall merely quote a few
things as a sample of what Jacobi has to say about an especially notable
friend of his, Hamann, of whom we catch an interesting glimpse in Jacobi’s
letters and whose writings we may perhaps hope to see collected by Jacobi.
The enjoyment which I take in him is indescribable, just as the peculiar individual
impression that extraordinary people make on us always consists precisely in what
is indescribable or inexpressible about them. The degree to which he unites almost
all the extremes is amazing. That is why, even as a youth, he had rejected the
principle of contradiction (and thus all the more so the principium exclusi tertii
29
mentioned above [Hegel’s interpolation]) as well as that of sufﬁcient reason, and
never subscribed to any principle but that of the coincidentia oppositorum. I have
yet to discover the coincidentia (Jacobi understands it here not as an empty abyss,
as formlessness, chaos, radical indeterminacy, and nothingness, but rather as the
highest form of the life of the spirit [Hegel’s interpolation]), the formula that
would resolve some of his contradictions, but each day sheds new light on the
matter, and in the meantime I continuously graze on the freedom of his spirit
which produces the most delicious harmony between us. He is as inclined as I
am to give free rein to his fancy and to pursue the inspiration of the moment.
Buchholz said of him jokingly that he was a perfect indifferentist, and I have
retained the epithet. He takes the same keen pleasure in diverse and heterogeneous
things, whatever displays some special beauty, truth, or integrity, whatever has
Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, Sendschreiben an Fichte, in: Walter Jaeschke, ed., Transzendental philoso-
phie und Spekulation. Der Streit um die Gestalt einer ersten Philosophie (1799–1807), vol. II (Hamburg:
Meiner, ), p. .
Hegel’s quotation signiﬁcantly abbreviates this passage taken from a letter to Jacobi’s older brother,
Johann Georg, written on September , , from which an excerpt is included in the volume
Hegel reviewed (pp. –).

[Schelling’s philosophy of nature]

some life of its own or betrays an inner richness and virtuosity: omnia divina, et
humana omnia. He ﬁnds Lavater’s thirst for miracles distasteful, and it makes him
suspicious of the man’s devoutness, though he loves and honors him with all his
heart.
Then may we not feel certain that Jacobi, portraying Hamann’s spirit
as he does and ﬁnding himself in harmony with it, must also ﬁnd himself
in harmony with a form of thought that consists only in a consciousness
of coincidence and a knowledge of the ideas of personhood, freedom, and
God, and not in the category of inconceivable mysteries and miracles?

Proceedings of the Estates Assembly of the
Kingdom of W¨urttemberg, 1815–1816
(33 sections)
[introduction]
The task that was begun two and a half years ago – of introducing a
30
representative constitution and thereby bringing to completion a German
monarchy that has arisen in our time– awakened from its beginning
such a universal interest in the German public that nothing could be more
agreeable to it than the publication of the Proceedings of the W¨urttemberg
Estates Assembly. In place of the hopes which accompanied the beginning
and the progress of this effort, there must appear at the end a result and
the judgment of it. The thirty-three volumes with which this review is
concerned of course do not yet contain the completion of the main goal,
but they do form an historical whole. For, on the one hand, they present
the progress up to the death of the king who founded the monarchy and
who began the second step – the inner, free structuringof that monarchy –
and the characteristic development of this event in its principal features
falls within his reign. On the other hand, the work of the Estates appears
to have been brought to completion, since a representative committee is
ﬁnished with its draft of a constitution, which likewise has appeared in
print.
Of course, these Proceedings present only one side of the efforts of that
endeavor: the public efforts, insofar as they enter into the Estates Assembly.
The inner history of the efforts of the cabinet and of the ministry, as
well as what happened outside of the Assembly among the people, the
possible external goals and activities of members of the Estates – all that is
W¨urttemberg became a monarchy “in our time” because Duke Friedrich II had taken the title “king”
and become King Friedrich I only at the beginning of , in the wake of Napoleon’s annexation
of the left bank of the Rhine and reorganization of the Holy Roman Empire (see footnote 
below). Hegel views the attempts made by Friedrich and his successor, Wilhelm I, to introduce a
representative constitution as part of the political maturation or “completion” (vollenden) of the new
Kingdom of W¨urttemberg.
Constituirung.


[Introduction]

customarily attributed to the secret connection of events and actions – is
here hidden. The interest of the public, however, has mostly centered on
the public part of the proceedings, which in any case are the main sources
of worthy material for history. Until recently, a psychological perspective
on history was popular which stressed the importance of so-called secret
motives and the intentions of speciﬁc individuals, as well as of anecdotes
31
and subjective inﬂuences. This perspective has, however, fallen out of
repute, and history strives to regain the dignity of presenting the nature
and the course of the substantial issue at hand and of allowing the characters
of historical agents to be recognized from their deeds. The conviction has
become more widespread that it is not contingent factors that reveal the
real issue or the characters of historical agents in all their solidity.
The historical events which we see before us have the peculiar charm
that they do not contain such a considerable part of the past as a history of
distant times would; the great purposes and interests as well as the smaller
characteristics and externalities still retain their presence. The concepts
which we bring to bear on the object of interest in this event could not
be demanded from any distant age, even that of cultivated Greece and
Rome; they are characteristic of our time. Hence also these ideas about the
constitution of a state and in particular about granting the people political
inﬂuence and a public life are to be regarded not merely as the thoughts of
one writer compared with those of another, for what we see is a German
government and a German people engaged in spiritual labor over these
matters and whose thoughts are occupied with the rebirth of an actuality.
The age had presented W¨urttemberg with a new task and the demand for
its resolution: the task of building the parts of W¨urttemberg into a state.
After the absurd institution known as the German Empire (and rightly
called the “constitution of anarchy” by an historian gifted at least with
´esprit)ﬁnally had reached its deserved – and also externally its appropriate
Wirklichkeit.
The most important political task facing W¨urttemberg in this regard was the union of “New”
W¨urttemberg – i.e., the territory acquired in the aftermath of the Napoleonic wars – with the former
duchy. After W¨urttemberg’s surrender in the War of the Second Coalition (–), Napoleon,
intent on establishing strong allied states in southern Germany, had more than doubled its pre-
territory in recompense for its losses in Alsace after the War of the First Coalition (–), thus
increasing its population from about ,to about ,,. Until W¨urttemberg became a
sovereign kingdom and member state of the Confederation of the Rhine in –, Friedrich had
ruled over the new territories as a state separate from Old W¨urttemberg and with a different (more
autocratically fashioned) political organization.
This comment of Voltaire’s was apparently a favorite political quotation of Hegel’s: see its use
in his unpublished work The German Constitution (Hegel, Fr¨uhe Schriften, in Gesammelte Werke,
ed. Eva Moldenhauer and Klaus Markus Michel, vol. I: , ; translated in T. M. Knox and


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
and humiliating – end, the former territory of W¨urttemberg received not
only an enlargement more than double its prior extent, but this new
whole, composed of former ﬁefs of the German Empire (the part which
comprised the dukedom having also been a Bohemian sub-ﬁef), threw
off this subjection and, with the monarchical dignity of a prince, stepped
forward to claim its sovereignty and the status of a state, the status of one
of those actual German realms which are taking the place of the absurdity
that bore only the empty name of an empire.
Such epochs are extremely rare – as rare as those individuals to whom fate
has allotted it to found states. The historical traces of these few epochs are
lost in dark antiquity and in a condition of wild or at least underdeveloped
32
customs,where a state has come into existence externally but the inner
arrangement lies in the simple habits of the people and in the character
of the leader. The historical emergence of articulated constitutions has
spread out over a long series of centuries; the few chief features which
were at the basis of this emergence were developed and added on to at
each particular point by the need of the moment, necessity and the power
of circumstances. The issue around which the more speciﬁc endeavors
of this development turn is rather simple. On the one hand, there were
the efforts of the regime to overcome the power and presumptions of the
intermediate class of aristocrats,and to give the state its rights against
that aristocracy; on the other hand, there were the exertions of the third
estate, which is often also called the people, to force this middle-power and
occasionally also the government to grant it civil rights.Thus, upon survey,
Z. A. Pelczynski, Hegel’s Political Writings [Oxford: Clarendon Press, ], p. ) and in the
Heidelberg Lectures on Natural Right and Political Science, which he gave during the same academic
year in which the Estates essay was published (cf. Lectures on Natural Right and Political Science,
transcribed by Peter Wannenmann and edited by the staff of the Hegel Archives with an introduction
by Otto P¨oggeler, trans. J. Michael Stewart and Peter C. Hodgson [Berkeley: University of California
Press, ], p. ). Hegel’s qualiﬁcation of Voltaire as being gifted “at least with ´esprit” may be
compared with his remarks in the Jacobi review concerning ´esprit (das Geistreiche) as an imperfect
surrogate for reason and the concept.
Not only did the new Napoleonic order along the Rhine allow W¨urttemberg to expand its territories,
but the former duchy – which had been one of the principalities (“ﬁefs,” as Hegel puts it in feudal
terms here) composing the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation – now became itself a
kingdom, and Duke Friedrich II of W¨urttemberg took the title King Friedrich I. Hegel here employs
an important distinction between Reich and Staat, using the term Reich to refer both (in the
singular) to the now defunct “empire” and (in the plural) to the “realms” of the emergent German
Confederation that have now attained a political sovereignty – i.e., the status of statehood, which, on
Hegel’s view, both the empire and its subordinate parts previously lacked.
Sitten.
The aristocrats form an “intermediate” class (Mittelglied; Hegel also uses the term Mittelstand)
between the king and the people.
B¨urgerrechte.

[Introduction]

a constitution appears to have arisen as an aggregation. The development
has not progressed uniformly; several parts have remained undeveloped and
others expanded to troublesome excesses. Such a constitution is like an old
house whose simple original plan has been altered by a long series of owners,
according to expansions of the family and the needs of the moment, into a
collection of extensions and corners which have their individual comforts
but together make up a misshapen and ill-conceived whole. The intellectual
cultureof the age has produced the idea of a state and its essential unity,
while twenty-ﬁve years of a mostly terrifying actuality have afforded the
rich and valuable experience of the diverse attempts at grasping that idea.
The third factor, the external conditions, was granted to W¨urttemberg’s
ruler by the favor of circumstances, along with the exceptional advantage
that here the aristocratic middle estate did not pose the usual hindrance
of a privileged landed nobility, for this element was only just on the verge
of entering into the state. The king thus appeared to be in the singular
historical position of being able to give a constitution that was all of a
piece.
The one side of achieved sovereignty – the existence and recognition of
the new W¨urttembergian state from the outside – had been attained. The
ﬁrst period of its development took place in circumstances under which it
was necessary to dictate measures for external creation and preservation,
so that within the state means were concentrated in a powerful ministerial
regime and made ready for use by a strong hand. Now the time had come in
which not merely the power of the state but also its will could be brought
to life. The luck and exertions of the European governments and their
peoples brought it about that the sovereignty of the German realmscould
33
be freed from their persistent limitations, and thus enabled them to extend
to their peoples at least the promise of free constitutions. But higher than
the necessity implicit in the merely externalbond of a promise is the
necessity inherent in concepts that have come to be general conviction –
i.e., that it is essential to a monarchy to have a representative constitution,
a body of laws, and popular participation in legislation. Friedrich II now
took this second step of instituting the monarchical state on its internal
side.
The promise could have been fulﬁlled in a way which would have been
regarded as the wisest – even the most just – yet would also have been the
most perﬁdious counsel ministers could ever give. If the princes of the new
realms had wanted to deceive their peoples thoroughly and to acquire, so to
Geistesbildung.
Reiche.
in dem positiven Band.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
say, honor before God and men, they would have given their peoples back
the so-called old constitutions. Indeed, it would have brought them honor
before God and the world because, to judge by recent historical events and
the many public voices, one might have thought that the people would
have ﬂooded the churches and sung loud Te Deums. For Machiavelli’s shade
the princes would have won the fame of the reﬁned politics of Augustus
and Tiberius, who likewise allowed the earlier republican forms to persist,
even though the republic existed no longer and could no longer be called
back – a deception to which their Romans succumbed and which made
the institutions of a rational, monarchical condition (whose concept the
Romans failed to discover) impossible. This policy could have seemed an
obvious course to our princes when they considered the dangers and terrors
of the experience of the last twenty-ﬁve years, which are bound up with
the creation of new constitutions and of an actuality that proceeds from
thought, and compared them with the safe tranquillity and nullity into
which the institutions of previous Estates constitutions have sunk. Indeed,
it might have seemed even more attractive had they connected the nullity
that was already there with the further reﬂection that outside a German
imperial ﬁef and in the new context those institutions would lose the
little meaning and consistency they might have had (just like the Roman
institutions that Augustus and Tiberius had allowed to persist).
King Friedrich rose above the temptation of this deception. On March
, , he called together the heads of the princely and ducal families of
his realm and a selected group of the rest of the nobility, as well as a number
of deputies chosen by the citizens. The history of these Proceedings opened
34
with the invariably grand scene of the king on his throne ﬁrst addressing the
full Assembly of the Estates of his own realm. In his speech, he ﬁrst spoke
of what had already happened, namely that the previously diverse elements
of the country and his subjects had been united into an inseparable whole,
that differences of religious confession and of class had disappeared in the
relation of citizenship, and that public tax burdens for all had been brought
to the same level and thus everyone made into citizens of one state. Then
he gave testimony to the loyalty and obedience of his people, the courage
and honor the army had brought the name of W¨urttemberg, the support of
the civil servants in all his efforts, and the willing submission of all classes
in the difﬁcult burdens of the time and efforts of all sorts through which
security and preservation had been achieved.
Then he declared that he was laying the keystone of the ediﬁce of the
state by giving the people a constitution. Afterwards he reminded the
present representatives that they were called upon to unite the nation

[Introduction]

with the head of state in order to exercise the most important rights of the
government’s power. He exhorted them: “Let us, united for the furtherance
of the concerns of the nation, to which the constitution calls this Assembly,
secure the holy bond between me and my subjects with mutual trust.”
He then had the minister of the interior announce the Constitutional
Charter. After it was read he pledged to uphold it and presented it with his
own hand to the President of the Assembly.
There is perhaps no greater secular dramaon earth than when a
monarch adds a further foundation to the power of state – which at ﬁrst
lies exclusively in his hands – by bringing his people into it as an essentially
inﬂuential part of the whole. Since the great work of a state constitution, as
in fact most other governmental action, usually takes place only in a series
of divided acts and contingent events without oversight or publicity, and
the public appearance of princeliness and majesty has gradually become
restricted to birthday celebrations and marriage observances, it is tempting
to dwell for a moment on such a beneﬁcent, sublime, and powerful scene
as that in which the appearance of majesty so corresponds to the inner
substance of its action. But one might also be inclined to think that one
35
should apologize for dwelling on such a moment. For the occasions on
which the king’s ofﬁcial presence has been customary, and the emptiness
and ineffectuality of the previous national assembly,the German Impe-
rial Diet,and in general the nullity and unreality of public life, have
brought about a prevailing mood of irksomeness toward such ceremonies
and of moralistic and hypochondriacal self-conceit toward the public and
the appearance of his majesty. This has happened to such an extent that
the mention of his majesty’s appearance – and, for instance, the view that
such an appearance is capable of arousing feelings of magnanimity – runs
the risk of being taken as anything but serious, and hardly as good will,
but rather of being judged as courtly stupidity, slavish blindness, and ten-
dentiousness. Our political deadness is unreceptive to becoming happy at
such scenes, and seriousness demands turning away from them as mere
externalities and to the substance of the matter and to one’s own thoughts
about it. Here then, to cite it brieﬂy, is the substance of the matter, the
content of the Constitutional Charter which the king gave.
It consists of sixty-six paragraphs, divided into two parts, in which the
ﬁrst part (sect. –) bears the title “The Constitution of the Estates” and
the second part (sect. –) the title “General Provisions in Relation to the
Constitution of the Kingdom and the Rights and Duties of His Majesty’s
weltliches Schauspiel.
Anschauung.
Staatsversammlung.
Reichstag.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
Subjects.” The ﬁrst part appears thus to be the more detailed, the second
part the less developed.
By the ﬁrst part the king grants an Estates representation with the
following chief provisions: the Assembly is to consist both of non-elected
membersand elected members, together in a single chamber. Eligibility
for the latter is not limited to any estate; crown ofﬁcials, junior ofﬁcers
and soldiers, clergy, doctors, and surgeons are excluded. The only further
condition is an age of thirty years and membership in one of the Christian
confessions. The possession of a certain amount of property is not included
under the conditions. To be a voter, a net income of guilders from
real estate is required. The Estates assemble only at the summons of the
king and at least once every three years. After this period, half of the
elected representatives step down, but are re-electable, and are replaced
by new elections. The Assembly is not to last more than six weeks and
is to be dismissed, adjourned, or completely dissolved by the king. The
elected deputies, as well as the chancellor of the university, the general
superintendent of the protestant churchand the catholic dean, receive
their travel expenses and daily allowance (ﬂorins, crowns per day).
Ministers can attend the Assembly at any time. In the years when the Estates
36
Assembly is not summoned, a committee of twelve members chosen from
the Assembly for three years meets to complete pressing business; raising
taxes or changing the laws is not, however, in its competence.
For the introduction of new taxes, direct as well as indirect levies, and for
raising them, the consent of the Estates is necessary. Existing taxes remain
the basis of the government of the current king. The reckoning of income
and the expenditure of taxes are presented to the Estates every year. The
determination of a civil listfor the king is left for further proceedings.
The Estates have a similar part in legislation; without their approval,
no new general law concerning personal freedom and property or the
The ﬁrst set of members, the so-called Virilstimmf¨uhrer, included certain nobles and ofﬁcials in the
kingdom (e.g., the university chancellor and the heads of church bodies) who were not elected in a
representative manner but rather granted individual votes in the Assembly by the king strictly on the
basis of their being peers or having an ofﬁcial status. In the Holy Roman Empire, a Virilstimmf¨uhrer
had been a member of the Imperial Diet (Reichstag) in Regensburg who was entitled to cast an
individual vote (votum virile) rather than sharing in a collective vote from the bench representing a
particular estate. (Knox translates this term as “ex ofﬁcio” members, but it included here not only
speciﬁc governmental ﬁgures in their ofﬁcial capacity but also princes, counts, and nobles of various
houses whom the king wished to have present in the Assembly.)
The German term evangelisch is roughly equivalent to the English word protestant; in fact the
coextensive term protestantisch became increasingly common in Germany in the course of the
nineteenth century.
Civilliste – an English loan-word, referring to an annual sum paid out of the public treasury to a
monarch for the royal household’s use.

[Composition of the Estates]

constitution can be promulgated. The king retains the initiative in this
matter, but the Estates can present suggestions for laws as requests to the
king; in the case of a negative answer, they can repeat them three times
in future assemblies, and at the ﬁnal answer, which must be justiﬁed, they
can make new appeals in response to the justiﬁcation.
It is further allowed that the Estates can present general requests, appeals,
and complaints to the king, and the king promises to give a decision to
every petition of the Estates. He also promises to take up complaints
brought to the Estates by individual subjects, if proof can be shown that
the governmental authorities have refused to take them up.
Finally the Estates can demand investigations against state ofﬁcials,
and upon the king’s mandatory approval judgment is to be passed – in the
case of high treason and of extortionby an Estates court and in other
cases in the usual legal mode of proceeding.
[composition of the estates]
The inﬁnite importance and liberality of the rights here allowed to the
Estates, as well as the simplicity and openness of their stipulation – consid-
ered purely and disinterestedly according to their content and with regard
to nothing else – certainly honors the prince who gave them and the age
in which constitutional lawhas puriﬁed itself of privileges and matured
into principles. Such an accomplishment gains even more in comparison
with the formlessness, pettiness, and lack of clarity of local and foreign
constitutions – especially that of Old W¨urttemberg – where the rights
of the people have been veiled and vitiated by privileges and particulari-
ties, qualiﬁed and equivocated on to the point of becoming empty shams.
Are the provisions cited not such constitutional foundations, which must
be recognized and taken up with nothing other than highest approval?
Whatever might be missing from them certainly cannot be anything that
37
would be incompatible with such constitutional foundations, but only
such additions and more developed provisions as would accord with those
universal truths of constitutional law.For the most part, the only thing
that has been retained from the positive constitutional law is the privilege of
the aristocratic institution. But beyond the fact that rational constitutional
law has turned away from the democratic abstractions which absolutely
reject such an institution, the privilege of this (in any case) given actuality
Staatsbeamte.
Concussion – a Roman legal term, referring to use of threats or violence.
Staatsrecht.
jenen allgemeinen Wahrheiten eines staatsrechtlichen Zustandes gem¨aß.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
has been distanced widely from feudal rights through further statutes. Here
it will sufﬁce merely to point out that the king’s Constitutional Charter
grants only ﬁfty votes to this element, which has been united into one
chamber with the elected deputies, while the elected representatives have
seventy-three votes and thus a signiﬁcant majority. This political balance
of power departs greatly from that involved in the dual-chamber system
whose considerable authority stems from its age and widespread accep-
tance.The reason we have bothered to mention the contrast between
this voting relation and that incorporated in the provisional Estates Assem-
bly of the Kingdom of Hanover – where the nobility is allotted one vote
more than the burgher Estate – is that in the following Proceedings, the
W¨urttembergian Estates frequently invoke the liberal expressions of the
Hanoverian delegation at the German constitutional Congress in Vienna.
Even less expected are the wider scope and almost complete freedom
given to the democratic principle by the mode of electing representatives,
which allows this element to enter into the order of the state in an almost
completely unrestricted form. Among the few tempering factors which
appear here, besides the fact that the non-elected members are not in a
chamber of their own, are the provisions that the chief crown ofﬁcials
(or, in the good towns, the provincial governors) preside over the election
assemblies,and that the persons brought in for the business of the election,
such as the district notaryand his assistant, are only eligible for election
in districts other than the one in which they serve. The eligibility for
being elected representative is, as mentioned above, limited by very few
conditions. First, all civil servantsand clergy, as well as doctors and
surgeons, are excluded. The reason why the last two classes are excluded
Although Friedrich’s constitutional sketch involved a unicameral assembly, a signiﬁcant proposal
for a bicameral estates was made during that year by University of T¨ubingen curator Karl August
von Wangenheim in an anonymous publication entitled The Idea of a State Constitution in its
Application to W¨urttemberg’s Old Estates Constitution and a Proposal for its Renewal. Wilhelm I,
Friedrich’s successor, appointed Wangenheim minister of state and took up his bicameral suggestion
in the new constitutional proposal he offered to the Estates in March . It is interesting to notice
that, although Hegel here certainly indicates a preference for two chambers, his support is limited
to this sentence (as Rosenzweig points out in exonerating Hegel of the charge of having tried to
curry favor with Wangenheim for a position at T¨ubingen), whereas in his contemporaneous –
Lectures on Natural Right and Political Science there is an extended justiﬁcation of bicamerality – in
fact, a more extended treatment of the issue than is later present even in the Berlin Philosophy of
Right (cf. Lectures on Natural Right and Political Science, pp. –).
Landvogten.
The district notary (Amtsschreiber) was a senior position of great inﬂuence within W¨urttemberg’s
peculiar notaries system (Schreiberei-Institut). The district notary had a monopoly on all the account-
ing done in his particular jurisdiction (Amtsbezirk) or “district.” This is the ﬁrst mention in Hegel’s
text of the class of notaries (Schreiber), whose ofﬁcial functions (and corruption) are discussed below.
Staatsdiener.

[Composition of the Estates]

may also be the reason in the ﬁrst case: that their ofﬁcial functions allow
them no long absence or other business demands. Yet this reason is certainly
not signiﬁcant enough to justify a provision of such great importance for
the main issue. For apart from the fact that the same argument would apply
38
to the non-elected members who have crown positions (as it is hardly to be
assumed that they are supposed to be stood in for every time), it loses much
of its force in the case of civil servants living in the location of the Estates
Assembly, which is of course usually the capital. Yet in the outline of the
chief provisions of the new Estates constitution, the drafting of which the
king himself had worked on (see supplement of ﬁles, p. ), and which he
delivered in an address on January , to the Assembly of the council of
statefor consideration of a special commission of councillors and senior
ofﬁcials, the provision occurs that the civil servants, insofar as their service
allows, should also be eligible for election.
The reviewer wants to enlarge upon this highly important matter. It
ought not be overlooked, ﬁrst of all, that in large states such as France
and even more so in England the whole domestic social situation and the
far-reaching connections available with foreign countries afford individuals
completely different relations – in terms of wealth, education, and the habit
of living in and comporting oneself toward more universal interests – than
are possible in a country with a greater limitation of its territory, social
circumstances, and wealth. In such smaller countries the greater part of
those who receive a higher education,or any more universal education at
all, see themselves compelled to seek their economic and social existence
in some form of public service.If civil servants are out of consideration,
there will therefore be disproportionately fewer to be found who possess
sufﬁcient insight and experience in universal matters – and even still fewer,
in any case, who could be called statesmen. Part of the nobility is already
excluded as being non-elected members, and another part of them are in
service to the crown. In general, the positions of the elected deputies are not
expected to be ﬁlled by the nobility. On the contrary. Among the remaining
classes, although the class of lawyers might seem specially suited, they are
bound because of their concepts and business to the principles of private
right and (moreover) of positive right, which are opposed to the principles
of constitutional law,namely of rational law, for a rational constitution
rules out any other. The spirit of an all-too-famous statesmanhit the mark
exactly when he declared lawyers to be the most inept advisers and actors
Staatsrat.
wissenschaftliche Bildung.
Staatsdienst.
Staatsrecht.
Knox says Hegel means Napoleon here; Jamme and Hogemann suggest Burke.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
in public matters. The inﬂuence which the lawyer’s spirit has exercised on
the history of the W¨urttembergian Estates Assembly will become apparent
in the following.
The legal exclusion of this class could well be disputed from the stance of
39
abstract right, but not more so than the exclusion of doctors and surgeons.
A state’s organization rests on a completely different concrete wisdom
than that of a formalism extracted from private right. In what follows
we will make acquaintance with a peculiar structure of Old W¨urttemberg
which was of the ﬁrst importance for its Estates constitution: the class
of notaries.The contribution which the class of merchants, tradesmen,
and other proprietors can make to an Estates Assembly in this regard,
as important as it is, can not be in such a heavy proportion as perhaps
in England, and cannot by itself make up for the loss occasioned by the
exclusion of state ofﬁcials.
The fact that this exclusion reduces the supply from which capable
deputies can be drawn is important enough; yet more important, however,
is the effect it has on the basic attitudeof the Assembly, which must
be the weightiest thing in an Estates Assembly if it is not to fall into the
most dangerous evil. This fundamental quality can in general be called
the “sense of the state.”It cannot be reduced to abstract right, mere
rectitude, or a good attitude in favor of the well-being of the whole and
the best for individuals. Landowners as well as those individuals who are in
trade or who otherwise ﬁnd themselves in possession of a piece of property
or of a skill have an interest in maintaining civil order, but their immediate
purpose here is what is private in their possession. When all that Estates
deputies bring with them is the sense of private interest and private right
as their chief aim, to which everything else is subordinated, they will try
to limit the demands of the state as much as possible, arguing that they
are superﬂuous, and though not purposeless, even so not strictly necessary
for their own purpose. In a word, they thus come into the Assembly with
the will to give and do as little as possible for the universal. The question
is not which attitude the deputies could have, from whichever class or
Schreiberstand.
Staatsbeamten.
Hegel uses here the word Gesinnung, which refers in general to a person’s basic set of convictions or
atttitudes. More speciﬁcally, Hegel is linking the “basic attitude” which should be represented in the
Assembly to the “sense of the state” referred to below – the awareness of the demands of the state as
a political whole to which one belongs. The notion of such a political attitude or set of convictions
is central to Hegel’s account of the dispositional or subjective side of an individual’s relation to the
state in the Philosophy of Right. There, he characterizes politische Gesinnung as a sort of “patriotism”:
the habitual awareness that the community is “the substantial basis and end” (PR §).
Sinn des Staates.

[Composition of the Estates]

circumstance they are taken; when it comes to the setting-up of the state,
or of any rational institutions, it is not the contingent that ought to be
counted upon, but the question can only be what the nature of the matter –
here, of the class – involves.
The sense of the state is acquired above all in habitual occupation
with universal concerns, which gives occasion not only to discover and
acknowledge the inﬁnite worth which the universal has in itself, but also
to experience the intransigence, hostility, and disingenuousness of private
40
interest and to struggle with its obstinacy in cases where it is posited in the
form of right. Since the deputies are elected, it is essential that the electors
come from conditions in which this sense of the state must be present and in
which it is developed. The previous interior minister in France, Vaublanc,
bluntly included in his sketch of a law for the mode of electing the Chamber
of Deputies the provision that crown ofﬁcials of all sorts as well as the
clergy should make up the majority of electors in the departments. There
is unanimity that the English constitution is maintained only through what
are called its abuses – for without the completely unequal and therefore
unjust, even at times fully senseless, privileges connected with voting rights,
the government could not in general count on the majority of votes.
The ill-informed believe that the opposition party is a party that is anti-
government or anti-ministry as such. Even when the opposition attacks
not merely individual ministerial measures (which happens with individual
members who otherwise vote, on the whole, with the ministry) but ﬁghts
the ministry on each and every point, its ﬁght is only against the individual
ministry, not against the government and ministry in general. The reproach
that is often made against the opposition – that it only wants to be in the
ministry itself – is actually its greatest justiﬁcation and entirely the opposite
of the tendency which is often prized in German individuals and Estates
as the courage of freedom and the defense of citizens and their rights, the
tendency, that is, to win as many state resources as one can for oneself.
It must be left to German history to show how far the appearance of
the former so-called “third estate” in the Estates Assembly had its origin
in the former status of city leaders as princely ofﬁcials in relation to the
government’s ministry. A similar historical account would be needed to
show how the burgher delegates, as they acquired the same status, came
to participate in the Estates. Nor can we recount here how the original
ofﬁcials were at ﬁrst mere advisers and only later came to have a direct
say in decisions. In the T¨ubingen Treaty of , which is regarded as the
fundamental law in the constitution of the former Duchy of W¨urttemberg,
the princely ofﬁcials are expressly named along with one from the court


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
and one from the city council as those who should compose the deputies of
the Estates to the Assembly. But the Estates were able with the help of the
imperial commissioners to root out the ofﬁcials again only six years later, in
. The Estates thereby presented a bad example for the unchangeability
41
of treaties so recently and solemnly concluded. The objection is readily
made against the eligibility of ofﬁcials to be deputies that, being in the
service of the prince, they will naturally also speak and act in his interest,
and along with that objection comes, from time to time, the thought that
what is in the interest of the prince is against the interest of the people
and the state. In any case service for the person of the prince in the royal
household is something different from service which is performed for
the government and the state, and the opinion that what is done in the
interest of the government and the state is against the interest of the people
differentiates the rabble from citizens. The most recent world events –
the struggle for Germany’s independence – have imbued German youth
in the universities with a higher interest than that of a mere focus on
immediate future bread-winning and provision. Some of them have shed
their own blood that German states might obtain free constitutions, and
they have brought with them from the battleﬁeld the hope that they might
further contribute to that cause and go on to play a role in the political life
of the state. If higher educationhas equipped them to have such a role and
they are devoted above all to the service of the state, ought they now, along
with the entire educated class who share this calling, lose their eligibility
to become members of the Estates and representatives of the people?
Here the important circumstance is to be considered, that the change
in the relation of what used to be service for the crown was a signiﬁcant
moment in Germany’s transition from its earlier crudity and barbarism
into the rational condition of the life of a state. Something about this
circumstance can be cited from the appendix to the twenty-ﬁfth section
of the Proceedings. There it is mentioned (p. )that, beginning in the
thirteenth century, the ofﬁces of the chamber were at ﬁrst usually entrusted
only to persons from the nobility with a considerable income from real
estate and proceeds from vassals;but the nobles found an excuse to give
up an ofﬁce which had become burdensome to them and to delegate
wissenschaftliche Ausbildung.
Hegel’s further direct references in the body of his text to section and page number of the Proceedings –
most of which he makes by parenthetical insertion – will be footnoted in what follows.
Pr¨astationen (= Precariae), a term, originally from Roman law, for what tenants of manors were
bound to give their lords for use of the land (Eugen Haberkern and Josef Friedrich Wallach,
Hilfsw¨orterbuch f¨ur Historiker. Mittelalter und Neuzeit [Munich: Francke, ]).

[Composition of the Estates]

its administration to a caretaker from the burgher estate, with orders to
manage things with a light hand. Later these ofﬁces, such as those of
ducal commissioner, judges, and other positions, were simply given over to
persons from the burgher estate, who viewed this not (as it was later viewed)
as a favor, but as a great burden. Also, this hardship was not imposed on
anyone for too long. It was considered a particular favor to remain spared
42
from such positions – of which many examples are cited in the section
mentioned.
Now although these ministers continued to be vassals and even perhaps
thralls of a sort, it was at least no longer possible for someone to believe
that they existed only for the interest of the prince against the people in
the sense later believed, namely that those in the service of the prince were
virtually the prince’s servantsand a class excluded from the people. To
the extent that they were a class apart from the people, this was because the
income which they had to take in and account for, as well as the judicial
and police power which they had to exercise in the name of the prince, had
more the character of rights stemming from a private possession and of a
private power of a third element against the citizens than the character of
state income and state duties. But as the domanial possessions and princely
family trusts have come ever closer in later times to the character of state
property, and as the rights of ducal commissioners and others over their
subjects and dependants have begun to take on the rational character of state
duty and state power, so the servants of the prince are no longer dependent
for their salaries on the prince’s arbitrary whim but have rights in their
ofﬁces and the dignity of ofﬁcials in service of the state.This transition
from the administration of a private possession to the administration of
the rights of the state is one of the most important transitions which have
been introduced over time. It has also freed ofﬁcials from the position they
were in at the time of the old W¨urttemberg constitution. This is one of the
changes that has been solidiﬁed and completed by the general transition of
a non-sovereign principalityinto a state.
Since history is the basis of the positive claims of constitutional law,
upon which the Estates Assembly in turn based their claims, the general
remark can here be made that it is exactly history which teaches us to
recognize the conditions under which a particular constitutional provision
was rational, and which leads us in the present example to the result that
if the exclusion of crown ofﬁcials was at one time rational, it is no longer
The contrast is between f¨urstliche Diener and f¨urstliche Bediente.
Staatsdiener.
F¨urstentum.
Staat.
das positive Staatsrecht.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
so under other conditions. That the Estates Assembly has recalled neither
the old relation of the ministries and the explicit speciﬁcations of the
T¨ubingen Treaty, nor the difference between former princely servants and
state ofﬁcials, is quite understandable. But what is more striking is that it
appears to have been the ministry that occasioned the exclusion of state
ofﬁcials.
The constitution of the former duchy presented another closely related
sphere of public business: the courts and city councils, from which the
43
parliamentary deputies were supposed to be taken. Certainly the position
of a city magistrate is an appropriate school of preparation for Estates
functions. Magistrates live, as do state ofﬁcials, in the daily activity of
handling the civil order and in the daily experience of how laws and
institutions function, and of exactly which counter-forces of evil passions
must be fought against or endured. Magistrates are, moreover, drawn from
the class of citizens; they share in their particular interests and can have
their closer trust. From one end of Germany to the other the complaint
about incompetence, laziness, and indifference – and even the corruption
and wickedness of local administration – had become so loud that a rebirth
of their very nature seemed necessary before they would be able to produce
men who were capable of taking on a wider spectrum of duties. The right
of the magistrates themselves to ﬁll positions which have become vacant
among them was probably one of the chief reasons for their decay. What
otherwise could perhaps be called despotism – that many governments
have taken away from city magistrates and other community leaders the
administration of community property and of church, school, and welfare
agencies – may in light of such incompetence not only prove to have been
justiﬁed, but to have been an unavoidable duty. Their incompetence is also
the reason why the role of the magistrates in the administration of justice
has frequently dwindled to a mere formality, leaving the proceedings and
the decision in the hands of the crown’s judicial overseers and senior ofﬁcials
or making it necessary to take recourse to the legal opinions of counsellors
and advocates. The governments in any case saw themselves thereby forced
to take out of the magistrates’ hands the part of the administration of
justice that was formerly theirs.
Now even if the city magistrates, given their previous organization and
character, can awaken no great hope of producing competent parliamentary
deputies, still this provision of the old constitution should not be com-
pletely forgotten. But further modiﬁcations would admittedly be needed
to alleviate some of the more exaggerated and one-sided restrictions against
their service. The other extreme, equally wide-reaching, can be seen in the

[Composition of the Estates]

king’s constitution: that, ﬁrst of all, the eligibility of deputies is almost
unlimited, and second of all, that the qualiﬁcations for being a voter are
44
equally insigniﬁcant. The only requirement besides being years old is
that one have an income of guilders from real estate.
This latter sort of condition on voting eligibility has until now been
alien to German institutions and has come into circulation only in more
recent times. We want to say something about it. The ﬁrst striking thing
is that, on such dry, abstract stipulations as the two mentioned, voters
appear otherwise in no unity or relation with the civil order and the
organization of the state as a whole. The citizens appear as isolated atoms
and the electoral assemblies as unordered, inorganic aggregates, the people
in general dissolved into a mass – a shape in which the community, when it
performs an action, should never have shown itself. It is the most unworthy
of its essence and the most at odds with its concept, which is to be a spiritual
order. For age, as well as property, are qualities which concern individuals
taken in isolation, not characteristics which make up the worth of an
individual in the civil order. The individual has such a worth only by
virtue of his ofﬁce, class, a civilly recognized occupational skill, and the
qualiﬁcations for the same, for example a master craftsman’s diploma, title,
etc. This notion of worth is so familiar to common expectations that a
man is not said to “be somebody” until he has achieved an ofﬁce, become
a master craftsman, or otherwise gained acceptance in a particular civil
circle. By contrast, someone who is only years old and possessor of
real estate which yields him guilders or more per year is said to be
“nobody.” When a constitution makes him somebody – that is, a voter –
it grants him a high political right without any connection to the rest of
the roles he plays in his life as a burgher, and it creates a situation in which
an important constitutional matter is determined more by the democratic,
even anarchical, principle of isolation than by the principle of an organic
order. The great beginnings of internal legal relations in Germany, through
which the formal development of a state has been prepared, are to be found
in history, where, after the old monarchical government’s power sank in the
middle ages, and the whole had dissolved into atoms, the knights, freed
peasants, cloisters, the nobility, and those who run trade and industry
formed themselves, against this state of disruption, into associations and
corporations which were in friction against each other until they found a
tolerable co-existence. The highest state power, whose weakness made these
corporations necessary, was so loose that these partial communities were
able to shape their modes of connection all the more closely and exactly,
45
even pedantically, up to the point of a completely restrictive formalism and


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
guild-spirit, whose aristocratic character became an obstacle and a danger
to the formation of state power. With the more complete development
of the supreme powers of the state in more recent times, these subsidiary
guild-circles and communities have been dissolved, or at least their political
position and relation to internal constitutional lawhas been taken away.
But perhaps it would again be time to bring the subordinate spheres back
into political order and dignity and to lead them, now puriﬁed of privileges
and injustices, back into the state as an organic formation, just as previously
the circles of the higher-ranking state authorities were also organized. A
living connection lies only in an articulated whole, whose parts form the
particular, subsidiary circles. But to achieve such a whole, the French
abstractions of pure number and quanta of wealth must be left aside, or at
least they must not be made the chief determination and represented as the
only conditions of the most important political functions. Such atomistic
principles are – in science as in politics – death for every rational concept,
articulation, and vitality.
It is worth remembering that the exercise of such a completely isolated
callingas that of being a voter quickly and easily loses its interest, depend-
ing, as it does chieﬂy, on contingent conviction and momentary whim. This
occupation expires with a single action – an action which occurs only once
in several years. When the number of voters is large, the inﬂuence which
the individual’s vote has can seem to him quite insigniﬁcant – even more
so, given that the deputy whom he helps elect is himself only a member
of a large assembly in which only a small number can ever gain manifest
importance, while most members are also limited to making only a modest
contribution with their single vote among many. From the perspective of
psychology, it might be expected that the interest of the citizenswould
drive them to seek eagerly the power to vote and that it would be held as
an important honor, exercised disinterestedly and with great circumspec-
tion. Yet experience shows the opposite. The huge distance between the
importance of the effect which is supposed to follow and the extremely
insigniﬁcant inﬂuence of the individual soon makes voters indifferent to
their right, and if the ﬁrst laws are concerned with the exclusion of many
citizens from voting, legal arrangements are soon needed to encourage
those entitled to do so to make it to the polls. The often superﬁcially used
46
example of England – of the powerful machinations when Parliament is
elected – is not appropriate here, since in this part of the English consti-
tution it is exactly the privileges and inequalities of voting rights that are
das innere Staatsrecht.
Beruf.
Staatsb¨urger.

[Composition of the Estates]

the most inﬂuential condition, while the opposite occurs in the atomistic
method.
Obviously, however, these remarks against the abstract principles of
number, of property amount, and of age are not meant to deny the impor-
tance and inﬂuence of these features. On the contrary: when voting rights
and eligibility are connected with the other institutions of the state, these
features exercise an inﬂuence of their own, and when for example the law
requires that one be of a certain age or own a certain amount of property
in order to be eligible to become a member of the city magistracy, a court,
or a corporation, or a guild or similar association, such requirements are
more ﬁtting than when such dry, merely external conditions are so sharply
placed upon the high interest of Estates membership. The guarantee which
is sought through such conditions for the competence of voters and those
elected is in any case in part merely negative and in part pure presump-
tion, since there is instead a completely different, positive guarantee in the
trust the government has in those who serve the state– or in the trust
communities and citizens have in those who serve the communities, to be
chosen for ofﬁces and accepted in associations. Moreover, effective activity
and participation in the organic life of the state and the people guarantee
that voters will have acquired political skill as well as the sense of the state
and of the people, the sense of ruling and obeying, and that they will have
been able to get to know and test their attitudes and abilities for such
participation.
Stipulations of the sort which assume that the people are not a state
but rather a mass, and then divide this mass into smaller masses accord-
ing to age and one lone property condition, cannot truly be called state
institutions.These stipulations are not sufﬁcient to eliminate the demo-
cratic formlessness from the people’s share in universal concerns, and, more
speciﬁcally, are not sufﬁcient to eliminate contingency when it comes to
ﬁnding competent deputies for an Estates Assembly. To earn the right to be
called a state institution, it is not enough merely to demand that something
should happen, or to place limits on a few conditions which could impede
it; to be a state institution is to make happen what ought to happen.
Since the reviewer has digressed on this point, the remarks about other
matters must be shorter. The Estates have been given the prerogatives that
47
without their consent no new taxes should be introduced and that existing
taxes should not be increased. W¨urttemberg may have been the ﬁrst Ger-
man state where the general Estateshave been granted this right so early,
Staatsdiensten.
Staatseinrichtungen.
allgemeine Landst¨ande.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
and in such an open and determinate manner. The Estates which we have
elsewhere seen emerge or revive either contain very restrictive elements
from the feudal constitution, or their formation and the determination
of their inﬂuence is still too provisional and indistinct to be compared
with the free, frank, and clear form which the monarch of W¨urttemberg
wanted to give his own Estates. The bloody struggle of the Tyrolese against
forms of state administration which they believed were opposed to their
old traditional rights awakened universal interest. When they ﬁnally suc-
ceeded in reintroducing their former constitution, the monarch reserved
for himself the right to determine the total amount of state taxes and left
to the Estates only their distribution. Now it may be disputed whether the
old W¨urttemberg Estates already had the right which is recognized in the
king’s constitution or not – and whether their earlier rights were not more
extensive. This is a dispute utterly devoid of practical interest, though it is
for that very reason all the more suited for a proper querelle d’Allemand.
It could well be said that the W¨urttemberg Estates, through the provision
that existing taxes remain and that their consent be required only for
tax increases, were formally returned approximately to the status of the
previous W¨urttemberg Estates. For direct and indirect taxes, which had
never stopped ﬂowing into the prince’s treasury, and which derive from
ground rents, dues, tithes, and provision of labor, are seigneurial rents
and the property of the ruler or of the state in the sense of property as
deﬁned by private right. They are based on an existing arrangement and
are thus not subject to approval by the Estates. The other part of actual,
direct, and indirect taxes, the revenue raised in the sense of constitutional
law, was determined by treaty under the supreme judicial court’s action
and the ratiﬁcation of crown ofﬁcials, both in terms of its amount and
its use for state purposes – namely, for paying off state debts and for
paying both local and royal military. The Estates were thus bound to an
existing arrangement as to a law. From all the qualiﬁcation and particular
elaboration under which the previous Estates exercised the tax-consent,
and not merely in the case of raising taxes, a general perspective and claim
can be drawn, that they possessed this right of consent in a broad sense. Yet
48
such a right comes to have a completely new status and an incomparably
greater extent and importance in the context of W¨urttemberg’s transition
from imperial ﬁef to independent state. In its condition as an imperial ﬁef,
war and peace were made, not by an individual Estate of the empire, but
by emperor and empire. At least part of their military contributions in
A dispute over nothing.

[Composition of the Estates]

time of war were ﬁxed, once and for all, by a quota-list.This is not to
mention that the formalistic obstinacy of the German Estates, their doing
nothing which could be legally or illegally avoided, usually brought on even
greater exertions than would otherwise have been necessary, the expense
of which inevitably fell to the Estates. Against refusals of the Estates, the
prince generally had support and help from the imperial courts. But after
W¨urttemberg became an independent state, the Estates’ right of consent
in matters of taxation attained an independence and a completely new
meaning which cannot be justiﬁed by appeal to the previous situation.
Now the state needed completely new guarantees against private interest
and the pretension of the Estates, since the previous guarantees which the
government had in the emperor and the empire were no longer available.
The Estates were thrust into an essentially new element, that of the political,
which had previously been missing.
Germany’s special history gives sufﬁcient examples of the earlier Estates’
impulse, in their political nullity, toward a passive neutrality. Most of all
they would have liked to avoid any intervention into world affairs at all
and would rather have endured disgrace than make any decision of their
own or undertake any action for the sake of honor. This inclination to
neglect honor and refrain from action in external affairs is bound up with
a tendency to direct activity against the government rather than against
external enemies. Only too often the Estates have used critical situations
merely as an opportunity to embarrass the government, an opportunity
to prescribe conditions and acquire advantages for themselves against the
government and for the efforts which the government made for the honor
and well-being of the government and the people. Only too often did they
manage to bring immediate misfortune and an affront to the land, and to
limit and weaken the government’s power in the long term, thereby paving
the way for internal and external destruction. A spirit of all-consuming
private interest and an indifference or indeed hostility to the very thought
of national honor and its attendant sacriﬁces were the inevitable result
of the political nullity to which the German people had been reduced
by its constitution, and the result as well of the inability of the many
small wholes and the greater part of the imperial Estates to have their own
decision and will. When the feeling of national honor has permeated the
different classes of the people more universally, as it has in England for
example, the right of parliament to give annual consent to taxes takes on an
49
Matrikel. The Reichsmatrikel was a roster of estates of the empire according to their rank and
resources.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
entirely different meaning from that which the same right would have in a
people brought up to attend only to private affairs,and who, because any
political standpoint is alien to them, have been kept in a spirit of limitedness
and private selﬁshness.Even just against such a spirit, governments would
need a new guarantee for the preservation of the state, since they have lost
the guarantee of emperor and empire which was insufﬁcient to begin with.
Now that the Estates have no supreme authority other than their own state
government,with which they are at the same time locked in opposition,
the right of participating in the determination of state taxes, however it
might previously have been structured, has rather become, in-and-for-itself,
an inﬁnitely higher, more independent right than it was before, for it grants
the Estates an inﬂuence on war and peace, on external politics generally,
and on the inner life of the state.
Because in the king’s constitution existing taxes were regarded as basically
determined for the lifetime of the reigning monarch, there was a formal
limit to the right of taxation. Materially speaking, of course, this right is
limited in any case by necessity – a necessity which should be evident these
days in terms of how high taxes are. In all states – and, most of all, in
the richest, such as England – the need of recent years has driven taxation
to a previously unimagined extent, and France, Austria, and others have
been able to help themselves in these ﬁnancial difﬁculties only through
high-handed, powerful maneuvers. Apart from the consideration of need,
whose presence has never been disproved, and apart from the impossibility
of basing a ﬁnancial constitution all of a sudden on any other principles, the
W¨urttemberg Estates could have put up with this article out of gratitude
to a prince who was the ﬁrst (and up to now, after two and a half years,
almost the only) prince who has given his country such an open and liberal
constitution – a prince to whom, as Count von Waldecksaid in the ﬁrst
speech given on the part of the Estates Assembly at the opening of the
meetings,all the Estates of the country, all the provinces of the empire
vie in expressing their feelings of gratitude for his decision to establish a
constitution – a prince whom Count von Waldeck goes on to praise
in dem Privatsinne auferzogen.
Privateigensucht.
Staatsregierung.
Georg Friedrich Karl, Count von Waldeck (–), Landvogt of Stuttgart, was the leading
representative of the nobility in the Estates Assembly and played a vital role throughout the
negotiations with the king. After the majority of the nobles left the Assembly at its ﬁrst meeting on
March , , Waldeck was one of four noble representatives who remained (the others being Prince
von Hohenlohe-Oehringen, the president of the Assembly, Prince von Hohenlohe-Schillingen, and
Count von Zeppelin).
Proceedings, Section II, p. .

[Composition of the Estates]

() “for leading W¨urttemberg in all the storms of the last decade with rare
strength” (“rare qualities,” it says in the continuation of the speech,
“have for a long time been displayed by the rulers of W¨urttemberg”;
for this vague word, a more precise meaning – that of imperious arbi-
50
trariness, or weakness of character – is given by the broader historical
record, with the exception of Duke Christoph);
() “for having given W¨urttemberg a considerable expansion” (through
the so-called “mediatizing” of Estates that previously stood in a direct
relation to the empire – an expansion which Count von Waldeck
characterizedas an unlawful situation, as a reduction of the rights of
mediatized princesand of the subjects entrusted to them by God, and
as an expansion which the incorporated part of W¨urttemberg would
have sought to avoid had it not succumbed to force);
() “for losing no time in cancelling the results of the events of 
which ran counter to his will – i.e., the cancellation of the constitution
established forever by his lordship’s ancestors.” (The whole remainder
of the Proceedings shows that the opposition of the Estates concerned
only the point that the constitution the king gave did not bring back
the old one, that the results mentioned were not cancelled.)
It is of course well known that the Estates’ demand that, even during
the lifetime of the king, their right to consent should extend to already
existing taxes, was moot because of the early death of the king.It is equally
well known that their refusal to accept the king’s constitution has blocked
the way to negotiations on new taxes at the change of a government, for it
was his constitution which conceded the right to such negotiations.
In order to complete the historical details of the chief moments of the
constitutional charter, the second part of the Proceedings should be cited:
“General Provisions in Relation to the Constitution of the Kingdom and of
the Rights and Obligations of the King’s Subjects.” These allow, however,
neither excerpt nor assessment – they are simple, organic provisions which
speak for themselves and make up the rational basis of a constitutional
order.For example:
Ibid., p. .
Ibid., sect. VI, p. .
“Mediatized princes” translates the German term Standesherrn, used to designate the nobility who
had been mediatized in the years from to . They constituted the high nobility (Hochadel),
i.e., that part of the nobility which (until the dissolution of the empire in ) had been subject to
no lord but the duke or king and the emperor himself. They were thus the highest-ranking nobles
within the state and enjoyed special privileges.
Friedrich I had died during the night of October , , while the proposed new constitution
remained unapproved by the Estates.
die vern¨unftige Grundlage eines staatsrechtlichen Zustandes.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
§. All subjects are equal before the law; they have access to all state
ofﬁcials; they are excluded neither by birth nor by membership in one of
the three Christian confessions.
§. All contribute equally to public costs and taxes, according to the
laws.
§. Every subject has the right to emigrate once he is free of military
duties or has satisﬁed them.
§. Every subject is free to choose his class and trade according to his
51
own free inclinations and to educate himself for it.
These examples allow only the remark that it would never have occurred
to the imperial Estatesto reject them, and that only contrarian perversity
or stubbornness or whatever one wants to call it could cause such an
assembly to fail to mention them and to honor the king who expressly
made them the fundamental provisions of the rights and obligations of his
subjects. However older constitutions were related to such principles, those
principles were bound up with, entangled in, and even frequently obscured
by particular and external circumstances. Rights were not incorporated in
such constitutions on principled grounds – that is, for the sake of rationality
or absolute right – but appeared rather as individual acquisitions thanks
to particular circumstances and were thus limited to certain kinds of cases,
as if through unfortunate circumstances they could be as easily lost. It is
an inﬁnitely more important development of culture that it has advanced
to the knowledge of the simple foundations of the institution of a state,
and knows how to grasp these foundations in simple sentences, like an
elementary catechism. If the Estates Assembly had given occasion for the
twenty paragraphs which contain these general provisions to be hung on
tablets in the churches, for youth to be taught them as they matured, and
made into a standing article of school and church instruction, it would
have been less amazing than for an Assembly to ignore them and fail to feel
the worth of the universal awareness of such principles and of their public
recognition by the government.
Because of their generality, however, these principles make up only the
outline for legislation to be drawn up, like the Mosaic law or the famous
Droits de l’homme et du citoyen of a more recent time. For existing legislation
and a government and administration that is already in power, these are the
permanent regulators upon which a revision or an extension of what already
exists must be grounded. The king’s Constitutional Charter stops with
In W¨urttemberg, these were the Lutheran, Reformed, and catholic communities.
Reichsst¨ande.

[The attitude of the Diet]

these universal foundations and contains neither the further development
of them nor the inclusion of more precise provisions which could already
exist as state institutions. Organic constitutional provisions and actual laws
generally verge quite close on one another, and the further work of the
development and subsumption of the already existing institutions could
have provided a primary object of activity for the Estates Assembly.
[the attitude of the diet]
These, then, are the chief aspects of the manner in which the king thought
he had supplemented the previous state constitution of his realm by adding
the important element of the people’s representation and by recognizing
52
and proclaiming the universal principles of justice in the life of the state.
And he believed himself to have achieved and perfected the incorporation
of that element, thereby creating the basis for the further development and
application of the principles of right, namely by actually convening the
Estates according to the provisions of the Constitutional Charter, publicly
pledging to uphold the charter, and solemnly presenting it to the Estates
and promulgating it as the basis of their authority. The expectation was
that the further course of history would show how this new creation, the
Estates, was active in the sphere given to them and how this important vital
element which had been introduced into the organism of the state would
inﬂuence it. But the story developing before our eyes is not one of vitality
and assimilation into a larger whole. Instead, the members called to the
Assembly refuse to be taken as members into the state, declaring themselves
instead to be Estates of another world,a past time, and demand that the
present be changed into the past, and reality into unreality.
What happened at the beginning of that same March meeting, at
which the king thought he had completed the inward constitution of his
realm, was that both the previously privileged classes and those called to
the Estates declared that they were outside the new legal constitution and
that they would not accept the constitution given by the king.
To begin with, the male heirsof the royal house declaredthat they
wanted explicitly to reserve the rights of their earlier condition for them-
selves and all future male heirs, other descendants, and heirs-of-heirs of
the royal house. Then a number of mediatized princes declared that they
awaited from the Congress of Monarchs in Vienna the determination
I.e., as Estates of the old German Empire, not of the new sovereign state of W¨urttemberg.
Agnaten, the speciﬁcally male heirs of the king.
Proceedings, sect. I, pp. ff.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
of their rights and relations and that they could therefore not subordi-
nate themselves in advance to a particular Estates constitution; they thus
renounced participation in the proceedings. In fact, a declaration was
inserted into the ﬁrst address of the Estates (without it being exactly clear
on what authority) to the effect that the remaining princes and counts and
the entire nobility could participate only under reserve of their rights and
the decision of the Congress. These reserved rights were given a strikingly
broader sense in particular in an appeal directed to the Estates by Count
von Waldeck in the name of the House of Counts of Limpurg.It is stated
53
therethat the house had never accepted the abdication of the Roman
emperor (an abdication which had been accepted by all the potentates of
Europe) andthat after the dissolution of the Confederation of the Rhine
it had returned to the legal possession of all its earlier rights, though it
lacks until the present moment the actual possession of them (even if that
is unjust). In other words, it formally renounces legal incorporation into
the W¨urttemberg state and any subjection to it. It was further stipulated
that the count was prepared, when W¨urttemberg became a constitutional
state, to give the conditions under which the county of Limpurg would
become subject to W¨urttemberg by treaty.
To determine how the king’s ministry might have viewed the pretensions
of the mediatized princes, which reached the ridiculous level of refusing
to recognize the abdication of the Roman emperor, is not the business
of this account. It does seem incomprehensible, however, that an Estates
Assembly would concede participation and voting rights in its deliberations
and decisions to members who have formally declared that they legally do
not belong to the Kingdom of W¨urttemberg, and that although they wish
to take part in reaching obligatory decisions for the people of W¨urttemberg,
such decisions will not be binding on those who help make them until such
time when a constitutional state has come about with their help and they
have declared the conditions on which they are willing to join it. Even if
the pretension of making laws for others but declaring oneself not to be
subject to them is a frequent enough phenomenon elsewhere, it may be
more difﬁcult to ﬁnd examples of such a degree of laxity in Estates that
allow such participation in deliberations and decisions under conditions
which treat the king so arrogantly.
Several days later, yet another Estate – the prelates – made the insignif-
icant move of addressing a petition to the king that they be represented
in the Assembly and be accorded their prior rights as a particular Estate,
Ibid., sect. VI, pp. ff.
Ibid., p. .
Ibid., p. .

[The attitude of the Diet]

all the while characterizing the content of their petition merely as a wish.a
Of the two prelates who were already members of the Estates Assembly,
the one who was summoned as chancellor of the University of T¨ubingen
declared that he did not know whether he represented the university, the
54
church, or the learned class; the other, summoned as general superinten-
dent of the protestant church, made the naive comment that a good friend
had advised him not to endorse the appeal of the other prelates in order to
appear impartial and to be able to support their cause all the more.
The whole Estates Assembly thus puts itself in a position that is opposed
to actual conditions in the world. It rejects the constitution given by
the king and therewith the instructions on the strength of which it was
convened. It gives itself a determination of its own and, in deciding upon
the rejection of that constitution, contradicts the universal constitution of
Germany and Europe as so recently founded by all the European powers.
The Estates Assembly did not reject the king’s constitution because it
was opposed to the right which subjects can demand for themselves in a
political constitution on the basis of the eternal rights of reason. One might
have expected that their rejection would proceed from an investigation of
the Charter, which they did not get involved with, and that they must at
least have recognized its universal principles. But they rejected it because it
was not the old W¨urttemberg constitution – not merely because it differed
from the earlier one (an investigation did not precede this either) but
frankly and expressly because it was not this former constitution itself,
because the act whereby they would accept it was not the pure restoration
and revival of the old one. But the dead cannot come to life again; the
Estates Assembly proved in their demand that they had not only no concept
of, but no clue about, the nature of the task at hand. They showed that
they regarded what was necessary in this task as a wish or private arbitrary
choice of the king or his ministry and that they thought it had to do with a
contingency and not with the nature of the thing. They granted that several
circumstances were new and therefore modiﬁcations had to be introduced.
Yet the changed circumstances which they themselves referred to were
highly marginal and had virtually no bearing on the essential difference
between the old and new political condition of W¨urttemberg. For example,
they mentioned the addition of a noble class. But as we noted above, the
a [Footnote in the original:] In the Assembly of the previous Duchy of W¨urttemberg all fourteen
prelates had seats and voted, and were thus not represented but participated as non-elected members,
as peers.
Proceedings, Section II, pp. ff.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
nobles insisted that legally and hence constitutionally (since it is only in
the context of a constitution that legal conditions apply) they were not
yet actually subjects of W¨urttemberg; indeed, they even refused to allow
the state with the concurrence of the Estates to give them a determinate
constitutional or civil status within the realm. The other circumstance they
mentioned was the extension of equal civil rightsto subjects belonging
to a Christian confession other than the Lutheran faith – a circumstance
55
which had no bearing on the nature of the constitution anyway, just as the
ﬁrst circumstance was supposedly not yet part of the constitution either.
A further cause for modiﬁcations was thought to be the expansion of the
country by more than half its previous size. In fact this circumstance could
have provided a very important ground for opposing the mere reintroduc-
tion of the previous constitution of Old W¨urttemberg. Instead, the Estates
Assembly sought to show, with lawyer’s arguments drawn from prior cases
and appeals to the old positive right of the state and the formal concept of
incorporation, that the newly added part had the same right to the blessing
of the constitution that the other part did. At root, however, the whole
treatment of this consideration and especially the legal argument was quite
pointless in regard to the main issue at hand, something quite close to a
querelle d’Allemand. For even if W¨urttemberg had not been expanded and
had remained in its prior territory, the change in the situation, and the
need for and necessity of a new constitution, would have remained the
same.
In order to illustrate the necessity of a new constitution, it would be
possible to adduce many and various adverse consequences of reintroduc-
ing the old W¨urtttemberg constitution under circumstances which had
changed in many other ways than those just noted. The culture of the age
already demanded at least a collection and review of the constructions and
constitutions which had ended, like the German imperial constitution,
in an unshapely building. One needs only to consider the commendable
collection of chief articles of the original W¨urttemberg state constitution
arranged by our ecclesiastical counselor Herr Paulusin order to see that
such a condition makes the principles of the constitution into an in-
exhaustible armory for lawyers’ and advocates’ deductions but at the same
time makes knowledge of the constitution and thus more or less the
Staatsb¨urgerrechte.
Hegel’s one reference in the Estates essay to the theologian Heinrich Eberhard Gottlob Paulus,
who was now his colleague at Heidelberg (hence “our” Paulus). It was Hegel’s rejection of Paulus’
essay on the W¨urttemberg Estates that led to a falling-out between the two (see Introduction,
footnote ).

[The attitude of the Diet]

constitution itself inaccessible to the people. Our age can no longer be
satisﬁed with such a condition of the constitution. That something was
achieved in regard to this formality and that what is to all appearances a
purely formal business also came to have an inﬂuence on more material
concerns, will be the subject of discussion below.
To return to the adverse consequences just mentioned, other supposedly
beneﬁcial consequences may be weighed against them – especially the law,
which is supposed to be made independent of consequences – and this
the Estates did to the point of tedium. Such controversies lead to the
usual interminable back and forth, because such arguments and counter-
arguments are insufﬁcient for a ﬁnal decision so long as there is no Praetor
56
to render it. What matters is only the nature of the issue at hand, and this is
in the present case very simple. The change which has been in preparation
for centuries and has only recently been completed is the transition we have
already mentioned: that the more important German countries have gone
from being imperial ﬁefs to being sovereign states. In the previous situation
the prince on the one hand and the country and people on the other hand
(although the latter are subjects, often to the point of bondage) could stand
opposite one another with an independence which on both sides verged on
rights of sovereignty. Between the two stood the emperor and the empire
as an external connection which kept both in their independence and also
necessarily kept them together – just as a private individual as opposed to
another private individual is an independent person. The relations which
bound such individuals to one another were predicated on subjective need
and arbitrary choice, yet it is only to the extent that they are within a
single state and subject to a common authority and courts that there are
contractual relations at all, and only then does making contracts have a
complete and actual sense, and only then are the independence and the
mutual relationships of individuals maintained. But the less powerful that
authority between and over them proved itself to be, the worse the collisions
between both parties had to be, because they were bound together in their
independence as government and subject and could not break apart from
one another.
Such a condition, in which prince and people were bound through such
an external power, carried with it the consequence that political rightsin
the proper sense of that term were found on the side of subjects.To rights
of this type belong most of those which ﬂowed from the ﬁef-relationship,
yet it would be superﬂuous to touch here on such rights, because there
Staatsrechte.
On the side of the subjects rather than on the side of the prince.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
was in Old W¨urttemberg an insigniﬁcant nobility whose rights were of
no great consequence for the state’s relations. The right of the previous
W¨urttemberg Estates to handle the receipt of taxes is, however, worthy of
special mention. Bound up with that was the right not only to enjoy a
parliamentary allowance themselves, but also to name ofﬁcials, advisers,
and above all a committee,as well as to order payments from the treasury
for their members and other ofﬁcials. Indeed this committee itself had the
management of the treasury, from which it drew the payment determined
as a whole by the Estates. Beyond that, however, its administrative right
stretched so far that it also decreed allowances and remunerations for itself,
and both decreed and made awards and recurring payments to its own
members as well as to other individuals for actual or imagined services. It
57
was just this use of the country’s monies for personal ends, for themselves –
something honor most disdains to hold secret – that was removed from all
control. The inner destruction and ethical decay inherent in such private
plundering and in such a condition more generally is very closely related
to the formal destruction of the state, in that the Estates use their control
of the treasury to pursue their own ends and become a kind of sovereign
power standing in relation to foreign powers. There is only a small step
between having one’s own treasury and maintaining one’s own troops,
and it would be simply laughable to place a legal prohibition on the
Estates’ maintaining their own troops but to give them the power and
means to do just that, by letting them have their own treasury. When the
previously mentioned power of the emperor and empire over and between
its subjects was still present, such consequences could be prevented in
individual cases – when, that is, this power was effective and also when
it desired to act; but it remained a contingency whether this consequence
was prevented or not. Indeed, the German Empire did not lack for cases in
which Estates were authorized to keep their own troops – as, for example,
A central feature of the politics associated with W¨urttemberg’s Estates was the standing committee
(Ausschuss) which met and made decisions in the absence of plenary meetings of the Assembly. There
was a smaller (eight-member) and a larger (sixteen-member) version of the committee, but over
time the positions in both tended to be drawn from a very narrow circle of families and, given the
infrequency with which the Assembly met during long periods of W¨urttemberg history (in the 
years after there were only four plenary sessions), real power – especially over ﬁnancial matters –
shifted to the committee members. The committee was not only authorized to assemble at its own
discretion, it also possessed the right to petition the sovereign independently of the plenary assembly
and to elect its own members; it even had separate ﬁnances. The smaller committee established
itself as a virtual oligarchy within the state, co-opting new members without need of the Assembly’s
approval and taking on all the rights and responsibilities of the Estates Assembly itself. (Cf. Hartwig
Brandt, Parlamentarismus in W¨urttemberg 1819–1870. Anatomie eines deutschen Landtags [D¨usseldorf:
Droste, ], pp. f.)

[The attitude of the Diet]

the city of Emden in East Friesland. It was in this country, which was more
distant from the reach of the empire’s power, that the Estates themselves
recruited troops in opposition to their princes, concluded treaties with
foreign powers, and called armies into the country and paid them. It is
hard to ﬁnd in this connection a more instructive history than the splendid
history of East Friesland by von Wiarda. We see in it a coherent picture of
the most shameful, oppositional, and destructive ruin emerging from the
relation between prince and Estates, in whose hands lay rights to which
the sovereign was entitled. On a larger scale, we ﬁnd the same thing in
the history of France and England (not to mention Poland), for example,
before these countries had completed their developmentinto states, only
that these histories are also free from the nauseating aspect of the rights-
and paper-formalism of Germany.
The archives of the East Friesland Estates were open to von Wiarda,
who was in their service and on whose commission he wrote his work. The
W¨urttemberg Estates have not arranged for such a history. The famous
Moser, who was qualiﬁed to do it and who was also the Estates’ adviser,
was driven out of their company. Yet among other particularities put before
the public, a brochure stands out that allows at least a glimpse into one
aspect of the matter we have touched on: the independent administration
of the treasury by the Estates during a certain period. The title of this
brochure is: “The Administration of the W¨urttemberg Treasury by the
Former, Now Cashiered Committee of the W¨urttemberg Estates; Drawn
58
from the Accounts, Acts, and Articles of the Estates” (, no place of
publication given). The Assembly, which in was convened again for
the ﬁrst time in twenty-ﬁve years or so, investigated the accounts of the
committees that had been in power; the brochure relays at least part of
the results of this investigation. The preface says summarily: “the results of
these accounts contain not only many tons of gold which had been spent
against the law but run into the millions, and, from the last Parliament of
until the opening of the present one in March , when the trouble
was put to an end, amount to the enormous sum of ,,guilders:
that is, four million, two hundred, thirty-eight thousand guilders of state
funds to whose trustworthy administration and use the committees were
bound by oath and duty.”
It is perhaps sufﬁcient to mention this result. A detailed picture, drawing
out how deeply independence has been allowed to sink the Estates’ admin-
istration, does not belong here. In particular there would be the manifold
Bildung.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
forms of remuneration to dig up which the committee members allot-
ted themselves for every signiﬁcant and insigniﬁcant task outside of their
usual salary – for example, a clerk inquiring after the health of the duke –
and so much that can rightly be called fraud, in which these same family
names come up particularly often. Noteworthy also are shining examples
of diplomatic attempts and embassies, and above all their remuneration. In
the account from –there appears a sum of ,guilders which was
paid to a foreign councillor in for a trip to St. Petersburg to pursue
the concerns of the country that had come to “embarrassment” (??);a
trip to Munich on commercial affairs at ,guilders, etc. It does not
help to say that the squandering and plundering of the state treasury were
abuses and illegalities; when the sum of illegally spent national funds can
run up to million, certainly the laws that make such illegalities possible
are no good. A good constitution is indeed only one through which illegal
actions are punished and moreover prevented. If they do such things in
the green tree, one could ask, what shall be done in the dry?Such plun-
dering and squandering, after all, occurred at a time when emperor and
imperial courts stood above the Estates, when the Estates themselves ended
a lengthy, extremely costly suit against their prince because of extortions
and illegalities, and a huge mass of debt had been taken on which has not
been paid off in ﬁfty years to this very moment. This is a time one hears
59
praised as a time of German honesty, a time when the Estates were worthy
and happiness was brought about through the constitution – all this in
contrast to the ruin, luxury, and wrong of more recent times!
The deplorable fact that the Estates’ independence made it possible for
them to plunder the state treasury may have been a natural consequence
or it might have been possible to stop it by laws and altered institutions.
Yet be that as it may, there remains the greater social evil in relation to
the state, that the independence of the Estates in the arrangement and
management of a state treasury makes it possible to impede and hinder the
progress of the state both in its internal affairs and particularly in its political
relations with other states. It is the latter set of relations which in any case
is distant from the concern of the Estates – indeed, it is often odious to
them, and, for the Germans up to now, has been a completely alien matter.
Hegel’s question marks are occasioned by what is probably a solecism in the German original from
which he is quoting. There reference is made to the “dort verlegenen Landesangelegenheiten,” literally
“the land’s business which is embarrassed there.” A more likely reading would be “die dorthin
verlegten Landesangelegenheiten” (“the land’s business which had been transferred there”). Hegel’s
point seems to be to draw attention to the Assembly’s poor command of German – yet another jab
at the Estates.
Cf. Luke :.

[The attitude of the Diet]

The notion of putting military power and an army independent of the
government into the hands of the Estates or some corporation in the state
would be universally viewed as a provision that destroys the state, but there
would be no great difference if the arrangement of the whole or of a part
of the state treasury and the authority to allocate payments and pensions
should be granted to such a corporation. It might seem that the Estates of
a former German country which had and then lost such control over the
treasury would thereby lose much of their authority and power. Yet it has
already been observed that through a country’s transition from imperial
ﬁef to sovereign state the authority and power of the Estates were inﬁnitely
increased and, if only for that reason, they must not retain their earlier
authority. The state would cease to be a state under such provisions and
would be destroyed by the two sovereign powers it ﬁnds in itself. Or rather
the unity would be restored, either by the so-called Estates’ bringing down
the government and seizing it, as we have seen in recent history, or, as
we have likewise seen, by the government’s throwing out such Estates and
thereby saving state and people. The greatest guarantee and security of
the Estates lies precisely in their not possessing a power opposed to their
nature. By contrast, the greatest folly is to seek in such a power a protection
for themselves and for the people, since such a power makes it right and
(sooner or later) necessary to annul such Estates.
It remains to be added that with the qualitative change from ﬁef to state
60
there has also been a complete change in the more precise formal relation
between prince and subject that had obtained in the former. Since prince
and land stood over one another as owner and holder of particular rights
in the manner of persons bearing private rights, they thus were subject to
a third party, the power of emperor and empire. They were therefore able,
under a praetor, to conclude contracts with one another and to relate to
one another in the mode of private right. Even in more recent times, when
truer concepts have emerged in place of the idea – previously accepted
without thought and reason – that governments and princes rest on divine
authority, the expression “contract of state” has still seemed to contain
the false thought that in the state the concept of contract truly suits the
relation of prince and subject, of government and people, and that the legal
provisions of private right which follow from the nature of a contract could
and even should ﬁnd here their application. It does not take much thought
to see that the connection between prince and subject, between government
and people, has an original, substantial unity at its basis, while in the case
of a contract one proceeds rather from the opposite assumption, namely
the equal independence and indifference of both parties with respect to one


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
another. Any agreement into which they happen to enter is a contingent
relationship, emerging from subjective need and the arbitrary choice of
both. The connnection involved in the state differs essentially from such
a contract in that it is an objective, necessary relation independent of
arbitrary choice and pleasure. Rights depend on what is a duty in and
for itself; in the case of a contract, by contrast, arbitrary choice grants
reciprocal rights between parties, and duties follow from these reciprocal
rights. When a country undergoes the transition from being a ﬁefdom
under the empire to being a state, the previous independence of the two
sides, mediated by a third power between and over them (and therewith
also the whole relation of contract), has fallen away.
The fundamental error of the position taken by the W¨urttemberg Estates
lies in their beginning from a positive right, believing themselves still to
have it as a standpoint and to be demanding their right only on the ground
that they had previously possessed it. They have acted like a merchant who
lost his fortune in a shipwreck, yet who wanted to continue his same mode
of life and demanded the same credit from others, or like a landowner who,
after a ﬂood has covered his formerly sandy ﬁeld with fertile loam, wanted
to till and cultivate his ﬁeld in the same manner as before.
The attitude of the Estates that have been convened in W¨urttemberg
is precisely the opposite of what began twenty-ﬁve years ago in a neigh-
61
boring realm and what at the time had resonated among all spirits: that in
a state constitution nothing ought to be recognized as valid except what
can be recognized according to the right of reason. Some were worried
that the leavened dough of the revolutionary principles of that time – the
abstract thoughts of freedom – had not yet risen and been digested in
Germany, and that Estates Assemblies might take the opportunity to make
similar experiments and to cause confusion and danger. To that degree,
W¨urttemberg has provided the admittedly comforting example of that
evil spirit having ceased its haunting. At the same time, however, it has
also shown that the incomparable experience which took place in France,
and outside of France in Germany as well, was lost on these Estates –
the experience that both the extreme of ﬁxed insistence on the positive
constitutional law of a defunct state and the opposite extreme of an abstract
theory and shallow prattle were equally the entrenchments of selﬁshness
and the sources of unhappiness in that land and outside of it.
The W¨urttemberg Estates wanted to begin again on the basis of the
standpoint at which the previous Estates had found themselves: they refused
to consider the content of the king’s Constitutional Charter, and neither
asked what rational law was nor sought to prove that anything was in accord

[The attitude of the Diet]

with it, but insisted instead on the formalism of demanding an old positive
right on the ground that it is positive and in accord with contract. The
beginning of the French Revolution must be considered as the struggle
of the rational right of the state against the mass of positive rights and
privileges which had oppressed it; in the Proceedings of the W¨urttemberg
Estates we see the same struggle between these principles, except that the
positions are reversed. If at the time the majority of the French Estates and
the people’s party claimed and demanded back the rights of reason while
the government was on the side of the privileges, in W¨urttemberg the king
placed his constitution in the realm of the rational right of the state. The
Estates, on the other hand, are casting themselves in the role of defenders
of what is positive and of privileges; indeed, they present the perverse
spectacle of doing so in the name of the people against whose interests, far
more than against that of the prince, those privileges are directed.
One could say of the W¨urttemberg Estates what has been said of the
French ´emigr´es who returned to their country: they have forgotten nothing
and learned nothing. They appear to have slept through these last twenty-
ﬁve years, the richest that world history has perhaps had, and for us the
most instructive because our world and ideasbelong to them. There
62
could scarcely be a more terrible mortar for pulverizing the false concepts
of right and the prejudices about state constitutions than the trialof
these twenty-ﬁve years, but these Estates have emerged unscathed, just as
they were. “Old right” and “old constitution” are such grand and beautiful
words that it sounds like a sacrilege to rob a people of its rights. However,
whether that which goes by the name of the old right and constitution is
right or wrong cannot depend on its age. The abolition of human sacriﬁce,
of slavery, of feudal despotism and of countless infamies was also always a
cancelling of something which was an old right. It has often been repeated
that rights cannot be lost, that a hundred years of wrong cannot make a
right. One should have added: even if the hundred years of wrong had
been called right for those hundred years; and moreover that a hundred
years of actual positive right is rightly destroyed if the basis falls away
which is the condition of its existence. Those fond of empty phrases may
insist that one spouse retains his right toward the other even after the
other’s death, or that the merchant whose ship was swallowed up by the
sea yet retains his right to it. The Germans’ sickness has always been to
hang upon such formalisms and waste time arguing about them. Thus also
with the W¨urttemberg Estates Assembly almost the entire content of their
Vorstellungen.
Gericht.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
activity has been limited to fruitlessly asserting their formal right with the
stubbornness of a lawyer. There were some, among others the Assembly
president, the Prince zu Hohenlohe-Oehringen,who attempted in vain
to lead them to the real issue and to deter them from their litigious path.
For the mortar in which our age has been crushed for the past twenty-ﬁve
years was clearly powerless to change them.
[course of the proceedings]
The Estates’ insistence on the formalism of positive right and the standpoint
of private right, when what was at issue was a matter of rational right and
the right of the state, has had the effect upon the history of their one-and-
a-half year proceedings that they are extremely empty of thoughts, and
for such a great object as that which was presented – the free constitution
of a contemporary German state – they contain little or almost nothing
instructive. Instead of a fruitful work, what is almost only a superﬁcial
history presents itself, to whose main thread we now turn.
As we mentioned above, after the king had solemnly opened the Estates
Assembly on March , , presented the Constitutional Charter, and
63
then left the Assembly to itself, Count von Waldeck (who was neither from
Old W¨urttemberg nor even a non-elected member of the Assembly, but
only a substitute for one) made a speech that began with the previously
mentioned praise of the king, the “sublime monarch, who demonstrated
rare power, enlarged W¨urttemberg considerably, and is now restoring the
constitution eternally founded by his lordship’s ancestors, pure princes of
rare qualities.”
It could not perhaps have been otherwise than that the ﬁrst statement on
the side of the Estates Assembly, while not acknowledging the fact that the
king had just given his realm a constitution, nevertheless contained a vague
encomium intended to preserve appearances. This praise is, like the whole
speech, so pretentiously and ambiguously given, the stamp of subtlety so
pressed upon every word, that the Estates Assembly could enjoy the skill
of their speaker, proving outwardly due devotion but inwardly committing
to nothing; the king and his ministers, on the other hand, could take these
twisted and concealed expressions as scorn, the more so particularly as
the decision is ascribed to him to restore the bond between ruler and all
Friedrich August Karl, Prince of Hohenlohe-Oehringen (–), was a non-elected member of
the Estates Assembly from until and its president from till , a post the king had
commanded him to accept after Christian Friedrich Karl, Prince of Hohenlohe-Kirchberg, originally
appointed as president, had failed to appear at the Assembly.

[Course of the proceedings]

Estates of the state that has been recognized for centuries as beneﬁcial and
a constitution that is satisfactory to all parts of the state, and to cancel
again the cancellation nine years ago of the constitution founded for all
time by his lordship’s ancestors. One could take this assurance for a bold
presupposition, if they had only and immediately acted in accord with that;
but, as we said, it could only appear the more spiteful and scornful as the
vexations of the Estates Assembly had from the beginning stemmed from
the very fact that the king did not want to restore the old constitution, and
that no single Estate of his state, no part of it (except for the king himself
and his ministers), was satisﬁed with his constitution.
The further course of this speech is an historical compilation of the
fortunes of W¨urttemberg under its constitution; in general it appears that
the condition of the land had been miserable, dejected, and unhappy for
as long as it had had that constitution. From these premises, the highly
surprising conclusion is drawn “that the old W¨urttemberg constitution
made the country happy for centuries, that it has the most decisive merits
in comparison with all other constitutions of other lands, and has without
doubt always been the best constitution of any German country, being the
object not only of admiration in Germany but even repeatedly drawing
attention in England.”
64
For these reasons and for the reason that in the old constitution every-
thing had been settled by contract, that nothing in it was open to doubt,
that it was guaranteed and sworn to by all the rulers, that the people had
not waived their right to it etc., the Estates insisted that it alone must be
recognized as the fundamental lawand the fundamental compact.Any
modiﬁcations made necessary by the aforementioned change in circum-
stances would, they said, have to be grounded on the old constitution. The
petition proposed by the speaker and accepted by the Assembly expressed
these thoughts not in a direct style but inappropriately put them in the
form of the following indirect hypothesis: if the people had elected rep-
resentatives only on the assumption that the old, bequeathed, conﬁrmed,
beneﬁcial etc. W¨urttemberg constitution would have to form the founda-
tion of any modiﬁcations, and if furthermore the majority of mediatized
princes were forced to reserve their rights and await the decision of the
Congress,then the Estates must recognize with most humble gratitude
that by opening the Assembly the king has given them occasion to delib-
erate on how to apply the new conditions to the former conditions of the
Grundgesetz.
Grundvertrag.
I.e., the Congress of Monarchs at Vienna.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
land. Thus although the Assembly could not at this point tell the king
what the outcome of their deliberations would be, they do not doubt etc.
In its very next meeting and in a style altogether different from these
hypothetical and cryptic formulations of “reserving the right to further
deliberations,” “informing the king of the outcome of their deliberations
at some future date, in case they should reach a conclusion,” and so on,
the Assembly expresses the meaning of its petition in an explicit way,
saying that they have declared that the newer modiﬁcations brought about
through particular conditions could be negotiated only on the basis of the
old W¨urttemberg constitution.
After Count von Waldeck’s speech and the verbatim reading of his
previously prepared petition to the king, a single deputy made a few
remarks encouraging the Assembly to endorse the petition, whereupon it
was silently and unanimously accepted.
We have already remarked on the content of the speeches and petitions
and their carefully balanced style, laced with a boldness that could be called
contempt and yet nevertheless obfuscatory, cryptic, and stilted. In all their
carefulness, level-headedness, and balance of expression, the diplomatic
proceedings of recent times nevertheless reveal an open, direct, digniﬁed
attitude, and in their great astuteness are anything but complacently clever.
How much more ought one to expect from a German Estates Assembly a
frankness, liveliness, and digniﬁed openness in their ﬁrst declaration, and
not the sickening obfuscation and crypticism and then the silence with
which the rest of the Assembly hid itself behind that obfuscation!
What they prided themselves on most as time went on was the unanimity
65
of their decision to accept the petition. The following meeting and the
further course of the proceedings reveal the reason for that unanimity and
for the external manner in which the petition had been accepted in the
meeting. For in that meeting (on March ), six nobles protested against
the petition’s statement that the present group of nobles were reserving
their rights. By way of explanation they point out that the reports of two
members which led to the petition were given so quickly and with such a
weak voice that they could not be heard; and they go on to remark that not
everyone knew that standing up from one’s seat was supposed to represent
a formal vote.
Above all else, formal voting procedures must be determined in an
assembly and must be made known to the members. Even if they were
only going to be tentative, they ought to have been accompanied by an
expression and declaration whose meaning could be subject to no doubt.
The picture of silence is completed by the mention of the quick reading of

[Course of the proceedings]

the reports and of the soft voice in which they were read. Is this a picture
worthy of the ﬁrst appearance of an Estates Assembly, an appearance with
which they make the most decisive, even their only, resolution? Those
six members straightforwardly declared that they gratefully accepted the
constitution given by the king. This explicitness contrasts with the phrases
of the petition, for one could not have known that it was supposed to
signify the non-acceptance of the constitution if one had not been prepared
and instructed to this effect in advance. It would have been more open
and worthy of an Assembly of German men and representatives of the
people if it had declared its non-acceptance of the king’s constitution as
straightforwardly as those six nobles gave their acceptance. In what follows,
we will occasionally mention the delicacy which was observed toward
the king; genuine delicacy, however, lies without doubt in a cultivated
frankness, and the indelicate behavior and tone toward the king and toward
the Assembly itself is precisely the obfuscatory attitude mentioned above.
More importantly, however, the Assembly’s main resolution should not
have been preceded by just two written statements, which were moreover
tangential to the issue; and the unanimity of their decision, far from being
a virtue, is rather occasion for reproach and criticism. What we see is an
Estates Assembly, the overwhelming majority of which has already agreed
66
in advance about their decision and settled the matter in silence. Although
later on another group mounted partial opposition, what they really showed
was complete indifference toward the real thrust of the decision, namely
the old constitution; this group neither made appeal to formal right nor
to its content, but only wanted a good and thus a better constitution
than that of Old W¨urttemberg. Thus we see an Assembly which is still
new to its role, an assembly which has been made restrained and silent
by its ignorance of constituent parts, its uncertainty about what ought to
happen, and its lack of habit and practice, and which is intimidated by the
obfuscation and concealed resolve of a few members. If the Assembly could
have grasped its status and concept more clearly and more courageously,
they would have made a rule of the greatest openness and fullness, rather
than remaining silent, and they would have had to agree that the greatest
thing was to have a say now that they had been given one. Whether their
unanimity corresponded to their genuine intentions or whether it was the
result of intimidation and a lack of self-conﬁdence, in either case they
should have felt obliged to appoint an Advocatum diaboli, if one can call
it that, as this name does not appear too inappropriate in light of the
animosity they demonstrated toward the king’s constitution. It would have
been the duty of their ofﬁce to look into all the grounds which could be


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
given for the acceptance of the king’s constitution and put those in the
brightest light, and then to have an equally straightforward statement of
their actual opinion and a detailed discussion of their motives precede
their resolutions. Yet such deliberation neither preceded nor followed their
resolutions, whereas it is the purpose of an Estates Assembly not only not
to act without deliberating, but to deliberate about the interests of the state
before the eyes of the people and of the world.
When several months later Herr Gleich, the representative of Aalen,
delivered a speech which was completely opposed to the previously undis-
cussed assumptions of the Assembly, the committee in charge of making
a report on it impressed upon him that such appearances were bound
to occasion displeasure and general disapproval in the Assembly, where
up to now harmony and patriotic sincerity had kept any alien, dishonest
inﬂuences at a distance. What? Is a deputy to be exposed to insinua-
tions of having bowed to “insidious inﬂuence from outside the Assembly”
merely for having shown the courage of voicing his dissent from that
silent and dead unanimity? In any case the direct accusation of dishon-
esty, or else complete abstention from mere insinuation, would have been
worthier.
In the beginning of the committee’s report, Herr Gleich’s speech is
67
ascribed the purpose – or rather it is said that he appears to have the
purpose – of forming an opposition party in the Assembly that until now
has most gloriously been characterized by harmony. It cannot escape anyone
who has reﬂected on the nature of an Estates Assembly and is familiar with
their appearances that without an oppositionsuch an Assembly will lack
external and internal life, that such an oppositionbelongs to its essence
and justiﬁcation, and that it is not actually constituted until an opposition
emerges within it. For without an opposition,the Assembly has the shape
only of a party or even of a clump.
The reviewer has spent so much time on the behavior of the Estates
Assembly not only because it is noteworthy in its own right but also because
it is characteristic of the whole of what follows. Regarding the purely formal
Heinrich Maximilian Gleich (–) joined the Assembly on March , , as a representative
from Aalen, but left his post seven months later in September of . As indicated in the text, the
reason for his brief tenure was his openness to accepting the royal constitution and his sharp criticism
of the Assembly’s manner of proceeding. The unfavorable response to his proposals moved him to
resign, and he later refused any candidacy as a deputy in the Landtag. For a further account of Gleich’s
criticisms and the Assembly’s response to it, see Joachim Gerner, Vorgeschichte und Entstehung der
w¨urttembergischen Verfassung im Spiegel der Quellen (1815–1819) (Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, ),
pp. –.
Opposition. In contrast to Gegensatz, also used in this passage, Opposition has primarily political
connotations.
Gegensatz.
Opposition.
Opposition.

[Course of the proceedings]

aspect of the proceedings, it is useful to highlight two further circumstances.
The course of their proceedings within the Assembly was in general that
the committee was appointed for a matter that had come up, a report
was given by the committee, and then debated, and a decision about it
reached. In the selection of the committee, most frequently, particularly at
the beginning, when it is most crucial to stake one’s claim and intimidate
rivals, it was invariably the vice president who suggested the members
by name. This executive committee,chosen by the Assembly, suggested
members for the ﬁrst committees at a point when only two members of
the Assembly had shown up, exactly those who were forever distinguished
as the heads of the Old W¨urttemberg party. The result was that they had
all the say, even more so when one sees the further delicacy of the members
of the Assembly toward one another. This delicacy extended so far that in
one case, where eleven members on a committee of twelve had received a
majority vote, whereas for the twelfth position four members had the same
number of votes, the Assembly did not choose one of these four (which
would have meant excluding the other three), but contrary to their original
decision named all ﬁfteen to the committee of twelve members.
In the case of the very next committee up for appointment, they man-
aged, by way of a conspicuously obfuscatory maneuver, to bring it about
that the four leaders named to the ﬁrst committee would not miss out on
being members of the second. Given the great inﬂuence of a committee
in general (for every matter that comes forward must be prepared by such
a committee), it is essential for the freedom of an Assembly that the same
individuals not occupy all committees and that the same hands not be
responsible for preparing everything. This inﬂuence is almost completely
unrestricted in an Assembly where almost the only or at least the main
68
statement on any issue is presented by the committee – and, so to speak, is
actually not even discussed.
The other notable item is the mode of speeches. One does not ﬁnd
in the proceedings any extemporaneous speeches but rather for the most
part only lectures read from prepared scripts,fewer and only brief oral
expressions, and no spontaneous exchanges of opinions at all. Only once,
toward the end of the Assembly, when, instead of the matter itself, the
personality of a dissenting member, Dr. Cotta,was made into an issue,
Vorstand.
Hegel contrasts here freigehaltene Reden with abgelesene Vortr¨age.
Johann Friedrich Cotta (–) is famous as one of the most distinguished German publishers
of his times. Works by Goethe, Schiller, H¨olderlin, Schelling, and Hegel appeared in the prestigious
J. G. Cotta’sche Buchhandlung. Cotta represented B¨oblingen in the Estates Assembly from to
and was active in almost all the major committees. Though he remained a staunch opponent
of the royal constitution, he came to be a moderate supporter of Wangenheim’s constitutionalism.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
were statements made (among them rather offensive personal slurs), and
then extemporaneously and in close succession. Instead of the usual vota
scripta, statements were delivered on this occasion without preparation,
blow by blow, and although they displayed the natural eloquence which
has remained in common use in our marketplaces for cases such as this,
the eloquence which dominated the Roman forum was not on view.
It is natural that committee reports were drawn up in writing and
read aloud. But the so-called debate that followed consisted mostly of one
or several members reading a prepared votum scriptum several days and
weeks afterwards, and again perhaps days and weeks later another member
producing another such votum. Thus in one and the same meeting, several
papers might be read aloud in succession, each related to a completely
different issue, even very frequently having no further consequence than
that of having been read aloud. This method of doing everything in writing
almost entirely does away with the living element that results from an
assembly of men confronting each other in order to make face-to-face
assertions, proofs, disputes, and motions with the living presence of the
spirit.
One cannot call the reading aloud of various treatises a discussion. The
English Parliament rightly prohibits by law the reading aloud of written
speeches, in part because such a paper can very easily be the work of
another and especially because the whole nature of such an assembly is
thereby altered. Outside of a very few speeches which, though composed
with a sense of vivacity,were likewise read aloud, the present volumes
of the Proceedings make up, above all, a collection of legal reﬂections,
stillborn briefs by lawyers, and closely reasoned arguments larded with
citations, not merely from the litany of parliamentary bills that have been
passed, inheritance settlements, princely wills, and so forth, but also, for
example, from the Corpus Juris, Montesquieu, Zonaras, Cramer (in the Abb.
de tacente dissentiente in Opusc. T. II and in Usus philosoph. Wolf. in jure
spec XII), and other such weighty products of scholarship.
If an Estates Assembly represents the people, are such proceedings the
way in which the people express themselves? Is this the way to inﬂuence
an assembly and the people itself? Treatises composed in a scholar’s study
69
are also only addressed to the scholar’s study or destined for the ﬁles of
Hegel’s contrast between the marketplace where German eloquence can be heard and the eloquence
associated with the Roman forum underscores the contrast, central to this essay and Hegel’s contem-
poraneously emerging political philosophy, between the economic realm of civil society (represented
by the Estates) and the distinctively political world of the state.
mit lebendigem Sinn.

[Course of the proceedings]

businessmen. Estates assemblies, however, have their essential audience in
the people itself; how can the people take an interest in and thus make any
progress with such paper-proceedings and pedantic deductions?Rather,
the people’s representatives isolate themselves in this manner from one
another and still more so from the people itself, and (even if the meetings
were public) pursue the business of the people by excluding the people.
The physiognomy of the Proceedings of the W¨urttemberg Assembly is thus
not much different from the activity of a society of young people who
come together to compose essays for practice and the progress of their
education, and swap them with each other to hear them read. Apart from
the material, it was perhaps this written mode, with the consequences
which it inevitably had for the whole course of treating business, which
occasioned the utterance (declared, of course, to be “unseemly”) of one
representative,quoted as saying that “if the submitted petititions had not
provided matter for conversation, no one would have known how to ﬁght
off the boredom.” In any case, if the debates of the Estates were supposed
to consist mainly in the communication of written arguments, meetings
in person would be rather superﬂuous and much expense could have been
spared; the whole could be accomplished through the circulation of papers.
Those accustomed to reading prefer to read such papers themelves, anyway,
rather than having to listen to them; and they would also have had the
choice of having the papers read to them by their wives or by a good friend,
and they could have sent in their vota in written form as well.
To pursue the history further, the great political event of Bonaparte’s
arrival in France from the island of Elba occurred right at the beginning
of the meetings of the Estates Assembly. It was only two days after the
Assembly convened that the king informed them of the measures Vienna
had threatened to impose. An event of this sort was suited to illuminate
the whole attitude and character of a German Estates Assembly through
its behavior and manner of action. If it had been possible for a German
people to respond to this event with joy and hope, it might have seemed
dangerous for Estates who were (as already mentioned) opposed to the will
of their king to be meeting at this moment in time. But since that was
impossible, such an Assembly was bound to seem even more desirable, to
be able with united energy to provide the means demanded by such an
70
important event, which appeared to threaten the peace of Europe anew,
particularly in those countries near France.
Deductionen.
Proceedings, sect. VIII, p. .


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
All too often it has been the ruinous, unpatriotic, even in a higher sense
criminal ploy of Estates Assemblies to use the pressure of the political
circumstances to win advantages for themselves from the government and
at the same time create an awkward situation in internal and external affairs,
rather than making open and common cause with the government to ward
off the trouble facing the state. They have thus weakened the power of
the government, instead of expanding it, and made common cause with
the enemy both in essence and in deed. On March a member, ﬁlled
with conviction of the importance of the present circumstances, made the
motionthat the Assembly should make a declaration of their own to
the king. It would state that they were prepared to give the last drop of
their blood, the last gift from their soil for him and for the good cause;
say how the Assembly intended to achieve this arming the population and
granting a loan to the government; but that they were only able to do
so on the basis of the old constitution. In an address to the Estates,a
part of the nobility recognized that great dangers demand strong measures,
and they urged the Assembly, without adding conditions, to suggest that
the king order both a general mobilizationof the country and weapons
training. Similar petitions were received from many districts of the land.
One petition from Esslingen on March (the others have remained
unpublished) expressed a worry that the king’s provision for a regional
battalion of men from every district was too sparing and could hinder
and delay the defense measures; a general summons was requested instead.
A report added by SchultheissReinhard of Oberesslingen likewise is
printed as a “bold declaration”; it says:
The attempt to get formerly discharged soldiers to re-enlist as sergeants appears
to be in vain. The feeling for love and defense of the fatherland is too dull with
these men, as it is with many or indeed most of the common people. Whoever
is healthy and between the ages of and should reach for a weapon. If the
Swabians are summoned en masse, they go and ﬁght with might, but when they
have free will, nothing happens!
Since this Schultheiss speaks of his people as one of its common mem-
71
bers, the Estates Assembly presumably did not want to charge him with
Ibid., sect. II, p. .
Ibid., p. .
Bewaffnung.
Proceedings, sect. II, p. .
Although often translated as “mayor,” the Schultheiss was (at least originally) not a popularly elected
local ofﬁcial but rather one who reported to the ducal administration. According to Vann, however,
most mayors by the late sixteenth century were elected for life by a council of village elders (James
Allen Vann, The Making of a State: W¨urttemberg 1593–1793 [Ithaca: Cornell University Press, ],
p. ).
Proceedings, sect. II, p. .

[Course of the proceedings]

slandering the people – a popular expression in recent times – when they
distinguished his letter by printing it under the description of a “bold
declaration.”
But the Estates Assembly had already tied its own hands in this and
other matters by assuming that if they made offers and suggestions, these
could be interpreted as an exercise of the right of petition acknowledged in
the king’s constitution and thus, as a consequence, as a de facto recognition
of this constitution. As if the very Assembly of the members of the Estates
were itself not a fact rooted in that formal framework and as if the people’s
representatives, brought together under such circumstances and under
whatever title, form, and authority you wish, were not obliged to ban all
other considerations from their minds – in particular the fear of actions
having consequences – and to devote all their energy to acting and thinking
for the salvation of their people!
At ﬁrst, the Assembly read aloud the petitions it had received and then
placed them ad acta. The city of T¨ubingen was credited (rather prema-
turely) with having called for a general mobilization before the conditions
in France were even known. Though at a time of external threat patriotism
is quick to hit upon the notion of a general mobilization of the people,
we should have expected the Estates Assembly to display more mature and
better insight into the military and, what is more, the political advisability
of such a measure, especially at a time when the new Assembly of the Estates
itself caused manifold machinations and internal tension. Think how the
call for mobilization could have been interpreted if it had been made even
earlier, before the events in France gave occasion for such a measure! The
experience of twenty-ﬁve war-torn years in W¨urttemberg had shown any-
way that such a mobilization as provided for in the constitution had never
had the least effect; indeed, it never once even took place, which is hardly
surprising in light of the whole purpose and condition of the constitution.
Thus it is faintly ridiculous even to think of what such a general mobiliza-
tion could have achieved in the face of the danger of the times. When the
Estates brought forward a proposal upon which they must in all probability
have assumed that the king would not act, and when they then went on
to fail to co-operate in measures which the king thought appropriate and
which he had ordered, the faith in their seriousness and good will became
yet more doubtful. Of those measures, the main one was the raising of
emergency wartime funds. The king had presented the Estates on April 
with an estimate of those costs. According to it, the costs of outﬁtting and
72
maintaining an army of ,men – provisions the king was obliged
to his allies to make – went beyond the peacetime budget of /million.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
There were also the costs of the marches of the allied armies which had
likewise been settled by agreement. If we ask what W¨urttemberg’s Estates
(whose co-operation had been explicity requested by the king and by those
on whose behalf they were acting, and who were thus authorized to do
their part in the European cause) did to turn away that danger, which
was of a unique sort and an entirely extraordinary character, the answer is:
they did nothing. Whatever contribution W¨urttemberg made among the
ranks of all the European powers in those days is due solely to the king,
the erstwhile crown prince, the ministry, and the army. The government
pursued its course with honor and glory to the fulﬁllment of its universal,
moral, and positive obligations, and as it appears, found itself hindered
not in the least by the refusal of the Estates to co-operate. The Estates by
contrast achieved nothing besides having shown their own ill will, their
failure to appreciate their lovely position, and the dispensability of their
co-operation.
Further, several of the petitions directly relating to this matter were
given by the Estates to the ministry, petitions which no longer spoke of
the readiness for sacriﬁce but proposed to provide relief to an admittedly
exhausted land by demanding that the king’s domain treasury, church
property, and so forth be used to pay for the expense of the war. For that
purpose the king had already effectively negotiated with his allies and the
appropriate army commanders; the answer which the Estates received to
their demand was simply this, that whatever was chipped in from other
state revenues would have to be repaid into the budget from other sources
in turn, and that the present issue was one of emergencyrelief funds in
the ﬁrst place. The spirit of the former relation, where prince and land
each had their own private treasury, led both sides to try to shove the
burdens as much as possible onto each other. Since the Estates in general
recognized nothing of the existing relation of a state, and since in particular
the exclusion of a civil list (about which the king had already declared his
openness in the constitution) had not even been discussed yet, let alone
been settled, the old ideas of the opposition of country and state interests,
of a country’s treasury and the state’s treasury, taken as they were from
the conditions of the past and more confused than ever in the altered
73
circumstances of the present, had no meaning and even less application
and effectiveness.
außerordentliche Hilfsmittel. The sense of außerordentlich here is to denote that these are irregular,
that is, non-recurring, expenses, not part of the Estates’ regularly recurring contributions to the
budget.

[Course of the proceedings]

But the Estates’ main response to the king’s request for co-operation in
the extraordinary conditions of the fatherland was that their co-operation
depended on whether the king agreed to revoke his constitution and re-
institute the old one. That part of the nobles who on April thought
they were able to speak both for themselves and for the whole nobility on
this matter, declared in a petition to the Estates that they recognized their
duty to ﬁght in any military action and with the other Estates to sacriﬁce
blood and property for the fatherland, yet they qualiﬁed their remarks the
following day to the effect that the submitted declaration was appropriate
only for the Estates Assembly and in no way for the king’s ministry of state,
since texts which ﬂowed from the heart were easily susceptible to various
construals.
In point of fact, this explanation was itself the most immediate example
of how something can be susceptible to multiple interpretations. They
thus made their willingness to contribute with blood and property to the
defense of the fatherland contingent upon the initiative of the Estates
Assembly. The Assembly’s initiative, though, consisted in a petition to
the king on the same date in which they combined both the issue of the
constitution and the measures which the present situation demanded, in
spite of the fact that the king had already announced that he would post-
pone a deﬁnitive decision on the ﬁrst matter until the return of the crown
prince. This momentarily evasive reason was an argumentum ad hominem
directed toward the Estates, since the latter had proven by involved argu-
ments drawn from constitutional lawthat any matters concerning the
constitution had to be submitted to the male heirs for approval; hence the
Estates could infer from the king’s consultation of the crown prince that
he had in fact recognized this right.
More precisely, the Estates declared in their petition that nothing was
more pressing than putting the people, through the united leadership of
monarch and estates, in the position of defending the fatherland, and that
the will of the honest people, in their enthusiasm, was prepared to do
anything that seemed to them necessary. But they could only base their
actions upon the foundation of the inherited constitution of the country,
and the restoration of the state’s credit would be possible only through a
constitutionally guaranteed loan – that is, by transferring responsibility for
the collection of taxes and the disposition of this part of the state trea-
sury to the Estates. Something similar occurred in an address on April ,
74
in which they say that “for all subjects, for new and old, the name ‘old
staatsrechtliche Deduktionen.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
constitution’ has a magic power.” The submitted petitions and addresses,
however, showed that the universal indignation at Bonaparte’s reappear-
ance, the feeling of the threat it posed to the fatherland, proved to be a
magic power in itself, and it had the effect of an electric shock. When
the petition states in the passage immediately prior to this one that the
fruit and wine harvest was ruined by frost and thus a great part of the
subjects were literally struggling with despair, it is hard to understand how
the old constitution could have demonstrated its magical power in this
case, or how the Estates could abstain from trying to effect a uniﬁed relief
when the internal and external circumstances were so hard. It has moreover
become sufﬁciently evident that the Old W¨urttemberg constitution exer-
cises utterly no magic power on the new subjects – more than half the land –
and that to the extent that they have had the pleasure of getting to know
it ﬁrst-hand, they view it as a kind of plague and the worst scourge of the
land, as will be shown later. Otherwise, though, the whole course of the
Estates proceedings can be seen as a story of the magic power of the name
to which the Assembly had surrendered itself right from the beginning
without bothering with what it was (or rather had been) a name for – for
our discussion of the Estates’ treasury budget above already intimated what
that name concealed, and our later description of a certain plague on the
land will reveal yet something further in this regard. In the present case it is
due to the black magic of that word that nothing more came of the words
“being ready to sacriﬁce blood and property for the good cause” than that
they remained mere words. The Estates go on to declare that the fatherland
has had no more certain protection against the poison of the dangerous
principles which now again, as twenty-ﬁve years ago, are emerging from
France, than the magical power of that word, though we already remarked
that that power has protected the Estates not only from the poison of the
bygone twenty-ﬁve years, but also, so to speak, even more from the rational
concepts of those twenty-ﬁve years.
As to the more speciﬁc aspects of the position in which the Estates had
placed themselves, they were in uncertainty as to whether they existed
at all or not since they had rejected the king’s constitution, upon whose
basis they were gathered. To be consistent, they should have dissolved and
separated after the king opened the Assembly – or rather, since even the
mode of election was not in accordance with the old constitution, they
should not have let themselves be elected in the ﬁrst place and the voters
ought not to have voted. Since it had become a fundamental maxim of their
activity to do nothing from which their factual recognition of the king’s
constitution could be inferred, they continued to tread on eggshells even in

[Course of the proceedings]

the most triﬂing formalities. Even in their ﬁrst address on March , they
75
prudently abstained from signing themselves as the “Estates Assembly.”
Instead, they signed themselves as “Those Called to the Estates Assembly.”
It was made clear to them in the king’s resolution of the th of the same
month, that the king awaited motions and petitions not from such an
entity, but only from the Assembly constituted by him in the appropriate
form, since only the Assembly is entitled to the rights determined in the
Constitutional Charter; for the rest he assured them that he would not
waste time with formalities and hence for the present would ignore the
bad form – and the resolution did in fact go on to discuss the content
of the Estates’ petition. The initial reaction of the majority was that the
signature “Estates Assembly” was an inconsistency, since it presupposed
the constitution’s validity, until the representative from Marbach, Herr
Bolley,remedied this scrupulousness by the clever expedient of signing
their next petition (of March ) as the “Estates Assembly,” but at the same
time adding a protest below the signature! In this petition it also says that
overscrupulousness about formalities (namely in relation to their mode
of election and their appearance at the convocation) would have been an
offense against their only purpose, the well-being of the monarch and the
subjects. Why, then, are they so scrupulous when it comes to the other
formalities? Have they not thereby offended against that single purpose, as
they say? Despite that conclusi and the protest appended to it, the secretary
announced in the meeting of the th that it had occurred to him only
after the issuing of the petition (which by the way in the meeting of March
had once again been publicly read in the Assembly and signed by the
president, vice president, one non-elected member, and an elected deputy)
that the closing phrase “Estates Assembly” was still missing. This fault was
then removed through a later petition. In the next resolution from the king,
the Assembly was ordered to adhere to protocol and remove the mistakes
in outward form which had marked their previous petitions, and also to
Heinrich Ernst Ferdinand Bolley (–), an advocate president of the superior court in
Stuttgart, represented Marbach in the Estates Assembly from to . From the ﬁrst meeting
of the Assembly on March , , Bolley asserted himself as perhaps the single most important
leader of the Altrechtler, i.e., the majority faction that vehemently demanded restoration of the old
constitution of W¨urttemberg. His draft for the petition of March , , justifying the Estates’
demand for the restoration of W¨urttemberg’s old constitution, was perceived as having formulated
the Altrechtlers’ “credo” (cf. Gerner, Vorgeschichte und Entstehung, p. ; cf. –). He was a
leading member of numerous committees, among them the examining committee entrusted with
compiling a legal report on the royal edict of March , , the committee for the preparation of
the constitutional negotiations with the royal commissioners, the committee for the revision and
abridgement of the grievances of the country, and the committee for ensuring the recognition of
the “Estates principle,” i.e., the validity of the old constitution as the sole basis of negotiations.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
get on with the election of a vice president, secretary, and other Estates
ofﬁcials as prescribed by the Constitutional Charter.
To follow the pedantic course of these precautions any further would be
too dull and digressive. The president repeatedly summoned the Assem-
bly to elect the ofﬁcials for whom the king had already prescribed oaths
of ofﬁceand sought to dissuade its members from their continual and
76
“otiose repetition of statements long since made” and from their overly
“legalistic” behavior. He admonished them not to jeopardize the good
cause “for the sake of mere formalism and empty words,” seeing that the
election could be held without prejudicing the further course of proceed-
ings. Nevertheless, the Assembly’s overscrupulousness won out, and they
refused to be moved to what they considered insigniﬁcant actions. If only
their own actions had had more content and signiﬁcance!
[the estates’ misguided appeal to the “will of the people”]
More speciﬁcally, the Estates Assembly claimed that, in legal terms, the old
constitution had never ceased to be valid, so that when the king decided to
give W¨urttemberg a constitution as soon as circumstances permitted, the
Assembly and the people naturally took him to mean that the old consti-
tution was to go back into effect. They also demanded that the king make
no decrees while the Assembly was in session without ﬁrst seeking their
counsel and express approval, which was tantamount to their demanding
the exercise of the rights they would in fact have had as Estates under the
old constitution. Similarly, they refused to appoint a vice presidenton
the grounds that there had been no such ofﬁce in the Estates Assembly
of Old W¨urttemberg, although they did accede to the presidency of the
Prince of Hohenlohe-Oehringen and the voting rights of the mediatized
princes, neither of which had been provided for under the old constitution.
The restoration of that constitution was their sole and simple demand, and
they justiﬁed it by appealing to the will of the people, which, they said, had
been expressed at the elections and in numerous petitions submitted to the
Assembly. The “will of the people” – a solemn word which the people’s
representatives in particular must beware of profaning or taking in vain. We
have already mentioned what the will of the people of New W¨urttemberg
was like. As Schultheiß Reinhard, himself a man of the people, said, the
sentiments of most of his fellow people for the love and defense of their
Proceedings, sect. III, p. .
The royal edict of January , had speciﬁed that the Estates Assembly elect a vice president in
the opening meeting of the session.

[The Estates’ political options]

fatherland were excessively dull. Quite apart from that, however, to say
of someone that he knows his own will is a term of rare praise. Thus not
just anyone is chosen to be the people’s representative, but only the wisest
among them, for it is not the people, but their representatives who must
know the people’s true will, that is, they must know what is truly good for
the people.The Assembly sorely misconstrued their own dignity and
vocation as the people’s representatives when they followed the loud yet
empty calls to restore the old constitution and even appealed to written
statements and petitions as the source of their authority.
Moreover, the Assembly’s appeal to the will of the people as the sole
basis of its authority, along with its refusal to recognize the authority of
the king in constitutional matters, effectively placed the Assembly out-
77
side the government as an independent and opposed power whose basis
very nearly contained the poison of a revolutionary principle. In keeping
with this relation between government and Assembly, the Estates referred
to their proceedings with the government as “negotiations”; they spoke
of their written exchanges with the sovereign as “notes” and saw the peti-
tions they sent to the various ministries as expressive of “diplomatic rela-
tions”– relations that can only obtain between sovereign states. Both
the vulnerability of the government (due in part to the troubled times and
in part to the tension caused by the very existence of an Estates Assembly
under the given circumstances) and the king’s own resolve to see his ini-
tiative through to the end may have contributed to his restraint, but the
king is to be praised nonetheless for overlooking the Estates’ impropriety
and presumptuousness. In spite of the Assembly’s contemptuous refusal to
recognize the king’s constitution, the monarch continued to treat them as
legitimate Estates according to the principles of his constitution.
[the estates’ political options. basis
of constitutional legitimacy]
So much about the formal aspect of the Estates’ relationship to the king.
As to the essence of that relationship, however, it should be noted that once
the king had presented his constitution, the Estates had three options. For
one, they could refuse to recognize the constitution as binding until it had
been submitted to their scrutiny, and then proceed with an examination, at
the conclusion of which they would announce their ﬁnal decision. Alterna-
tively, they could provisionally accept the constitution, amend and adapt
Cf. PR, §.
Proceedings, sect. VIII, p. .


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
it, and then initiate appropriate legislation. Or thirdly, they could reject
the royal constitution outright, produce one of their own, and demand
that it be recognized by the king.
It might be thought not only unobjectionable, but absolutely just that
a people ﬁrst examine and approve the constitution given to them, for
what other source of legitimacy is there for a constitution except its con-
scious and willing acceptance by the people? Otherwise, one might add,
despotism, tyranny, and infamy could throw the people in whatever chains
they pleased. Yet even so, if historical experience be our guide, we must
admit that oftentimes even peoples who loved their freedom above all else
have confessed their incompetence to frame a constitution on their own and
entrusted a Solon or a Lycurgus with the task – men who moreover resorted
to deception to get around the so-called will of the people and the necessity
of submitting their constitution to it for approval. Moses and Louis XVIII
both established constitutions on their own initiative and appealed not to
the will of the people, but to divine or royal authority as the basis of their
78
legitimacy.As for W¨urttemberg, the dictum of Schultheiss Reinhard of
Ober-Esslingen says it all: When Swabians have free will, nothing happens. –
Concerns over despotic constitutions being set up without consulting the
people’s will may sometimes be based on sound suspicions, but they can
also stem from shallow wisdom and a faint-hearted underestimation of
the true power inherent in the spirit of the people and the times. We are
speaking of a particular case, and not of an hypothesis. These lessons of
experience can as easily be learned by reﬂecting on the nature of the matter
itself: no one could be less suited to setting up a constitution than what is
commonly referred to as the common people or than an Estates Assembly,
unless one means to say that the very existence of a people and an Estates
Assembly presupposes a constitution, an organic condition, an ordered life
of the whole people.
The third option and the one chosen by the W¨urttemberg Estates was the
most untoward, inappropriate, and unpardonable of all, namely to reject
the king’s constitution out of hand without prior examination and without
any indication of what they found acceptable and unacceptable, and of how
it might be amended. For by doing so they effectively demanded that the
king in his turn unconditionally accept whatever constitution the Assembly
and the people happened to believe they wanted. They even refused him
the act of acceptance, since he was in any case forced to acquiesce. It
Louis XVIII had decreed his charte constitutionelle in ; it provided for a chamber of peers and a
chamber of deputies with the right to approve taxation, but not to introduce legislation. The charte
consitutionelle was the model for Friedrich I’s original draft of a new constitution for W¨urttemberg.

[The Estates’ political options]

is beside the point that the Estates were at least not so arrogant as to
presume to frame a constitution on their own. It was the old constitution
of W¨urttemberg they opposed to that of the king, and in demanding its
restoration they were appealing to the authority of a constitution that lay
in shambles and which later on they would naively admit they were not
even able fully to present. And why not? Because they were barred from
using the old Estates archive!That a scholar of books is lost without the
key to his library is to be expected, but that the Estates are incapable of
presenting their constitution without consulting an archive – what dust
pile of a constitution can that be?
To answer that question, let us consider the sources on which “the
number and the development of the basic articles of the constitution are
to be based.” Their enumeration is characteristic enough to warrant being
quoted in full. The constitutional laws are not to be based merely
79
on W¨urttemberg’s budget regulations, government regulations, the resolutions of
the Landtagand its committee, and the testaments of the rulers . . . but also on
the various statute books such as W¨urttemberg’s Code of Law and administrative
regulations, the so-called miscellanies, church regulations, forestry regulations,
local administrative regulations . . . and on innumerable (!!) individual decrees and
above all on the many resolutions formulated in response to grievances, petitions,
and requests by the Estates . . . Some important articles can only be deducedby
Proceedings, sect. XI, p. . “Estates archive” translates the German term Landschaftsarchiv. Land-
schaft is a collective term signifying the union of all the Estates as a single party to negotiations
with the duke or king. (The difference between Landschaft and Landst¨ande is one of nuance only,
and both are rendered here as “Estates.”) Friedrich I had conﬁscated the Estates treasury and the
Estates archive on December , , when he dissolved the Assembly.
In pre- and early modern W¨urttemberg, as in other regions of Germany, the Landtag was an
Assembly of the Estates convened by the prince in order to deliberate on matters of importance to
the state, but especially to approve special taxation. Although “state parliament” recommends itself
as a translation in the case of the corresponding institution in modern, federalized Germany, we have
chosen to leave the term untranslated here. The reason is that in the dual system that characterized
the pre-modern and early modern German state, or rather ﬁefdom, Land (and hence also Landtag)
carries special political and institutional implications in contradistinction to the Regierung (the
sovereign or government), which would not only be lost, but also rendered confusing by an English
translation.
In eighteenth-century Germany, juridical deductions formed a special genre within the legal
literature. They were intimately bound up with the non-constitutional nature of the laws of the
Holy Roman Empire and consisted most frequently of genealogically supported derivations of
territorial rights. Associations with the logico-mathematical concept of deduction are therefore
misleading. Johann Stephan P¨utter was the author of a widely used primer for the composition
of such deductions. See his Anleitung zur juristischen Praxi wie in Teutschland sowohl gerichtliche
als aussergerichtliche Rechtsh¨andel oder andere Kanzley- Reichs- und Staats-Sachen schriftlich oder
m¨undlich verhandelt, und in Archiven beygeleget werden [Introduction to legal practice, concerning the
manner in which in Germany suits both in and out of court, as well as other matters pertaining to the
chancellery, the Empire and the state are to be handled orally or in writing, and how to document them
in archives], th ed., G¨ottingen, .


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
combining different sources of the law of W¨urttemberg, others only by induction,
and still others only on the authority of tradition as conﬁrmed by law.
Earlier in the same petition they worry that if the positive constitution
of Old W¨urttemberg lost its binding power, they would have to stray
into the “labyrinth of the natural law of states.”Yet can there be any
labyrinth worse than their hodgepodge of legal sources? Such an armory of
implications, combinations, inductions, and analogies may thrill the heart
of an advocate making legal deductions, but if reason itself, the source of
the so-called natural law of nations, strikes fear into the heart of the Estates
Assembly, how could its members possibly hope to ﬁnd shelter and safety
from it in such a paper labyrinth? If the Estates had the temerity to demand
that the king accept in advance as W¨urttembergian law the implications,
combinations, inductions etc., which by their own admission it would take
years to produce, neither did they shrink from claiming that the restoration
of this web of a constitution, with which the people could not possibly be
acquainted and even the Estates themselves were by their own admission
unable to provide in full, was the will of the people!
[sincerity of the estates’ motives for restoring the old
constitution. their treatment of “popular petitions”]
One might have thought that the Estates were not really serious about
restoring the old constitution after all, and that they were merely pursu-
ing the sensible goal of achieving a revision of various points in the royal
constitution (especially a more comprehensive development of the basic
principles) and were simply in need of an effective means to that end.
Admittedly, they could hardly have hit upon a more primitive method
80
than the revival of the “magic formula,” as they themselves termed the old
constitution of W¨urttemberg. We have already spoken of the Assembly’s
much touted unanimity on this point. Some among the high and low
nobility persisted in claiming rights for themselves that were inconsistent
with the rights and interests of the people and the government; they repeat-
edly cast doubt on whether they as nobles even belonged to the state of
W¨urttemberg and spoke of the conditions under which the nobility would
condescend to enter into a relationship of subjection. These elements must
Proceedings, sect. XI, p. .
For an overview of discussions surrounding the ambiguous term “natural law of states” in the ﬁrst
half of the nineteenth century, see Michael Stolleis, Geschichte des ¨offentlichen Rechts in Deutschland
1800–1914 (Munich: Beck, ), pp. –.

[Sincerity of the Estates’ motives]

have found the magic formula of the “good old law”very opportune.
The people of New W¨urttemberg did not at ﬁrst see how the royal con-
stitution could ease the various hardships they were straining under; thus,
in the initial unclarity of the situation, they too rallied to the call of the
old constitution. Petitions from the towns and districts poured in from all
sides; deputations appeared with demands for the restoration of the con-
stitution of Old W¨urttemberg, and a large part of the Assembly’s meetings
was taken up with reading them.
Popular petitionshad generally lost their credibility as a political
means, but no one hesitated to make use of them now, and the immense
inﬂuence that the caste of notaries had on the common people (of which
more later)made it even easier to manage. For that very reason, though,
the popular petitions had virtually no substance or authority in the eyes of
knowledgeable observers and tended rather to cast a shadow on the Assem-
bly. The natural purpose of an Estates Assembly is to mediate between
the monarch and the people. But under the prevailing external pressures
(namely the renewed civil unrest in France),and in light of the fact that
here a people with absolutely no historical experience of constitutional
government was in the midst of a transition from political nullity to hith-
erto unheard-of participation in and inﬂuence on the whole of the state,
it was imperative that the Assembly not play on the preconceptions of
the common people, who with all due respect are consistently lacking in
judgment when it comes to the constitution of a state. In the ﬁfth meeting
Count von Waldeck deemed it necessary to reassure the people, who, as
credible sources had informed him, were alarmed by the publication of the
royal constitutional charter. In order not to cause a sensation, von Waldeck
suggested that the representatives announce to the people that they had
“The good old law” (das gute alte Recht) became a watchword among the opponents of Friedrich
I’s constitutional draft when the Swabian poet Ludwig Uhland put the phrase in verse in his poem
of the same title, which begins Wo je bei altem, gutem Wein, der W¨urttemberger zecht, da soll der
erste Trinkspruch sein, das alte, gute Recht (“Wherever W¨urttembergians sit down to enjoy a good
old wine, their ﬁrst toast should be to the good old constitution”).
The popular petitions (Volksadressen) were petitions demanding that the king provide a constitution
and formulating recommendations as to how such a constitution was to be framed. Unlike the
petitions by the Estates, the popular petitions were written by one or more persons not belonging
to the Estates Assembly and they were signed by groups of citizens. The popular petition movement
in the years from to involved prominent democratically inclined intellectuals such as Fries
and Kotzebue; it came to an end with the repressive measures codiﬁed in the Carlsbad Decrees in
August of .
See the lengthy account of the abuses of the notary system below.
Napoleon had landed on the French coast on March , , and begun his march to Paris, where he
arrived on March , beginning his reign of the “One Hundred Days” that ended with his defeat
at Waterloo.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
“made themselves the spearhead of the people’s prejudices.” What kind of
reassurance is it when the Estates Assembly announces to the people that
they are the supporters of the peoples’ unrest against the king?!
81
Despite the many petitions that were read and although the Estates
Assembly prided itself on the attention they devoted to them, it is easy
to see that for the most part they were ignored. From the minutes of the
proceedings it is impossible to tell why some petitions were read and others
not even mentioned. Just a few examples: in the meeting of December ,
it was suggested that a number of received petitions “at least be noted
in the minutes, considered as read, and then ﬁled away.”On February ,
a petition from the town of Riedlingen is read before the Assembly; the
petition had been received on April , . In another case, a representative
requests permission to transfer a petition that had ostensibly already been
transferred to another section a year previously, on June , . However,
the Assembly did not convene on that date and on the th, when they did
convene, the petition was not mentioned. There are many more instances
of this kind showing that the Estates Assembly had no objective respect for
the petitions of the people, treating them rather as a means to their own
ends.
To return to the question of the Estates’ seriousness about the old con-
stitution, the proceedings reveal that the Assembly was not just using
the “magic formula” to gain public support. The majority consistently
demonstrated their seriousness about the old constitution, not least by
insistently demanding recognition of a formal principle of right.Since
time immemorial, the spirit of formalism and particularism has deter-
mined Germany’s historical fate, and that spirit is manifest here in all its
strength. If that spirit be called Germanness, then nothing could have been
more German than the attitude of the deputies from Old W¨urttemberg,
including the nobility. But if we deﬁne Germanness as a concern for what
is essentially universal and rational, then in spite of the differences in terri-
torial rule, it will be difﬁcult to ﬁnd anything more Un-German than that
attitude.
The immediate effect of the Assembly’s rejection of the royal constitution
was to render the Assembly incapable of any organic life-activity. For now,
Proceedings, sect. XVII, p. .
For a determination to be formell means in Hegelian parlance that the form can diverge from the
substance or content of the determination. An example would be an unjust law: although it has
the form of law (Recht), it is substantially unlawful or an injustice (Unrecht). Similarly, the will of
a particular individual is formally free, i.e., the individual chooses freely among alternatives, yet to
the extent that the individual makes choices which are incompatible with reason, he may prove to
be substantially unfree.

[The Estates’ behavior toward the government]

instead of forming an opposition on common ground with the government,
the Assembly was in a stand-off with the sovereign and hence in no position
to undertake and accomplish effective work on the institutions of the state.
When, after three months of waiting in vain for some sign of progress,
Mr. Gleich of Aalen ﬁnally lost patience and reproached the Assembly for
wasting time with trivialities and losing sight of the main business,it
82
was explained to him that he was quite mistaken, for the Assembly had
“passed a resolution” requiring every member to “prepare himself” for a
draft of the constitutional charter. As though not every deputy should have
come fully prepared in the ﬁrst place, and as though the passing of such
a resolution was to count as work and as an answer to the question of
what the Assembly had been busy doing for three months! But as we said
before, on the following October the Assembly would realize that it was
impossible to provide the basic constitutional laws anyway, since they had
not as yet been able to visit the Estates archive.
Even so, it would be wrong to say that the Assembly had been idle.
In the course of its “diplomatic relations” it had been occupied with its
various formalities. Since, however, such formalities are conﬁned within
the contingent limits of the positive law, which had ceased to have any
reality anyway, the harder the Assembly tried to enforce legal formalism,
the harder it became to ﬁnd a rational content for it that could stand on
its own. Thus, having already touched upon the most important aspects,
nothing is left for this account but to present the main points of an historical
series of events already familiar to the reader.
[the estates’ behavior toward the government after
rejecting the constitution framed by the king]
The king’s reply followed two days after the Assembly’s ﬁrst petition, in
which they had announced their rejection of the royal constitution in a
manner intended to be “tactful” but which was in fact merely roundabout
and stilted. The king simply notiﬁed them of their rights under the new
constitution and reminded them that should they ﬁnd anything lacking in
this regard, the constitution also provided ways for them to enter requests.
He also assured them that any requests and desires that proved consonant
with the interests of the kingdom as a whole were sure to ﬁnd favorable
attention.
Proceedings, sect. VIII, p. .


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
How else could the king have replied to their indistinct declaration? He
had asked that they submit matters of substance, but in their reply on March
, they persisted in formalities without content. Mr. Bolley composed a
more detailed draft of their petition containing critical remarks on many
points of the new charter (despite the fact that he begins by saying he will
refrain from a complete examination). The Assembly held this draft back,
83
retaining it as a record of their political creed and as justiﬁcation of their
behavior which might, if necessary, be submitted to the ministry of state
at an appropriate time.
Surely nothing could have been more pressing than to submit an account
of their reasons for rejecting the royal charter, and to do so precisely on the
basis of a complete examination. Nor were mere “remarks” suited to fur-
thering the cause, even if they had been submitted. Remarks are answered
by counter-remarks, and quite apart from any concrete results, what the
Assembly’s so-called “diplomatic channel” would ordinarily have required
were arguments and counter-arguments by the parties to the negotiation.
Ignoring the fact that such exchanges cannot take place between parties
whose relation is that of a government and its subjects (a relation into
which admittedly the high nobility claimed not yet to have entered), the
real business of an Estates Assembly is something quite different, namely
the internal examination and discussion of its own issues. The proceedings
might conceivably have taken a different turn from the very beginning if
the ministers of state had attended the meetings and taken the ﬂoor, as
provided for in §of the royal charter. The style of royal edicts precludes
remarks, refutations, and the ampliﬁcation of reasons; instead of written
statements against written statements, we might have found the content of
speeches delivered during the meetings by ministers and councils of state.
These too could have been submitted to scrutiny and been made the sub-
ject of development and discussion. Perhaps they would even have roused
the Assembly from the mute speechlessness of its paper proceedings.
In the closing plea of the Estates’ petition of March , Count von
Waldeck repeated his contrived ploy (which was neither honest nor sensi-
ble) of omitting any direct demand for the restoration of the old consti-
tution and taking it for granted instead. Though it may seem brave and
digniﬁed not to beg in such a matter as the constitution and instead to
Ibid., sect. I, p. . Upon joining the Confederation of the Rhine, Friedrich I completely reorganized
the system of government. Among other things, he dissolved the geheimen Rat (or privy council),
which had been at the heart of the old government, and replaced it with a ministry of state
consisting of six sub-divisions: the foreign ministry, the ministry of the interior, ministry of justice,
ministry of war, ministry of ﬁnance, and a ministry devoted to ecclesiastical matters.

[The Estates’ behavior toward the government]

create an air of indubitability, the ploy could never have succeeded. For
sooner or later it would become necessary to discuss the matter directly.
For the time being, the closing plea subtly refrained from making any
request except that the king extend the constitution of Old W¨urttemberg
to the whole kingdom. To this end, they appended to the application a
deduction of the rights of the incorporated regions to be included under
the constitution of W¨urttemberg’s original territories.
84
The royal resolution had asked that the Estates make any further
wishes known to the government. Now the Estates turned the tables and
demanded that the government make its wishes known to them. In private
legal affairs, reticence may be a sound legal tactic; rather than being the ﬁrst
to speak, one forces the other party to make the ﬁrst move and thus reveal
his claims and intentions. Thereafter the attack can be mounted without
danger of losing face or exposing a weak ﬂank. For an Estates Assembly,
however, no model could be less appropriate than the tactics of advo-
cates. Nevertheless, instead of indicating what they would have changed or
added to the articles of the royal charter, the Estates entered a second subtle
request for a list of modiﬁcations necessitated by the present conditions,
ostensibly to the end of reaching a common understanding (as though that
were all that was needed). If such a request, uttered with such conﬁdence,
is not to be taken as mockery, then it can only be an unfathomable lack
of good sense. Were the Estates altogether incapable of reﬂecting on the
fact that they were dealing with the king? How could they go their merry
way without once considering that to reach any understanding at all – not
to mention an understanding with the monarch and his government – it
is necessary to take account of the views and the desires of the party with
whom the understanding is to be reached?
The ministry responded on April by announcing that the king would
postpone his answer to the Estates’ application until the return of the
crown prince, whose voice also should be heard in the matter. On April ,
however, the king enjoined the Estates to help raise emergency war funds,
and at that time he also sent them a further response in which he presented
the point of view that had guided his framing of the constitution. Namely,
that in light of the state’s independence from superior rule, the relations between
the head of state and the Estates had been modeled after the example of other
sovereign states in order to ensure the establishment of a permanent condition
and to guarantee the rights of the people and the stability and efﬁcacy of the
government. No consideration was given to the question of whether the Estates’
rights had been more or less extensive under W¨urttemberg’s constitution while it
was still a territory of the empire, though in fact those rights proved to be greater


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
in several substantial points under the new constitution than they had formerly
been, particularly in regard to the independence of the Estates’ proceedings, the
extent of their participation in legislation, and even in regard to taxation, which in
85
the days when W¨urttemberg had been part of the empire had never been subject
to approval by the Estates.
The king also announced his intention of initiating oral negotiations
by authorized representatives from both sides in order to reach a common
understanding as to the applicability of the Estates’ motions.
As stated above, the Estates refused to help raise emergency war funds
unless the government agreed to meet their demands. They saw a state bond
as the means to this end. In order for the government to obtain favorable
terms, a guarantee by the Estates would no doubt be instrumental. The
Estates could have seized upon this situation as an opportunity to make
good on their constant declarations of devotion to the fatherland, for which
they were ostensibly ready to sacriﬁce both life and property, and to prove
the truth of their good will, for such proof can only consist in deeds.
Such a proof by deeds would also have facilitated a general agreement
with the government and contributed toward establishing a fund for the
amortization of debts. However, the Estates refused to extend the guarantee
required of them; instead, on April they sent the king a couple of
the written statements they kept in stock, repeated their monotonous
complaints, and agreed merely to elect their authorized representatives.
[the estates assembly’s negotiating committee
and its secret activities]
On April the Assembly appointed a twenty-ﬁve-member committee to
“prepare” for the negotiations and four commissioners to negotiate directly
with the king’s four councils of state. The four commissioners all appear
to have been from Old W¨urttemberg. The present turn of events seemed
ﬁnally to promise more substantial developments. It immediately became
evident that the committee which had been entrusted with preparing the
negotiations intended to lead the negotiations themselves and instruct
the Estates’ commissioners as to how to proceed. The result was a de
facto exclusion of the plenary assembly from the negotiations. When a
member of the Assembly complained of this on April , saying that
the committee needed to be more forthcoming about its activities, Mr.
Bolley (the district notary and one of the most active members of the
committee) assured him that the committee would undertake “nothing

[The Estates Assembly’s negotiating committee]

dangerous” without ﬁrst consulting the Assembly, but reminded him too
that negotiations required certain things to be kept “secret.” Hereupon the
86
Assembly formally transferred responsibility for appointing commissioners
and leading negotiations (pending ratiﬁcation by the Assembly) to the
committee.
The real business of the Assembly – drafting a constitution – was thus
placed in the hands of the committee. We now ﬁnd mention of meetings
between Estates commissioners and those of the government. On April
and May , two unpublished reports by the committee are read to the
Assembly; after that we hear nothing more until May , at which time Dr.
Cotta presents a royal resolution on six articles of the constitution which
had been communicated to the Estates commissioners.To form a more
accurate idea of the spirit and behavior of the committee, we may refer to a
remarkable speech given by Mr. Gleich of Aalen on June ,from which
we learn that instead of accepting the king’s charter in its present form as a
basis for further negotiations, the committee set down without further ado
six preliminary articles. These articles were in effect, as Gleich correctly
observes, fragments lifted in part from the old constitution of W¨urttemberg
and in part from the royal constitution. The supposedly “tactful,” but really
rather absurd, intention behind this action was apparently to pave the way
for the government to acquiesce in the Estates’ wishes without losing face.
Equally strange is the fact that the committee kept these six articles secret
from the Assembly, as can also be gathered from Gleich’s speech, for it
was only after several members threatened to resign in protest against the
committee’s secretiveness that they were conﬁdentially informed of their
existence. The Assembly’s characteristic muteness has been remarked on
above; but now, at the hands of its own committee, the Assembly was
in danger not of becoming deaf, since to be deaf is not to hear when
one is spoken to, but rather of having nothing to hear in the ﬁrst place,
since no one spoke to it! At this point it becomes impossible to imagine
what the Estates Assembly’s purpose and activities were supposed to be.
As Gleich tells us, “no one even thought of discussing these six articles” (a
fact conﬁrmed by the Proceedings), and yet if anything were indispensable
for an Estates Assembly, certainly such a discussion would have been! And
so the proceedings went on lacking any material upon which substantial
work could have been done.
Proceedings, sect. VI, p. .
Ibid., sect. VII, p. .


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
[the six preliminary articles]
The six preliminary articles which the committee had kept secret were not
made public until June , in a written statement by the Estates.This
87
was a turning-point in the whole affair. Since they contain matters of real
substance, it is appropriate to relate the content of the articles here along
with the king’s resolution of May , which contained concessions of great
importance.
[1. Estates’ participation in taxation legislation and state ﬁnances]
The commissioners awkwardly referred to their ﬁrst demand as “self-
taxation,” which they deﬁned as including prior submission of the state’s
budget for the Estates’ approval, an account of the royal chamber’s income,
and access to relevant ﬁnancial records, oversight of expenditure of allocated
funds, as well as the administration of funds belonging to the Estates.
The king had rescinded the limitations he had placed on matters requiring
the Estates’ concurrence and agreed to submit not only tax raises, but all
taxes whatsoever, direct and indirect alike, for approval by the Estates, with
the exception of the period from to , in which no current tax-laws
were to be repealed. Although the king refused to grant the Estates the
right to levy taxes and did not agree to their having their own treasury, he
did grant them oversight over state revenue and expenditure, and complete
control of how revenue was to be used (with the exception of revenue from
the king’s private and domanial property). The king stressed that he was not
opposed to a civil list on the basis of the domanial properties. Furthermore,
an ofﬁce for the payment of debts was to be called into existence with an
equal number of deputies from the Estates and from the government.
Ibid., sect. VIII, p. . Weishaar had formulated the six preliminary articles on April , , in a
meeting of the instruction committee. See Gerner, Vorgeschichte und Entstehung, pp. ff.
The following explanation of the difference between chamber income and the income of the Estates
sheds light on the issues involved in the Estates’ ﬁscal participation and oversight: “According to
the constitution of most German states, especially of those in which the land estates still have
a say in the determination of contributions and taxes, the state’s income is divided into ‘ﬁscal’
or ‘chamber income’ and the income of the ‘aerarium’ or the Estates. Each kind of income is
destined to be used in its own special way. So-called ﬁscal income is reserved for the maintenance
of the ruler’s person and his family, the court and its servants, as well as for all matters concerning
the ruler’s sovereignty and his ability to maintain himself in a condition appropriate to it. The
income of the aerarium, on the other hand, is intended to be used to maintain the security of the
population and such measures as necessary to increase the welfare of the state. The chamber income
consists of the income from the ruler’s domanial properties, royal monopolies, and sovereign rights
[Hoheitsrechten], while the Estates’ income mainly consists in taxes and contributions” (translated
from Johann Georg Kr¨unitz, ¨Okonomische Encyclop¨adie, oder allgemeines System der Staats-, Stadt,
Haus- und Landwirtschaft, –, entry “Journal”).

[The six preliminary articles]

The liberality of the king’s concessions need hardly be emphasized. We
have already stated that the Estates may control the treasury in a ﬁefdom
but not in a state. As is well known, neither the French Chambers nor
the English Parliament have any such administrative rights; the French
Chamber of Deputies appoints full deputies from among its members to
administer cash for the amortization of debts. The Estates commission-
ers’ use of the term “Estates’ assets” instead of “state assets” served to
denote the Estates’ right to administer the funds as their own. By contrast,
the expression “state” is incompatible with the distinction between the
government and the Estates, which is characteristic of a ﬁefdom to the
empire. Such a distinction plays no role in a state, for here private funds
belong exclusively to the state once they have become taxes, i.e., public
funds.
[2. Restoration of church property]
The second demand was the restoration of church property. The king
conceded it in whole, refusing only to restore a separate administration as
had formerly been the case.
[3. Special representation of the nobility]
The third article was a form of representation in which all classes of
subjects were to be represented in equal proportions. We went into some
88
detail about the very democratic form of representation above. To this
very indeﬁnite, cryptic demand, the king replied that he expected further
proposals in the matter, stating merely that he would not accede to separate
representation of the nobility if that was what was intended. On the same
June , Mr. Gleich remarks in this connection, “It is not easy to guess the
commissioners’ intent; it would have been only fair of them to state their
What is at issue here is the contrast between the pre- or early modern and the modern state. In the
pre-modern state, there is a distinction between the government (Regierung), frequently identiﬁed
with the state as such (Staat), and the Estates Assembly (Land or Landschaft). In a pre-modern
political entity such as Old W¨urttemberg, the government or state is to be identiﬁed with the ruler
and his court with its various administrative organs, whereas the Land and its representatives is
essentially a body outside the state and with its own source of funds. What is lacking in such a
state, Hegel is implying, is the existence of a public sphere encompassed by the state itself, such
that the administration and the Estates Assembly are elements within a uniﬁed and centralized
state. In the pre-modern context the distinction between funds belonging to the Land and those
belonging to the state makes sense, but, as Hegel rightly remarks, in the context of taxation by a
modern state the distinction is anachronous.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
intentions more plainly before the Assembly itself.”As late as June ,
therefore, the meaning of this article was still a secret.
[4. Payment of the members of the Assembly and its committees]
The fourth article was such as to be particularly dear to the hearts of all those
members of the Estates prone to miss the old familiar committee system:
it called for uninterrupted exercise of the Estates’ rights by a permanent
committee. The king replied that the period of four weeks set aside in
the royal constitution for the committee’s annual session could easily be
extended and the session even be repeated if necessary. He also called
the Estates’ attention to the attendant increase in costs. The question of
costs had been particularly important to the old committee system as well,
though it might well be said that under the old system the costs were more of
a tacit reason in favor of the extension and even the uninterrupted duration
of the sessions whether they were necessary or not, but never a reason against
them. Yet such considerations were probably superﬂuous under the old
system. For in the brochure entitled Administration of W¨urttemberg’s Estates
Treasury quoted above,we ﬁnd instances of the inner committee (which
controlled the cash and had the right to convene the larger committee)
ordering ﬁnancial recompense to be made to the committee as a whole
precisely for not having convened. In other words, the inner committee was
well versed in increasing costs without there being any business to attend
to and without any sessions taking place.
The public was only recently informed that the proceedings of the Estates
Assembly cost the government ,ﬂorins. In the published minutes
we occasionally ﬁnd references to a committee on members’ salaries and
other costs, but nothing more deﬁnite is ever quoted from the committee’s
reports or decisions, and speciﬁc sums are never mentioned. If there was
anything that the Estates Assembly should have been absolutely open about,
it was this. They should have made a point of publicizing any recompense
they received for their work – or at least, that is, for their having convened.
89
Though they ignored the other articles, the Assembly accepted this one
as to their own advantage. The very fact that members of an Estates
Assembly should receive salaries or allowances is highly unfavorable, and
the importance of the issue should not be underestimated, for the whole
character and status of a representative body can hinge on it. Salaries to
Proceedings, sect. VII, p. .
The German title is Die Verwaltung der W¨urttembergischen Landescasse.

[The six preliminary articles]

members of the Estates contribute to the predominance of the propertied
class at elections, not to mention their bearing on the honor of such an
Assembly. As long as the Estates receive a salary, they will never be above
the suspicion or reproach that perhaps not all, but many or at least some
of their members make their decisions with an eye to their pay. Yet in
the proceedings of the Estates we never ﬁnd any trace of scruples when
it comes to receiving a salary. Apparently they considered it a matter
of course that the deputies be salaried or at least that they have their
costs reimbursed, which happened on at least one occasion. If the author
remembers correctly, reproach of the practice was indeed publicly voiced.
However, the most bizarre demand that an Estates Assembly could possibly
have made was the right to appoint a committee with separate salaries and
other regular payments – indeed to establish and decide over consular
positions as they had in the old days, with the effect of legitimating the
laziness and incompetence of its members in advance.
Though the Estates’ leaders doubtless considered themselves to be the
most qualiﬁed members for such a committee, they did not claim the full
status and former rights to a secret fund. Even so, that hardly excuses them.
Regular payments were to be made to those who (in the formulation of the
draft for the restored constitution of Old W¨urttemberg)
had dedicated themselves completely to the service of their fatherland and been
called upon to take up residence in Stuttgart (what dedication!), but who had failed
to be reappointed to the committee at the end of the three-year term and who
were therefore to be paid annual recompense for their sacriﬁce to the fatherland
until which time they should be reappointed.
If the Estates’ leaders had succeeded in introducing salaries for committee
members and especially such regular payments, they would have restored a
state of things, the abolition of which the people and the Estates themselves
(with the exception of the committee members and those with prospects of
being appointed to the committee) had every reason to view as the greatest
single step toward a free and popular constitution in recent times.
That the Estates Assembly itself would have been rendered somewhat
superﬂuous by such a permanent committee is a consideration of perhaps
even greater importance. When abuses of this kind are anchored in the
very nature of the institution, the creation of laws is not sufﬁcient to
90
The parenthetical interpolation is Hegel’s.
The oligarchy of the inner committee was ﬁnally broken in as a direct result of the crisis into
which the state was plunged by W¨urttemberg’s defeat in the War of the First Coalition and its
consequent loss of extensive territories on the west bank of the Rhine.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
prevent them. Even disregarding the spirit that would inevitably come to
predominate in such a well-paid committee, historical experience with the
Estates of Old W¨urttemberg should have been sufﬁcient: if the present
Estates had reﬂected on the matter or given their own past experience
even a moment’s thought, they would have seen that the establishment of
a permanent committee, far from being the talisman they took it to be,
could very well turn out to be the downfall of the independent existence
of the whole Assembly.
[5. The revision of legislation since 1806]
The ﬁfth preliminary article provides for the Estates’ participation in leg-
islation from onward, i.e., it provides for a revision of all laws decreed
since by a bilateral deputation consisting of representatives of both
the government and the land estates. The king replied by reminding the
Estates that such a revision had already been provided for in the right
to petition. (The fact that the Estates demanded a revision of legislation
only since 1806, when the old Estates Assembly had been dissolved, can be
interpreted either as blind prejudice in favor of the conditions under the
old constitution and blind animosity against everything that originated
later with the king’s initiative, or as the need to demonstrate their faith in
the former and dissatisfaction with the latter.)Moreover, it was strange
and formally unacceptable that the revision was to be carried out only
by a deputation of royal counselors and members of the Estates – in ref-
erence to whom incidentally the well-worn terms herrschaftlich (“of the
sovereign”) and landschaftlich (“of the Estates”) are again employed. For in
the case of actual legislation, the concurrence of the whole Estates Assembly
is required, though of course it remained in the power of the Assembly to
entrust committees with any preparations that might be necessary.
[6. Right of subjects to emigrate]
The sixth article pertains to liberality in the old sense of the term. The
king granted anyone who wished to emigrate the right to do so at any time
Friedrich had dissolved the Estates Assembly late in , a step made possible by the imminent
collapse of the Holy Roman Empire and by his own new status as the monarch of a sovereign state.
When the War of the Third Coalition broke out in , Friedrich had sided with the French,
sending ten thousand soldiers to ﬁght against the coalition forces; in recognition, Napoleon made
W¨urttemberg a kingdom and, soon after, a state within the Confederation of the Rhine. For the
decade preceding the Assembly’s constitutional proceedings, Friedrich ruled W¨urttemberg without
an Estates Assembly.

[The Assembly’s intransigent refusal to enter debate]

(rather than having to wait a year after giving notice of his intention, as the
old constitution had required), extending this right even to serfs, who were
no longer required to purchase their freedom. Since, however, emigration
involved relations with other states, the king insisted on the principle of
reciprocity in respect to the supplementary tax.
[the assembly’s intransigent refusal to enter debate]
The Estates’ negotiating commissioners submitted these articles with a
peremptory statement to the effect that failure to grant them legally bind-
ing recognition would wreck any hope for a positive outcome to the nego-
tiations and make it absolutely impossible for the Estates to co-operate in
view of the troubled times. They declared that in order to reassure not
only the Assembly, but the people as well and even the international pub-
lic, the king would have to make a satisfactory declaration right now, or
91
else negotiations could not be continued. It was glaringly tactless of the
Assembly to refuse to co-operate in urgent affairs of the state and to block
further negotiations unless the king immediately submitted to their will,
but the king turned a blind eye to the fact and also overlooked the poor
style of negotiating on the basis of disjointed, vague, and often sketchy
preliminary articles. Instead, he graciously accommodated everything of
substance in their demands, adding only that his decisions were based on
“unalterable” principles and that it was on the basis of these same principles
that negotiations with the Estates’ deputies would continue in hopes of
reaching an understanding.
The Estates did not, however, continue with negotiations. If at this
point they had agreed to discussions, their previous insistence on formalities
might have seemed justiﬁed by the important concessions they had wrested
from the king. Even if the negotiating committee had continued to ignore
the royal constitution, which either already contained most of their articles
or in some cases even worked out their contents in greater detail, still it
was time that the Assembly began to make up their minds about what
exactly they found acceptable and what they did not. At least that might
have resulted in preliminary articles of an agreement with – as opposed to
Freiz¨ugigkeit was the right of a subject to emigrate without purchasing his freedom and without
paying a tax to the sovereign. According to the Deutsches Rechtsw¨orterbuch (ed. Eberhard, Freiherr
von Kunßberg, Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften, [Weimar: H. B¨ohlaus Nachfolger],
vol. III), the “supplementary tax” was a contribution paid by a subject upon leaving a sovereign
territory. The amount of the contribution was usually either three times the amount of the annual
wealth tax the subject would have owed or a tenth of the assets which were withdrawn from taxation
due to emigration, sale, gift, or inheritance.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
the subjugation of – the king. The committee had not presented the six
articles for discussion by the Assembly before submitting them to the king
as non-negotiable, and neither were they discussed now that the king had
responded. Rather than devote attention to the articles and the king’s reply
to them, three or four members of the Assembly read written statements
intended as drafts for a response to the king’s resolution. Their utter ﬁxation
on the goal of restoring the old constitution led the Assembly naively to
believe that the king’s constitution had nothing to do with them and that
they need not involve themselves in discussions of it now, either, but could
rest content in drafting “diplomatic notes.”
In a committee meeting on May , Dr. Cotta read a written statement
on the establishment of an Estates treasury. The matter was then brought
before the Assembly and occasioned a written statement by Mr. Weishaar
in the meeting of May .Cotta followed up with a further written
statement on June , in which he argued that such a treasury, like all the
other privileges of the old constitution, must not be carried to the point
of interfering with the rights of the monarch, and hence that the treasury
92
should be limited to an extent consistent with the state’s credit and the
dignity of the Estates. Cotta’s ideas, to which he was later to return, were
highly suited to a debate preparatory to passing a resolution on the king’s
declaration. Nonetheless, their only effect was that three weeks later and
long after the Assembly had already sent answer to the king, ﬁrst the district
notary Bolley and eight days later Dr. Weishaar read written statements
criticizing them. No vote at all took place on the matter itself.
Mr. Bolley had (as he phrased it) put his thoughts down on record,
and these were read before the Assembly, who received them with warm
expressions of gratitude.Notably, he refers to the well-known work
The Idea of a Constitution by the minister of state von Wangenheim,
which he justly praises, saying “that the rights of the people, especially in
Jakob Friedrich Weishaar (–), lawyer, represented Kirchheim in the Estates Assembly
from to . Together with Bolley, Weishaar was a leading ﬁgure among proponents of the
old constitution and served on numerous committees, among them the examining committee
entrusted with compiling a legal report on the royal edict of March , , the committee on the
question of whether it was permissible to elect a vice president, the committee on the reply to the
royal edict of April , , the committee for the preparation of the constitutional negotiations
with the royal commissioners, the committee for the revision and abridgement of the grievances
of the country, and the committee for ensuring the recognition of the “Estates principle.” From
November onward he was an authorized commissioner at the constitutional negotiations.
Proceedings, sect. VI, p. .
Ibid., sect. IX, p. .
Karl August, Baron von Wangenheim (–), had been called to Stuttgart in to preside
over the royal ﬁnancial authority; since he had been acting as a high court ofﬁcial and
curator of the university in T¨ubingen. After Friedrich I adjourned the Assembly on June , ,
Wangenheim intervened with the (anonymous) publication of The Idea of a State Constitution in

[The Assembly’s intransigent refusal to enter debate]

W¨urttemberg, have found a passionate defender in this noble author.”
Bolley’s remark concerning the Estates’ provisions for tax revenues are
also noteworthy. He gives his word that “when the vital interests of the
state demand the speedy raising of funds in extraordinary circumstances,
the Estates, conscious of their urgency, will surely never fail to help the
sovereign in every way they can.”That “surely” is rather naive: is giving
his word a guarantee that the existence of two independent powers of
government will not endanger the state? And when we ask what interest
could have been more vital, which circumstances more extraordinary than
Napoleon’s reappearance in France, that “surely” will sound very naive
indeed, for we have seen the manner in which W¨urttemberg’s Estates
came to the aid of their sovereign and dedicated themselves to the cause
of Germany and Europe just a few weeks before Bolley read his written
statement and gave his word before them.
We have already had several occasions in these pages to quote Mr.
Gleich’s spirited and eloquent speech of June , so excellent in thought
and spirit. Gleich presents the Assembly with more comprehensive reasons
for entering into serious discussion of the six articles. He admonishes the
Estates that they should be concerned not so much with W¨urttemberg’s old
constitution as with framing a good constitution, less with legal formalism
than with the substance of the laws; and instead of taking up random
fragments from this or that constitution, he proceeds to give a reasoned
its Application to W¨urttemberg’s Old Estates Constitution and a Proposal for its Renewal [Die Idee
der Staatsverfassung in ihrer Anwendung auf W¨urttembergs alte Landesverfassung und den Entwurf
zu deren Erneuerung], in which he adapted Montesquieu’s doctrine of the separation of powers
to suit conditions in W¨urttemberg. Wangenheim was inﬂuenced by Schelling’s philosophy of
nature, and organicist metaphors abound in the work, which develops the idea that the various
Estates are representative each of a peculiar form of life all of which are meant to ﬂow together
in the integrated life of the state, creating a harmony of functions. Wangenheim recommended a
bicameral system with separate representation of the nobility in an upper house. When Friedrich I
reconvened the Assembly on October , he appointed Wangenheim to negotiate with the Estates.
Wangenheim won the loyalty of a small group of moderate constitutionalists within the Estates
Assembly, notably Friedrich Cotta, the publisher, and Ludwig Griesinger, a prominent Stuttgart
advocate. After Friedrich I’s death in October of , he was succeeded by Wilhelm I, who made
Wangenheim and Karl Friedrich Kerner ministers of state. This very liberal administration was,
however, short-lived. Wangenheim lost his post in June of , after negotiations had once more
ground to a halt, and his recommendation of a plebiscite on the royal constitutional draft failed to
produce results. Wangenheim was replaced by Theodor Eugen Maucler, a conservative bureaucrat
who was destined to be the architect of the agreement between crown and Estates that paved the
way to a constitution in . (Cf. Rolf Grawert, “Der w¨urttembergische Verfassungsstreit –
,” in “O F¨urstin, der Heimath! Gl¨ukliches Stutgard.” Politik, Kultur und Gesellschaft im deutschen
S¨udwesten um 1800, ed. Otto P¨oggeler and Christoph Jamme [Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, ], pp. –
and especially Dieter Wyduckel, “Die Idee des Dritten Deutschlands im Vorm¨arz. Ein Beitrag
zur trialistischen Verfassungskonzeption des Freiherrn von Wangenheim,” ibid., pp. –.)
Proceedings, sect. IX, p. .
Ibid., p. .


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
account of the essential principles of a constitution. The Assembly was
taken aback by the tenor of Gleich’s speech, which was foreign to their ﬁxed
ideas, their incessant self-congratulation, and the praises heaped on them
by the papers. His courage certainly did not endear him to the Assembly,
as was noted above; his voice died away in the desert while half a dozen
93
written statements were written rebuking him for his plea “at least to take
the royal resolution into serious consideration and not simply throw away
the offers made by the king, some of which were acceptable.” From this
point on, Gleich disappears from the meetings, with no further explanation
in the minutes of why he left; some time later he is replaced by another
representative from Aalen. Such irregularities are typical of the Assembly:
deputies resign their posts and are replaced by others, and there is never an
indication of the authority to which the resignations were submitted or on
which the new deputy assumed his post. In Gleich’s case, more than a year
later we ﬁnd a dubious remark by a member of the Assembly, in which he
warns another deputy with an opinion different from that of the majority
not to forget what happened to Mr. Gleich.
By rejecting Mr. Gleich’s motion, the Assembly also rejected the oppor-
tunity which the king’s resolution had offered to them of acknowledging
their agreement on substantial points and thus of laying a sound foundation
for further negotiations. They discussed neither the issues themselves nor
the question which of the king’s decisions were acceptable and which were
not. Instead, they spent several meetings debating which written statements
they should append to their reply and under which titles to compose them,
and similar formalities. On June , four weeks after receiving the royal
resolution, they were ﬁnally done writing a reply.Yet again, this reply
contained no instructions to the Estates’ negotiators on how to respond to
the king’s decisions, for it was another petition to the king. Thus the Assem-
bly fell back into their old litigious ways, though they had led nowhere
and should have been given up in favor of oral negotiations with the royal
commissioners.
The king’s concessions are not even mentioned in the petition. It is ﬁlled
instead with grandiloquent expressions of the “utter disappointment” of
all the Assembly’s hopes, their “unspeakable pain” and “consternation,”
their dearly held “convictions,” and self-congratulatory avowals of their
unadulterated love of truth and the purity of their motives, to which
they would one day bear witness before the throne of God, and so on.
As far as the royal resolution itself was concerned, their position was
Proceedings, sect. VIII, pp. ff.

[The “grievances of the people”]

as straightforward as it was naive: the royal resolution was incompatible
with the principle of the Estates. The petition concludes dramatically by
94
requesting, nay beseeching, the king in the name of God and all that is
holy and venerable, and for the sake of the royal family’s own happiness, to
refuse no longer to restore the old constitution. (Mr. Gleich had abstained
from any admixture of such empty pathos in his speech, displaying that
much more reason; but reason had failed to achieve the desired effect, and
perhaps Gleich would have had more success if he had resorted to such
pathos, though he could not have achieved more than merely to prevent
the insinuation of ulterior motives.) In the rest of the text, the Estates bring
forth the usual arguments based on positive law and contractual relations.
They especially draw the king’s attention to the fact that he had “solemnly
sworn” to uphold the constitution upon becoming head of state, just as
all rulers before him had done. They add that in spite of diligent efforts
to determine whether any change had taken place that would legally free
him from his obligations, they had been unable to ﬁnd any. That they
should have been more conscientious in their search ought to have been
clear to them, for as things stood they were on the verge of arrogating the
authority to charge their sovereign with perjury against his whole people –
an authority from which they ought better to have recoiled.
[the “grievances of the people”]
The petition was notable for its appendix which, in addition to two written
statements, contained as a third supplement what was in effect a book
of pages in small print containing the “grievances of the people.”
The members had worked on this book for many weeks and stockpiled
grievances of all kinds and from every quarter. The book is revealing if only
because the Estates considered it to be their most important work, the one
by which they believed themselves to have fulﬁlled their most sacred duty
and incontrovertibly justiﬁed their behavior toward the king. It is hardly
possible here to go into the details of this lurid specimen of pressuring
and complaining. Without even beginning to question the accuracy of the
factual claims made in the book, one might at least have distinguished
between real grievances and the merely putative ones obviously based
on the authors’ judgment of the utility and harmfulness of government
institutions. And then there would be the task of deciding how much
of the burden of taxation was the government’s fault (to the extent that
Ibid., pp. –.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
the complaints were at all based in fact) and how much was due to the
general hardship and misfortune of the times. For not to mention the
unreasonableness of many of the complaints, there was hardly a region of
Germany that was above blaming the government for what was in reality
the consequence of the unprecedented events and developments of the
past twenty-ﬁve years. The list of grievances compiled by the Estates goes
to show how ill-informed they were as to the ﬁnancial needs of the state
95
and the condition of its ﬁnances, for the grievances were lodged without
troubling to compare the level of taxation with the extent of the state’s
needs. Furthermore, in the case of those grievances which were at all
justiﬁed, one should have determined whether it was the demise of the old
constitution of W¨urttemberg that had actually caused the problems, since
that was the claim that the book was supposed to prove in the ﬁrst place or,
to be more precise, the truth of which it assumed from the outset. Finally,
there was no trace of an argument showing that the royal constitution with
its concessions to the Estates was incapable of adequately redressing the
grievances, much less that they were bound to continue if that constitution
was accepted. Such an argument would have formed the only possible
backbone to all the remonstrations this mass of grievances was intended to
substantiate, and yet it did not even occur to anyone to make it.
The investigation of all these issues, however, though justice might seem
to demand it, proves superﬂuous as soon as we recognize an inherent ﬂaw in
the Estates’ book of grievances that rendered it utterly inconsequential. Not
to digress, the gravamina of the people or cahiers de dol´eances were a familiar
article in the business of the Estates under the Holy Roman Empire. Equally
familiar is their ineffectualness. Every new Landtag and Reichstagfound
the mass of grievances left unﬁnished by the last and piled new ones upon
it. The Estates or parliaments were in the habit of indulging themselves
in the name of duty and conscience in endlessly digressive formulations of
grievances; and the governments were in the habit of receiving such lists
from the Estates, together with the notices of budget approval. Thus the
lists of complaints ﬁnally grew to such an extent and both sides became
so inured to them that the sending and receiving of these masses of paper
ﬁnally sank to a mere formality. The author recalls reading somewhere
how during the legal conﬂict between Duke Carl of W¨urttemberg and his
estates in Vienna in the imperial court council in Vienna passed on
The Reichstag was the Imperial Diet of the Holy Roman Empire. It became an ofﬁcial institution
in , meeting at intervals in Regensburg. From until the demise of the empire in , it
remained permanently in session.

[The “grievances of the people”]

the Estates’ collection of grievances to the duke’s commissioners.The
commissioners replied that the court council should not be surprised at
the quantity of the grievances, for the authors of such gravamina had been
competing with each other for generations to exceed and outdo each other
in the severity of their descriptions, and that if one were to believe their
exaggerated accounts, the country would have been completely ruined a
century ago.
The royal constitution had opened new avenues for the Estates Assembly
to work toward actually ridding W¨urttemberg of its problems instead of
simply ﬁling grievances, but the Estates, stuck as they were in the legal
96
principles and protocols of the old constitution, preferred to continue on
their well-trod path and compile their list of disputes. They could not have
reconciled actually improving things with their conscience, since to have
engaged in any kind of productive work would have been tantamount to
recognizing the new constitution. In any case, it is easier to amass grievances
than to come up with constitutional and legislative initiatives, which alone
could have improved conditions in any substantial way. The merit to be
gained by actual legislation is meager and hard-won, and it was by far the
easier course for the Assembly to ease their conscience by telling themselves
that what they were doing was their duty. Minor problems caused, say, by
the excessive protection of wild game and hunting (which seem to have been
bad enough, anyway) can perhaps be solved by mere complaining, since all
that is needed is an order from the king to shoot the animals. Indeed, the
transactions show that the king gave orders to deal with the problem, “for
the solution of which he was immediately responsible,” as soon as it was
brought to his attention in March.Later on, when the Estates came to
doubt the effectiveness of the king’s measures, they rightly renewed their
complaints. But since they treated everything else they deemed unjust or
harmful about the institutions and the administration of the government
in the same way, namely by lodging formal complaints, it looked as though
they expected the king to solve these problems, too, by giving orders to
shoot.
Drawing attention to abuses and misgovernment is not completely with-
out merit; it is liable to reproach, however, when divorced from positive
Duke Carl Eugen had dissolved W¨urttemberg’s Estates Assembly in after they refused ﬁnancial
support to his plans for enlarging the army. The Estates successfully appealed to the imperial court
council in Vienna, the highest court in the Holy Roman Empire, to force Carl Eugen to grant
the Estates Assembly renewed formal recognition. In the so-called Erbvergleich of , the court
council found Carl Eugen guilty on all counts.
Proceedings, sect. II, p. .


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
efforts to contribute to their improvement by making considered sug-
gestions for corrective legislation. In one session of talks on the written
statements appended to the petition of June ,someone even expressed
the worry that the king might really act on the grievances and thus divert
attention away from their main goal of restoring the old constitution. In
response to this doubt, Count von Waldeck moved that the petition be
modiﬁed in such a way as to ensure that the government would not act on
it, whereupon Mr. Bolley came up with appropriate phraseology: the peti-
tion was to state “that the Estates will not permit themselves to be diverted
from their highest goal and only concern by negotiations over individual
grievances, though it was in the way of fulﬁlling their most sacred duty that
they lodged the grievances.” Had the grievances been dealt with through
97
negotiations, they would have been enough to keep negotiators busy for
years, or rather indeﬁnitely, since there was no longer any imperial court
council to intervene and end the proceedings. Yet what was the point of
the whole ballast of formal grievances if the Estates had no intention of
getting involved either in the business of legislation or in so-called nego-
tiations? The fact was that this ballast served no other purpose than to
give the Estates an opportunity to fulﬁll their “sacred duty,” as they called
it. They had another duty, as well, more sacred, albeit less comfortable,
namely the duty to take steps toward legislation that would remedy present
conditions; but of this duty no one spoke. On July the king replied in
the only way he could have, by saying that he had no choice but to base
his decision regarding the complaints on the information given him by his
ministries.
[the abuses of the notary system]
One among the many grievances touches upon what was referred to as
the abuses of the notary institute. Von Forstner’suntiring admonitions
served to single out the subject within the “melancholy litany of grievances”
Ibid., sect. VIII, p. .
Ibid., sect. X, p. .
Georg Ferdinand Forstner von Dambenois (–) represented Gerabronn in the Estates
Assembly from to . Together with Bolley and Weishaar he served on the examining
committee entrusted with compiling a legal report on the royal edict of March , and on
the committee for composing a petition in response to it. He was especially active in the inquiry
into the abuses of the notary system, introducing seven motions for its reform. In –von
Forstner was co-editor of the journal W¨urttembergisches Archiv; from on he was professor of
state economy (Staatswirtschaft) at the University of T¨ubingen.

[The abuses of the notary system]

and to illuminate it from its various sides. His report introduces us to an
institution peculiar to W¨urttemberg, the notary institute, and exposes legal,
moral, and intellectual conditions that can only be described as a swamp
and which shed light on the nature of the Estates’ interest in restoring the
“good old constitution.”
Since the notary system exercised wide-spread inﬂuence it is worthwhile
to consider it more closely here. As early as May , von Forstner criticized
the inﬂuence of the so-called notaries on the running of the government
as a “plague upon the land” and declared the evil to be rooted in the very
heart of W¨urttemberg’s old Estates constitution, which left the notaries
“wide margin for unprincipled behavior, oppression, and swindle.”A
committee was formed and entrusted with compiling a report with recom-
mendations for the improvement of the institute. When six weeks passed
without further mention of the matter, von Forstner repeated his motion on
June , remarking that even if the one or other honorable principal among
the notaries happened to deplore the abuses, he would still not be able to
prevent them and would not dare to express a desire for reform, knowing
that that would desecrate the old constitution, into whose very fabric the
abuses were woven. He adds that the people of W¨urttemberg would never
(and that means even if the old constitution were restored – indeed, espe-
cially if it were to be restored) experience any relief as long as these abuses
continued, for they were insufferable and more than enough to drive the
common man to desperation. He adduces unimpeachable evidence that
those abuses had always been the cause of the frequent emigration of Old
98
W¨urttemberg’s subjects (for there had been a constant departure of emi-
grants under the regency of all the different W¨urttembergian monarchs
even during the ﬂowering of the old Estates constitution). What else but
the constitution, he exclaims, could have caused them to leave the coun-
try? What was it about the constitution that was so insufferable to them?
What made them so desperate? Nothing but the extortion by the caste of
notaries. And it was the constitution that authorized this caste to oppress
the subjects as they did.
As Hegel will later remark, in many cases the leaders of the Estates and members of the inner
committee were themselves either notaries or were linked to notaries by familial or professional
relations, so that they stood to proﬁt directly or indirectly from the abuses inherent in the system
and thus in the constitution in which it was rooted. In , of the roughly seventy-one elected
deputies (their number varied slightly), nearly half were advocates (thirty to be exact) and roughly
a quarter notaries (eighteen in all): cf. Gerner, Vorgeschichte und Entstehung, pp. ff.
Proceedings, sect. V, p. .


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
When von Forstner later renews his motion for a third time,he cites
a passage from a report by the former governor von Gemmingento the
effect that “in comparison with other states, W¨urttemberg has the sorry
distinction of nourishing a race of people unknown to the rest of Germany
since the times of Dr. Faustus, the notaries.”
“The burden this race presents for the working class of people,” he goes
on, “is made heavier by the impudence with which they vie for the highest
ofﬁces of the state when opportunity presents itself, and the malice with
which they deprive the poorest class of nourishment when confronted by
misfortune. Either way, they live only from the labor of others.” In a most
remarkable and detailed report from the superior district of Horb,we
read that the annual income of the notary institute was on average as much
as six or seven times higher than the annual tax.
This account of things naturally stood in stark contrast to the tone of the
Assembly with its talk of W¨urttemberg’s three hundred years of happiness
under and by virtue of the former Estates Assembly, and with its constant
assurance that restoring the old constitution was the simple remedy for
all the many complaints. To many, this one single “plague” must have
seemed to outweigh all the others together. The contrast between von
Forstner’s account and the Assembly’s enthusiasm for the old constitution
is even stronger, for we must not forget that a good many of its members
(including leading personalities such as Bolley) held high positions in the
dynasty of the notaries, while most of the other elected deputies either
had brothers, sons, or other relatives among the notaries, or at least could
have hoped that their sons and family members might some day enjoy the
privileges of this “plague upon the land.”
Nevertheless, the Assembly had agreed to examine the matter and
appointed a committee to do so. The reader may therefore ﬁnd it sur-
prising – and then again, he may not – that the manner in which the
99
committee prosecuted the matter was altogether dilatory. Von Forstner’s
second motion resulted in nothing more than an admonition to the com-
mittee to speed up its work. After the Assembly was adjourned on July ,
Ibid., sect. XVI, p. .
Ludwig Eberhard Freiherr von Gemmingen (–) was a non-elected member (Virilstimm-
berechtigter) in the Estates Assembly.
Proceedings, sect. XIX, pp. ff. As part of his sweeping reforms of government and administration,
Friedrich I had reorganized W¨urttemberg into sixty-ﬁve administrative units of approximately
twenty thousand inhabitants, each called superior districts (Ober¨amter). They replaced the former
districts ( ¨Amter) and differed from them in that superior-district lines were drawn with an eye to
geographical features and administrative need exclusively, with no consideration of historical or
social bonds.

[The abuses of the notary system]

no more was done in the matter until it was reconvened on October .
Von Forstner was persistent, though, and on December other deputies
gave him their support. At one point two district notaries, against one of
whom serious charges were brought soon after,petitioned the Assembly
to better provide for their class, which, they claimed, had had the most ben-
eﬁcial inﬂuence on the state of W¨urttemberg and its people for centuries
past and to have set it apart from all other lands.Other unpublished peti-
tions, however, which were sufﬁciently numerous as to fairly represent the
general opinion of New W¨urttemberg,implied that of all the grievances
of the people the caste of the notaries was the worst (they gave ample
evidence in support of this), so that “the Assembly ought to establish insti-
tutions that will make it unnecessary for the caste of the notaries to spend
night and day thinking up ways of pillaging the citizenry and to make their
living by extorting and impoverishing the subjects of W¨urttemberg.” All
these petitions contain shocking accounts and condemn the oppression by
the notaries in the strongest possible terms.
At the time these petitions for help against the notaries’ exploitation,
cheating, and pillaging started to come in, the Assembly’s main occupation
consisted in writing remonstrations against the king’s collection of the
yearly tax of –. The complaints about the insufferable plague and
pillaging wrought on the desperate people by the notary institute came in
the midst of the Estates’ campaign to lower their ﬁnancial contributions to
the government, creating the impression that the government’s taxes were
getting in the way of the notary institute’s collecting the separate taxes it
imposed on the subjects. On April , , after nothing had happened in
the matter for nearly a year, von Forstner again recalled it to the Assembly
in an unpublished written statement. A report had been promised by the
speaker of the committee entrusted with investigating the notaries’ abuses;
it was to contain a list of all the relevant grievances. However, although
the Assembly had needed but a few weeks to bring together their mass of
grievances about every single branch of government, after more than a year
the promised report had never yet appeared.
100
Provoked by the Assembly’s insistence on a separate Estates treasury and the establishment of a
permanent committee, and not least by the Assembly’s claim that the old constitution had not
been rendered defunct by the events of that led to W¨urttemberg’s promotion to a kingdom
under Friedrich’s rule, the king adjourned the Assembly on July , , only three months after
it had been convened. When Prussia, Hanover, and Austria exerted pressure, however, he agreed
to reconvene the Assembly on October , .
Proceedings, sect. XIX, p. .
Ibid., sect. XVIII, p. .
Ibid., pp. ff.
Proceedings, sect. XXII, p. ; sect. XXV, appendix, p. .


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
[griesinger’s assessment. history of w¨urttemberg’s
notary system]
What did appear was an assessment by Consul Griesinger,published
separately as an appendix to the twenty-ﬁfth section (pp. ff.). In the
course of several meetings from June till July , this assessment was
read to the Assembly one piece at a time. Apart from an objection by Dr.
Weishaar on August to a motion in the previous meeting (of which no
mention whatsoever is to be found in the minutes of that meeting) and
a few isolated remarks here and there, the Assembly undertook nothing
more in this important matter for the remaining duration of its existence.
Consul Griesinger begins his detailed assessment with the remark that
he will refrain from painting the sorrowful picture of the “scandalous
and almost incredible facts concerning the notary institute that have been
amassed in the petitions and written statements received by the Estates,
since another member of the Assembly has already taken this task upon
himself.” (As noted before, the said depiction never saw the light of day.)
Nevertheless, Griesinger’s assessment, together with the handful of pub-
lished petitions, still contains enough to illustrate the truly “extraordinary
and almost incredible” nature of this famous W¨urttembergian institution
and its relation to the constitution of the Estates. Since the author takes
an historical approach, the ofﬁce of the court notaries, which is very old,
gives him occasion to speak of the courts of Old W¨urttemberg and offer
his opinion of them. These are of sufﬁcient interest that the present author
cannot forbear presenting some part of the history of the courts before
coming to the matter of the notaries themselves.
Chancellor Naucler,who lived at the end of the ﬁfteenth century,
composed a chronicle, from which Consul Griesinger cites the following
passage on the constitution of the courts:
Ludwig Friedrich Griesinger (–), chancellery advocate and director of the superior munic-
ipal court of Stuttgart, represented the district of Stuttgart in the Estates Assembly from 
to . He served on numerous committees, including the committee for the preparation of
the constitutional negotiations with the royal commissioners, the committee for the revision and
abridgement of the grievances of the people, the committee for ensuring the recognition of the
“Estates principle,” and the committee for the examination of Heinrich Maximilian Gleich’s criti-
cisms of the Assembly. Together with Cotta, Griesinger was for a time a proponent of Wangenheim’s
constitutional proposals, and on June , , he voted to accept the new constitutional draft. The
assessment discussed by Hegel is to be found in the appendix of section of the Proceedings
of the Estates Assembly of the Kingdom of W¨urttemberg under the title “Report by Representative
Griesinger” [“Vortrag des Repr¨asentanten Griesinger”].
The reference is to Johannes Naucler (–), the young Count Eberhard’s supervisor and the
ﬁrst chancellor of the University of T¨ubingen, famous among sixteenth-century humanists for his
World Chronicle, published posthumously in .

[Griesinger’s assessment]

In each city, market town, and village, twelve men who have distinguished them-
selves by their integrity and honorable conduct are selected as judges regardless of
whether they are literate, and those who take the ofﬁce of a judge upon themselves
do so purely for the sake of honor, for they receive no remuneration or wages. For
the sake of the common good they sit in judgment on the appointed days, putting
their own affairs last, and each swears to act according to that which he deems
better and more just. They hear the cases in the presence of the local magistrate
and after hearing both sides until they are satisﬁed they pass judgment, not by
applying the laws (that is, what used to be called leges imperatorum), of which
they have no knowledge at all, but rather as reason and the customs of the courts
dictate.
But do not ratio and consuetudo judicorum, and the coutumes (or customary
right) contain laws? Importing foreign rights also meant importing learned
101
consuls into the courts, and thus in the course of time the courts in which
equal and honorable men had administered justice for the sake of honor and
not for money were so far reduced that it ultimately became necessary to
abolish them.
For Griesinger, Naucler’s noble account is nothing more than a “vivid
portrayal of the ignorance” of W¨urttemberg’s courts in those days, and he
goes on to explain that
in courts with judges like the ones just described, the business of the court notaries
could only consist in recording crude and foolish judgments by the ignorant
judges of a barbaric age, for today the many (many indeed!) reasonable extensions
and limitations of the laws render anyone who has not studied law (such as the
members of the jury in England and France, where this institution is revered as a
hallmark of freedom)incapable of ﬁnding a verdict in a complicated law-suit.
Evidently, the resurrection of the glory of early German history and of
authentic national institutions is not to be expected from a legally educated
member of a German Estates Assembly who has views such as these. The
triumph of the new laws, “of the young and courageous Ulpians and the
defeats of W¨urttemberg’s judges,” are recounted in more detail on p. .
Hegel quotes this lengthy passage in the original Latin: “In singulis urbibus, oppidis et villis
duodecim viri, vitae integritate ac honestate praecipui, eliguntur in judices, nullo habito respectu, an
sciant literas, nec non, qui munus judicum necessario subeunt, licet remunerationem seu mercedem
nullam habeant, propter honorem. Sed pro bono communi, suis posthabitis negotiis, statutis diebus
judiciis intendunt, jurantque singuli, se facturos secundum quod eis visum fuerit justius ac melius,
et praesente magistratu loci causas audiunt, partibusque ad satietatem auditis sententiam dicunt,
non ut leges censent [that is, what used to be called leges imperatorum], quorum nullam notitiam
habent, sed prouti ratio et consuetudo judiciorum dictat.”
The parenthetical interpolations are Hegel’s.
The “new laws” refers to W¨urttemberg’s ﬁrst general code of law, decreed by Count Eberhard im
Bart in . Eberhard reorganized the administrative structures of the state, including its court


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
“The early German legal system and customs were in no way comparable
to Roman law. The simple-mindedness of a crude and uncultivated people
of the dark ages cannot help but seem laughable and even despicable when
compared to the wisdom of the greatest and most sublime jurists of Rome
and the ancient world.” Is the spirit of traditional German customsalive
and revered in tones such as these? Griesinger ridicules the Landtag of 
for its bitter complaints against the learned “who are making such inroads
into the courts throughout the land that someone in need of an advocate
must pay ten ﬂorins today for what cost ten shillings twelve years ago. If
this goes on, soon every village will need one or two learned doctors to
administer justice.” Futile complaints, for “death had been sworn to the
old German mores.” Instead of one or two learned doctors, however, it was
the notaries who were sent to every village in W¨urttemberg, and we need
102
not look far in order to decide whether the citizens proﬁted from these
new mores which were so different from those of old Germany.
Griesinger deﬁnes the notaries, who are the proper subject of this
account, as legal and economic practitioners, the peculiarity of
W¨urttemberg’s notaries being that they did not have a university law degree.
As far as that goes, however, the case was more or less the same in other
states, since the duties of a notary do not for the most part require a univer-
sity education. As Griesinger’s assessment shows, it was actually something
else that set W¨urttemberg’s notaries apart. Every area of jurisdiction had
either a town notary or a district notary (larger towns had a notary of their
own, while the rest of the district had the usual district notary) whose
monopoly it was to record all the legal and otherwise ofﬁcial business con-
ducted in the district. For the administration of a superior district, especially
the departments of justice and the police,the economic administration
system. As a result of the greatly increased use of written documents a special ofﬁce was created,
called the Kanzlei and directed by legally trained specialists. It is no doubt to these legal specialists
that Griesinger refers eponymously as “Ulpians.” Domitius Ulpianus was one of the last great
Roman jurists, assassinated in , likely as a result of his plans for a reform that would severely
restrict the privileges of the praetorian guard. Ulpianus wrote encyclopaedically on all branches of
the law (nearly books) and was a major source for the compilers of Justinian’s Digesta. (Cf.
the Oxford Classical Dictionary, ed. N. G. L. Hammond and H. H. Scullard [Oxford: Clarendon
Press, nd ed., ], p. .)
In the German original the phrase is Geist deutscher Volkst¨umlichkeit. Volkst¨umlichkeit is derived
from Volk, “the people,” and can, in the context, perhaps best be understood as signifying a national
identity rooted in popular tradition.
Polizei in early modern German usage has a much wider meaning than the corresponding term in
modern German or English. In addition to security and law enforcement, early modern German
police were responsible for matters as diverse as maintenance of public thoroughfares, public health
issues, canalization, and the navigability of waterways – in short, all things implicated in the welfare
of the polity.

[Griesinger’s assessment]

and the forestry department, the employment of notaries is a necessity they
have in common with other states. What was peculiar to W¨urttemberg was
that here such assistants were never recruited from among those who had
studied law, economy, or forestry at the university; the notaries’ only edu-
cation consisted in learning the routine, and they were never destined to
head the department in which they were employed. The department of
forestry, for instance, had always been in the hands of the nobility, and so
a burgher assistant could never aspire to the ofﬁce of the forester.
On the other hand, whereas in other states university graduates with a
law degree were required by law to gain practical skills as interns for one
or more years before taking on a permanent position in a department,
W¨urttemberg had no such legal requirement. Indeed, Griesinger’s assess-
ment frequently mentions that jurists with a university degree were far
too haughty ever to work as assistants to a government ofﬁcial. A petition
from the town of Urach, lodged with the Estates Assembly, contains the
complaint that the (unusually large) territory of the superior district, whose
seat had previously been Urach, had been reduced. Among other similarly
brilliant thoughts, the petition expresses the idea that the use of the many
smaller superior districts lay in providing inexperienced jurists from the
university with preparatory training. And training for what? Why, for the
administration of larger superior districts! As though there were any differ-
103
ence besides mere quantity; in terms of quality, the tasks are the same. By
that reasoning, the citizens of smaller jurisdictions would be the animae
viles destined to be practiced on by inexperienced staff for the sole reason of
their belonging to a geographically smaller superior district. Considering
that in W¨urttemberg it was the notaries who were responsible for the legal
practice which elsewhere was overseen by university-educated jurists being
trained under seasoned ofﬁcials, it is hardly surprising that they were so
important both for their inexperienced superiors and in their own right:
in a district of twenty thousand and more, their educated superior, who
was the police force, administrative branch, and legislative power in one
person, had no one but notaries on whom to rely.
The monopoly granted to the town and district notaries is the most
prominent subject in Griesinger’s portrayal of the notary system – or
rather the abuses of that system, for in the grievances and petitions the term
“notary abuses” practically takes on the status of a recognized, technical
expression for the notary institute. In order to exercise this monopoly, they
employed anywhere from ten to twenty notaries, some of whom worked in
the main ofﬁce, while others were sent out to the townships and villages in
order to work there. For a detailed list of their various duties, Griesinger’s


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
assessment should be consulted. In any case, these included the distribution
of taxes, ﬁlling out tax forms and tax receipts, the calculation of the taxable
assets of individual citizens, recording transfers of title due either to the
sale of houses and estates or to marriage, and also the distribution of local
expenditures due to the so-called town and district “damage.”b However,
there were two kinds of duties which seem to have been the special focus
of the notaries’ oppression and abuses.
First, they were in charge of the ﬁles of the non-contentious jurisdiction
and of contracts, marriage agreements, here especially wills, inventories of
the assets brought into the marriage by newly wedded husbands and wives,
estate auction inventories, divisions of inheritances, and so on. Regarding
divisions of inheritances we read for instance on p. that the value of most
of them was less than the fee for the notary’s paperwork. Thus the best
piece of the property was often publicly sold to raise cash money [sc. to pay
the fee]. Newly-weds fared no better. Either the inventory fee consumed
the money they had managed to save before they were married or the couple
had to go into debt at the outset of their marriage or sell a piece of land
etc. The effect of such procedures was the general impoverishment of the
104
lower class. An unwed married couple,for example, is forbidden by law
in W¨urttemberg to take inventory themselves or to have a person of their
choice do so and then have the list notarized. Only the notary-monopolist
is authorized to take their inventory. We shall soon see how lengthy and
expensive such inventories can be. The petitions and other documents are
ﬁlled with complaints unanimously criticizing both the relevant legislation
(whose very nature entailed endless accounting and unspeakable costs) and
the swindling and other abuses that multiplied the legally permissible costs
ten times over.
The notaries’ other occupation was keeping the accounts for the ofﬁce
of the chief accountant and the municipality, the accounts of the chari-
ties, ecclesiastic assets, and asylums, in short all the accounts pertaining
to the church and to endowments for the poor, as well as being respon-
sible for probating and reviewing the accounts of the municipalities and
legal guardians. Here we ﬁnd a very peculiar situation in which the chief
accountants and others in charge of managing the various assets of the
local government, charity, and so on were not permitted to keep their own
b [Footnote in the original:] According to this terminology the building of a bridge, town hall, and
the like would be referred to as “damage.”
Literal translation of unverheiratetes Ehepaar. Hegel appears to be referring to a couple engaged to
be married.

[Griesinger’s assessment]

ﬁnancial records or to have someone of their choice do so; they had to have
it done by the district notary’s book-keeping factory. The costs were borne
by the municipality, and here for once the term “district damage” seems
quite appropriate.
Shocking examples of these costs are adduced in the assessment. In one
case, a municipality in New W¨urttemberg was charged ﬂorins for an
account which would have cost only crowns before the introduction of
Old W¨urttemberg’s notary system. The notaries were artful enough to ﬁnd
sufﬁcient accounting to run up a bill of ﬂorins and crowns to a hamlet
which, lacking revenue, had formerly had no need of any accounting at
all.These and many other examples would make for entertaining reading
if only they were not at the same time such outrageous cases of cheating
and swindling. Just one more example: the town notary of a place called
M¨ogglingen had entrusted several different of his notaries in turn with the
municipal ﬁnancial records. The local municipality ended up paying these
various notaries a sum of ﬂorins just for reading the ﬁles, without their
having yet written a single word. That was the price of the account before
ever a line of it had even been written, and naturally the man who ﬁnally
actually wrote it also had to be paid. One of the most striking complaints of
all those ﬁled with the Estates Assembly concerns the steep rise in the cost
of managing the municipalities’ assets, the endowment for the poor, and
105
so on. What is striking is that the rise in costs is attributed to the demise
of the old constitution. To judge from the information brought together
about the notary system, these complaints were mainly lodged in the new
regions of W¨urttemberg, and the detailed municipal accounts (which are
reproduced in the assessment) also show that the enormous rise in costs
was due solely to the introduction of this Old W¨urttembergian nuisance.
Many more instances of such unlawful service charges and of the exces-
sive length and unnecessary detail of the accounts could be cited – among
others the fact that, since the accounts for the municipal charity had to be
ﬁlled out in duplicate and triplicate, the notaries charged the full fee for
each copy, counting even the craftsmen’s bills two and three times over. This
habit of milking the citizens for all they were worth by every possible means,
be it legal or not, is the basis for the shocking picture of the notaries’ mores,
their ignorance, brutality, ruthlessness, and arrogance painted on pp. ff.
On p. we read “that the profession had never at any time been respected
in W¨urttemberg. Implicit in the admiration occasionally shown for one or
the other deserving individual was always the disdain for the profession as
Proceedings, sect. XVIII, pp. f.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
a whole, for a virtuous notary was always a rarity.” The harsh tones in the
very ﬁrst chapter of the assessment are not so much Griesinger’s own as
they are the unanimous testimony culled from many sources old and new
on this peculiarly W¨urttembergian profession. Among those sources are
even authors who themselves belong to the profession and so presumably
knew it best. Nothing worse can be said of a class of people than what is
contained in these depictions.
Most drastic of all, however, is the fact that the principal (i.e., the town
or district notary) had to be paid the same amount again that the notaries
he sent abroad had been able to earn or extort by their own work. Here we
have a situation in which the principal not only has the monopoly on all
accounting done in his district, but also has to be paid the same amount
again that his notaries earn for themselves – prices which in themselves
had already been cause for bitter complaint. Thus the very man supposed
to be supervising the actions of his subordinates was exacting payment
from the citizens not as wages for his labor, but as a kind of tribute to his
dynasty. The duty paid to the town or district notary was separate from
the tax placed on accounting documents by the sovereign, and it went into
his private pocket. As Griesinger correctly states (p. ), “The subaltern
notaries are the town and district notaries’ money makers and the latter
106
have everything to gain by the illegal and incommensurate actions of their
subordinates. A worse arrangement than this can hardly be imagined.” One
is reminded of a ﬁefdom or dynasty in which town and district notaries
exact duty from the citizens as though they were their subjects or indeed
vassals, as they might be termed. The analogy seems especially apt in cases
like the one described on p. . Last year a district notary charged a tenant
who had inherited the estate of his brother, a catholic priest, ﬂorins,
although the man had been exempted both from ﬁling an inventory and
from dividing the inheritance. The notary was able to do this because the
exemption did not legally free the man from the obligation of paying the
fees for the division of the inheritance. We are told that the heir actually
paid the amount and that the district notary pocketed the money without
ever having spilled a drop of ink. We do not hear, though, of this act of
extortion ever having been punished by forced recompense, prison, or any
other penalty. In the feudal system the duties owed to the lord are based
on his prior rights to the land, but they also oblige the lord in turn to
protect his vassals. By contrast, the fees of the town and district notaries
were unencumbered by any such obligations. If W¨urttemberg’s citizens
were really afﬂicted by this bondage or serfdom to the notaries (as seems
de facto to have been the case; the Estates were in any case unable to
deny it), it would at least have been more practical (and more just) to

[Griesinger’s assessment]

have given the state the advantage of this subjection and to have leased the
monopoly to the notaries in the name of the sovereignc instead of allowing
private citizens to pocket what was essentially a duty and not wages for
labor. Indeed, some of the notaries amassed fortunes that put them on the
footing of a bishop in France or Austria!
We have already mentioned that the chief accountants and other heads of
local councils, those in charge of charity funds and so on, did not keep their
own accounts since this was the privilege of the notaries. This signiﬁcantly
hobbled local ofﬁcials and trustees. However, more signiﬁcant and even
more important than the increased expense to the municipalities and their
107
various charitable funds was the fact that the heads of local councils were
thus thoroughly dependent on the town and district notaries. This state of
things presented a serious interference with the organism of the state. In a
petition from Gm¨undwe ﬁnd a depiction based on ofﬁcial documents
revealing how egregious the notaries’ abuses were in this regard as well.d In
reference to a particular notary we read the following account:
In the case of the municipal accounts, the notary took possession of all the
documents of the journal,and the deposits and receipts of the accountant,
without giving any receipt of his own for them. From that moment on, the
chief accountant was his slave. He could no longer sleep, for the thought that
his credit, honor, and reputation were in the hands of a stranger tormented him
continuously. There were some who demanded pay advances and then left the
country for another part of the empire. If the notary handed over the ﬁles to a
successor, a period of suffering ensued for the accountant. Funds suddenly seemed
to have been used improperly, receipts came up missing, a deﬁcit opened up. The
accountant’s future lay in the dungeon or the prison. When the innocent man
had come to this point of desperation and offered appropriate remuneration, the
notary would give in, receipts would turn up again or be written anew, and so on.
The chief accountant and the others involved in the documentation would sign
their names to accounts that were utterly incomprehensible to them and ﬁnd the
fact that they now had a credit as mysterious as the fact that before they had been
accused of having a deﬁcit.
c [Footnote in the original:] On p. it is reported that “in Duke Carl used the notaries’
excessive earnings as a pretense for forcing them to purchase an obligatory bond of ,ﬂorins
to ﬁnance military spending.” What is here called a pretense could just as well be described as a
legitimate reason, and Carl’s supposed act of despotism as easily be considered just, as the tribute
and salaries of the town and district notaries themselves.
d [Footnote in the original:] This detailed account of how the notary system preyed upon the local
government is astonishing. We ﬁnd townships in which the notaries’ fees run to 
and times
the tax.
Ibid., p. .
Proceedings, sect. XVIII, p. .
In German book-keeping practice of the time, the term Journal (also diarium) refers to the
chronologically ordered list of cash payments received and rendered, kept by an accountant.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
These are the clutches into which local authorities and the common people
had fallen! In the words of the prophet, “O my people, they which lead thee
cause thee to err”with their talk of the good old constitution! Though
we are far from generalizing on the basis of this one individual notary’s
personal traits, it is also obvious that the dependency of the local councils,
the municipalities, and (when we take the notaries’ other activities into
account) individual citizens was not the effect of individual personalities
but of the notary system as such.
Formerly, the local councils nominated deputies for the main Estates
Assembly only, while the majority of members in the committees were
notaries. On p. of his assessment Griesinger writes,
108
In spite of the ﬂaws of the notary system, which were often felt and as frequently
criticized, plans for improvement or even total reform were bound to ﬁnd their
staunchest opponents among the Estates’ representatives, for they were mostly
either notaries themselves or exposed to the direct inﬂuence of notaries, so that
any signiﬁcant improvement was plainly contrary to their interests.
That says everything. Yet, what is presented here in the past tense as
merely historical facts about previous Estates Assemblies – are they not
facts about the Estates Assembly’s own history? Had the present Assembly
done anything useful to clean out those Augean stables? Wouldn’t that
have meant tearing into their own entrails? Did von Forstner’s repeated
and unﬂagging efforts bring about the publication of even so much as a
committee report on the notaries’ abuses after more than a year, or at least
some deliberation or even a resolution on the issue?e
It is telling that the majority of the complaints came from New
W¨urttemberg, as though Old W¨urttemberg were actively and passively
so enmeshed in the abuses that they had grown unconscious of or insensi-
ble to them or had perhaps resigned themselves to desperation on the one
side and soothed their conscience on the other with the conviction that
they were within their good, old, guaranteed rights. It may have played a
certain role that since the new region was forced to rely on them as experi-
enced professionals, Old W¨urttemberg’s notaries wreaked their havoc there
as though it were a conquered land. These new countrymen, brought up in
e [Footnote in the original:] The events of November will be mentioned below. [Editors’ note:
Friedrich I died on October , , and was immediately succeeded by his son, Wilhelm I.
The new king at once began to reorganize the government and replace his father’s privy council.
Wangenheim was entrusted with the draft of a new constitutional charter, and the Estates Assembly
adjourned until mid-January , at which time the draft was to be presented.]
Isaiah :(King James Version): “O my people, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy
the way of thy paths.”

[Griesinger’s assessment]

the customs and laws of Old W¨urttemberg, thus did little to recommend
either themselves or the old laws and constitution to the people of New
W¨urttemberg.
The ministry could be reproached for having convened an Estates Assem-
bly whose elements it must have known, rather than advising the king ﬁrst
to improve the miserable state in which the old constitution had placed
the majority of the people, and only then to embark on reform of the
government’s upper stories. For as long as W¨urttemberg’s peculiar burgher
aristocracy existed, commanding a duty that put its members on equal
footing with wealthy bishops and exercising power over the municipalities,
their authorities, and private citizens; and until local authorities and their
109
municipalities were freed from the clutches of this privileged caste and
until this element of moral and intellectual decadence that threatened to
ensnare the minds and the purses of the common people was destroyed, no
true concept of right, freedom, and constitutionality would be able to take
root, and the ministry could expect nothing other than that the appointed
deputies would continue to come from this element.
On the one hand, it was commendable of W¨urttemberg’s king to be the
ﬁrst among German princes to give his people Estates organized so as to
represent the rights of the people, rather than those of a speciﬁc class. For
he thus salvaged the Estates from the indifference and alienation, indeed
contempt, with which the previous Estates in Germany had come to be
regarded by the people.f On the other hand, there had been no signiﬁ-
cant nobility in Old W¨urttemberg; in place of such, the less prominent,
f [Footnote in the original:] In his Collection of Documents and Records of W¨urttemberg’s Recent History
[Sammlung einiger Urkunden und Actenst¨ucke zur neusten W¨urttembergischen Geschichte, G¨ottingen,
], [Ludwig Timotheus von] Spittler says in his Draft of a History of the Inner Committee of
the Estates [Entwurf einer Geschichte des engern landschaftlichen Ausschusses] [part , pp. f.], “In
some countries a well-framed constitution providing for collegiate bodies of appointed counselors
[Kollegien-Verfassung] has been a better guarantor of the general welfare than even an Estates
constitution. Thus the entire public often honors one or other of the ruler’s colleges with universal
respect, while the Estates Assembly sinks into a disregard that should have been nearly impossible
considering its original vocation, but which is unmistakable in every instance.” Though much could
be quoted from that article that is applicable to present circumstances, let this sufﬁce: on p. , we
read that there could hardly have been worse oversight of the administration of the Estates treasury
than that by the inner committee, but that apart from a few human weaknesses business had on the
whole been properly conducted. (In those days the administration of the Estates treasury described
above had not yet been exposed.) Spittler’s remark on pp. f. is also noteworthy, where he
says that the city magistrates’ familiarity with and comprehension of the laws dwindled to such an
extent that “in their ineptitude they could assert no rights and in their ignorance assert no authority
against the members of the committee” – which of course was inevitable, since affairs of general
import were no longer dealt with popularly [volksm¨aßig], but legalistically [advocatenm¨aßig] and
were moreover conducted in secret. Spittler also describes the relations between the committees
and the rest of the deputies during assemblies, at which the members of the committees presented
their report and then listened to the opinions of the others “just to pass the while, as it were.”


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
but more oppressive, aristocracy of the notaries had established itself. As
long as the people were not freed from these shackles, there could be no
110
genuine popular representation. Though the concept of a monarchic state
necessarily entails the existence of estates,it would have been better not
to have any at all than to tolerate the continuation of such privileges and
the oppression, deception, and demoralization of the people, and certainly
better than having Estates that are the representatives of the privileges of
such an aristocracy.
The ministry must also have been familiar with the principles of the
aristocracy who had just been incorporated into Old W¨urttemberg or
(to the mind of some of the nobles) was at least on the verge of being
so incorporated. They should therefore have been able to foresee that the
aristocrats would try to hold on to their former rights – rights which were so
broadly deﬁned as to make an open question of the nobility’s status within
the state and which, if maintained in their former extent, were inconsistent
with the organism of any state. In the majority of cases of great political
upheaval and reform, the monarch and the people have been of one mind
and will, but only too often an intermediate class (such as the aristocracy
and clergy in France or the nobility and burgher aristocracy of the notaries
in W¨urttemberg) has insisted on its privileges and monopolies instead of
forming the link between the monarch and the people as would have been
its true purpose, thus hindering the realization of the principles of rational
law and the common good. It falls to that intermediate class to be the
intellectuals of a people and to be immediately involved in exercising the
people’s rights and fulﬁlling their duties. However, this also places them in a
position to deceive the people and seduce them into taking their side when
in reality they are busy protecting their own privileges against the people.
A sad and revolting drama then unfolds in which injustices which for a
century paraded as law and drove the common people to desperation come
to be defended by the people themselves, who have allowed themselves to
be taken in by the mere name of law.
[the king adjourns the assembly]
Now that the principles, the spirit, and the interests of the Assembly have
been made apparent, the rest of the story, which is a plain and simple
Cf. PR, §§–.
For related remarks on the special role of the educated middle class (Mittelstand) in a constitutional
monarchy cf. PR, §§and .

[The king adjourns the Assembly]

consequence thereof, is of less intrinsic interest and can be told more
quickly.
Our account of events left off at June , when the Estates refused to dis-
cuss any potentially acceptable points in the king’s important concessions
which might in turn have been connected with other acceptable points in
the royal constitution. Instead, they insisted on an attitude of stubborn
dissatisfaction. It was a novel idea, though in keeping with the style of
the proceedings hitherto,that in the meeting following the decision to
reject the royal resolutions, an individual member of the Assembly, Dr.
Weishaar, suggested in a written statement that the rejected resolutions
111
now be examined. Hereupon, a committee was appointed to examine Dr.
Weishaar’s written statement. The committee reported back on June 
but neglected to mention either its examination of Weishaar’s statement or
any result thereof, and instead offered only to pass the statement on to the
royal commissioners. This decision, which fell on June , is nevertheless
recorded in the main petition dated the th. Similarly, the decision taken
on the th to mention the noble guarantors of the old W¨urttembergian
constitution – namely the three powers England, Denmark, and Prus-
sia– in the main petition bearing that date was overturned on
the th.
The content of the royal resolution that followed on July was pre-
dictable.The king adjourned the Assembly from July onward, giving
as his reason that the grievances of the people that had been lodged with
him were necessarily of far greater importance than the present discep-
tations on constitutional issues, and that he intended to subject them to
a strict examination and investigation by the government ministries and
authorities. He added that since the Estates’ written statements had surely
exhausted everything that they could possibly have to bring before the king,
there was nothing left to be discussed by an Assembly. For the rest, the
king bade them to name representatives who might continue negotiations
in the interim and to give them instructions suited to bringing about a
Proceedings, sect. X, p. .
In , W¨urttemberg’s Estates Assembly had declared the Lutheran faith as the state religion and
obliged the duke and his successors to relinquish all claims to a ius reformandi, i.e., the right to
change the state religion to suit his own. In , the catholic line of the succession, represented by
Duke Karl Alexander, came to power and insisted – unconstitutionally – on making catholicism
into the state religion. This attempt to overturn the constitution, as the Estates saw it, was thwarted
by the intervention of the protestant states of England, Denmark, and Prussia, which were thus
perceived as “guarantors” of the constitution. Cotta made the letter to the guarantors public in his
journal, the Allgemeine Zeitung.
Proceedings, sect. XX, p. .


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
timely agreement. One must admit that in regard to the two issues at hand
the king’s resolution was appropriate to the situation.
In a petition dated July , however, the Estates avowed that the com-
plaints did not mean nearly as much to them as the constitution and that
they were much disheartened that the king had resolved to adjourn the
Assembly before they had been able to give the people any consolation, any
reassurance.Apart from denying the king’s concessions of so much they
themselves considered essential – and he had indeed granted them every-
thing essential – they also announced that they had authorized a twenty-ﬁve
member committee, chaired by the acting president of the Assembly, to
carry on negotiations “and attend to the interests of the Estates.” Beyond
that they professed themselves unable to give any other instructions to the
committee than they had received from the people and carried in their
heart, and added that they would reserve the right to approve the result of
any negotiations. The Estates were thus on their way back to a committee in
the old style, authorized to “attend to the interests of the land as a whole.”
The king protected his people from such a committee and – though it
was against their will – saved the Estates from themselves. In a resolution
from July ,he rejected the Estates’ ridiculous proposal, saying that it
would be incompatible with the very concept of an adjournment to retain
112
a body representing the whole assembly. (Though, as we have seen over
and over again, many things were compatible with the ideas of the Estates
which were incompatible with reason.)They were instead to appoint
the same number of interim representatives as they had had negotiating
commissioners.
In the same meeting of July , during which the king’s resolution was
read, Bolley argued in a votum scriptum that the Assembly could under
no circumstances appoint only four representatives.Hereupon it was
The two issues to which Hegel refers were the Estates’ insistence on a separate treasury of their
own and the establishment of a permanent committee to represent the Estates both during and
between sessions of the Assembly.
Proceedings, sect. X, p. .
Ibid., p. .
In the original, the passage reads, Aber mit den Vorstellungen dieser St¨ande vertrug sich . . . vieles,
was mit dem Begriffe nicht vereinbarlich ist. Hegel plays here on two meanings of the word Begriff.
On the one side, he is using it according to more common usage as meaning the concept of
something; on the other side, however, he shifts to his own more technical, normative usage in
which Begriff denotes, inter alia, reason or rational thought as such. In this latter usage Hegel
frequently contrasts the term Begriff with Vorstellung, that is, the “mere” idea of something as taken
outside its connection with reason. This contrast is explicity present in the passage at hand.
The king later agreed to the appointment of twelve commissioners instead of the original number
of four.

[The king adjourns the Assembly]

suggested that a deputation be sent to the king to repeat their demands
orally and in person, though this idea was immediately rejected on the
grounds that such a deputation would be no more effectual than the written
demands they had already sent. They argued moreover that such a course
would not be in keeping with traditional norms and that a ruler had so
many ways of sending those who came before him away in embarrassment
that such a plan could end up causing troubles for the Assembly. (Were
they worried that their deputation would be tossed out on their ears?)
In view of the urgency of the situation, and while the committee was
busy composing their petition, the rest of the Assembly had nothing more
pressing to do than to listen to petitions from occasionally remote towns
and their districts dating from the previous day and sent by messenger to
the Assembly, in whose interest and manner they were written. In the case of
further petitions concerning other matters, only the long list of where they
had been sent from was presented – without, however, indicating the dates
when they were written and received. Among other written statements,
one in particular was read that had been “specially requested by several
members of the Assembly,” concerning the allowances the district cashier
had refused to grant them! For it had been noted in a previous meeting that
the members refused to accept their allowances from the state treasury and
demanded to be paid out of the municipal treasuries; the administrators
of the municipal treasuries, however, were not all willing to make the
unauthorized payments.
The petition ultimately approved by the Assembly reiterates their previ-
ous demands and concludes with great pathos and with the usual self-praise
and avowals of their good conscience, as also with the assurance that they
had done nothing but their duty, that the people had offered them moving
evidence of their gratitude, and all of Germany demonstrated its esteem
for them, and so on. – The king had convened them, presented them with
the constitution whose foundations we considered above, agreed more than
once to concessions, and persisted in negotiations in spite of the Assembly’s
contemptuous attitude; the meetings of the Assembly itself were pointless;
and the Estates reserved the right to instruct their authorized negotiators
113
and to ratify the results of talks between them and the sovereign. Yet despite
all that, the authors of the petition and with them the whole Assembly had
the effrontery to say to the king that if he failed to approve the transfer
of the Estates’ rights to a committee, they would have no choice but to
conclude that he intended to give the people no constitution at all! In
this desperate situation, when all seemed balanced on the razor’s edge, the


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
Assembly resorted to the dire remedy of appealing directly to the guaran-
tors. Mr. Bolley expressed the view that if the king failed to comply with
the demands formulated in the petition, not only would there be no pos-
sibility of addressing the Bundestag as an Estates Assembly, but the cause
itself would be utterly lost.It is strange indeed to see the Assembly work
itself up to such a fever pitch. Their exaggerations could have had no other
purpose than to make it appear that the king’s own intentions were aimed
at “losing the cause,” where that “cause” in fact was the reduction of the
Estates to the committee of yore.
As for the Estates’ appeal to the guarantors of the old constitution, all that
was lacking was for them to send letters to the Reichstag in Regensburg,
too, and the imperial court council in Vienna. The powers they called
on as guarantors were the very ones who had but lately reafﬁrmed the
dissolution of the empire and the promotion of the Duchy of W¨urttemberg
to a sovereign state at the Congress of Vienna; powers which, as was only
reasonable, stipulated Estates constitutions for the new German states, not
old Estates constitutions; powers who had with this articleextended the
only possible guarantee for a new German state, assuming any was necessary
to begin with, and who had spared even the French nation the humiliation
of such a guarantee for their charte, despite the fact that they had only just
done them the service of returning their king to his throne for the second
time– not that the French would ever have sunk to the depths of asking
them for such a guarantee! Nor of course did W¨urttemberg’s Estates ever
receive an answer to their letter to those three powers.
In his decree of July , the king made the Estates feel how incongruous
their behavior was and left it at their disposal, should it comfort them, to
appoint two or three times as many deputies as they had had negotiating
commissioners. He postponed the adjournment of the Assembly until the
th in order to give them time to take possession of themselves. On the day
of the th, the Assembly drafted another long petition like the ones that
had preceded it, full of an opinionated spitefulness and bitter ill-temper
that contrasted sharply with the composure, calm simplicity, and focus
of the king’s resolutions. The petition’s conclusion, which stated that the
114
Proceedings, sect. X, p. . The Bundestag (federal diet) in Frankfurt am Main (established in 
at the Congress of Vienna) was the highest political organ of the German League.
Article of the Articles of Confederation stipulated that every member state was to have a
constitution providing for an Estates Assembly.
Hegel is referring to Napoleon’s defeat at Waterloo and the end of his reign of the “Hundred Days,”
at the end of which Louis XVIII returned to the throne.

[The king adjourns the Assembly]

king had caused an irreparable division between himself and the land, was
unforgivable for an Estates Assembly. They disbanded.
Are we to imagine that this bitter ill-temper was cause for the people’s
“moving evidence of gratitude” (consisting among other things of a Nacht-
musik performed at one of the last assembly meetings)?It would seem
rather that only the rabble could have taken pleasure in such sentiments
and drawn a sense of self from them. The king in any case proved immune
to them, for by announcing that the Assembly was to reconvene on Octo-
ber , he refuted the Assembly’s propensity to act on the basis of the
intentions they themselves imputed to him, rather than on the basis of the
facts of the situation and the king’s own express intentions.
Given the material available in W¨urttemberg for an Estates Assembly,
the ministry might from the outset have known it to be highly improbable
that anything useful could be done with it; yet actual experience must
have convinced them that it was indeed impossible, and in the eyes of the
world they would surely have been justiﬁed had they never reconvened the
Assembly again. Such an Assembly, however, is of inﬁnite importance for
the political education that a people and its leaders require when they have
hitherto lived in a condition of political nullity. Unlike a people untouched
by political experience, in which case political education could begin afresh
and from the beginning, the people of W¨urttemberg had lived enchained
by an oppressive aristocracy and the inner constitution erected upon it,
with all the resultant perversion of the concepts of constitutional rights
and civil liberties.As we have seen, those concepts had become closely
entwined with the vested interests of the ruling caste, and in such a case
it is hopeless to combat misapprehension by means of argument alone or
to expect it have any immediate effect. Though less obvious, the indirect
effects of giving rein to such a mindset and allowing it to come fully to
This so-called Nachtmusik took place when the deputies resolved to remain in assembly until
midnight of July , (the deadline set by the king for their adjournment) as a demonstration
of their political will. Apparently, the musicians had been hired for a quite different engagement
very nearby. When the crowd that had assembled to support the Estates deputies began calling
out cheers for the individual Assembly members, the deputies came out to acknowledge them and
mistakenly assumed that the musicians had also come to honor them. The ensuing coincidences
and misunderstandings (which nearly had dire legal consequences for the unwitting musicians) are
described in Gerner, Vorgeschichte und Entstehung, pp. , –, as are the ﬂyers containing
poems and other expressions of gratitude that were in circulation at about the same time.
In fact, the Estates had appealed to Hanover, Prussia, and Austria as powerful members of their
German League to intervene on their behalf. It was under their pressure that Friedrich agreed to
reconvene the Assembly in October.
Freiheitsrechte.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
light and to tire itself out in the process are ultimately more lasting. The
effect on public opinion is that the people cease to have any sympathy
for such perversity as soon as it takes on explicit form. The disclosure of
the privileges at the base of the notaries’ abuses and the more enlightened
and wide-spread awareness attendant upon it was one such consequence
of far more lasting effect than the character and actions of the sovereigns
or passing circumstances, and we shall soon have opportunity to observe
the consequences of an education at least of their understanding.Given
the situation in W¨urttemberg, the a priori introduction of a constitution
could not have been, and indeed was not, successful.Thus there was
no alternative but to set the Estates on the path of educating themselves –
115
a path which humans admittedly have every right to take, and it does
honor to the king and his ministers to have opened that path in the faith
that although the Assembly began at the opposite standpoint, it would
eventually (whether consciously or not) be led to reason.
[the king reconvenes the assembly. new climate
of negotiations]
In the royal decree of October , which opened the new session, the
king clearly outlines the state of the negotiations. As he sees it, the Estates
hold that prior to any further proceedings the right of both Old and New
W¨urttemberg to the old constitution must be laid down, whereby the king
would be obligated to carry over what he sees as the faults of the constitution
The phrase “education of their understanding” renders Hegel’s expression formelle Bildung. Com-
parison of several passages written at about the same time as the Estates essay shows that by formelle
Bildung Hegel means an education or development of the cognitive ability to form distinct concepts
of the various aspects of things by abstraction, differentiate between essential and non-essential
characteristics, and to apply the concepts gained by abstraction in novel situations. (See Werke,
ed. Eva Moldenhauer and Karl Markus Michel [Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, ], vol. IV: N¨urnberger
und Heidelberger Schriften, p. ; cf. Hegel’s draft for his inaugural speech as professor at the Uni-
versity of Berlin on October , : ibid., vol X, p. . See also the somewhat later formulation
in section of the second edition of the Encyclopedia (), which Hegel carries over with slight
modiﬁcations in the same section of the edition: ibid., p. .) These are clearly aspects of
what Kant referred to as the power to judge (Urteilskraft; cf. Critique of Judgment, XXVI).
Hegel’s talk of introducing the constitution “a priori” is not untendentious; many contemporary
observers and later historians were apt to describe Friedrich I’s actions as an attempt to impose
from above a constitution suited to his own autocratic propensities. The biographer Rudolph
Haym was particularly critical of Hegel’s portrayal of events, referring to Hegel as a “Napoleon-
ist” who was drawn to “despotic natures” and also stood to gain a prestigious post as chancel-
lor of the University of T¨ubingen by ﬂattering the king. (See Rudolf Haym, Hegel und seine
Zeit. Vorlesungen ¨uber Entstehung und Entwicklung, Wesen und Werth der Hegel’schen Philosophie,
pp. ff.) Haym later withdrew the latter allegation.
Proceedings, sect. XI, p. .

[The king reconvenes the Assembly]

of Old W¨urttemberg to New W¨urttemberg as well; such an obligation,
however, would be contrary to his ﬁrmest convictions. If he believed Old
W¨urttemberg to have a legitimate claim to its former constitution – which
he does not – he would willingly restore that constitution within the older
territories; nor is it his intention to disregard the former rights and laws
of the newly acquired territories. There could, however, be no question
of organizing these very different parts of the kingdom according to their
peculiar norms. Rather, one constitution suited both to the former and
to the present state of affairs must be established on the basis of mutual
agreement.Furthermore, the decree contains no mention of a “royal
constitution”; instead, there is only talk of individual modiﬁcations which
the king thinks necessary for the welfare of the state and which are subject
to negotiation. He also declares his willingness to retain any elements of
the old constitution that prove compatible with modern times and a good
administration of the state. The recognition of the principle of the old
constitution in its whole extent would have been senseless and contrary to
the nature of the enterprise, and the promise to retain everything in it that
was of any use exhausted all that was of true value.
As to the composition of the Estates at the time the Assembly was recon-
vened, most of the non-elected members had either joined the Assembly
personally (among them six princes) or transferred their vote to those who
had.In a petition dated May , twelve members of the nobility had
informed the Assembly of their limited expectations and desires regarding
the maintenance of their former privileges within the new organism of the
state.Their demands were moderate, and, more importantly, they were
formulated precisely, in detail, and in an open, frank, and yet appropriate
Until –, Friedrich had governed the newly granted territory of New W¨urttemberg as a
political entity separate from the traditional territory of what at that point came to be known as
Old W¨urttemberg. From till Old and New W¨urttemberg formed a uniﬁed kingdom
within the Confederation of the Rhine, and Friedrich ruled it without an Estates Assembly.
Of the thirty-one noble non-elected members who had appeared at the ﬁrst meeting of the Assembly
on March , , twenty-seven had departed immediately after the opening statement by Prince
Maximilian Wunibald von Waldburg-Zeil-Trauchburg (–), who announced that it would
not be possible for the nobility to participate in proceedings until the status of the former mediatized
princes within the new German League had been settled (Gerner, Vorgeschichte und Entstehung,
pp. f.). By the time the Assembly was re-convened in October, the Articles of Confederation
had been signed into effect in Vienna (on June , ). Article reafﬁrmed the status of the
former mediatized princes as the most privileged class in the new German states. In particular,
it upheld the traditional laws concerning intermarriage among members of the nobility, taxation
privileges, freedom of movement within the territories of the member states of the German League,
exemption from military service, privileged status before the court, and the right to administer
justice in accord with state law in their own territories. Cf. Gerner, ibid., pp. f.
Proceedings, sect. IV, pp. ff.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
tone. (On June , Consul Griesinger read comments relating to a petition
116
of the nobility which he had been asked to present to the Assembly.
Since, however, his comments represented substantial content, the Assem-
bly naturally neglected to discuss them, much less to make any decision
regarding them.) On June the rest of the kingdom’s nobility followed
suit.On that same day further mediatized princes, who until then had
been awaiting the Vienna Congress’s decision on their constitutional sta-
tus und hence understandably had abstained from participating in the
Assembly’s proceedings, joined in them now that the Congress was over.
As Prince von Oettingen-Wallersteindeclared, they thereby laid claim to
their rights under the new Articles of Confederation as the highest nobles
in the states within which their possessions lay, and to any other rights and
privileges as may in the future be conferred upon them.
A number of princes failed to appear this time as well, and a number
of new members appeared in place of those who had laid down their
mandates. It seems that neither the resignation nor the appointment of
Assembly members was in any way regulated and that the ministry allowed
it to occur freely without there being anything pertaining to it in the royal
Constitutional Charter. Indeed, though it is an essential element in any
political assembly, the Estates Assembly adhered to no protocol at all. On
the occasion of the opening day of the new session, for instance, when
so much princely grandeur joined their ranks, they paid their respects to
the nobles with the same gesture they had previously used to signal their
vote.Though the status of the mediatized princes within the state and
within the Assembly was still somewhat vague, for the Assembly (which
was itself persistently vague as to its relation to the state) it was sufﬁcient
that they now saw themselves as mediatized princes within the kingdom. If,
however, the Assembly had been able to enter into substantial discussion
of constitutional issues, the insufﬁcient determinacy of the nobility’s status
would soon have become apparent.
In his resolution of October , the king had asked the Estates to instruct
their previously appointed negotiators in such a way that a settlement could
be reached on all the relevant issues. The Estates’ answer came in the form
Ibid., sect. VI, p. .
Ibid., sect. X, p. .
Ludwig, Prince of Oettingen-Wallerstein (–) began his political career as a non-elected
member (Virilstimmf¨uhrer) in the Estates Assembly, where he was a member of the instruction
committee entrusted with compiling a list of the articles of the old constitution to be included in
the Estates’ revision.
Proceedings, sect. X, p. ; cf. sect. I, p. .
At the ﬁrst Assembly meeting, the deputies had signaled their vote by rising from their seats:
cf. Gerner, Vorgeschichte und Entstehung, pp. , .

[The king reconvenes the Assembly]

of a twelve-page petition in small print which the Assembly owed to Mr.
Bolley.It rehashes the same old views in the usual manner, and it would
117
be superﬂuous to quote from it, with the exception of one passage (p. ),
where it is said that even a superﬁcial acquaintance with W¨urttemberg’s
constitution is sufﬁcient to be convinced that it forms a self-contained and
integral unity. In one sense that may be true, though barely so since even
a superﬁcial acquaintance would actually entail more scrutiny than such a
conviction, or rather judgment, could bear. We also read that the Estates
cannot allow the people of W¨urttemberg to be torn from their history and
for the articles of their former constitution to be made into antiques. They
would have done better, however, to ask whether a people which till now
has not been an independent state, but rather part of another people, can
be said to have a history at all, and whether a people can have a history
without having a state.
We mentioned above that in this petition the Estates confessed them-
selves unable to list the rights of the subjects of W¨urttemberg, since they did
not have access to the old Estates archive – as though a constitution were
a codiﬁcation of criminal law, civil law, etc., and as though the royal Con-
stitutional Charter had invalidated any such laws! The petition concludes
with the simple and monotonous request that the king solemnly recognize
the legitimacy and validity of the old constitution of W¨urttemberg for the
whole kingdom, excepting only such modiﬁcations as prove necessary or
convenient by mutual agreement.
In the beginning, the Estates had admitted no modiﬁcations to the old
constitution except those pertaining to the incorporation of the nobility
and the common rights of protestants and catholics. Now they seemed to
want the results of the present deliberations to go into effect in addition to
the chaos of the former laws of the land that were listed above. But if the
regulations of those two issues were all that was to be passed, then it would
have been the same untenable business, or rather the completely empty
illusion it had been from the start – nothing but the old constitution of
the duchy applied, to the great detriment and repression of the rights of
the new territories, to what was now the kingdom of W¨urttemberg. Yet
of course there was more at stake than just those two issues, and in due
course that would of itself have become evident. Indeed, the conclusion
of the Estates’ petition is framed in far more general terms. The difference
between the king’s will and the Estates’ demands came down to this. Was
Proceedings, sect. XI, pp. –.
Cf. Encyclopedia, §; PR, sect. –; see also Vorlesungen ¨uber die Philosophie der Geschichte
(Werke, vol. XII, p. ): “World history only deals with peoples who have formed a state.”


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
the object of negotiations to be the royal constitution and the modiﬁcations
to be made to it, or was it to be the old constitution of W¨urttemberg and
the modiﬁcations to be made to it? When it happens in the course of
118
diplomatic negotiations that the one side demands that their proposition
be discussed with a view to modifying it, and the other side demands the
same, well, then since the object is the same the wiser man will yield, as
the saying goes.
In a royal edict of November , the Estates’ main legal claims were
discussed, especially those pertaining to the incorporation of the nobility,
and their unfoundedness was demonstrated in a separate appendix. The
edict also reiterated the central point at issue, namely that of creating a
constitution that would unify both the old and the new territories under a
single government. The king stressed that in view of the dissolution of the
Holy Roman Empire and the consequent lack of any higher judge to clarify
legal uncertainties, he was unable to grant general recognition to the old
contracts between the Estates and the dukes without ﬁrst going into the
legal content of each and every one. Therefore a complete and thorough
exposition of those contents would be indispensable, scattered as they
were in a multitude of documents and more often than not of dubious
legitimacy. Otherwise the articles of the constitution would remain the
possession of a privileged few (i.e., the committee heads of olden days,
especially the consuls), and not the common property of the people. The
edict went on to say that in case no settlement was reached and the Estates
persisted in their refusal to participate in negotiations, the king would have
no recourse but to retain the current mode of representation in the territory
of Old W¨urttemberg while introducing a truly national representation in
the new territories based on a new constitution that integrated the present
and former laws of those regions. Furthermore, in a second appendix the
king laid down the fundamental points which, as any unbiased observer
(indeed!) would have agreed, formed a suitable basis for the negotiation of
a good constitution.
The inherent rationality of the mattercame through at least to the
extent that the Estates acceded to the (albeit merely formal) step of begin-
ning negotiations. Prince von Oettingen-Wallerstein motioned that after a
suitable interval the Assembly members should present their views on the
royal edict and then submit them to examination by a committee.This
proposal deviated markedly from the usual course of handing over such
The German phrase is die Vernunft der Sache.
Proceedings, sect. XIII, p. .

[The king reconvenes the Assembly]

matters directly to a committee whose decision the Assembly would auto-
matically and unanimously accept, for such committees seemed to have
attained a monopoly on the Assembly’s agreement. It had recently become
119
popular, however, to appoint four speakers instead of a committee, since
the individual members of the examining committees were in the habit
of presenting their separate written statements to the Assembly anyway.
Apparently it had come to the point that even a committee of just a few
members was incapable of coming to a consensus, producing a series of
monologues instead. In the meetings that followed, many statements were
read, of which several argued that even now it was too early to enter into
negotiations, appealing for example to the principle de juribus singulorum,
which could not be decided by a simple majority in the Assembly. This
principle had been much hallowed in the law of the Holy Roman Empire,
the fundamental ﬂaw and injustice of which consisted precisely in the fact
that the rights of the state had become jura singulorum.
Among the more reasonable voices, von Varnb¨ulerreplied to Lang,
who had admonished the Assembly to heed its conscience and cried out
“with pathos”: “No negotiations!”, that that proposal was the greater threat
to conscience, for if they followed his advice they might end up with no
constitution at all.
It is not going to help the people for the old constitution to remain valid merely
on paper, and it will not help us any to quote from learned treatises when one day
the people cry out to us, “The stakes were high and you bet all on nothing. They
wanted to give us a say in legislation, the right to approve taxation, the restoration
of church property, administration of public expenditures, personal liberty, legal
accountability of civil servants, the right to emigrate, and the permanent repre-
sentation of the Estates – and you threw it all away! Who is to blame that we have
lost everything?”
It is remarkable that it was the members of the nobility who often
distinguished themselves before the other deputies by their more moderate
and unbiased views.
As indicated in the text, jura singulorum (literally individuals’ rights) are rights such that a member
of a political body holding jura singulorum cannot be overridden by a majority vote.
Karl Eberhard Friedrich von Varnb¨uler (–), a non-elected member of the Assembly (Viril-
stimmberechtigter), was also one of the Estates’ negotiating commissioners. He is notable in German
cultural and economic history for having pioneered new agricultural methods, which he propogated
in his periodical, the Annalen der W¨urttembergischen Landwirtschaft.
Friedrich Ludwig Lang represented Maulbronn at the Estates Assembly. He was a member of the
committee for preparing negotiations with the royal commissioners and on the committee on the
notary abuses. He voted against accepting the royal constitution on June , .
Proceedings, sect. XV, p. .


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
Mr. Bolley found it necessary to defend himself against the murmurs of
disapproval that had not escaped his notice during his speech.He felt that
the reproach of bitterness and contempt was misdirected and attributed
the offence he had caused to the fact that he had held forth in such a
120
loud voice.g It seems that the Assembly had tired of the previous petitions’
style and digressiveness, and on November , in a vote of ﬁfty-seven to
forty-nine, the Assembly approved an unassumingly formulated draft by
Weishaar free of bitterness, self-righteousness, and disparagement of the
king’s intentions. In that address the Assembly expressed its gratitude and
relief that all obstacles to successful negotiations had now been removed
and announced the imminent appointment of the Estates’ negotiators.
In the meeting after this motion had already passed, and while the votes
for the negotiators were already being counted, Mr. Bolley tried once
more to persuade the Assembly to insert reservations and qualiﬁcations
into the petition, arguing that its excessive diplomatic openness was untrue
to the character of the Estates thus far. And indeed, the plain, open, and
simple style of the petition contrasted strongly with that of the preceding
petitions. Still, the Assembly did not waver in its decision.
It was proposed that the Estates’ negotiating commissioners should
be instructed to press only for an accessory agreement.Although this
proposal was rejected, Mr. Bolley managed to persuade the Assembly to
include a clever amendment stipulating that the commissioners declare
at the earliest opportunity that the Estates desired an agreement in
keeping with their previous applications and petitions to the king – the
applications and petitions, that is, which had limited negotiations to an
accessory agreement.The object of the negotiations, however, was the
whole gamut of constitutional issues. The commissioners from both sides
g [Footnote in the original:] Prince von Waldburg-Zeil remarks in sect. XVI, p. , that “most of
the written statements were read so fast and so loudly” (Mr. Bolley alone had been entrusted by the
responsible committee with reading a number of statements pertaining to the draft of a petition,
after having read that draft himself in the previous meeting), “that if one had not been given
precise instructions in advance” (as the committee had) “one could not grasp all of the content.”
The circumstances mentioned above combine easily with the reading of written statements, but
they are not conducive to an Assembly’s achieving any insight into the matter at hand, for it
inclines them rather to depend entirely on their committees and grant unanimous approval to their
recommendations.
Ibid., p. .
An accessory agreement (accessorischer Receß) in the legal parlance of the time is an agreement
whose fulﬁllment depends upon some further conditions’ being met. Bolley was of the opin-
ion that such a tactic would ensure that the old constitution remain the basis of negotiations;
cf. Gerner, Vorgeschichte und Entstehung, p. .
Proceedings, sect. XVI, p. .

[The king reconvenes the Assembly]

held their ﬁrst conference on December , . At a later date (January
, ) the Estates’ commissioners were joined by seven more deputies to
form an instruction committee with twelve members (later – February –
increased to twenty-ﬁve). These members’ work consisted mostly in com-
piling material on chapters of the old constitution according to a certain
121
plan and then editing it into an ordered series of propositions, the content
and formulation of which the committee had to agree upon before passing
them on to the negotiators. The Estates had already demonstrated their
unwillingness or inability to turn their attention to universal principles or to
take them as their starting-point, and the “fundamental articles” included
in the royal edict of November were no exception, for the Assembly
completely ignored them.Since all their proceedings were based on the
compilations of details, it was natural that the need arose to reduce all that
material to general propositions, and Prince von Oettingen-Wallerstein
motioned that they do so.Such an ascent to the universal is integral to
the formal side of the political education of a new Estates Assembly.
The fruits of their labors appeared in print in under the title Draft
of the Renewed Constitutional Charter of W¨urttemberg, Based on the Reso-
lutions of the Estates’ Instruction Committee.This work not only differs
in appearance from any mere collection of resolutions by the Landtag,
legal miscellanies, etc., for its content also deviates in essential points from
that of the old constitution. The very existence of such an ordered body
of determinate propositions reduces the old constitutional laws to mere
“antiques.” The so-called “General Clause” appended to the work stipu-
lates that all the common and house lawsof the former duchy remain
in effect, to the extent that they are not explicitly modiﬁed or superseded
by the new constitution, a demand that had been dear to the Estates from
the beginning. Such a clause is due in part simply to an innocent need to
ease the formal conscience, in part, however, also to the fact that, although
a constitution is something solid, it is not utterly ﬁxed and unmoving,
and the sessions of an Estates Assembly represent the constant and unin-
terrupted development of the constitution. That is the true general clause
that the world spirit appends to every constitution.
Appendix B of the royal edict of November , , presented fourteen so-called fundamental
points worked out by Wangenheim as a new framework for negotiations. Cf. Gerner, Vorgeschichte
und Entstehung, pp. –.
Proceedings, sect. XVII, pp. and .
In the original: Entwurf des zu erneuernden W¨urttembergischen Verfassungsvertrags, nach Beschl¨ussen
des st¨andischen Instructions-Comit´e (), p. .
The house laws (Hausgesetze) were norms established by individual families of the high nobility
which governed the line of succession, marriage, and inheritance practices, and similar matters.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
The Estates Assembly’s activity, as soon as it was directed toward a deter-
minate content (for otherwise it would not have really been work), even in
the present form of a mere revision of a draft of the constitutional charter,
immediately caused them to forget the contentless formal principle of right
that hitherto had been their highest aim. A concentrated effort to frame a
whole constitution and its determinate articles is in itself incompatible with
blind adherence to the positive determinations contained in a confused and
122
scattered manifold of countless documents and edicts, for it requires the use
of one’s own understanding and reason, as in the case of the so-called nat-
ural law of states. The most important results always consist in the effects
which the very nature of thingsbrings about unconsciously in people’s
heads against their own most stubbornly held and ardently professed con-
victions, and hence a far-sighted ministry like that in W¨urttemberg will
overlook the temporary manifestations of passion, prejudice, and perverted
notions that precede those more lasting effects.
The proceedings of the Assembly from December to December
dealt only in part with these questions, being also concerned with
other constitutional issues, among them the extension of the rights of the
mediatized princes. As touched on above, it remains to this very moment
unclear how a German Estates Assembly is to be instituted as long as the
status of the nobility has not been settled. At ﬁrst it seemed as though
the Assembly might become an instrument for achieving the goals of the
nobility; had that been the case, then the Estates would have revealed that
they were not yet organized. Some of the issues with which the Assembly
were concerned have already been discussed, while others of them are
relatively insigniﬁcant and can be passed over here. (We have for instance
already spoken of the notaries’ abuses.)
Among the more notable issues was the king’s announcement of the
annual taxes and their collection. Since October , , the king had
also begun sending the Estates his ministers’ commentary and evaluation
of the Assembly’s list of complaints, as well as a number of constitutional
modiﬁcations it had occasioned. The ministers’ commentary exposes the
shallowness of some of the views expressed in the complaints. The Assem-
bly appointed a committee to consult on these issues, but like most of the
similar committees formed by the Assembly, it was later disbanded with-
out ever having produced results. On February , all of the Assembly’s
members who did not belong to the negotiating committee were united in
In the German original the phrase is die Natur der Sache.

[The division of the Assembly]

a grand committee with several sub-divisions which were to divide up the
complaints and other material among themselves to be prepared for nego-
tiations. Yet neither did any of these various sub-committees ever produce
any results. Had their work contributed to successful negotiations with the
ministry, then what they had adamantly refused before would have come
to pass, namely a serious consideration of the various complaints. Though
pressing current affairs such as the decree and collection of the annual taxes
occasionally drove the Assembly to try to undertake practical measures,
such attempts immediately collided with their lack of any determinate sta-
123
tus. They could exercise participatory rights neither as the Estates Assembly
of Old W¨urttemberg, for that Assembly no longer existed; nor could they
claim the rights granted them in the royal charter, for these they refused
to accept; nor ﬁnally could they appeal to the new settlement, for this had
not as yet been reached. This quandary was to remain an issue in a later
discussion, too, that took place in June : the Assembly was at a loss to
determine the extent of the Assembly’s competence or even the extent to
which it had been constituted.This lack of any determinate status was
grounds for the royal ministry to reject the Assembly’s attempts to claim
rights as a legally constituted body.
[the division of the assembly into a negotiating
committee and auxiliary sub-committees]
The Assembly had transferred responsibility for proceedings relating to
the constitutional comparison to its commissioners and committees. At
ﬁrst (beginning December , ) the meetings were kept closed and their
minutes separate from those of the Assembly, but it opened its proceedings
once the committee had been given responsibility for preparing negotia-
tions on January , . As early as January , , the commissioners
had motioned not to present the individual phases of their work on the
constitution to the Assembly, but rather to wait until they had completed
their work and then to present the whole.On February , , Mr.
Knappwarned the committee that on this proposal, apart from the fact
that “diplomatic” proceedings were not in keeping with the true relations
Proceedings, sect. XXV.
Ibid., sect. XVII, p. .
Gottfried Gabriel Knapp (–) represented Gaildorf in the Estates Assembly from to
. Knapp was an opponent of the royal constitution and voted against accepting it on June ,
.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
between the king and the Estates, only ﬁve of the twelve committee mem-
bers would be actively engaged in work on a regular basis, and the other
seven only occasionally, while all the others would for the most part be
occupied with issues of little or no signiﬁcance.As to how the Assembly
was to pursue its calling in regard to the constitution while the committee
was busy negotiating, it was resolved on February , , that the whole
draft of the constitution was to be presented to the Assembly at some
future date for deliberation and not one section at a time, and that in
the meantime the committee would at intervals report to the Assembly
on the general progress of the negotiations.It was after this resolution
that the previously mentioned grand committee comprehending all the
remaining members of the Assembly was established.
Thus the Assembly ultimately found themselves in precisely the form
that the king had proposed at the time of the Assembly’s adjournment
at the end of July, ,and which had elicited so violent a passion in
them that they believed themselves to have nothing left to lose. Neither the
fact that the Assembly had no important say in regard to the constitution for
a full year, nor consideration of the high costs of maintaining the Assembly
members had prevented them from meeting regularly. Mr. Knapp said in
124
a statement from February , , that the question was frequently and
justly being raised, “What is the use of an Assembly of more than one
hundred men that costs more than one hundred ducats a day, when only a
handful are responsible for the business of the Assembly and are sufﬁcient
to attend to it?”To this the Assembly had no answer.
In the course of the ensuing year, the committee was occasionally called
on to read individual sections of the constitutional draft or other statements
and papers relating to it to the Assembly. In effect, though, the newspapers
and journalists played a greater role in the proceedings and discussions of
the Assembly. Its members were so estranged by the right to free speech
and the opinions whose expression it inspired, which differed markedly
from the former hymns of praise they had been accustomed to hearing,
that they deliberated as intensely on newspaper articles and pamphlets
as they did on royal edicts, appointing committees and writing articles
in book length intended to justify the Estates and to “refute” what they
Proceedings, sect. XIX, p. .
Ibid., sect. XX, p. .
The royal edict of July , , had called for an adjournment of the Assembly and the continuation
of negotiations by four commissioners. The negotiating commissioners in February, , numbered
ﬁve.
Proceedings, sect. XIX, p. .

[The division of the Assembly]

referred to as “cooked-up libel.” These lengthy and often laughable tracts
were read before the Assembly.
In the meeting on September , , it was announced that the instruc-
tion committee had ended its work on the constitution, the results of which
were now to be gradually presented to the Assembly.Some of them were
actually read to the Assembly. Even so, in this last quarter of the year
the Assembly still did not manage to initiate serious deliberation on the
constitution, much less come to any decision concerning it. On October
, , shortly before Friedrich I’s death during the night of October
, indignation over the notary abuses was again aired before the Assem-
bly.The report of an unusually scandalous case had torn the Assembly
from its habitual lethargy. The committee charged with investigating the
notary abuses was augmented. Since an excess of responsibilities in connec-
tion with the constitutional draft prevented Mr. Knapp from ﬁnishing his
report,and seeing as how the Assembly itself had come to no decision, a
new petition was submitted to the new king on November ,requesting
that he institute a bilateral commission composed of members from both
the royal government and the Estates to ﬁnish the task with which the
Estates had been entrusted. The petition argues in favor of including royal
deputies in the commission, saying that they would bring to the commis-
sion long experience of a kind that only high-ranking ofﬁcials can have –
an admission that the Assembly perhaps should have considered when they
125
started compiling their list of complaints, organizing the Estates, and in
other such matters. Now, however, since “every month that we delay inﬂicts
severe damage on the land and its people” (why then had the Assembly
hesitated with its work for so many months? – the ﬁrst committee had
been formed on May , , eighteen months previously), the committee
submitted an appraisal suggesting provisional measures. It is noteworthy
that the Assembly itself did not accept credit or responsibility for this paper
and thus even now had failed to make any recommendations of its own on
how to improve the situation.
On December the king informed the Estates that the privy council
would now begin examining both the draft for a constitutional charter
Ibid., sect. XXX, part , p. .
Ibid., sect. XXXII, p. .
Knapp’s report did not appear until , when it was published separately under the title On
W¨urttemberg’s Notary System: A Report Originally Intended for the Estates Assembly [German:
Ueber das W¨urttembergische Schreibereiwesen. Eine f¨ur die St¨ande-Versammlung bestimmt gewesene
Relation].
Proceedings, sect. XXXIII, pp. f.


Proceedings of the Estates Assembly
and the alternative draft that the Estates had worked out on its basis, and
that the Assembly would therefore be adjourned until January , .
Hereupon the Assembly ended its session.
[conclusion]
The aim of this extensive report would be sorely misconstrued if it were
taken as a defense of anything other than the concept of land estates and
the supreme interest attaching to it against an actuality that was so highly
inappropriate to it and at the same time so presumptuous. By publishing
the minutes of its proceedings, the actual Assembly has presented itself for
public scrutiny and judgment. In conclusion, it remains only to mention
the curious end result and fate of this assembly: never in the long and
expensive course of its proceedings did it ever reach either an agreement
with the king or even a decision among its own members regarding any
substantial constitutional issue.
Ibid., p. .

appendix
Excerpts from letters by Hegel, Jacobi, and
Jean Paul concerning Hegel’s review
of Jacobi’s works
Hegel’s letter to Immanuel Niethammer, dated April , , indicates that
he consciously intended his lengthy and for the most part positive review
to help effect a reconciliation with Jacobi, whom his scathing remarks in
Faith and Knowledge () had deeply estranged. Hegel writes,
[A]s I see, the main letter I wrote to Munich reached its addressee, and I am very
pleased at your news that I succeeded in expressing and fulﬁlling my intention in
the review. I thank Jacobi warmly for the friendly welcome he gave to this essay. An
Encyclopedia is supposed to be ready by Easter. sheets of it are printed. Copies
for you and Jacobi have been ordered. I do not begrudge God that he makes things
so miserable for us, but rather that in the end he does not allow our achievements
to reach the degree of perfection we wanted and of which we could have been
capable.
Just a few months later, Hegel was instrumental in persuading the Uni-
versity of Heidelberg to grant Jacobi’s close friend Jean Paul, the novelist,
an honorary doctorate, and no doubt this new friendship between Hegel
and Jean Paul also helped facilitate the rapprochement between Hegel and
Jacobi.In any case, in a letter dated September , , Jean Paul conﬁrms
Johannes Hoffmeister, ed., Briefe von und an Hegel (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag, rd ed., ),
vol. II, Letter , p. . Hegel is referring to the ﬁrst edition of his Encyclopedia of the Philosophical
Sciences, which came out not, as planned, at Easter, but in June of . Friedrich Immanuel
Niethammer (–) was a close friend of Hegel’s at least since Hegel’s arrival in Jena in .
Also trained at the protestant seminary in T¨ubingen, where Hegel, Schelling, and H¨olderlin had
received their education, Niethammer (who was four years older than Hegel) had come to Jena in
, soon becoming a member of Reinhold’s philosophical circle. In the mid-s, Niethammer
was co-editor (with Fichte) of the Journal einer Gesellschaft Teutscher Gelehrten (Journal of a Society of
German Scholars). He participated in Hegel’s habilitation examination in . From onward,
Niethammer played a signiﬁcant role in Hegel’s gradual reconciliation with Jacobi. See Walter
Jaeschke, Hegel Handbuch. Leben-Werk-Wirkung (Stuttgart/Weimar: J. B. Metzler, ), pp. –.
During Jean Paul Friedrich Richter’s (–) ﬁrst visit to Heidelberg in the summer of , Hegel
suggested that he be awarded an honorary doctorate. There was some initial resistance stemming from
questions as to Jean Paul’s Christian faith and his love of drink, but Hegel overcame it. Together with
Friedrich Creuzer, the scholar of comparative mythology, Hegel handed over the honorary diploma
to Jean Paul personally on July , . Cf. Jaeschke, Hegel Handbuch, pp. f. See also the colorful



Appendix
Jacobi’s impression of a convergence, writing, “Hegel has come much closer
to you, except for just one point concerning the will.”
Two passages from Jacobi’s correspondence are especially relevant, for
in them he relates his perception of Hegel’s review and of the points of
similarity and difference between his own philosophical outlook and that
of his younger philosophical contemporary:
You will have seen Hegel’s review of my third volume in the HeidelbergerJahrb¨ucher.
Although he does me bitter injustice on at least three points, on the whole his
work made me very happy, and I only wish I could understand everything he says.
But I am not able to see anything through to the end because my eyes and memory
are failing.
A short time later, Jacobi goes into greater detail:
As it seems to me, you do not understand my salto mortale (which you refer to in
your letter from January as a salto fatale) as I understand it and as anyone must
understand it who has ever seen a daring acrobat perform the reversal in mid-air
referred to by that name. What I have in mind is not at all plunging from a cliff
headlong into the abyss, but rather a broad leap across both cliff and abyss in order
to land ﬁrmly and in one piece on the other side.
In his review of my third volume, Hegel praises my leap, saying: “In his innermost,
Jacobi had made just this transition from absolute substance to absolute Spirit and
account in Terry Pinkard, Hegel: A Biography (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ),
pp. –.
G¨unther Nicolin, ed., Hegel in Berichten seiner Zeitgenossen (Hamburg: Meiner, ), p. .
Excerpt from Letter from Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi to Jean Paul (Munich, May , ).
This and the following excerpt, from Jacobi’s letter to Johann Neeb (Munich, May , ), are
taken from Friedrich Heinrich Jacobis Auserlesener Briefwechsel, ed. Friedrich Roth (Leipzig: Gerhard
Fleischer, ), vol. II, p. and pp. f., respectively. – Neeb (–) pursued a number
of vocations in the course of his life. Throughout the s he was a catholic priest, though he left
the church in , apparently in order to marry; during the same period and into the ﬁrst decade
of the nineteenth century he was professor of philosophy in Bonn and Mainz but relinquished
his chair during the French occupation. In the late s he made the acquaintance of Friedrich
H¨olderlin, who invited him to contribute to a journal which was then in the planning (Iduna) but
which failed to materialize. Neeb also served as mayor of Niedersaulheim (near Mainz) and seems
to have met with success as a farmer. Neeb’s philosophical career began under Kantian auspices
( ¨Uber Kants Verdienste um die Interessen der philosophischen Vernunft, Bonn, ). Mid-decade,
he shifted somewhat to a Reinholdian position (System der kritischen Philosophie, auf den Satz des
Bewußtseins gegr¨undet [Frankfurt am Main: Andr¨aische Buchhandlung, /], vols. Although
Neeb had already articulated views explicitly informed by Jacobi’s arguments in the Spinoza Letters
(see Neeb’s Vernunft gegen Vernunft oder Rechtfertigung des Glaubens [Frankfurt am Main: Andr¨aische
Buchhandlung, ]), the two men’s friendship dates from a later period: Neeb intervened in the
debate between Schelling and Jacobi “on divine things” with an open letter adressed to the latter
( ¨Uber den Begriff von Gott und g¨ottliche Dinge nach der neuesten Philosophie), which also marks
the beginning of their private correspondence. Neeb includes the letter in his Vermischte Schriften
(Frankfurt am Main: Hermannsche Buchhandlung, ), pp. –. All the titles mentioned are
available as reprints in the series Aetas Kantiana (Brussels: Culture et Civilisation), pp. ff.

Appendix

had proclaimed with an irresistible feeling of certainty, ‘God is Spirit, the Absolute
is free and has the nature of a person.’”He adds: “It was of the utmost signiﬁcance
that Jacobi brought out the moment of immediacy in our knowledge of God so
distinctly and emphatically.”Hegel’s only criticism is that for me “the transition
from mediation to immediacy has more the character of an external rejection and
dismissal of mediation, for that immediacy is a living, spiritual immediacy that
only arises within a self-sublating process of mediation.”
The difference between Hegel and myself consists in this. Although he, too,
holds Spinozism to be the ﬁnal, true result of thinking to which every consistent
philosophy must lead (“that substantial absolute, in which everything goes under
and all individual things are negated and extinguished”),he seeks to pass through
it into a system of freedom without a leap by traversing a still higher pathway of
thought, which however is the same as (and thus not really higher than) the usual
pathway; whereas I only get there by way of a premature leap from the springboard
of a merely substantial knowledge which he, too, accepts and presupposes, but
which he thinks we need to treat differently than I do. He thinks my method is
like the one we follow as living beings when we transform food into juices and
blood by way of unconscious digestion, unaided by the science of physiology. He
may well be right, and I would gladly join him in testing every means available to
unaided reason, if only my old man’s head were not too weak for it. Now I take
consolation by applying one of K¨astner’s canny thoughts to myself, who once said
in one of his excellent observations on the way in which universal concepts are
present in the mind of God, “I would rather learn about the lynx from a hunter
than listen to an adherent of method tell me that it is a cat with a shortened tail
and ears that are bushy at the tips.”
See above, p. .
See above, p. .
Jacobi’s quotation draws two separate passages from Hegel’s text together without indicating the
ellipsis. See above, p. .
Here again, Jacobi tacitly elides two separate passages from Hegel’s text. Cf. above, p. .
Abraham Gotthelf K¨astner (–) was a prominent mathematician in his own right and the
teacher of both Lichtenberg and Gauss. He remains perhaps best-known for his aphorisms and
epigrams, collected in his Vermischte Schriften (Altenburg, ), vols.

Further reading
Recommended primary and secondary sources on the constitutional debate in
W¨urttemberg –and on Hegel’s relation to it:
HEGEL IN HEIDELBERG
Hans-Georg Gadamer, “Hegel und die Heidelberger Romantik,” in Gadamer,
Hegels Dialektik. Sechs hermeneutische Studien (T¨ubingen: J. C. B. Mohr,
), pp. –.
HEGEL AND THE CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATE IN
W ¨URTTEMBERG
P. Gehring, “Um Hegels Landst¨andeschrift. Friedrich List im Spiel?” Zeitschrift f¨ur
philos. Forschung (): –.
Rudolph Haym, Hegel und seine Zeit (Berlin: Rudolph Gaertner, ), pp. –
.
Rolf K. Hocevar, St¨ande und Repr¨asentation beim jungen Hegel. Ein Beitrag zu seiner
Staats- und Gesellschaftslehre sowie zur Theorie der Repr¨asentation (Munich:
C. H. Beck, ), pp. –.
Christoph Jamme, “Die Erziehung der St¨ande durch sich selbst. Hegels Konzep-
tion der neust¨andisch-b¨urgerlichen Repr¨asentation in Heidelberg /,”
in Hegels Rechtsphilosophie im Zusammenhang der europ¨aischen Verfassungs-
geschichte, ed. Hans-Christian Lucas and Otto P¨oggeler
(Stuttgart-Bad
Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog, ), pp. –.
Otto P¨oggeler, “Die Heidelberger Jahrb¨ucher im wissenschaftlichen Streitge-
spr¨ach,” in Heidelberg im s¨akularen Umbruch. Traditionsbewusstsein und
Kulturpolitik um 1800, ed. Friedrich Strack (Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, ),
pp. –.
“Hegel und der Stuttgarter Landtag,” in Kant oder Hegel? Stuttgarter Hegel-
Kongreß 1981, ed. Dieter Henrich (Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, ), pp. –.
Franz Rosenzweig, Hegel und der Staat (Munich and Berlin: Oldenbourg, ),
vol. II, pp. –.


Further reading

LITERATURE ON THE HISTORY OF W ¨URTTEMBERG AND
THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE ESTATES ASSEMBLY –AND
HELPFUL LITERATURE ON GERMAN CONSTITUTIONAL
HISTORY
Hartwig Brandt, Parlamentarismus in W¨urttemberg 1819–1870. Anatomie eines
deutschen Landtags (D¨usseldorf: Droste, ).
Brandt’s important study focuses on the period after the constitution was ratiﬁed
in , but the introductory chapter offers a servicable overview of the history of
W¨urttemberg’s Estates and an analysis of the events leading up to and the interests
involved in the constitutional debate from to . Brandt also helpfully places
the debate in the context of German constitutional history.
Joachim Gerner, Vorgeschichte und Entstehung der w¨urttembergischen Verfassung im
Spiegel der Quellen (1815–1819) (Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, ).
Gerner offers a comprehensive study of the constitutional debate in W¨urttemberg
from King Friedrich’s early initiative in January of until the ratiﬁcation of a
new constitution in Sepetember of . For those with some knowledge of German,
Gerner’s study is a useful complement to Hegel’s portrayal and analysis of events,
since Gerner is able to make use of many sources to which Hegel would not have
had access, including the private correspondence of the participants in the debate and
records of discussions that took place within the royal cabinet. In addition to helpful
information on the mode of the election and appointment of Assembly members,
Gerner also offers a sociological proﬁle of the Estates Assembly, shedding light on
professional backgrounds and social allegiances.
Rolf Grawert, “Der w¨urttembergische Verfassungsstreit –,” in “O F¨urstin,
der Heimath! Gl¨ukliches Stutgard.” Politik, Kultur und Gesellschaft im deutschen
S¨udwesten um 1800, ed. Otto P¨oggeler and Christoph Jamme (Stuttgart: Klett-
Cotta, ), pp. –.
Walter Grube, Der Stuttgarter Landtag 1457–1957 (Stuttgart: E. Klett, ).
E. H¨olzle, W¨urttemberg im Zeitalter Napoleons und der Deutschen Erhebung
(Stuttgart, Berlin: W. Kohlhammer, ).
Michael Stolleis, Geschichte des ¨offentlichen Rechts in Deutschland 1800–1914
(Munich: Beck, ), pp. –.
Dieter Wyduckel, “Die Idee des Dritten Deutschlands im Vorm¨arz. Ein Beitrag
zur trialistischen Verfassungskonzeption des Freiherrn von Wangenheim,” in
“O F¨urstin, der Heimath! Gl¨ukliches Stutgard.” Politik, Kultur und Gesellschaft
im deutschen S¨udwesten um 1800, ed. Otto P¨oggeler and Christoph Jamme
(Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, ), pp. –.
SOURCES
August Ludwig Reyscher, Historisch und kritisch bearbeitete Sammlung der
W¨urttembergischen Gesetze. Vols. I–III, part : Die Staats- und Grundgesetze
vom Jahre 1806 bis Ende des Jahres 1828 (Stuttgart and T¨ubingen: Cotta, ).
Die Verhandlungen in der Versammlung der Landst¨ande des K¨onigreichs W¨urttemberg
1815–1819. Vols (Stuttgart ff.). Abt. –.


Further reading
LEXIKA
Eugen Haberkern/Joseph Wallach, Hilfsw¨orterbuch f¨ur Historiker. Mittelalter und
Neuzeit, vols. (M¨unchen: Francke, ).
Deutsches Rechtsw¨orterbuch. W¨orterbuch der ¨alteren deutschen Rechtssprache
(Weimar: H. B¨ohlaus Nachfolger, ff.).

Glossary of translated terms: German to English
Abgaben
levies
Adel
nobility; hoher/niederer Adel high/low nobility
Adresse
petition
Advokat
advocate
Agnaten
male heirs
Ahnung
intimation
Allerhandordnungen
legal miscellanies
allgemein
universal; Allgemeinheit, universality; allgemeine
Landst¨ande general estates
Amt
ofﬁce; district
Amtschreiber
district notary
anderes
(an or the) other
Anschauung
intuition; erkennende Anschauung cognitive intuition;
intellektuelle Anschauung intellectual intuition;
Vernunft-Anschauung intuition of
reason
an und f¨ur sich
in and for itself
Armenfonds
charity
Armenkasse
charity
Artikel
article
aufheben
sublate; cancel; (rarely) negate; Aufhebung,
Aufgehobensein sublation
Aufkl¨arung
Enlightenment
Ausschuß
committee; bleibender Ausschuß permanent committee;
innerer Ausschuß inner committee
Ausschußwesen
committee system
bedingt
conditioned
Begierde
desire
Begriff
concept
begr¨undet
grounded
Beilage
supplement



Glossary: German to English
Beruf
calling
Beschwerde
grievance
Besoldung
salary
Besonderung
particularization
bestimmt
determinate; Bestimmtheit determinateness
Bestimmung
determination; Erkenntnis-Bestimmung
determination of knowledge;
Reﬂexionsbestimmung determination of reﬂection;
Verstandesbestimmung determination of the
understanding
Bevollm¨achtigter
authorized representative
Bewegung
movement
Beweis
proof; werkt¨atiger Beweis proof by deeds
Bewußtsein
consciousness; sinnliches Bewußtsein sensuous
consciousness; reﬂektierendes Bewußtsein reﬂective
consciousness; nat¨urliches Bewußtsein natural
consciousness
Beziehung
relation
Bild
image
Bildung
culture, cultivation, education; formelle Bildung
education of the understanding
B¨urger
burgher
b¨urgerlich
burgher, bourgeois
B¨urgermeister
chief accountant
B¨urgerrecht(e)
civil right(s)
Casse
see Kasse
Charte constitutionelle
Constitutional Charter
Civilliste
civil list
Comit´e
committee
Comit´eherr
member of the committee
Commissar
see Kommissar
Communordnung
see Kommunordnung
Concussion
extortion
Constituiring
structuring
Consul
see Konsul
Darstellung
account, exposition, manifestation
Dasein
existence
delikat
tactful
Denken
thought, thinking
Denkm¨oglichkeit
logical possibility

Glossary: German to English

Deputation
deputation; gemeinschaftliche herr- und landschaftliche
Deputation bilateral deputation (consisting of
representatives of both the government and the land
estates)
Deputierter
deputy
Deutschheit
Germanness
Dialektik
dialectic; dialektisch dialectical
Di¨aten
allowances
Ding-an-sich
thing-in-itself
Domanialeigentum
domanial possession, domanial property
(of the king)
Dorf
village
Einbildungskraft
imagination
Eingabe
petition
Eingebung
sudden inspiration
Einheit
unity
Eink¨unfte
revenue
Einm¨utigkeit
unanimity
Einsicht
insight, oversight
Empﬁndung
sentiment
endlich
ﬁnite; Endlichkeit ﬁnitude
Entfremdung
alienation
entgegensetzen
oppose
Entschließung
resolution, decision
Erblande
W¨urttemberg’s original territories
Erbschaftsteilung
division of an inheritance
Erlaß
decree
Erkennen (das)
cognition, recognition
erkennend
cognitive
Erkenntnis
cognition; knowledge; Erkenntnis seiner selbst
self-knowledge
erkl¨aren
claim, declare, explain
Erkl¨arung
claim, declaration, explanation
Erschaffen aus Nichts
creation ex nihilo
Erscheinung
appearance; Erscheinungswelt world of appearance
Erziehung
education
evangelisch
protestant
Fleck
township
Forstamt
forestry department; Forstordnung forestry regulations;
Forstwirtschaft forestry
Freiheit
freedom


Glossary: German to English
Freiheitsrechte
civil liberties
Freiz¨ugigkeit
liberality
F¨urst
prince, monarch; f¨urstliche Diener/f¨urstliche Bediente
those in service of the prince/prince’s servants
Garanten
guarantors
Gedanke
thought
Gedankendinge
entia rationis
Gediegenheit
solidity
Gef¨uhl
emotion, feeling
Gegensatz
opposition
Gegenstand
object
Gegenstoß gegen sich
repelling that is in itself its own self-repelling
Geheimer Rat
privy council; Geheimrat privy councillor
Geist
mind, spirit
Geistest¨atigkeiten
mental activities
geistreich
with ´esprit
Gelder
funds; Landesgelder funds belonging to the Estates;
¨offentliche Gelder public funds;
private Gelder private funds; verwilligte Gelder
allocated funds
Geltung
validity
Gemeinde-Verm¨ogen
assets of local government
Gemeindekasse
municipal treasury
General-Klausel
General Clause
Gerichtsbarkeit
jurisdiction; nicht-streitige Gerichtsbarkeit
non-contentious jurisdiction
Gerichtsschreiber
court notary
Gesetz
law; sittliches Gesetz moral law
Gesetzb¨ucher
statute books
Gesetzgebung
legislation
Gesinnung (politische)
(political) attitude
Gestalt
form; unter der Gestalt des Ewigen sub
specie aeternitatis
Gestaltung
form
Gewißheit
certainty; Gewißheit seiner selbst certainty of self
Gewohnheit
habit, custom, mores
Glauben
belief, verb: believe
Gleichg¨ultigkeit
indifference
Grund
ground, reason
Grundgesetz
fundamental law
Grundlage
foundation

Glossary: German to English

Grundsatz
principle; Grundsatz der Reziprozit¨at principle
of reciprocity
Grundvertrag
fundamental contract
G¨ultigkeit
validity
Gutachten
appraisal, assessment
Haus-Grundgesetze
house laws
Heiratspakte
marriage agreements
Herzog
duke
Hexenr¨auche
sorcerer’s smoke
Hofrat
court councillor
Hoheitsrechte
sovereign rights
Ich (das)
the I, the ego
Idee
idea
Instruktions-Comit´e
instruction committee
Intelligenz
intellectuals
Jahressteuer
annual tax
jenseits
beyond
Jura
law (as a subject of study)
Justizamt
department of justice
Kameralistik
economy; Kameralverwaltung economic
administration
Kammereink¨unfte
(royal) chamber income
Kasse
cash, fund, treasury
Kaste
caste
Kastenordnung
church regulations
Kirchenfond
ecclesiastic assets; Kirchengut church property;
Kirchenordnung church regulations
Komitee
committee; Komitee aus mehreren Sektionen grand
committee
Kommissar
commissioner; st¨andischer Kommissar estates
commissioner
Kommune
municipality; Kommunalbeamter local ofﬁcal;
Kommunordnung local adminstrative regulations
k¨oniglich
royal
Konsul
consul
Kopula
copula
Kriegsbed¨urfnisse
war funds
Landes-Grundgesetz
common law
Landesherr
prince, ruler
Landeskasse
estates treasury
Landesordnung
administrative regulations


Glossary: German to English
Landplage
plague upon the land
Landrechte
code of law
Landschaft
estates (considered collectively and in actual
assembly, rather than severally and as distinct
social classes)
Landschaftsarchiv
estates archive
Landstand
estate; allgemeine Landst¨ande general estates
Landtag
estates assembly, parliament
Landvogt
provincial governor
Maßstab
standard
Mechanismus
mechanism
Metaphysik
metaphysics; vormalige Metaphysik metaphysics of the
old school
Ministerium
ministry
Mitte
middle term (of a syllogism, in contradistinction to
the extreme terms)
Mittelstand
middle class, intermediate class
M¨oglichkeit
possibility
moralisch
moral
Nachsteuer
supplementary tax
National-Repr¨asentation
national representation
negativ
negative
Negativit¨at
negativity
Neuwirtemberg
New W¨urttemberg
Nicht-lch
non-I
nichtig
illusory; Nichtigkeit, Nullit¨at nullity
Nichtigkeit
vacuity
Nichts
nothingness
Notwendigkeit
necessity
N¨utzlichkeit
utility
Oberamt
superior district
Objekt
object
Objektivit¨at
objectivity
¨offentlich
public
Parlament
parliament
Patrimonial-Eigentum
private property (of the king)
Pension
regular payments
Pers¨onlichkeit
personality
Pﬂicht
duty
Plenarversammlung
plenary assembly
Polizeiamt
department of the police

Glossary: German to English

Positive (das)
positivity
positives Recht
positive law
Pr¨aliminarartikel
preliminary articles
Pr¨astationen
proceeds from vassals
Prinzip
principle; Prinzip der Abscheidung in sich selbst internal
principle of separation
Privatrecht
private right
prozessualisch
legalistic
Protestant
protestant
Pr¨ufung
examination; oversight
Publikum
public, readers
Realisation
realization
Realit¨at
reality
Rechner
accountant
Rechnung
account
Recht
right; Recht des freim¨utigen Urteils right to free speech;
Petitionsrecht right to petition
Referent
speaker
Regierungszeit
regency
Reglement
protocol
Reich(e)
empire, realm(s)
(Reichs)matrikel
quota list
Reichstag
Imperial Diet
Reichsterritorium
territory of the empire
Repr¨asentant
representative
Reskripte
edicts
Rezeß
resolution; azzessorischer Rezeß accessory
agreement
Romantik
romanticism
Satz
article
Schein
appearance, illusion
Schluß
syllogism
Schranke
limitation
Schreiber
notary; Schreiberei-Institut notary institute;
Schreiberei-Unfug notary abuses; Schreiber-Stand
caste of notaries; Schreib-Monopolist
notary-monopolist
Schuldentilgungskasse
fund for the amortization of debts;
Schulden-Zahlungs-Beh¨orde ofﬁce for the payment
of debts
Sein-Sollen
ought


Glossary: German to English
Sektion
sub-committee
Selbstbestimmung
self-determination
Selbstbewußtsein
self-consciousness
Selbstgef¨uhl
sense of self
Selbsttaxation
self-taxation
Sinn des Staates
sense of the state
Sitte
custom, mores
sittlich
ethical
Sittlichkeit
ethical life
Sitzung
meeting, session
sollen
ought
Staat
state; monarchischer Staat monarchic state
Staatsanlehen
state bond
Staatsausgaben
state expenditure
Staatsbeamte
state ofﬁcials
Staatsbed¨urfnisse
state ﬁnancial needs
Staatsb¨urger
citizen
Staatsdiener
civil servants; Verantwortlichkeit der Staatsdiener legal
accountability of civil servants
Staatseinnahmen
state revenue
Staatseinrichtungen
state institutions
Staatsminister
minister of state
Staatsministerium
ministry of state
Staatsrat
council of state
Staatsrecht
law of states; nat¨urliches Staatsrecht natural law
of states
Staatsregierung
state government
Stadt
town
Stadtschreiber
town notary
Standesherr
mediatized prince
Standpunkt
standpoint
Steuer
taxes
Steuerempfangb¨ucher
tax receipts
Steuerrepartition
distribution of taxes
Steuerzettel
tax forms
Substantielle, das eine
the one substantial being
T¨atigkeit
activity
Testament
will
Totenkopf
caput mortuum
Trieb
passion, striving
Trockenheit
inanity

Glossary: German to English

Truhe, geheime
secret fund
Tugend
virtue
unbestimmt
indeterminate; das Unbestimmte indeterminacy; das
absolut Unbestimmte absolute indeterminacy
undeutsch
un-German
unendlich
inﬁnite
unerweislich
indemonstrable
Unrecht
injustice
Unterhandlung
negotiation; Unterhandlungs-Comit´e negotiating
committee; Unterhandlungskommissar negotiating
commissioner
Unterschied
difference; sich in sich bewegendes Unterscheiden
internal movement of self-differentiation
unvern¨unftig
non-rational
Ursache
cause
urspr¨unglich
original, originary
Urteil
judgment; synthetisches Urteil a priori synthetic
judgment a priori
Vereinzelung
particularization
Verfassung
constitution; ehemalige st¨andische Verfassung old
Estates constitution; positive Verfassung positive
constitution; Verfassungsentwurf constitutional draft;
Verfassungsrechte constitutional rights;
Verfassungsurkunde constitutional charter;
Verfassungsvergleich constitutional comparison
Verh¨altnis
relation
Verhandlung
negotiation
Verkn¨upfung
connection
Verlassenschafts-Gant-
estate auction inventories
Inventare
Vermittlung
mediation
Verm¨ogen
assets; Bestimmung des steuerbaren Verm¨ogen
calculation of taxable assets
Vernunft
reason
vern¨unftig
rational
Verordnung
decree
Verschiedenheit
difference, diversity
versenken
immerse
Verstand
understanding
Verstandesbestimmung
determination of the understanding
vertagen
adjourn


Glossary: German to English
Vertrag
compact, contract, treaty; Vertragsverh¨altnis
contractual relation
Verwalter
administrator; Stiftungs-Verwalter trustee
Virilstimmf¨uhrer
non-elected member
Volk
people; Volksadresse popular petition; Volksgeist spirit
of the people
Vollversammlung
plenary assembly
Voraussetzung
presupposition
Vorstellung
idea, (mere) representation, imagination
wahr
true; das Wahre the true
Wahrheit
truth
Wahrnehmung
perception
Weltgeist
world spirit
Wesen
entity; essence
Wesenheit
essentiality, essential constituent
Widerspruch
contradiction
Wille
will
Wirken
(effective) activity
Wirklichkeit
actuality
Wissen
knowledge
Wissenschaft
science; wissenschaftlich scientiﬁc
Zauberformel
magic formula
Zeitgeist
spirit of the times
Zergliederung
analysis
Zusammenrufen
convene
Zusatzartikel
amendment
zur¨ucknehmen
revoke

Glossary of translated terms: English to German
accessory agreement
azzessorischer Rezeß
account
Darstellung, Rechnung
accountability of state servants
Verantwortlichkeit der Staatsdiener
accountant
Rechner
activity
T¨atigkeit, Wirken
actuality
Wirklichkeit
administrative regulations
Landesordnung
administrator
Verwalter
advocate
Advokat
alienation
Entfremdung
allowances
Di¨aten
amendment
Zusatzartikel
appearance
Erscheinung, Schein
appraisal
Gutachten
article
Artikel, Satz; preliminary article
Pr¨aliminarartikel
Assembly
Versammlung; plenary assembly
Plenarversammlung, Vollversammlung; assets
Verm¨ogen; assets of local government
Gemeinde Verm¨ogen; ecclesiastic assets
Kirchenfond
belief
Glauben
beyond
jenseits
burgher
B¨urger, b¨urgerlich
calculation of taxable assets
Bestimmung des steuerbaren Verm¨ogens
calling
Beruf
caput mortuum
Totenkopf
cash
Kasse
caste
Kaste; caste of notaries Schreiber-Stand
cause
Ursache
certainty of self
Gewißheit seiner selbst



Glossary: English to German
chamber income
Kammereink¨unfte
charity
Armenkasse, Armenfonds
chief accountant
B¨urgermeister
church property
Kirchengut
church regulations
Kirchenordnung, Kastenordnung
citizen
Staatsb¨urger
civil liberties
Freiheitsrechte
civil list
Civilliste
civil right(s)
B¨urgerrecht(e)
civil servant
Staatsdiener
code of law
Landrechte
cognition
Erkennen
cognitive
erkennend, wissend; cognitive movement in
itself wissende Bewegung in sich selbst
commissioner
Kommissar
committee
Ausschuß, Comit´e; committee report Relation
des Comit´es; committee system
Ausschußwesen; inner committee innerer
Ausschuß
common laws
Landes Grundgesetze
common sense
gesunder Menschenverstand
concept
Begriff
conditioned
bedingt
consciousness
Bewußtsein; natural consciousness nat¨urliche
Bewußtsein; consciousness of reason Bewußtsein
der Vernunft; reﬂective consciousness
reﬂektierendes Bewußtsein
constitution
Verfassung, Recht; old estates constitution
ehemalige st¨andische Verfassung; positive
constitution positive Verfassung; royal
constitution k¨onigliche Verfassung
constitutional charter
Verfassungsurkunde, charte constitutionelle;
constitutional comparison
Verfassungsvergleich; constitutional draft
Verfassungsentwurf; constitutional rights
Verfassungsrechte
consul
Konsul
contract
Vertrag
contradiction
Widerspruch
convene
zusammenrufen
copula
Kopula

Glossary: English to German

council of state
Staatsrat
court councillor
Hofrat
court notaries
Gerichtsschreiber
creation ex nihilo
Erschaffen aus Nichts
cultivation
Bildung
culture
Bildung
custom
Sitte
decree
Verordnung; royal decree k¨oniglicher Erlaß
deputation
Deputation; bilateral deputation (consisting of
representatives of both the government and the
land estates) gemeinschaftliche herr und
landschaftliche Deputation
deputy
Deputierter
determinate
bestimmt; determinateness Bestimmtheit,
determination
Bestimmung; determination of the
understanding Verstandesbestimmung;
determinations of knowledge
Erkenntnis-Bestimmungen; determinations of
reﬂection Reﬂexionsbestimmungen
dialectic
Dialektik; dialectical dialektisch
difference
Unterschied, Verschiedenheit
distribution of local
Repartition der Communial
expenditures
Ausgaben; distribution of taxes
Steuerrepartition
district
Amt; superior district Oberamt
district notary
Amtschreiber; town notary Stadtschreiber
division of an inheritance
Erbschaftsteilung
domanial possession,
Domanialeigentum
domanial property
duke
Herzog
duty
Pﬂicht
economic administration
Kameralverwaltung
economy
Kameralistik
edict
Reskript
education
Bildung; education of the understanding
formelle Bildung; political education politische
Erziehung
ego
das Ich
emotion
Gef¨uhl
empire
Reich
entia rationis
Gedankendinge


Glossary: English to German
entity
Wesen
essence
Wesen; essential constituents die Wesenheiten;
essentiality Wesenheit
Estate
Landstand; Estates (considered collectively and
in actual assembly, rather than severally as
distinct social classes) Landschaft
Estate auction inventories
Verlassenschafts-Gant-Inventare
Estates archive
Landschaftsarchiv; Estates Assembly Landtag,
Landst¨andeversammlung, St¨andeversammlung;
Estates commissioner st¨andischer Kommissar;
estates treasury Landeskasse; general Estates
allgemeine Landst¨ande
ethical life
Sittlichkeit; ethical sphere sittliche Sph¨are
existence
Dasein
exposition
Darstellung
extortion
Concussion
feeling
Gef¨uhl
ﬁnite
endlich; ﬁnitude Endlichkeit
forestry
Forstwirtschaft; forestry department
Forstamt; forestry regulations
Forstordnung
form
Form, Gestaltung; form of knowledge Form der
Erkenntnis; scientiﬁc form wissenschaftliche
Form
foundation
Grundlage
freedom
Freiheit
fund
Kasse; secret fund geheime Truhe
fundamental contract
Grundvertrag
fundamental law
Grundgesetz
funds
Gelder; allocated funds verwilligte Gelder;
emergency war funds außerordentliche
Kriegsbed¨urfnisse; funds belonging to the
estates Landesgelder; fund for the amortization
of debts gemeinschaftliche Schuldentilgungskasse;
public funds ¨offentliche Gelder; private funds
private Gelder; general estates allgemeine
Landst¨ande
Germanness
Deutschheit
God
Gott
governor
Regierungspr¨asident
grand committee
Komitee aus mehreren Sektionen

Glossary: English to German

grievance
Beschwerde
ground
Grund; grounded begr¨undet
habit
Gewohnheit
house laws
Haus Grundgesetze
I (the)
das Ich
idea
Idee
illusion
Schein; illusory nichtig
image
Bild
imagination
Einbildungskraft, Vorstellung
imperial court councillor
Reichshofrat
Imperial Diet
Reichstag
in and for itself
an und f¨ur sich sein
inanity
Trockenheit
income
Eink¨unfte
indemonstrable
unerweislich
indeterminacy
Unbestimmtheit; absolute indeterminacy das
absolut Unbestimmte
indifference
Gleichg¨ultigkeit
injustice
Unrecht
inquiry
Untersuchung
instruction committee
Instruktions-Comit´e
intellectuals
Intelligenz
intermediate class
Mittelstand
intimation
Ahnung
intuition
Anschauung; inﬁnite intuition unendliche
Anschauung; intellectual intuition intellektuelle
Anschauung; intuition of reason, rational
intuition Vernunft-Anschauung
judgment
Urteil; synthetic judgment a priori synthetisches
Urteil a priori
jurisdiction
Gerichtsbarkeit; non-contentious jurisdiction
nicht-streitige Gerichtsbarkeit
knowledge
Erkenntnis; knowledge of God Wissen von
Gott; scientiﬁc knowledge wissenschaftliche
Erkenntnis
law
Recht; law as a subject of study Jura; private
right Privatrecht; good old law/good old
constitution gutes altes Recht; positive law
positives Recht
legal formalism
formelles Recht
legal miscellanies
Allerhandordnungen


Glossary: English to German
legal system
Recht
legislation
Gesetzgebung
levies
Abgaben
liberality
Freiz¨ugigkeit
limitation
Schranke
local adminstrative regulations
Communordnung
local ofﬁcials
Kommunalbeamte
magic formula
Zauberformel
male heirs
Agnaten
manifestation
Darstellung
marriage agreements
Heiratspakte
means
Mittel
mediation
Vermittlung
meeting
Sitzung
member
Mitglied; member of the committee Comit´eherr;
non-elected member Virilstimmf¨uhrer
mental activities
Geistest¨atigkeiten
metaphysics
Metaphysik; metaphysics of the old school
vormalige Metaphysik
middle class
Mittelstand
middle term (of a syllogism)
Mitte
mind
Geist
minister of state
Staatsminister
ministry
Ministerium; ministry of state (k¨onigliches)
Staatsministerium
monarch
F¨urst; monarchic state monarchischer Staat
moral law
sittliches Gesetz
moral sphere
moralische Sph¨are
mores
Sitten
movement
Bewegung; internal movement of
self-differentiation sich in sich bewegendes
Unterscheiden
municipality
Kommune
municipal treasury
Gemeindekasse
national representation
National Repr¨asentation
natural law of states
nat¨urliches Staatsrecht
necessity
Notwendigkeit
negate
negieren, (rarely:) aufheben
negative
negativ; negativity Negativit¨at

Glossary: English to German

negotiation
Unterhandlung; negotiating commissioner
Unterhandlungskommissar; negotiating
committee Unterhandlungs Comit´e
New W¨urttemberg
Neuwirtemberg
nobility
Adel; high/low nobility hoher/niederer Adel
non-I
Nicht-lch
non-rational
unvern¨unftig
notary
Schreiber; notary abuses Schreiberei-Unfug;
notary institute Schreiberei-Institut; notary-
monopolist Schreib-Monopolist
note
Note
nothingness
Nichts
nullity
Nichtigkeit; political nullity politische
Nullit¨at
object
Gegenstand, Objekt; objectivity Objektivit¨at
ofﬁce for the payment of debts
Schulden-Zahlungs-Beh¨orde
Old W¨urttemberg
Altwirtemberg
one absolute substance
das Absolut-Eine
one substantial being
das eine Substantielle
original
urspr¨unglich
originary
urspr¨unglich
other (an or the)
Anderes
ought
sollen, sein sollen
parliament
Parlament
particularization
Vereinzelung, Besonderung
passion
Trieb
people
Volk
perception
Wahrnehmung
personality
Pers¨onlichkeit
petition
Adresse, Eingabe; popular petition Volksadresse
(political) attitude
(politische) Gesinnung
positivity
das Positive
possibility
M¨oglichkeit; logical possibility Denkm¨oglichkeit
prelate
Prelat
prince
Landesherr; mediatized prince Standesherr
principle
Prinzip; internal principle of separation Prinzip
der Abscheidung in sich selbst; principle of
reciprocity Grundsatz der Reziprozit¨at
privy council
Geheimer Rat
proceeds from vassals
Pr¨astationen
proof
Beweis; proof by deeds werkt¨atiger Beweis


Glossary: English to German
property
Eigentum; private property of the
king k¨onigliches Patrimonial
Eigentum
protestant
evangelisch, protestant
protocol
Reglement
provincial governors
Landvogten
public
¨offentlich
quota list
(Reichs)matrikel
rational
vern¨unftig
reality
Realit¨at
realm(s)
Reich(e)
reason
Vernunft, Grund
recognition
Erkennen
reﬂect
reﬂektieren; reﬂection Reﬂexion
regency
Regierungszeit
relation
Beziehung, Verh¨altnis
repelling that is in itself
Gegenstoß gegen sich
its own self-repelling
representation
Vorstellung
representative
Repr¨asentant; authorized representative
Bevollm¨achtigter; people’s representatives
Repr¨asentanten des Volks
resolution
Rezeß, Resolution, Entschließung
revenue
Eink¨unfte
right
Recht; right to free speech Recht des freim¨utigen
Urteils; right to petition Petitionsrecht;
sovereign right
Hoheitsrecht
romanticism
Romantik
ruler
Landesherr
salary
Besoldung
science
Wissenschaft
self-consciousness
Selbstbewußtsein
self-determination
Selbstbestimmung
self-knowledge
Erkenntnis seiner selbst
self-taxation
Selbsttaxation
sense of self
Selbstgef¨uhl
sense of the state
Sinn des Staates
sentiment
Empﬁndung
session
Sitzung
sorcerer’s smoke
Hexenr¨auche

Glossary: English to German

speaker
Referent
spirit
Geist; spirit of the people Volksgeist; spirit of the
times Zeitgeist
state bond
Staatsanlehen
state expenditure
Staatsausgaben
state ﬁnancial needs
Staatsbed¨urfnisse
state government
Staatsregierung
state institutions
Staatseinrichtungen
state ofﬁcials
Staatsbeamte
state revenue
Staatseinnahmen
statute Statut; statute books
Gesetzb¨ucher
structuring
Constituirung
sub specie aeternitatis
unter der Gestalt des Ewigen
sublate
aufheben; sublation Aufhebung,
Aufgehobensein
substance
Substance
supernatural
¨ubernat¨urlich
supplement
Beilage
tactful
delikat
tax
Steuer; annual tax Jahressteuer; supplementary
tax Nachsteuer; tax form Steuerzettel; tax receipt
Steuerempfangb¨ucher
territory of the empire
Reichsterritorium
thing-in-itself
Ding-an-sich
thought
Gedanke, das Denken
town
Stadt
township
Fleck
treasury
Kasse
treaty
Vertrag
trustee
Stiftungs-Verwalter
unanimity
Einm¨utigkeit
understanding
Verstand; ﬁnite understanding endlicher
Verstand
un-German
undeutsch
unity
Einheit; substantial unity seiende Einheit
universal
allgemein; abstract universal abstrakte
Allgemeinheit
universality
Allgemeinheit
utility
N¨utzlichkeit
vacuity
Nichtigkeit
validity
Geltung, G¨ultigkeit


Glossary: English to German
village
Dorf
will
Wille, Testament
world
Welt; world of appearance Erscheinungswelt;
world spirit Weltgeist
W¨urttemberg’s
Erblande
original territories

Index
absolute, the , 
abstraction , , , 
actuality n., , 
Administration of W¨urttemberg’s Estates
Treasury 
Aeschylus n.
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung viii
annihilation 
antithesis 
appearance , , , 
aristocracy –, , , , , 
Aristotle xv, n., –
Magna Moralia 
Arnim, Achim von ix
Articles of Confederation xviin., n., 
atheism , 
Bachmann, Karl Friedrich viiin.
beauty 
being –, , , , 
Beiser, Frederick ixn., xiiin.
belief , , n.
Boeckh, August viii
Bolley, Heinrich Ernst Ferdinand , n., ,
, –, , n., , –, ,
–, n.
Bonaparte see Napoleon
Bouterwek, Friedrich n.
Brandt, Hartwig xx, xxn.
caput mortuum , n.
Carl, Duke of W¨urttemberg , n., n.
Carlsbad Decrees xxi, xxiv
Carsten, Francis Ludwig xviiin.
categories , 
causa sui –
cause –
certainty , 
Charte constitutionelle xvii
Christianity , , , 
Catholicism , n., 
Lutheranism , n.
Protestantism , , 
Christoph, Duke of W¨urttemberg , 
Cicero n.
citizens , 
citizenship 
clergy , 
cognition –, –, , , , , 
conceptual 
ﬁnite 
immediate 
universal 
concept n., , , , , 
translation of Begriff xxviii
concreteness 
Confederation of the Rhine n., , n.,
n.
Congress of Vienna xvii, –, , , 
consciousness , , , , , , , 
natural 
constitution –, , –, , , , , 
feudal 
legitimacy of 
of estates , 
of Old W¨urttemberg , , , , –,
, –, , –, , , , , ,
, , , , –, 
Constitutional Charter , , , , , ,
–, , , 
contingency –, 
contract –, , , 
contradiction , 
Cook, James n.
copula , 
corporations , , 
Cotta, Johann Friedrich , n., , 
Creuzer, Georg Friedrich viii, xxiv
Crusius, Christian August –n.
An Outline of Necessary Truths of Reason n.
The Path to Certainty and Reliability of
Human Knowledge n.



Index
culture , 
custom 
Daub, Karl viii
David 
de Witt, Johan , n.
democracy , , 
Descartes, Ren´e xvin., xxvi, 
Desdemona 
despotism 
determinism n.
dialectic xiv, –, , , –, 
di Giovanni, George xn., n.
Draft of the Renewed Constitutional Charter of
W¨urttemberg 
duty , , , 
East Friesland 
education 
effect –
election –, 
emigration 
Empire, German –, , n., , , –,
, , –, –, n., , , n.,
, –
England , , , , , 
constitution of , 
history of 
parliament of , , 
Enlightenment , n.
Epaminondas 
´esprit xv, n., –, 
translation of geistreich xv, xxvi–xxvii
Estates
German , 
membership in 
Estates of W¨urttemberg –, –, –,
–, n., –, , , –, –,
–, , –, , , –, ,
–
burgher , 
courts 
deputies of –
rights of , 
treasury of , n.
Estates Assembly of W¨urttemberg , , , ,
, –, –, , –, –, –,
n., –
adjournment of n., n., , , n.
debate in 
negotiating committee n., –, –,
–
new session of –
opposition in 
salaries of members –
ethical life 
existence , n.
externality 
faith n.
fatalism n., n.
feudalism 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb ix, xiv–xv, , n.,
n., –, n.
Science of Knowledge n.
Address to the German Nation viiin.
ﬁnitude , 
Forstner, Georg Ferdinand n., n., –,

France , , , , 
Chambers of 
history of 
Franks, Paul W. ixn.
freedom , n., , , –, –, , , ,

French Revolution vii, xxi, 
Friedrich I, King (earlier Duke Friedrich II) of
W¨urttemberg n., n., n., –, ,
, n., –, –, n., , –,
–, –, –, n., n.,
n., n., –
constitution of , , , , , , , ,
, –, , –, –, , n., ,
, , 
death of 
Fries, Jacob Friedrich viii, ix, xx, xxii, xxiin.,
n.
Gadamer, Hans Georg viiin.
Gemmingen, Ludwig Eberhard Freiherr
von , n.
German Confederation n.
Germany , , , , , , –, , ,

customs of 
history of , , 
independence of 
Gleich, Heinrich Maximilian , n., , ,
, –, n.
Gm¨und 
God xiv, , –, n., , , –, , , 
as practical postulate –
concept of 
knowledge of see knowledge
of Christianity n.
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von n.
good, the , , –
G¨orres, Johann Joseph von xx
government , , , , , –, , , ,
, 

Index

European 
German 
interests of 
rights of 
Griesinger, Ludwig Friedrich n., n.,
–, 
Hammacher, Klaus xxv
Hamann, Johann Georg –
Hamilton, William xxviin.
Hanover, Kingdom of 
Harris, Henry Stilton xiiin.
Haym, Rudolf xxii
heart , , , 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich n., n.,
n.
and W¨urttemberg x, xvi
Difference between Fichte’s and Schelling’s
System of Philosophy n.
Encyclopedia, xii, xvi, xxiii, n., n., n.,
n., 
Estates Essay x
Faith and Knowledge x, xv, 
German Constitution, n.
Heidelberg period vii–ix, xii, –
in Berlin xxiv
Lectures on the History of Philosophy xvi, n.,
n.
Lectures on Natural Right and Political
Science n.
on the French Revolution xxi
on Spinozism xiii–xiv
Phenomenology of Spirit viiin., xxvi, n., n.
Philosophy of Right n., n.
relations with Jacobi xi–xii
Science of Logic viiin., xii, xvi, xxviii, n.,
n., n., n., n.
Hegel, Marie xiin.
Heidelberg Yearbooks vii, ix
Henrich, Dieter ixn., n.
history , , , 
Hobbes, Thomas xxi
Hogemann, Friedrich xxin., xxv
Hohenlohe-Oehringen, Prince of , n.,

H¨olderlin, Friedrich ix, n.
Horstmann, Rolf-Peter xiiin.,
xxiii
Hume, David xvin.
I, the , , 
idea n., , –
idealism 
identity xiv, 
imagination , –
immediacy xiv, , , –, 
in knowledge of God 
of consciousness 
inﬁnity , n.
intuition , n., n., , , , 
intellectual , n., , , n., , 
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich –
David Hume on Faith , n., n.
in Bavaria xi
Letter to Fichte , , n., 
Letters on the Doctrine of Spinoza , n.,
n., 
On a Prophecy by Lichtenberg 
On Critical Philosophy’s Attempt to Bring
Reason to Understanding and to Transform
Philosophy as Such 
On Divine Things and their Revelation , ,
n., 
on God –
on Spinoza n.
reaction to Hegel’s review 
salto mortale , 
Jacobi, Johann Georg n.
Jaeschke, Walter xi, xiv, xvn., xvin., xxv
Jamme, Christoph xxin., xxiiin., xxivn., xxv
Jean Paul viii, xin., xiin., –
Jena vii
judges 
judgment 
synthetic a priori , 
justice , 
Kant, Immanuel ix, xiv, xxviin., , n., n.,
n., , n., –, –, n.
Critique of Judgment n.
Critique of Pure Reason n., , 
On a Newly Arisen Superior Tone in
Philosophy n.
practical philosophy of , 
Kirsten, J. F. E. n.
Knapp, Gottfried Gabriel n., –,
n.
knowledge , n., , , , , , 
ﬁnite 
immediate 
of freedom 
of God –
of personhood 
philosophical 
practical 
speculative 
Knox, Sir Thomas Malcom xn.
Kotzebue, August von viiin., xx
Krug, Wilhelm Traugott n.


Index
Landtag xviii, , n.
Lang, Friedrich Ludwig , n.
Lavater, Johann Kaspar 
law , , , –, , , , , , 
abstract 
constitutional –, , , , , 
Mosaic 
of reason 
positive , 
rational , 
Roman , 
lawyers –
legislation 
Leibniz, Gottfried xiv, n.
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim n.
Spinozism of n.
life n., 
Limpurg 
Locke, John xvin., 
logic , 
Louis XVIII xvii, , n.
Machiavelli 
magistrates , 
materialism 
Maucler, Theodor Eugen xxi, n.
mediation , –
Mendelssohn, Moses n., n.
metaphysics , , n., , 
Metternich, Klemens Wenzel, Prince von vii
military –, , , , 
mind , 
M¨ogglingen 
monarchy , –, , 
morality 
sphere of 
M¨uller, Johann Friedrich n.
Napoleon vii, xixn., xxiin., n., , , n.,
n., , n.
Napoleonic wars n., n., n.
nation 
nature , , 
Naucler, Johannes n., –
necessity –, –, , , , 
Neeb, Johann n.
negation , 
negativity xiv, , n., n., 
Niethammer, Immanuel xi, xin., xiii–xiv,
xixn., xxii, 
Nipperdey, Thomas xviin.
nobility , , , –, , , , ,
–, 
rights of 
non-I see I, the
notaries n., , n., –, n.,

translation of Schreiber xxviii–xxix
nothingness , 
object 
objectivity 
Oettingen-Wallerstein, Prince of , n., ,

opposition, political , 
Orestes 
Otho 
Paulus, Heinrich Eberhard Gottlob , n.
Pelczynski, Zbigniew xviiin.
people , , , , , , , , , , ,
, –, , , 
German , 
grievances of –, 
habits of 
interests 
rights of , 
will of –, , 
petitions xx
philosophy , 
German 
history of 
of nature , 
systems of –
physiology 
Pinkard, Terry ixn., xii, xvi, xxvi
P¨oggeler, Otto ixn.
Poor Conrad uprising xixn.
possibility 
practice 
princes, mediatized n., , , , 
principle
coincidentia oppositorum, 
of contradiction 
of sufﬁcient reason 
principium exclusi tertii 
Proceedings of the W¨urttemberg Estates Assembly
, , , , n., , , , , 
property , , , –, 
of church , 
of community 
psychology 
Pylades 
reality 
reason , n., , , , , , , ,
–
in Kant n.

Index

practical –, 
theoretical –
reﬂection , 
Reinhard of Oberesslingen , , 
Reinhold, Karl Leonhard , n., n.
religion , 
representation , , , , , –, ,

of estates , 
of the people of W¨urttemberg 
republic 
Richter, Friedrich see Jean Paul
rights –, , –, , , , , –, ,
, 
civil xviii, , , 
of free speech 
of state , 
private , 
traditional 
Rome , 
Rosenzweig, Franz xxii, xxiv
Rottmanner, Karl xin.
Rousseau, Jean Jacques xxi
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph ix, xin.,
xiiin., xiv, xv, xvn., n., n., n.
Philosophical Investigations into the Essence of
Human Freedom and Matters Connected
Therewith n.
Schelver, Franz Josef viiin.
Schlegel, August Wilhelm ix
Schlegel, Friedrich ix
Schlosser, Johann Georg n.
Schulze, Gottlob Ernst n., n.
science , , 
self-consciousness , –, –, , –
knowledge of 
unity of 
self-determination , 
sense of the state , , 
sensibility 
servants, civil , –
Sheehan, James xviin.
Sinclair, Isaak von ix
Socrates –
sovereignty 
space xiv, , , 
speeches 
Spinoza, Baruch de xiii–xiv, , n., n., n., ,
–
Ethics n., 
Spinozism ix, xiii–xiv, , –
scientia intuitiva, n.
“omnis determinatio est negatio” xiv
spirit xiv, , n., –, , , , , , ,
–
translation of Geist xxvi–xxvii
state , –, , , –, , , , , ,
, –, , , , 
destruction of 
interests of 
knowledge of 
natural law of 
ofﬁcials of , , 
power of , , –
rights of 
will of 
Sterling, James Hutchison xxvii
The Secret of Hegel xxvii
striving , , n.
Stuttgart 
subjectivity , , , 
sublation , –, , , 
translation of Aufhebung xxvii–xxviii
substance , n., –, , 
syllogism 
synthesis , , , , 
taxes , , , , , , , , , –
in W¨urttemberg –
theory , 
Thibaut, Anton Friedrich Justus viii, ix
thing-in-itself n., –, 
thought , n., , , , , 
time xiv, , , 
Timoleon 
truth , , , 
T¨ubingen 
Treaty of xviii, , 
understanding , , –, , , , –,
–
universality , , –
universities 
utility , n.
Varnb¨uler, Karl Eberhard Friedrich von ,
n.
Vienna , , 
Congress of see Congress of Vienna
Voltaire n.
Voss, Johann Heinrich viii
voting
requirements for –
rights of 
Waldeck, Count von n., –, , , , ,
, 


Index
Wangenheim, Baron August von xx, n., ,
–n., n.
Weishaar, Jakob Friedrich n., , n., ,
, 
Wilhelm I xx, n., n.,
n.
Wilken, Friedrich ix
will –
Wolff, Christian xiv
W¨urttemberg n., n., –, , , , , ,
, , –, , , , , , , ,

constitution of xvii–xviii, –
estates (history and character of) xviii–xix,
xixn., xx–xxi
Old W¨urttemberg n., , , , –,
, , , , , n., , , , ,
n., , 

