
G. W. F. Hegel 
The Encyclopaedia Logic 
(with the Zusatze) 
Part I of the 
Encyclopaedia of Philosophical Sciences 
with the Zusatze 
A new translation with Introduction and notes by 
T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting, and H. S. Harris 
Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. 
Indianapolis / Cambridge 

G. W. F. Hegel: 1770-1831 
Copyright ©1991 by Theodore F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting, H. S. Harris 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
95 94 93 92 91 
5 4 3 2 1 
Cover design by Listenberger Design & Associates 
Interior design by Carol Sowell, Elizabeth Shaw Editorial Services 
For further information, please address 
HACKETI PUBLISHING COMPANY, INe. 
P. O. Box 44937 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46244-0937 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770-1831. 
[Wissenschaft der Logik. English] 
The encyclopaedia logic, with the Zusatze: Part I of the 
Encyclopaedia of philosophical sciences with the Zusatze / 
G. W. F. Hegel; a new translation with introduction and notes by 
T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting, H. S. Harris. 
p. 
cm. 
Translation of Encyklopadie der philosophischen Wissenschaften. 
Teil I, Wissenschaft der Logik. 3rd ed. 
Includes bibliographical references and indexes. 
ISBN 0-87220-071-X (cloth: alk. paper). 
ISBN 0-87220-070-1 (pbk.: 
1. Logic. I. Geraets, Theodore F. 
11. Suchting, W. A. (Wallis 
Arthur). Ill. Harris, H. S. (Henry Stilton), 1926-
. IV. Title. 
V. Title: Encyclopaedia logic, with the Zusatze. 
VI. Title: 
Encyclopaedia logic. 
B2918.E5H37 1991 
160-dc20 
90-29023
CIP
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American National 
Standard for Information Sciences-Penranence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, 
ANSI Z39.48-1984. 

CONTENTS 
Translators' Preface .... . ... . .... . ..... ... .. .. . . .. .. .  . 
Acknowledgements .. ...... . .. . .. .. . ... . ... .. . ... .. . . 
Introduction: Translating Hegel's Logic 
[H.S.H., 
Translating Hegel's Logic: Some Minority Comments on 
Terminology [W.AS. ] ... .
.
.
.
. . .
. . . .
. .
. .. . . . .
. . .
.
.
.
 . 
ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF THE PHILOSO PHICAL SCIENCES 
Preface to the First Edition .. ... .. . . . .. . . . .... . . .. ... .  . 
Preface to the Second Edition . . . ... . ... . . ......... . .. . 
Foreword to the Third Edition . . ... . .. . ... .. .. ... .. . .. . 
Introduction (§§ 1-18) . .... . .... ...... ............... . 
First Part: THE SCIENCE OF LOGIC 
Preliminary Conception (§§ 19-83) ........ .... .. . ...... . 
A. The First Position of Thought with Respect to 
Objectivity: Metaphysics (§§ 26-36) . ......... . . .... . 
B. T he Second Position of Thought with Respect to 
Objectivity (§§ 37--60) ... ... ....... .. . . .. . ......... . 
I. Empiricism .. .. .. ... .. .. . .... . ... . . . . . . . .. . . . . 
11. Critical Philosophy 
. ... ... .. .. . .. ..... .. . . .. . . . 
C. The Third Position of Thought with Respect to 
Objectivity: Immediate Knowing (§§ 61-78) ......... . 
More Precise Conception and Division of the L ogic 
(§§ 79-83) 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 . 
First Subdivision of the Logic: The Doctrine of Being 
(§§ 84-111) .. . ...... .... ........ . ..... . ...... . .... . 
A Quality (§§ 86-98) .. .. ....... ... .. . .. ....... . ... . .  . 
B. 
Quantity (§§ 99-106) ....... ..... .. ...... .. . . . .... . 
C. Measure (§§ 107-111) ...... .. . ......... ... .. .... .. . 
vii 
xi 
xiii 
xxxii 
1 
4 
18 
24 
45 
65 
76 
76 
80 
108 
125 
135 
136 
157 
170 
v 

Second Subdivision of the Logic: The Doctrine of Essence 
(§§ 112-159) ....... ....... .... .. . .... .. .. .. .. . . ... . 
A. Essence as Ground of Existence (§§ 115-130) ........ . 
B. 
Appearance (§§ 131-141) . . ...... .......... .... .. .. . 
C. Actuality (§§ 142-159) . . . .. .. .... .. .. .. . .......... . 
Third Subdivision of the Logic : The Doctrine of the 
Concept (§§ 160-244) ..... . .......... .... ... ........ . 
A. The Subjective Concept (§§ 163-193) . . ..... .... .... . 
B. 
The Object (§§ 194-212) ................... ... . .. . . 
C. The Idea (§§ 213-244) ........... ....... ... . ...... . 
Notes 
Preface to the First Edition ... ........ .. .... . .... ... . 
Preface to the Second Edition ..... .. . . ... . .. . . . ... . . 
Foreword to the Third Edition . .. ..... .. . .. .. . . . . ... . 
Introduction (§§ 1-18) ........... ..... . . .... ....... . 
The Science of LogiC: Preliminary Conception 
(§§ 19-83) ..... ... ... ... .... ................ .. . 
The Doctrine of Being (§§ 84-111) .. ............ ..... . 
The Doctrine of Essence (§§ 112-159) .. . ... ... ..... .. . 
The Doctrine of the Concept (§§ 160-244) ............ . 
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . 
Notes to the Glossary 
. .. . .. .. . . ... ..... .. . . . ... ... . 
Index of References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . 
Bibliography . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . 
Index 
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. 
. 
vi 
175 
179 
199 
213 
236 
239 
272 
286 
308 
308 
310 
310 
312 
324 
328 
331 
336 
347 
353 
359 
364 

TRANSLATORS' PREFACE 
This book contains a collaborative translation of Hegel's Encyclopaedia Logic. 
The text is that of the third edition (1830) with the Zusiitze (Additions) 
added posthumously by the editorial committee that published the first 
edition of Hegel's Werke; the editor responsible for the Logic was L. von 
Henning. We have worked mainly from the Philosophische Bibliothek edition 
(edited by F. Nicolin and O. Poggeler) for the text of 1830, and from 
volume 8 of the Theorie Werkausgabe (edited by E. Moldenhauer and K.-M. 
Michel) for the Zusiitze, first published in 1840. 
Our text went through a considerable evolution even before Hegel's 
editors added the lecture commentary. The first edition of the Ency­
clopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Outline (of which our Logic is just 
the first part) was a slim volume that appeared in 1817. The second edition 
of 1827 was greatly enlarged, and included a lengthy historical preamble 
on the relation of Hegel's logical standpoint to the rationalist tradition, the 
empiricists Kant and Jacobi. This second edition was somewhat revised1 
and augmented in the final edition that appeared in 1830. 
The Encyclopaedia as a whole is a compendious presentation of the foun­
dations of Hegel's entire philosophical sy stem, meant, above all, for the use 
of those attending his lectures ("Zum Gebrauch seiner Vorlesungen," as it 
says on the title page). It is essentially a set of propositions and arguments 
for discussion and explanation in the lectures, set forth in numbered sec­
tions. The numbered paragraphs are usually fairly brief, and as a general 
rule they are supplemented by a Remark (Anmerkung). In the present 
translation the Remarks are indented from the left margin to distinguish 
them from the main paragraph. T he editors of the first collected edition of 
Hegel's works (which began appearing in 1832, just one year after his 
death) published the whole Encyclopaedia in three volumes with Additions 
(Zusiitze) to a great many of the sections; the volumes were put together by 
the editors from notes taken by themselves and other auditors of the 
lectures. These Additions are included here, printed in smaller type than 
the main text. 
Just as some paragraphs have no Remark by Hegel, so some were not 
furnished with a lecture commentary by the first editors. But many of the 
Additions are quite lengthy, and, where several Additions are given, we 
can generally see that they came from different courses. Hegel spoke 
vii 

viii 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
haltingly and some students (notably the redoubtable Captain von Gries­
heim in the period 1823-26) managed to transcribe practically everything 
he said. Of course, their understanding of what they heard was not always 
perfect, and their records were subject to errors of many kinds. But the 
editors had several sets of notes available for each course; and although 
they were quite willing to conflate the scripts of courses given in different 
years, there is no serious doubt that we have a generally reliable record of 
what Hegel said. 
Of course, not even Hegel's very own spoken words (supposing that we 
had them) could have the authority of the long-pondered and carefully 
revised text that Hegel himself published. That is what is indicated by the 
use of reduced type. But we have followed the example set by the first 
editors, who inserted the lecture-commentary into Hegel's text, because 
Hegel himself made clear, in his successive prefaces to every edition, that 
the printed text was not meant to stand alone, but to be supplemented by 
the lectures. It is always important to remember that the "science of logic" 
in the Encyclopaedia is only an "outline." The truly complete and indepen­
dent statement of his Science of Logic was given to the world by Hegel in 
three volumes published between 1812 and 1816. The "outline" published 
here is often much easier to understand (especially with its less authorita­
tive Additions to help us). But anyone seriously interested in Hegel's logic 
should realise that the Encyclopaedia is only a stepping stone to the even­
tual study of the larger work. (Hegel was working on a revision of the 
Science of Logic when he died. The first volume of it exists in a second 
edition that is almost exactly contemporary with our text.) 
Our own collaborative translation came into existence gradually. T. F. 
Geraets began work on a new translation of Hegel's text in 1984, and he 
enlisted the aid of H. 5. Harris soon after he began. Then, through the 
kind offices of James Hullett of Hackett Publishing Company, the two of us 
discovered in mid-1987 that W. A. 5uchting had been working on a new 
version of the text for several years. (He actually began in 1984 also.) So, in 
August 1987, the three of us began to work together, with a general agree­
ment that the Geraets draft of Hegel's text (as revised at that time) should 
be taken as basic. 5uchting's draft of the lecture commentary served sim­
ilarly as the basis of our translation of the Zusiitze. 
Harris was the "primary" translator only for the three Prefaces. These 
have never been translated into English before, and the reader should take 
note that Hegel wrote them as prefaces for the Encyclopaedia as a whole. It 
is also important to remember that the Encyclopaedia of 1817 was, to all 
intents and purposes, a different book from the one that now exists, com­
plete in English for the first time. 

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
ix 
We have all worked upon the text as a whole; and we have consulted all 
the previous translations (old and new) that we could find and use, es­
pecially the English of Wallace, the French of Bourgeois, and the Italian of 
Verra. In the main, our standard Glossary was fixed by the Geraets-Harris 
draft of Hegel's text. There was much agonised debate, and some revisions 
were made. But Suchting was unable to prevail in many places where we 
could not agree. Hence the necessity for two introductory statements--an 
essay by Harris and Geraets outlining the policies that have prevailed, and 
a set of comments by Suchting explaining how he thinks those policies 
could have been improved. 
Geraets has assumed the primary responsibility for the Glossary, with 
notes on points that are not covered in either Introduction as well as some 
that are. The historical and philosophical notes are mainly the work of 
Harris, though we have all contributed anything useful that we could; and 
the bibliography (with its notes) is mainly the work of Suchting (though, 
here again, we have all made suggestions). We hope and believe that, by 
pooling our knowledge and our thought processes in this way, we have 
produced a volume that will be of more help to a wider range of readers 
and students than any of us could have produced working alone. 
T. F. G. 
W. A. S. 
H. S. H. 
1 . At certain points the revisions are quite important. For an example of this see the com­
mentary on § 57ߗ77 by T. F. Geraets, "Les trois lectures philosophiques de l'Encyclopedie 
ou la realisation du concept de la philosophie chez Hegel," Hegel-Studien, Bd. 10, 1975, 
pp. 231-54. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
11l1?odore F. Geraets wishes to thank the Humanities and Social Sciences 
Research Council of Canada for release time part of which he devoted to 
the completion of this translation. Special thanks are due to Denise 
Therien, the departmental secretary, who undertook most of the arduous, 
and seemingly unending, task of typing, correcting, and processing the 
present text. Without her patience and good humour, my work would have 
been a real nightmare. 
H. S. Harris gratefully acknowledges the assistance of James Devin in 
compiling the Index of References. 
W. A. Suchting thanks V. Leahy for the typing up of his scripts. 
xi 

INTRODUCTION: 
TRANSLATING 
HEGEL'S LOGIC 
The Encyclopaedia Logic was the first of Hegel's logical works to be trans­
lated as a whole into English (indeed, one of the first of his books al­
together). Rendered by William Wallace as The Logic of Hegel, it appeared 
in 1873 in the context of the movement of absolute idealism and the associ­
ated interest in Hegel that began in England (and to some extent in the 
United States) in the last third of the nineteenth century. 1 It was published 
with an extensive commentary, which was shed in a revised second edi­
tion of the translation in 1892.2 The translation itself was subsequently 
reprinted no less than eight times by the time the work went into a third 
edition, differing from the second only in a few insignificant points, in 
1975. It has continued to be in demand, being without a competitor 
(though there have been two complete and independent versions of the 
Science of Logic, a much larger work, within this century) . 
One of the most striking features of Wallace's rendering is that it reads so 
well: At least among the translations that appeared before 1939, say, no 
other has such fluency that it can often make readers forget that they are 
engaged with a translation and spare them that feeling, familiar to those 
who use such, of perusing a palimpsest. Those who know little else about 
Hegel know that he is a notoriously 
"difficult" writer, as regards both 
thought and style. He is found to be such, not only by native Anglophones 
(perhaps spoiled by the generally conversational style of the English philo­
sophical classics), but even by those whose mother tongue is Hegel's. The 
young Marx, for instance, who was an enthusiastic admirer of Hegel, 
speaks of his "grotesque craggy melody."3 
What is generally uninviting about so much of Hegel's work is probably 
more clearly displayed in the Encyclopaedia than anywhere else. It is a long 
road of brief, dry sections, containing none of the sometimes baroque 
exuberance of the Phenomenology of Spirit, and next to none of the more 
unbuttoned touches to be met with in the works later put together by 
other hands from lecture notes, such as those on the philosophy of history, 
xiii 

xiv 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
of art, of religion, and so on. Many a sentence, "like a wounded snake, 
drags its slow length along."4 Then there is Hegel's unique vocabulary, 
which involved giving ordinary German words new or at least specialised 
meanings, inventing new expressions, and deliberately exploiting the spe­
cial capacity of the German language for neologisms.5 Even Wallace's trans­
lation does not read like the normal English of most native philosophers, 
but generations of students have regarded his version as a lesser evil in 
comparison with the original. Perhaps only someone who has struggled 
with the task of putting Hegel into English can really appreciate Wallace's 
very many felicitous, and often apparently serendipitous, renderings. 
This having been said, it must immediately be added that Wallace paid a 
high price for the sake of readability. Anyone who compares his version 
with the German must often be tempted to say, "e' est magnifique, mais ce 
n'est pas Hegel." All too frequently, Wallace achieves his relatively smooth 
surface, not just by occasionally supplementing the original, but by taking 
immense liberties with Hegel's syntax (going well beyond the necessary 
adjustment to English sentence structures), and by showing little regard 
for a consistent rendering of Hegel's technical vocabulary. The overall re­
sult is frequently more a paraphrase than a translation.6 So, though Wal­
lace's version sometimes illuminates the sense of the original, and will 
certainly continue to have a place in the history of philosophical literature 
in English, it cannot be relied upon by anyone seriously concerned with 
Hegel's text who must depend solely or for the most part on an English 
translation of it." 
...... 
Hegel showed his first visible interest in philosophical logic when he 
obtained his license to teach at Jena. He gave a course on logic and meta­
physics at once (winter term 1801), probably at the instance of Schelling 
and some of Schelling's pupils. For several years he was the recognised 
"logician" of the Schelling party. But all the time he was becoming in­
creaSingly unhappy, both about the "formalism" that was evident among 
Schelling's imitators and followers, and about the "high academic" charac­
ter of their terminology. By the end of 1804 he was convinced that logic 
must be expressed in the plain German of ordinary, unacademic con­
sciousness, and with the most ordinary words for its basic concepts. Rosen­
kranz cites his first proclamation of a new programme (probably delivered 
at the beginning of his winter course in October 1804). The introduction to 
this course, says Rosenkranz, 
"These four introductory paragraphs were drafted by w.A. Suchting (and slightly revised by 
us). 

INTRODUCTION: TRANSLATING HEGEL'S LOGIC 
xv 
contains important declarations about [philosophical] terminology 
generally-to wit, that as far as possible it should be wholly 
brought back to the mother tongue. Hegel speaks first of how we 
make the study of philosophy more difficult, partly because we 
make demands on it that ought not to be made, and partly because 
we terrify ourselves with pictures of the demands that philosophy 
makes on us and which are too hard for us to meet. The truth 
should present itself to us in religion, of course, but for our culture 
faith is altogether a thing of the past; Reason, with its demand that 
we should not believe, but know what the truth is, has grown 
strong, that we should not merely have intuitive consciousness of 
the truth, but should comprehend it. The truth of his individuality, 
which the path of his existence traces precisely for him, the single 
individual is well aware of, but the consciousness of the universal 
life he expects from philosophy. Here his hope seems to be disap­
pointed when instead of the fullness of life there appear concepts, 
and in cqntrast to the riches contained in the world of immediate 
experience the poorest abstractions are offered. But the concept is 
itself the mediator between itself and life, in that it teaches us how to 
find life in it and the concept in life. But, of course, only science 
itself can convince us of this. 
What Hegel himself said, so Rosenkranz reports, was: 
For the fixation of concepts there is a means at hand which 
achieves its end, on the one side, but can also become more dan­
gerous than the evil of being without concepts even, namely, philo­
sophical terminology, the vocabulary established for this purpose 
from foreign languages, [specifically] Latin and Greek. I do not 
know, for example, what there is to the idea that the expression 
"quantitative Unterschied" is more definite than "Grossenunter­
schied". Properly speaking, it belongs to the highest cultural devel­
opment of the people to say everything in their own language. The 
concepts that we mark with foreign words seem to us to be them­
selves something foreign and not to belong to us immediately as 
our very own. The elements of things appear to us not to be the 
present concepts with which we are environed and have to deal 
with all the time and in which the most ordinary man expresses 
himself. Being, Not-Being, One, Many, Quality, Size and so on, are 
pure essences of this kind with which we keep house all the time in 
ordinary life. Such forms as these appear to us to be not worthy 
enough, as it were, for the grasping of those high other-worldly 
things, the Idea, the Absolute, in them; and something foreign is 

xvi 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
more apt for it, since the Absolute, the supersensible world itself, is 
foreign to the common round of daily life in which we employ 
those concepts. But that which is in itself must just not have this 
foreignness for us, and we must not give it this foreign look by using 
a foreign terminology, I but must count ourselves really convinced 
that the spirit itself is alive everywhere and that it expresses its 
forms in our own spontaneous natural language. They come up in 
the speech of everyday, mingled and wrapped in crude concrete 
[instances], for example, in "The tree is green." "Tree" and 
"green" are what controls our representation. We do not in ordi­
nary life reflect on the "is:' we do not set this pure being in relief, 
make it our ob-ject, as philosophy does. But this being is here 
present and expressed. It is, of course, necessary to have recourse 
to foreign terminology if we cannot find the determinate charac­
teristics of the concept before us in our own language. It is not 
customary for us to do violence to language and to mold new forms 
out of old words. Our thought is still not properly at home in our 
language, it does not dominate the language, as it should, and we 
cherish in this regard, a blind reverence for what is brought from 
abroad. 
But this foreign terminology, which is used partly in a futile and 
partly in a perverse way, becomes a great evil because it reduces 
concepts which are implicitly movement to something stable and 
fixated, so that the spirit and life of the matter itself disappears and 
philosophy degenerates into an empty formalism, which is very 
easily supplied for social chat; yet to those who do not understand 
the terminology it seems very difficult and deep. That is precisely 
what is seductive in a terminology of this kind, that it is in fact very 
easy to master it. It is all the easier to speak in it, because if I have 
no sense of personal shame, I can permit myself to utter every 
possible nonsense and triviality when I am talking to people in a 
language that they do not understand.7 [emphasis probably added 
by Rosenkranz] 
When he made this pronouncement, Hegel was still struggling with the 
problem of how systematic philosophy ought to be shaped, and what the 
place and function of pure logic were in a philosophical system. He solved 
this problem (more or less to his own final satisfaction) only at the end of 
that academic year. So it is crucially significant that he repeats the slogan of 
his new programme in his letter to J. H. Voss of May 1805: 
Luther has made the Bible speak German; you, Homer-the great­
est present that can be given to a people; for a people is barbarous 

INTRODUCTION: TRANSLATING HEGEL'S LOGIC 
xvii 
and does not consider the excellent things it knows as its own 
,property until it gets to know them in its own language;-if you 
would forget these two examples, I should like to say of my aspira­
tions that I shall try to teach philosophy to speak German. Once 
tHat is accomplished, it will be infinitely more difficult to give 
shallowness the appearance of profound speech. 8 
The attempt to teach philosophy to speak German, upon which Hegel 
was just then embarking, involved first an arduous struggle on the part of 
ordinary consciousness to overcome its own standpoint and assumptions 
in order to reach the level of "pure thinking." This logic of "the experience 
of consciousness" was set out in the Phenomenology of Spirit (1807). Only 
after an immensely hard labour of self-purification is the student ready for 
the discipline of "pure thinking" in his/her "own language"; and the "pos­
session of philosophy in one's own language" is by no means as simple as 
the reading of Homer in translation (or even of the Bible). As Hegel said in 
his lectures about twenty years later, it is more nearly comparable to the 
understanding of his creed achieved by someone who has tried to be a 
good Christian all his life. 9 
For although the philosophical logic of our own rational being is ex­
pressed with the most ordinary words of our ordinary lives, those words 
are not used in any ordinary way.1O They are names of the concept of 
"pure thinking" (and its moments). That "Concept" moves toward full self­
consciousness through use of these words. The most remarkable aspect of 
the way that Hegel does logic is his methodical insistence upon the self­
reference of the "pure concept." The Concept is made to refer to itself at 
every stage, because there is nothing else available for its words to charac­
terise. The whole standpoint of "consciousness," which has a world of 
"things" that its thoughts naturally refer to, has been transcended and put 
behind us. We are asked first to think what the concept of "pure being" is; 
and we go on from there in what is, or should be, an unbroken chain of 
"necessary" reflections until we finally comprehend what the logical 
thinking that has been doing all this self-reflection and self-determining is. 
The stages on the way, or the links in the chain, are represented by 
ordinary words; and we must depend upon our previous familiarity with 
them, and with how they are used in ordinary life, to gUide us to our 
comprehension of the motion of "pure thinking." But al of the "concept­
words" in the chain have been lifted out of the great complex web of their 
ordinary meanings and uses. Logically, they mean only what the move­
ment of "pure thinking" allows them to mean, at the point where they are 
introduced; and the destiny of that initial meaning is always to develop 
until it reaches a breaking point, and becomes a new "concept."Il 

xviii 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
In his own oral commentary, Hegel does quite a lot of picking and 
choosing among the ordinary uses of his German words. He is very con­
scious that the most familiar words for the categories and relations that 
structure our shared universe of discourse and experience, have many 
uses. Sometimes he tells us that this or that use (or family of uses) is 
"subordinate" -and then we are meant to disregard it; on the other hand, 
he also points to what may look like a very "subordinate" use as peculiarly 
illuminating or instructive. Occasionally he even points out that one of his 
"concept-names" has a logical meaning that diverges seriously from its 
ordinary use. 
What then are we to do when we want to make Hegel's logical concept 
"speak English"? Obviously we must choose the best equivalents that we 
can in our natural language for the words that Hegel isolated from his own 
natural German. But no word in English will have quite the same complex 
of ordinary uses as a German word. So when we try to render the sys­
tematic movement of "the Concept," the words that we choose to isolate 
must come under strain at times; and the points of serious strain will 
usually be different from the points where Hegel himself was (or perhaps 
should have been) conscious of strain in his German. 
What are we to do when this happens? To take one of the most elemen­
tary examples, philosophers in English (and French) are used to speaking 
of God as "the supreme being" (or I'Etre supreme); and of man as "the 
rational being." But Hegel's German gives him "das hochste Wesen" and 
"das vernunftige Wesen"; and for his logic, the distinctions between 
"being" (Sein), "essence" (Wesen), and "concept" (Begriff) are funda­
mental. 
Now, "essence" is the proper logical equivalent of Wesen. So, if we want 
to render Hegel's logical thinking clearly and consistently, we must render 
the German expressions logically. This means that we must break radically 
with "ordinary usage" and speak of "the supreme essence," and the like. 
To do this is to violate one of the most sacred taboos of the English 
philosophical tradition. But it is the logical structure of "pure thinking" 
that is our topic, not the use-structures of two natural languages. 
When three translators, with different backgrounds, and differing rela­
tions to and experiences of English and German, seek to collaborate in 
rendering Hegel's Logic in English, even a decision as elementary as the 
consistent rendering of Wesen by "essence" causes different degrees of 
strain. For Harris it causes no strain at all, and is even welcome, because it 
drives home two fundamental truths: First, that "pure thinking" must be 
distinguished sharply from the "experience of consciousness" (as we 
share it in ordinary language); and second, that Hegel's "essences" are real 
beings, not the mental entities of native English nominalism. Geraets ac-

INTRODUCTION: TRANSLATING HEGEL'S LOGIC 
xix 
cepts the violation of normal usage because the use of "essence" stresses 
that we are dealing with beings that are recognised as mediated, as in­
wardly relational, as having their raison d' etre or ground, and therefore as 
not simply given or "there" any more. 
Of course, even when one accepts the principle that the logical relations 
of the concept-names are what is crucial, there are places where ordinary 
usage must be respected in the interest of simple intelligibility. Thus, when 
the decision to render Beziehung as "relation" and Verhiiltnis as "relation­
ship" has been painfully arrived at, the difficulty that in the sphere of 
quantity a Verhiiltnis is properly a "ratio" will not go away. English readers 
cannot be relied upon to identify "quantitative relationships" as "ratios". 
So the translator must make this identity explicit, and rely upon the reader 
to remember that this time the German word has two meanings which are 
both essential to the conceptual structure of the Logic. (Here, for once, we 
are all three quite happily agreed.) 
As a rule, both the general philosophical tradition and the tradition of 
English Hegel translation must be respected as far as possible in order that 
there may be no avoidable obstacles in the way of our "possessing philoso­
phy in English." But the English Hegel tradition is loose and various;12 and 
the arguments we have had about what precedents should be followed, 
and what departures are unavoidably necessary, have been as eloquent as 
they are (in some cases) seemingly interminable. The decision to follow the 
lonely precedent provided by H. s. Macran,13 who translated the three 
"moments" of the Concept (Allgemeine, Besondere, Einzelne) as "universal, 
particular, and singular", was determined by the insistence of Harris that 
"individuality" is what belongs to the concrete thinking of the logician, 
who unites the moments and comprehends them in their unity. In this 
view, the distinction between the "individual" and the "singular" is abso­
lutely fundamental, and no translation that would permit even the acci­
dental possibility of a confusion between them should be considered at all. 
Geraets agrees, mainly because "individual" and "the individual" have to 
be used to translate individual and Individuum (WL 2:571ss. 417ss). Hegel 
even speaks of "das einzelne Individuum" (Enc. § 34). 
Wallace, Johnston and Struthers, and Miller (together with almpst all the 
commentators) use "individual" for Einzelne. But ever since the triumph of 
nominalism in the fourteenth century, English thinkers have spoken of 
singular entities as "particulars". When the general tradition has been so 
radically corrupted, a fresh start is clearly necessary; and, since we have 
four German terms to render, we should utilise the resources of our logical 
vocabulary to the full. We do, in fact, have four words available, and there 
is one place in the logic books where even the nominalists needed them, 
so that our purely logical tradition was not corrupted by oversimplification. 

xx 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
In the classification of "judgments" the traditional logicians have spoken 
always of "universal, particular, and singular judgments."I4 This is the 
usage to which Hegel translators must return, both because it enables us to 
use "individual(ity)" in exactly the ways that Hegel uses its German cog­
nates, and because it belongs to ouƸ own properly logical tradition. The fact 
that-because of the nominalist degradation of "particular" in reference to 
"things", and the implicitly rational tendency of ordinary discourse to 
speak of singular living organisms as "individuals" -the logical words 
"single" and "singular" now fall upon the eye and ear somewhat unexpec­
tedly in reference to real things, both organic and inorganic, should be 
looked upon as an advantage in this case, too, because it reminds us that, 
although philosophical logic is the living spirit of language, the spirit of 
pure thinking is not directly identical to the spirit of everyday life. IS 
The need to distinguish between the language of logic and the language 
of experience brings us to one of the most vexing problems in Hegel's 
logical chain-the word Daseyn.I6 Language, as Hegel says in the Phe­
nomenology, is the Daseyn of the Spirit.17 In the Logic he adds the clarifica­
tion that, as the element of free subjective spiritual Daseyn, ordinary lan­
guage is the perfect paradigm of the necessary place of contingency in the 
total scheme of things.I8 Logic itself, on the other hand, is the determina­
tion in language of the "necessary" structure of the Concept, i.e., of think­
ing as self-knowing freedom. There can be nothing random in it. Philo­
sophical logic must be a perfectly determinate linguistic structure. 
Hegel himself says, at the very beginning of his discussion of Daseyn, 
"Daseyn ist bestimmtes Seyn."I9 This looks like a definition, so the earlier 
translators, faced with a word for which they had no proper equivalent­
since they needed "existence" for the directly cognate Existenz, which is a 
much higher "determination of thought"-felt that they were directly au­
thorised here to use "determinate being" for Daseyn. 
This was a disastrous decision, which has had nothing but misleading 
consequences. Hegel's opening statement is not a definition; it only tells us 
that Daseyn is the first and most primitive "determination" following pure 
being (which is completely indeterminate). Daseyn is, in fact, the most gen­
eral and, as such, the most indeterminate form of "finite" being. It is "deter­
minacy that simply is, quality" (WL 1:95). It is "determinacy as such" (op. 
cit., p. 96), determinacy in the determination of being. In the Phenomenol­
ogy, §§ 506 and 793, Hegel speaks of bestimmtes Daseyn. These are both 
crucial moments, and if Daseyn logically needs to be qualified in this way 
specifically, it is easy to see why a competent translator must not build the 
qualification into the universal rendering of the category. Daseyn is, on one 
side (looking back), "becoming," that which both is and is not; and on the 

INTRODUCTION: TRANSLATING HEGEL'S LOGIC 
xxi 
other side (looking forward) it is "something" -a "something" that is not 
logically distinguishable from "the other". 
Anyone who wants to direct the mind of an English reader to the inter­
mediate point in just this logical progression (from "becoming" to "some­
thing") is bound to recognise that in this instance we must go a little way 
on the road with J. H. Stirling (who is, in general, the worst possible model 
for a Hegel translator, because his attempt to use English as if it were a 
German dialect denies the living genius of our native language altogether). 
Stirling calls Daseyn "There-being". We must be literal too; but we can at 
least allow the hyphenated English words their natural order and speak of 
"being-there" instead. Or we can make a logical universal in the normal 
way (which is not confined to the schoolroom) and speak of "thereness".2o 
Logic is the "being for itself" of rational knowing, or the absoluteness of 
Wissen. Everything that can properly be called "experience" must have a 
cognitive aspect; and in that aspect it is a mode of Wissen. So Wissen must 
comprehend even our "errors"; and its absolute self-concept must embrace 
the comprehension of how and why "error" is necessary as relative truth 
in the process of the very coming-to-be of truth.21 In his oral commentary 
on the Logic, Hegel illustrates this necessity several times when he dis­
cusses how the different stages of the Concept apply to God, or the human 
spirit. 
The development of immediate wissen (the extremely fallible "certain­
ties" of our sense and feeling) into absolute (or philosophical) wissen is set 
forth in the Phenomenology of Spirit as the discursive theory of the coming­
to-be of erkennen ("cognition"). When it is fully explicated, and the whole 
map and compass of the journey are available to us, then cognition as 
cognition 
is 
comprehended 
and wissen 
has 
become 
Wissenschaft 
("science"). In that perspective, the ordinary common sense wissen, from 
which we began, is mere kennen (or unscientific cognition). 
The English word "know" is, of course, a blood relation of kennen. But 
the blood relations of wissen vanished with the demise of Anglo-Saxon. If 
we had a verb derived from the Latin scire as well as a noun, we should be 
better off, because we could use that for wissen, and so preserve the link 
between wissen and Wissenschaft. Then we could use "know" for erkennen 
(which is the normal recourse of all translators of German philosophical 
works). But as things are, the Hegel translator must take a different 
route-and it seems that only a rather stony road is available. We must use 
"know" and "knowledge" -our one surviving general term-for the com­
prehensive concept, wissen; and we must do the best we can with "cogni­
tion" and all its cognates for the rendering of erkennen and its cognates. 
Kennen is not logically important, and we have a ready supply of appropri-

xxii 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
ate renderings for it. 22 But Hegel's erkennen and related terms should al­
ways be recognisable to the reader; and since almost any use of the verb 
"cognize" creates a strained effect, we have frequently replaced it with 
phrases that involve "cognizance" or "cognizant" as well as "[re]cognise". 
We are well aware that the results are still somewhat unnatural in places, 
but we are at least confident that the desired goal has been attained; and 
one valuable side effect is that the connection between erkennen and 
anerkennen ("recognise") is never lost to sight. 
Languages, as the Daseyn of the Spirit, grow up freely, and reflect the 
contingency of experience, with its incidental needs and its accidental con­
trivances. But logic (we can now say clearly) is the linguistic "being-for­
self" of thinking Spirit as such, its perfected determinateness; and when 
someone uses the resources of his or her native language to distinguish 
the objective "necessity" of thought-thinking-itself from the subjective 
freedom of experience, then he or she is bound to use those resources in 
ways that can only be matched artificially in other languages. 
Thus, Hegel has two words for "object" available to him. He uses Objekt 
for the logical concept of the object (the one-sided counterpart of the still 
one-sided logical "subject", or "subjective concept"), and Gegenstand for 
the ordinary object of experience, in all its modes-the object of "con­
sciousness" (and the complement of Bewusstseyn). As we would expect, 
the two words often occur in near proximity. We might well be tempted to 
think-as Knox did about most of Hegel's vocabulary, and as almost all 
translators have felt about Objekt and Gegenstand-that Hegel's usage is 
determined only by the fact that he recognised (or was taught) very early 
that frequent repetition of the same word is tedious and inelegant, and 
should be avoided where possible. But a translator who has grasped the 
crucial importance of the distinction between "consciousness" (or experi­
ence) and "pure thinking" (or logic) must see that any variation upon a 
word that has an unmistakably logical function (such as Objekt) has to be 
rendered faithfully, because there may be a logical distinction involved; and 
if nothing but a stylistic contingency is actually discoverable, that fact itself 
must be made visible. 
So, we are here obligated to provide the reader with an accurate picture 
of how Hegel used two words, when we have only one word ourselves. In 
this case, we have made our one word into two by hyphenating it ("ob­
ject") whenever it represents Gegenstand, the clumsier compound of 
Hegel's native Volk. Gegenstand occurs more frequently than Objekt, but it 
is good to remind the reader that it is not the proper counterpart of Subjekt; 
and because it belongs (as we think) to Hegel's "ordinary" vocabulary, we 
have felt justified in avoiding our artificial expedient wherever "subject 

INTRODUCTION: TRANSLATING HEGEL'S LOGIC 
xxiii 
matter" or "topic" is an appropriate rendering for Gegenstand in ordinary 
parlance. 
A somewhat similar case is the one involving Unterschied and Differenz, 
except that here both are specifically logical terms. Unterschied belongs 
properly to the doctrine of essence and has to be distinguished from the 
otherness of Daseyn.23 It is the distinction of reflection; in absolute distinc­
tion (A and non-A) the terms are distinct in virtue of "the simple not." 
Hegel stresses the importance of grasping absolute distinction as simple, 
i.e., as relating to itself, as self-distinction. "But what is distinct from the 
distinction is the identity. It [distinction 1 is therefore itself [i. e., distinction 1 
and identity." Both distinction and identity are at the same time the whole 
and one of its moments. Although distinction develops into "diversity" 
which implies comparison by a third and is a moment that "repeats" the 
othemess of Daseyn, and further into the "antithesis" and "opposition" of 
what is positive and what is negative, it must always be understood in its 
essential opposition to (or distinction from) identity. Identitiit and Un­
terschied are opposed by virtue of the Scheidung, or separation, that negates 
the unseparatedness of identity. In making our terminological choice we 
should, as is often the case, take our cue from the verb: unterscheiden 
means "to distinguish". We must not forget, however, that Hegel fre­
quently speaks of sich unterscheiden ("to distinguish itself"). Indeed, the 
logical distinctions are not just our work; they are produced by the logical 
"subject," i.e., the Concept, itself. Unterschied is more akin to the distinctio 
realis than to the distinctio ration is tantum of traditional metaphysics. It is in 
no way due to a purely subjective act. "Reason" in the Hegelian sense 
does, of course, produce (and overcome) distinction, but then, for Hegel, 
logic is metaphysics; distinctio ration is is distinctio realis.24 
Although we recognise that Unterschied can mean "difference", this hap­
pens because "distinction" itself can and must sometimes be understood 
in this way. But Unterschied does not always, or even principally, mean 
"difference". The more fundamental meaning is "distinction". And since 
there is great advantage in using only one English word to translate a 
logical term of such capital importance and its cognates, we have chosen to 
translate Unterschied always by "distinction".25 This terminological choice 
gives us the additional bonus of freeing "difference" for the translation of 
Differenz. 
For Hegel, Differenz characterises the second moment that follows the 
first simple and undeveloped unity of determination, and that precedes 
the third moment of "return from Differenz into simple self-relation" (§ 85). 
This intermediate position gives the term a double meaning. On the one 
hand, what is different is more developed than what remains in its simple, 

xxiv 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
initial unity. Different thus means "differentiated" (§§ 196, 199, 200, 201), 
and Differentiierung "differentiation" (§§ 202, 203). These terms are akin to 
"particular" and "particularisation" (Besonderung, § 201). On the other 
hand, what is different can resist the return to self-relation. Under this 
aspect, Differenz does not mean a finitude waiting to be transcended, but a 
dualism (WL 1:47) that attempts to prevent its assumption into a new, 
articulated unity and tries to absolutise itself. We then have something 
quite close to the radical difference (or differance) of some postmodernists. 
The most apt translation for Differenz is simply "difference", a term to be 
interpreted, like the German term itself, in a more positive, developmental, 
or a more rigid or even absolute way, according to the context in which it 
occurs. 
Quantitative Differenz is Schelling's term to express the difference in 
degree of either subjectivity or objectivity that characterises subject and 
object.26 Each side is a relative Totality in which one of the two outweighs 
the other, while both sides remain nevertheless absolute identity. Hegel's 
key criticism of this position is: "Die quantitative Verschiedenheit ist nicht 
wahrhafter Unterschied; das Verhiiltnis ist ganz aulSerlich" ("The quantita­
tive diversity is no genuine distinction; the relationship is entirely exter­
nal"). Moreover, the outweighing of one or the other is just "sense deter­
mination" (sinnliche Bestimmung). For Schelling the Absolute is not only 
absolute identity; but, more specifically, "quantitative Indifferenz des Sub­
jektiven und Objektiven." Hegel uses Indifferenz in our text, not only to 
refer to the middle between the two poles of the magnet (Indifferenzpunkt), 
but also with reference to the Absolute (§ 86). We have decided to translate 
it as "Indifference", using the initial capital to distinguish it from "indif­
ference", which stands for Gleichgultigkeit. 
In a number of cases we have had to use two English words for one 
German term. In the case of Verhiiltnis, which has been discussed already, 
there is an idiomatic use of Verhalten or Verhiiltnisse which makes "situa­
tion" necessary as a third rendering. The reader will find all such cases in 
the Glossary; and she or he can rest assured that, whether the Glossary 
gives one, two, or, in desperate cases, three, renderings for a German 
word, any overlapping in the rendering of different German words in 
English has been clearly shown. We believe that all important logical 
words have been successfully distinguished. The only exception to this 
rule is that the English idiom "for this reason" (or "for the same reason", 
etc.) renders words like darum and ebendarum, and does not indicate the 
presence of Vernunft. (This exception, too, is absolutely reliable, and we 
think that it will cause no difficulty.) 
In another set of cases, we have been forced by the copiousness of 
German to use the same English word for two different words in German. 

INTRODUCTION: TRANSLATING HEGEL's LOGIC 
xxv 
In these cases (the couplets formelllformal, ideelllideal, reelllreal are the most 
obvious, but not the only ones), we have marked the distinction clearly by 
inserting the German word itself for the less frequent members of the 
German pair. 
After much agonised debate we have managed to rescue the German 
words Ding and sache from this category. Ding is the most ordinary word 
for "thing". In its perfectly determinate logical use it means a complex 
universal object of perceptual consciousness: an "essence" that "has prop­
erties". This is a familiar meaning of "thing" in philosophical English. A 
sache is a "thing" in another sense. It is an object of theoretical or practical 
concern, the thing in question; and although it may be a physical thing­
for instance, the objects of sense-certainty in the Phenomenology ("tree" 
and "house") are as such sachen, not Dinge-it is also, quite typically, a 
goal of human practical concern, a "cause" that we strive to serve, as well 
as what our effort of cognition is concerned with. 
The two words became connected in German philosophical logic, be­
cause both the common sense philosophers and the sceptics who can be 
loosely classified as "influenced" by Kant, began speaking of his Ding-an­
sich ("thing-in-itself") as die sache selbst ("the Thing itself"). When Hegel 
developed his speculative concept of "absolute knowing" as the knowing 
of "what truly is," this suited his logical need, because it provided him 
with a perfect bridge in ordinary consciousness between the strictly un­
knowable and the absolutely known. His sache is a Greek pragma-one of 
those "things" of which Protagoras said that "man is the measure." Hence, 
the English translators have gone all over the linguistic map in rendering it 
(and all of them need four or five terms for it). But in logic it is essential to 
maintain the awareness that die sache selbst is the right answer to the 
"problem" of the Ding an sich; and, of course, we must have one word for 
it In the Logic we do not have to deal with the concrete Sac hen of sense­
certainty, so we have finally settled upon "the matter itself" for die sache 
selbst. It is true that we also need "matter" as one of the complements of 
"form"; and that physical "matters" play an important role in the dialectic 
of das Ding; but these uses of "matter" are confined to restricted contexts 
where the meaning is readily distinguished. So we do not think that any 
confusion will occur. The "mattl1(' of the discussion will always be readily 
( ,I. 
, 
• 
. 
apparent. 
. 
'I,' , 
" ,:.[.,.
.... 
.
' , Ľ 
Detailed discussion of other terms seems hardly necessary at this point, 
except for two that pos,.e 
(aufheben). The first is/peculiarly obscure, and the second is systematically 
ambiguous. With sc'hein and scheinen we must start from three fixed 
points, two provided by the context, and one provided by ordinary usage. 
First, Erscheinung, which means "appearance", is a higher development, 

xxvi 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
and contains or expresses the "truth" of Schein in a fuller measure. Sec­
ond, the use of scheinen is determined by the physical analogy that is basic 
to the logic of "reflection". Finally, ordinary usage tells us that Schein is 
deceptive; it is what seems to be, but is not really so. This fact of ordinary 
usage harmonises with our first logical guide, and conflicts with the sec­
ond. For the "light" of "essence" that "shines" inwardly expresses the 
inner articulation that makes "being" into "essence", which is "the truth 
of being." 
The reader must be left here with a puzzle. We have used "seem" and 
"semblance" in the contexts where the negative aspect is clearly dominant; 
and "shine" (verb and noun) most of the time. The previous tradition 
favours "show", but nothing in Hegel's discussion is made any clearer by 
it. It seems wiser-where the interpretation is problematic in any case-to 
stay as close to Hegel's language (with its implicit metaphor) as possible.27 
With aufheben, there is no problem about the meaning, because Hegel 
explains the term (in its systematically ambiguous use) as clearly as it can 
be explained.28 But there has always been controversy about how it should 
be rendered. One tradition allows the translator to decide whether the 
"cancelling" or the "preserving" moment is dominant, and to use a battery 
of words to render different supposed shades of meaning. But the perfect 
determinacy of Hegel's logical concept forbids us to take this route (which, 
being the road of subjective arbitrariness, is a thoroughly bad one in any 
event). So, for this fundamental name of the logical movement of the 
Concept, we have had to decide between "sublation", an artificial logical 
word that has virtually no meaning, except what Hegel's explanation and 
its own context give it, and "suspension", which is the ordinary word that 
comes closest to being systematically ambiguous in the right way. Aufheben 
is a very ordinary word in German; the English "put by" has most of the 
same ambiguity, though without the element of "raising up". But "put by" 
would be as alien in logical discourse as "sublate" is in vernacular speech 
(and about as empty of all obvious meaning). In the end, our majority has 
decided that even "suspend" is out of place in pure logic. So only "sub­
late" will be found in our translation. 
Hegel uses ubergreifen to express the positive aspect of the process of 
Aufhebung. The concept that results from speculative "comprehension" 
(begreifen) reaches back and "overgrasps" the opposition of the moments 
produced by thought in its dialectical stage. The metaphor comes from 
Stoic tradition. Zeno used the five fingers to represent the differing "ap­
prehensions" of the five senses; then, dosing his fist, he called that gesture 
"comprehensive sensation". 
To express the comprehensive power of 
thought, he grasped the closed fist in his other hand. "Overgrasp" is not to 
be found in our dictionaries. But anyone who reflects upon Zeno's meta-

INTRODUCTION: TRANSLATING HEGELS LOGIC 
xxvii 
phor will see why we need it, and how different the meaning is from any 
of the current uses of "overreach" . 
English is a language with a distinctly mongrel ancestry. But by and 
large, it will be seen that we have adopted a word of Anglo-Saxon origin in 
preference to one of Latinate descent where we appeared to have a choice; 
and where the Fiirsichseyn of the logical Concept was not at issue, we have 
exploited the full resources of all the English that we jointly possessed. In 
the case of some German expressions of which Hegel was fond (iiberhaupt, 
for example), we were often burdened with an embarras de richesses in 
choosing the best English equivalent. At other times it is a matter for very 
nice judgment as to whether the use of different words to render the same 
German word may not produce a misleading impression of the style of the 
original. In general, we have striven to mimic, where possible and appro­
priate, the etymology of the foreign words. To take an example largely at 
random, the verbs "change" and "alter" are pretty much synonyms, but 
we have often chosen the second to render veriindern, because the (Latin) 
root meaning of alter mirrors the ander root of the German verb. (This is an 
example of a conflict of criteria, too, since "change" is an Anglo-Norman 
product.) 
Apart from Daseyn, there is just one place where we have resorted to 
Stirling's artificial mimicry of German. Hegel's schliefJen is directly cognate 
with SchlufJ (which is his regular word for "the syllogism"). There are 
many verbal plays upon this relationship in German which cannot be 
reproduced because the corresponding words are not cognate in English. 
But where Hegel uses mit sich zusammenschliefJen to express the "closure of 
the Concept with itself" (as a "syllogism"), we have concluded that an 
artificial echo of the process of syllogistic reasoning was not more opaque 
or obscure than more "normal" expressions like "closing with itself." So 
we have allowed the Concept to "con-clude with itself." It is our hope that, 
by reminding the reader of syllogistic inference, this may even be more 
helpful than the use of more ordinary (but nonlogical) words. 
There is one logically significant way in which Hegel violates the normal 
grammatical conventions. He sometimes gives us a singular verb after two 
subject terms. This seems to be meant to indicate that the subjects are 
really identical. Often this is easy to grasp (see, for instance, "vanity and 
superficiality" on p. 22). But occasionally it is quite unexpected and para­
doxical, as in § 149. If his usage were not preserved in such cases, his 
meaning would be quite lost. So we have elected to follow him consistently 
in all instances. 
Two disconnected points, broadly relating to vocabulary, should be 
added here. One relates to Hegel's use of emphasis (italics). In some cases 
this simply reflects different typographical conventions, and as English 

xxviii 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
translators, we have felt free to choose to follow the conventions of our 
own community and time. For example, Hegel regularly emphasises the 
names of philosophers, but we have not followed him here. He often uses 
emphasis where today we would use quotation marks. We have occasion­
ally replaced emphasis by quotation marks where they seemed more ap­
propriate. But wherever Hegel chose to emphasise words and phrases, for 
some reason that was not apparent to us, we have followed him faithfully. 
The other point concerns our capitalisation of the initial letter. The 
reader should understand that we cannot be guided by Hegel's usage here, 
since all German nouns normally have an initial capital. We decided to 
limit the use of initial capitals to the Concept and the Idea, where these are 
used in the singular and absolute sense. Being and Essence are capitalised 
where they stand for the entire first and second "sphere" of the Logic. 
**** 
One final remark. No translation is produced in a linguistic vacuum. 
Even if translators were to work entirely for themselves, rendering a for­
eign text for self-clarification, for fun, or for some private reason, and not 
showing the result to anyone else, they would necessarily have to work 
within a tradition, however much they were to transform it. Those who 
expect their work to be used by others (whatever the determining motives 
for embarking on the project) must function even more completely in the 
context of a tradition, since all readers inevitably have sets of expectations 
formed by previous, related renderings. Sometimes the translator may 
judge it essential to depart from the tradition, perhaps radically, in order to 
achieve, broadly, greater fidelity to the original. But such steps must not be 
taken lightly if one wants the important innovations to be given a hearing. 
Any hint of change for its own sake in one place can easily lead the reader 
to a prejudice against the whole. Here the motto must be: "Hasten slowly!" 
None of us wanted to go too fast; and if some readers feel that we have 
done so (or agree with Suchting that we have sometimes gone in the 
wrong direction), we have at least tried to give a clear account, both here 
and in the following essay, of what our relation to the tradition is. * 
H. S. Harris 
T. F. Geraets 
'Like our opening paragraphs, this last one was first drafted for us by W.A. Suchting. 

INTRODUCTION: TRANSLATING HEGEL'S LOGIC 
xxix 
NOTES 
1. For details about the English scene, see J. Muirhead (1927). 
2. A revised text of the commentary was published separately in 1894 as Prolegomena to the 
Study of Hegel's Philosophy and Especially of His Logic. 
3. Marx, letter to his father, November 1837, Marx-Engels, Collected Works, vol. 1, 18. 
4. Alexander Pope, An Essay on Criticism, line 357. 
5. For the relation of Hegel's "philosophical language" to "ordinary" language, see first John 
McCumber (1979). For general discussions of Hegel's philosophy of language see further 
A. Koyre (1931), J. Simon (1966), T. Bodammer (1969), D. Cook (1971), M. Clark (1971), and 
M. Ziifle's detailed study, Prosa der Welt, which tends, however, to be oriented more to 
Hegel's Aesthetics and Phenomenology of Spirit than to his Logic (for which see particularly 7lff, 
289ff). 
6. See also the criticisms of Wallace's translation of the third part of the Encyclopaedia 
(Philosophy of Mind) by M. J. Petry in his translation of Hegel's Philosophy of Subjective Spirit 
(1979), l:cxxi-xxiii. Wallace himself was very modest about his translation. In the Prolegomena, 
he writes, "With a subject so abstruse and complicated as Hegel's Logic, and a style so abrupt 
and condensed as that adopted in the Encyclopaedia, a satisfactory translation can hardly fat! 
within the range of possibilities." The task of such a translation, he goes on, has "come to 
seem nearly insuperable." And he notes later: "The translator has tried to keep as closely as 
possible to the meaning, without always adhering very rigorously to the words of the origi­
nal. It is, however, much more literal in the later and systematic part, than in the earlier 
chapters" (op. cit., vii, xvi). 
7. K. Rosenkranz, Das Leben Hegels (Berlin, 184), 183-M; Harris and Knox, 256-58 (with 
some slight modifications). 
8. Hegel, Briefe, vol. 1:99-100; Butler and Seiler, Bd. S, p. 107. 
9. See below, § 237, Addition. 
10. "Philosophy has the right to select from the language of common life which is made for 
the world of representational thinking, such expressions as seem to come close to the deter­
minations of the Concept. There cannot be any question of demonstrating for a word selected 
from the language of common life, too, one associates it with the same concept for which 
philosophy employs it; for common life has no concepts, but [only] notions, and to [re]cog­
nize the concept of what is else a mere notion is philosophy itself. It must suffice therefore if 
representational thinking, in the use of its expressions that are employed for philosophical 
determinations, has only a faint notion of their distinctive meanings; just as it may be the case 
that one [re ]cognizes in these expressions nuances of representation that are more closely 
related to the corresponding concepts." Wissenschaft der Logik, ed. G. Lasson, 2:357, Gesam­
melte Werke, 12:130, Miller, 708 (translation amended). Our use of "Concept" or "concepts" 
for Begriff(e), and of "representational thinking" or "representation" as well as "notion" for 
Vorstellung, is discussed in the Notes to the Glossary. The above quotation shows, we think, 
how the word "notion" is much more appropriate for translating Vorstellung than for Begriff 
(as Miller has done). This departure was initiated by W. Kaufmann in his rendering of the 
Preface to the Phenomenology (1966) . 
11. Compare further J. McCumber, Hegel-Studien 14 (1979): 183-96. 
12. See M. J. Inwood, Hegel Selections, Glossary, 68-70. 
13. In Hegel's Doctrine of Formal Logic (Oxford, 1912) and Hegel's Logic of World and Idea 
(Oxford, 1929). Among the commentators, Stace followed this sound precedent. Stirling also 

xxx 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
uses these terms for the "forms of the Notion"-see, for instance, The Secret of Hegel (1898), 
159. But Stirling's habit as a translator was to reproduce the German terms of Hegel with 
English semantic elements (as if German were the only language in which philosophical logic 
could be written); and his use of the simple antithesis between "universals" and "particulars" 
in his own English discourse about Hegel illustrates very vividly the nominalist decadence of 
ordinary English usage. 
14. For once we are logically richer than the Germans, so that we can make one necessary 
logical distinction that drove Hegel himself back to the dog-Latin of the schools. When he 
comes to the classification of judgments he simply uses the traditional terminology (§ 75). 
Partly this is because he wants the gulf between the "traditional logic" and his own philo­
sophical logic to be quite plain. But partly it is because German did not give him the distinc­
tion that he needed. If he had used his own terminology here he would be in difficulties. An 
einzelne Urteil would be what we call "a single judgment" rather than what we call "a 
singular judgment". 
15. Although we have called this a "fresh start"-and have mentioned only Macran as a 
forerunner-the reader should realise that our translation already belongs to a new "tradi­
tion" in this matter. The "Trinity Hegel Translation Group" followed the Macran convention 
in its rendering of the Jena Logic; and it has been adopted uniformly, so far, in the translations 
of Hegel's Vorlesungen for which Peter Hodgson is the general editor. (See his Glossary for the 
Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion, University of California Press, 1984-87). The convention 
also holds for the Lectures on the History of Philosophy, which is already in preparation; and 
Leo Rauch has adopted it in his translation of "Reason in History" (he marks his few 
departures from it quite carefully; see Introduction to the Philosophy of History, Hackett, 1988). 
16. We use the spelling of Hegel's own time deliberately, to remind those who think that 
Dasein belongs by right of philosophical conquest to Heidegger and his adherents, that the 
most ordinary words in a language belong to the people, and not to philosophers (whether 
collectively or individually). 
17. Gesammelte Werke 9:276-78; Miller, §§ 508-11. 
18. Encyclopaedia § 145, Addition. 
19. This is the first sentence of Chapter 11 of the Science of Logic, and those who think that it 
authorises the translation of Daseyn as "determinate being" are forced to paraphrase it. But 
see also Encyclopaedia § 90 below. 
20. The modern Italian and French translators have seen the necessity to go this far with 
Stirling too. De Negri began it with esserci in 1931; and Bourgeois has followed suit with 
Etre-la. It is ironic to notice that in 1898 Stirling was moved to add a footnote (p. 243) apolo­
gising for the "irredeemable ugliness" of "There-being"; for this footnote graces a page upon 
which we find "be-ent" (for seiend) and "There-beent-ity" (for Daseiendes). Only the hyphen 
needs any apology in "being-there"; and Stirling himself hoped that "thereness" would 
join "whereness" in the dictionary. (It is obvious that he did not think that "be-ent" would 
do so!) 
21. See Phenomenology, Gesammelte Werke 9:30, Miller, § 39. 
22. The expressions actually used are recorded in the Glossary. 
23. For this and what follows see WL 11, 32ss. 
24. Even the most recent French translators have chosen to translate Unterschied by difference, 
mainly because the term difference has taken on such an important and strongly nonsubjective 
sense in recent French philosophy. Distinction has in French become a close equivalent to 
distinctio ralionis in the traditional sense. Our assessment of the situation in English usage is 

INTRODUCTION: TRANSLATING HEGEL'S LOGIC 
xxxi 
that this has not (yet) happened. "To be distinct" draws the term "distinction" away from its 
purely subjective sense. Valerio Verra has also chosen to use distinzione for Unterschied; so 
have the Italian translators of the 1817 Encyclopaedia. 
25. Miller uses "difference" in the section dealing specifically with Unterschied. 50 the sen­
tence quoted above, "Das Unterschiedene aber vom Unterschiede ist die Identitat," is trans­
lated as "But that which is different from difference is identity" (He gel's Science of Logic, 
p. 417). One page earlier, however, die Unterschiedene is rendered as "distinct terms", 
unterschieden sein as "are distinguished", and die Unterschiedenheit as "the distinguished­
ness". The confusion is made worse by the fact that "difference" is also used to translate 
Verschiedenheit (p. 413). 
26. For this and what follows see Vorlesungen uber die Geschichte der Philosophie, vol. 3, TWA 
20: 440-41 . 
27. Of course, we do not all agree that the interpretation is problematic; but the problems 
arise quickly enough when we start comparing what we think Hegel means. 
28. 5ee the Remark to § 96; and compare the Remark at the end of Chapter I of the Science of 
Logic (Lasson 1:93-95; Miller, 106-8). 

TRANSLATING 
HEGEL'S LOGIC: 
SOME MINORITY COMMENTS 
ON TERMINOLOGY 
What is so much in the power of men as language, will very often 
be capriciously conducted . . . .  The chief rule which I propose to 
follow, is to make no innovation, without a reason sufficient to 
balance the inconvenience of change . . . .  This . . .  will give occa­
sion to many curious disquisitions, and sometimes perhaps to con­
jectures, which, to readers unacquainted with this kind of study, 
cannot but appear improbable and capricious. But . . . they are not 
to be considered altogether as wanton sports of wit, or vain shews 
of leaming. 
Samuel Johnson, 
The Plan of a Dictionary of the English Language 
When people come together to produce a translation disagreements are 
to be expected, and when the text is Hegel's Logic they are inevitable. 
Many of the differences within the present troika have been resolved in the 
course of long discussions: through persuasion, compromise, or just plain 
exhaustion. However, a number of problems could not be ironed out thus. 
In this regard, it has happened that I have been, more often than either of 
my colleagues, the odd man out. So it was finally decided that we would 
handle the situation in the following way. As regards comparatively minor 
issues of terminology and broadly "stylistic" questions, final responsibility 
would rest with the translator who had produced the original working 
draft translation-specifically, as regards Hegel's own text, with my two 
colleagues, and, as regards the "Additions," with me. As to more basic 
questions of terminology, the majority view would prevail, and the Glos­
sary lists the renderings canonical for the translation. We all contributed a 
xxxii 

SOME MINORITY COMMENTS ON TERMINOLOGY 
xxxiii 
great deal to it, and we all concur on the majority of choices. However, it 
was agreed that I would have the right to state dissident views in a sepa­
rate place, and so the most significant of these are presented in the follow­
ing pages. 
What is said there should not obscure the fact that I agree with much of 
my colleagues' Introduction. I have tried to take account of what positive 
arguments they offer for their alternative views, even if not always in 
explicitly polemical form. Informed readers must be the ultimate judges of 
the strengths and weaknesses of the various cases. They should, we be­
lieve, gain from this opportunity to consider differing views about difficult 
matters. 
I do not offer any general theory of translation underlying my approach 
to the problems of rendering Hegel's Logic in particular. In any case, the 
problems in question cannot be resolved just by appeal to broad principles 
relating to translation as such or to Hegel's texts in particular; rather, they 
require detailed, highly contextualised argument. Hence I beg indulgence 
in advance from readers for many of the following discussions which may 
sometimes seem at first reading too finely drawn. Nevertheless, some gen­
eral pointers have emerged in the course of actually working on the trans­
lation, and a couple of them may be worth recording here, if only to give 
the reader some idea of assumptions underlying the following discussions 
of specific questions. 
I take very seriously a passage from one of Hegel's letters which is cited 
(with fuller context) in my colleagues' Introduction: "1 wish to try to teach 
philosophy to speak German." Hegel here alludes to his program of pres­
enting his philosophy in the words and syntax of his native language 
rather in those of Latin and Greek in their various derived forms. Now, 
this is a less clear-cut goal in English, where the influence of the classical 
tongues, especially via their Romance descendants, is much deeper, much 
more bone of the bone, flesh of the flesh of the language than is the case in 
German. But it means at least that the translator should strive for a max­
imum of linguistic "naturalness," consistent, of course, with fidelity to the 
meaning of the text in a narrower, so to speak "semantic" sense. 
Furthermore, Hegel tried to achieve the aim set out in the sentence 
quoted above by various means, probably the most important of which was 
the use of ordinary German words and phrases (either as such or in 
cognate forms) in special senses. One result is that he often uses the same 
expression in both technical and nontechnical senses, in different contexts. 
It is not always easy to decide which is which. However, the translator 
must try to do so. To say (as it has been put to me) that the translator 
should render the text "consistently," leaving it up to the reader to decide 
how a certain expression is being used, is to abdicate the translator's 

xxxiv 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
proper role, and, anyway, this rule already breaks down even in the sim­
plest cases. 
Finally, the point may be made that it is not by any means always clear 
when it is correct to say that a "mistranslation" has occurred. On the one 
hand, when, for example, my colleagues render Erinnerungen in the first 
sentence of the Remark to § 86 as "recollections", this is a clear mistransla­
tion: Though it is in general correct to express the German word in this 
way in English, it makes no sense whatever in this particular passage, 
whereas giving the German the legal sense of "objection", which it can 
have, makes perfectly good sense. On the other hand, when, for example, 
they render Entiiuflerung as "uttering" or (applied to God) "self­
emptying", disagreement may well reduce in the end to a matter of taste. 
A very large number of cases lie somewhere between these extremes. 
W. A. Suchting 
Specific Disagreements 
All otherwise unattributed § references are to the Encyclopaedia Logic. 
The § sign followed by a number signifies Hegel's own major statement, 
which comprises the initial paragraph of a section; an R after the number 
means Hegel's own Remark, and an A after the number means the edi­
torial Addition, itself followed by a number if there is more than one such 
to a section. References to Hegel's Werke (see following list) specify volume 
number followed by a colon and then page number(s). 
Abbreviations of titles used are 
EL 
Encyclopaedia Logic (that is, the work of which the present is a 
I:THL 
OED 
SL 
W 
translation) 
"Introduction: Translating Hegel's Logic" (earlier in this book) 
Oxford English Dictionary 
Science of Logic (translated by A. V. Miller, London: AlIen & Un­
win, 1969) 
Hegel's Werke in zwanzig Biinden (Theorie Werkausgabe, Frankfurt 
a.M. : Suhrkamp Verlag, 1969ff) 
(1) Anzahl 
This is an ordinary German word, meaning "number" or "quantity" . 
Hegel uses it as a purely technical term to signify one of the two concep­
tual constituents of number, the other being Einheit, "unit" (§ 102). Anzahl 
means the number of units contained in a given number. It is important to 
remember that the notion of Anzahl becomes properly applicable only at 
the stage of multiplication (factorisation) where the units involved are 
homogeneous, as distinct from addition. This is clear enough from a rea-

SOME MINORITY COMMENTS ON TERMINOLOGY 
xxxv 
sonably close reading of § 102 R, especially paragraph five, but it is made 
perfectly explicit in SL, 210, line 5 (W 5:240, bottom of page). Thus in, for 
example, the number 6, if 2 is taken as the unit, then the Anzahl is 3; if 3 is 
the unit, the Anzahl is 2. 
Wallace rendered the term by the old word "annumeration". This has 
the considerable merit of similarity in etymology to Anzahl. But it may well 
suggest that an Anzahl is the result of a process (of counting) (like Miller's 
"amount") rather than its being more accurately describable as the "index" 
of a number. This can be captured, retaining the etymological point of 
Wallace's word, at the expense of a step in the direction of neologism, by 
rendering Anzahl as "annumerator". 
The reader should realise that the present translation renders Anzahl 
sometimes as "annumeration" and sometimes as "annumerator", thus 
suggesting to the unwary reader that there are two concepts, whereas in 
fact there is just one. 
(2) aufheben, (das) Aufheben, Aufhebung 
Aufheben (the discussion may be confined to the verb) is an ordinary 
German word, which (as Hegel explains in § 96 A) has the double meaning 
of "do away with" and "preserve". He uses the word in both nontechnical 
and technical senses. As to the former, the first of the two meanings just 
listed (e.g., § 119 R) is the usual one. As to the latter, he makes use of both 
meanings to mark his conception of the way in which one logical cate­
gory successively does away with and also includes an immediately pre­
ceding one. 
The present translation does not clearly recognise the distinction be­
tween Hegel's nontechnical and technical uses, rendering aufheben as if he 
always uses it in the second way. If the distinction were to be respected, 
there would be no difficulty at all about the first, for there are many 
English words ("cancel", "abolish", and so on) that would do the job quite 
satisfactorily. It is the second, technical use that gives trouble. Since the 
publication of J. H. Stirling's The Secret of Hegel (1865), the standard English 
rendering has been "sublate". Now, according to the OED, the term 
appears first in English about the mid-sixteenth century, with the mean­
ing "remove", including removing by destroying. It appears again in 
nineteenth-century logic books (as early as 1838), where it means "deny", 
"contradict". Stirling simply imposed on it the extra semantic dimension 
of "include", "preserve", for the sole purpose of having an English word 
with a meaning to match the dual meaning of aufheben. So it is clear that 
this involves the rendering of an ordinary German word by a quite extraor­
dinary English one that by the nineteenth century lived on only in man­
uals of logic and that as a translation of aufheben was completely factitious. 

xxxvi 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Is there an English word which is both ordinary and also possessed of 
the dual meaning of the German one? I suggest that "suspend" fills the 
bill: it is perfectly ordinary and has the dual sense of something's being put 
out of action whilst continuing to exist. In addition, it has strong ety­
mological similarities to aufheben: sus- is a form of sub-, which can signify 
"from below" and consequently "on", and pend is the stem of the verb 
pendere, "hang", whilst aufheben is formed from aUf, meaning "on", and 
heben, "lift". These etymologies reflect logical features of the operation of 
aufheben. A category that is aufgehoben "hangs" from the next higher one in 
the sense of being dependent upon it, having been "lifted" into that posi­
tion by the dialectical process. The only objection I have heard against this 
suggestion is that "suspend" has an overtone of temporariness, which 
aufheben, at least in Hegel's technical use of it, does not. But, on the one 
hand, there is nothing incoherent in the idea of something's being sus­
pended indefinitely, and, on the other hand, a category that is aufgehoben 
in Hegel's logic is once more in play when it is abstracted from the larger 
context in which it has been shown to be a mere "moment", as it regularly 
is by the "understanding". Even if the objection were judged to be sound, 
still, taking everything into account, a verY' good case can be made that 
"suspend" comes incomparably closer to aufheben than "sublate" does, and 
therefore should be employed in the absence of a better rendering. 
(3) dasein, Dasein (or daseyn, Daseyn) 
This is an ordinary German word which Hegel uses both technically and 
nontechnically. Nontechnically it means, as a noun, "existence" (with a 
certain bias to what is living) and, as a verb, "to be there" (as its etymology 
indicates), "to be present", "attend" , "exist". The following discussion 
will be restricted to the nominal form, because this is of most relevance in 
the context of Hegel's logic. Its technical meaning is explained in the "Doc­
trine of Being," specifically in the second stage of the initial triad of catego­
ries comprising "Quality," and is stated very succinctly in the opening 
words of the relevant section of the larger Science of Logic: "Daseyn ist 
bestimmtes Sein" (SL, 109 = W 5:115). 
(i) Taking the technical meaning first, it is probably true that, as 
I:THL suggests, the passage just cited is what has been consid­
ered by translators and commentators in the main line of the 
Anglophone tradition to be the authority for rendering Dasein 
as "Determinate Being". In brief, the latter is what Hegel him­
self says that Dasein means. Why change the traditional ren­
dering? I:THL says that the passage in question is not a defini-

SOME MINORITY COMMENTS ON TERMINOLOGY 
xxxvii 
tion and that in fact "Daseyn is . . . the most . .
. indeterminate 
form of 'finite' being." So, when Hegel writes "determinate", 
we are told in effect that he really means "indeterminate"! It is 
also stated in the same place that rendering the word as "de­
terminate being" is "a disastrous decision, which has nothing 
but misleading consequences." However, the argument ad­
vanced for this claim rests upon a couple of passages in the 
Phenomenology of Spirit, a work that was published a good five 
years before the first volume of Hegel's logical magnum opus, 
the Science of Logic, and that lacks the rigorous terminology 
first systematically developed in the latter. An examination in 
particular of the two passages adduced shows Hegel is there 
simply using Dasein in an "ordinary language" way. 
What of the main term used in the present version, namely, 
"Thereness"? This has the advantage of etymological mimicry 
of the original (da = "there" and sein = "ness", as in, for exam­
ple, Bewufitsein = "consciousness"). But I can see no other ad­
vantages, and I do see several serious disadvantages, which 
include the following. (a) "Thereness" renders an ordinary 
German word by an English expression that is even more re­
mote from ordinary English than "sublate". (The three exam­
ples of its use given in the OED include one from the seven­
teenth century and two (both philosophical texts) from the 
nineteenth century. (b) This rendering of Dasein destroys the 
verbal continuity with the other two members of the triad (Sein 
and Fiirsichsein) as well as with others introduced in that first 
section, like Ansichsein. (Of course, continuity could be partly 
restored by rendering Fiirsichsein as "foritselfness", and so on. 
But what, then, becomes of Sein? Is it to be rendered "Ness"?) 
(c) Last but not least, proceeding in this way cannot but cause 
confusion among readers of Hegel, old and new, in view of the 
entrenched character of "Determinate Being" in standard 
translations and secondary literature. This is certainly not a 
common English expression, but it is not by any means a weird 
one, and, all things taken into consideration, I believe it should 
be retained. 
(ii) Hegel also uses Dasein non technically. See, for example, the 
way in which he uses this and Sein interchangeably in §§ 36 
and R, 51 R, W 8:103, 157, and its use in combinations such as 
"Gott hat Dasein" (§ 28 R), or "hat Gott Dasein?" (§ 28 A), or 
"Beweise vom Dasein Gottes" (§ 68 R). The remark about the 

xxxviii 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
alleged logical significance, for Hegel, of Dasein in "Oasein 
Gottes" is not underpinned with any argument and so cannot 
be discussed here. 
The present translation, making as it does no distinction 
between technical and nontechnical uses of Dasein, grips tight 
the nettle and renders these, respectively, as "God is there:' 
"Does thereness belong to God?", and "proofs that God is 
there". I rest my case! (Note that the day cannot be saved by 
rendering the expressions as "there is a God" and "proofs that 
there is a God", for this would be cheating: "there is" would 
here be rendered "es gibt".) 
In such cases the right path is to render the passages 
straightforwardly as "God exists" and "proofs of the existence 
of God"; there is no problem in such contexts of a confusion 
between Hegel's Dasein and Existenz. 
(4) Differenz, different. See Unterschied. 
(5) Eines, Einheit. See Eins (das). 
(6) Eins 
Some remarks on this term are in order here, both to outline a case for 
rendering it slightly differently from the way it is in the present translation 
and also to indicate its relations to various other terms which are flagged at 
various places in the text but not explicated. 
Das Eins has a place and a different meaning in the first two major 
subdivisions of the "Doctrine of Being," namely, those under the rubrics 
"Quality" and "Quantity." The "bad" or "spurious" infinite involved in 
Something's going over into Other, and this, qua Something, going over 
into a further Other has been terminated by the reflection that the series is 
a totality which is self-contained by virtue of the fact that what is contained 
in it is determined by itself and which is thus infinite in the sense of not 
being limited by anything outside it. This self-enclosed whole is called 
"Being-for-itself". Insofar as this is regarded purely in terms of its charac­
ter as a self-determining whole, abstracting from the reference to otherness 
which the preceding section on Dasein has shown to be necessary for 
determinateness, Being-far-itself is immediate (not mediated), but, as in­
cluding this necessary reference to otherness (negativity), it is determinate, 
"a" Being-for-itself (not Filrsichsein but Filrsichseiendes), excluding others. 
As such, it falls under the category das Eins. 

SOME MINORITY COMMENTS ON TERMINOLOGY 
xxxix 
Translators of Hegel have usually rendered das fins as "the One", and 
the present version is no exception. But this is not dictated by the expres­
sion itself, for the indefinite article in German (as also in, for example, 
French) is part of a specific noun in a way that is not the case in English. 
(Thus Marx's main work, Das Kapital, is rendered in English Capital, not 
The Capital.) My argument for rendering das fins as "One" rather than 
"the One" is twofold. It is not intended as decisive (insofar as any argu­
ment in this area can pretend to be so), but to be at least worth serious 
consideration. The first takes its point of departure from Hegel's remarks 
in § 96 A that the most familiar example of Being-for-itself is "I". (Cf. also 
§ 24 AI.) On the one hand, "I" can be looked at from the point of view of 
pure self-relation as such, and here "I" does not refer to any specific 
individual. On the other hand, "I" is necessarily some specific "I", though 
unspecified, as against other specific "I"s, similarly unspecified. From this 
second point of view, "I" as Being-for-itself is a Being-for-itself. 
Now, there is arguably a similar situation in regard to the English "one" 
in a sentence like "One doesn't eat one's peas from the blade of a knife." 
"One" refers simultaneously to anyone at all, anyone, and also to specific 
individuals, anyone(s). (It is worth remarking how the language seems to 
have within it the idea of the correlativeness of othemess with oneness in 
this sense-"you" can be substituted for "one" in the above example.) This 
suggests that das fins be rendered simply as "One". The second part of 
the argument for proceeding thus is that this would be an especially ap­
propriate way of rendering das fins when the latter expression is used in a 
quantitative (rather than, as so far, a qualitative) context. This is introduced 
in § 97 in (briefly) the following way. Being-for-itself considered mediately, 
excluding other "Beings-for-themselves", that is, Being-for-itself as das 
fins, is one-among-many. This is what Hegel refers to as "repulsion" . But, 
as has been seen, Being-for-itself can also be looked at as immediate, and 
this Hegel calls "attraction" . What is grasped as this oscillation between 
the two aspects of Being-for-itself is "Quantity". Das fins in the new 
quantitative context refers to the "moment" of "attraction" or, as it comes 
to be called in § 100, "continuity", characterised there as "that in which 
the many ones are the same, [namely] unit". (Unfortunately, the present 
translation renders the final word here, die Einheit, as "unity", thus de­
stroying the sense of the passage. This is in spite of the fact that the word 
is correctly rendered in a passage of identical sense in § 102, first para­
graph, ad fin.) The plural of das fins in the quantitative sense (see §§ 97, 
102 R) is very naturally rendered by "Ones", rather than by "the Ones". (It 
may be remarked, by the way, that Hegel also uses the term fines, § 97 A, 
which seems to mean one qua one-among-many.) 

xl 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
As correlatives of the quantitative das Eins, we have the following: (a) 
viellViele as in "Setzen vieler Eins" and "die se Viele Seiende [sc. Eins]" 
(§ 97), as well as die Vielen (§ 97 A), which would seem to refer to the 
quantitative Eins taken distributively. (b) das Viele (§§ 97 A, 98 A), which 
would seem to designate manyness-as-such. (c) ein Vieles (§ 97 A), which 
apparently means a particular manyness, so to speak, a particular group of 
ones. 
(7) erkennen, (das) Erkennen, Erkenntnis 
Hegel uses three groups of words, all from ordinary German, in inter­
connected ways: (1) erkennen, (das) Erkennen, Erkenntnis, (2) wissen, (das) 
Wissen, (3) kennen, (das) Kennen, Kenntnis(se). In the final analysis, they 
cannot be considered, especially in Hegel's usage, apart from one another. 
But this is especially true of (1) and (2), so the discussion will start here; (3) 
will prove to be relatively easy to sort out. (For the sake of simplicity and 
brevity, the discussion will mainly concern only the first, verbal form of 
each.) 
The problems in the present context flow from various conjunctions of 
the following facts: (a) as already indicated, (1) and (2) are all ordinary 
German words; (b) Hegel sometimes uses them nontechnically (indeed 
even synonymously so--see, for example, § 24 A3 at W 8:89); (c) he also 
uses them in technical senses; and (d) they would both be normally ren­
dered by "know". Before considering the problems raised by the conjunc­
tion of (a), (c), and (d), let us survey the relevant technical uses. We can 
then consider questions connected with (b). 
(i) As I:THL correctly points out, wissen is the more inclusive, the 
general concept of knowledge (using the last word in a provi­
sional way at least). As Hegel says in Part III of the En­
cyclopaedia, "Consciousness is already knowledge [Wissen]" 
(Encyclopaedia, § 445 A at W 10:244 == Philosophy of Mind, 
Wallace-Miller translation, p. 191 [heavily revised here]). But 
he distinguishes two grades of Wissen. The lower he calls 
in the passage from which I have just cited "mere [blof5en] 
Wissen", knowledge "that an object is .
.
.
 what it is in gen­
eral and with respect to its contingent, external determina­
tions." Now, this lower grade of Wissen is to be distinguished 
from the next (higher) step, which is achieved by the proce­
dure of knowing in the sense of erkennen. In EL this is charac­
terised as follows (translating in an amplified if awkward way 
in order to bring out the terminological points): "Knowing 
in the sense of erkennen means nothing other than to know 
[wissen] an object [Gegenstand] in terms of [nach] its definite 

SOME MINORITY COMMENTS ON TERMINOLOGY 
xli 
[bestimmten] content" (§ 46). Knowing an object in the 
sense of erkennen is to wissen in a "mediated" way (§ 112 A at 
W 8:232). All this is in perfect accord with what is said fur­
ther in the passage from Part III of the Encyclopaedia already 
cited, where it is said further that to know in the sense of 
erkennen is to wissen "in what the object's specific, substantial 
nature consists." (For other passages of similar tenor, see for 
example Encyclopaedia § 445 at W 10:240, translation cited, 
p. 188; W 16:156ff; W 17:334, 335, 379f; W 19:422; W 20:383.) 
So wissen in the first, "lower" sense refers to immediate 
knowledge, where "immediate" contrasts with explicitly me­
diated knowledge, which is the province of erkennen. (Cf. 
Kant's distinction between Wissen and eigentliche Wissenschaft 
in the Preface to the Metaphysische Anfangsgrunde der Natur­
wissenschaft, Suhrkamp Werkaugabe, 9:12.) Now, above this is 
Wissen in the "higher" sense, indeed knowledge in its highest 
development, absolute philosophical knowledge. (The connec­
tion between the two sorts of Wissen is presumably that in 
the second we return to immediacy, only this time with medi­
ation aufgehoben.) Wissen is used in this way in the present 
work at § 237 A, but can be found in other places like the last 
section of the Phenomenology of Spirit, entitled "Das absolute 
Wissen", and the Philosophy of Religion at W 17:533: "The 
concept of spirit is the concept that is in and for itself, know­
ledge [das Wissen]." 
(ii) Now, (c) having been cleared up, what is to be done about the 
problems created by it in conjunction with (a) and (d)? The 
present translation consistently uses "know" for wissen and 
"cognise" or (sometimes) "[re]cognise" for erkennen. The cen­
tral and very serious problem with this is that it involves ren­
dering an ordinary German word (erkennen)-and, moreover, 
one used many more times than wissen-by one that is used 
in English by no one but a few scholars. 
My alternative suggestion is as follows. Since, as just noted, 
erkennen occurs much more frequently than wissen, it should 
be rendered by "know". How, then, is wissen in both its 
senses to be distinguished (where, 
of course, 
this is 
necessary-the question of what is to be done when it is not 
necessary will be taken up later)? As regards the first, "lower" 
sense of wissen, the OED comes to our aid. This (vol. 3:745, 
col. 2, 3:8) ties "know" in the sense of "to be aware or ap­
prised of" with wissen. So the latter has a natural rendering in 

xlii 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
"to be aware of" where it is used in its first sense. As regards 
the comparatively rare use of wissen in its second, "higher" 
sense, it can be rendered as "know absolutely" (taking a clue 
from the Phenomenology of Spirit-see above) or as "know" 
with appropriate flagging of some sort (for example, the Ger­
man word in brackets after it or in a footnote). 
(iii) Now, what is to be done when the two words in question are 
used nontechnically? The problem does not arise for the pres­
ent translation, which does not recognise (b), that is, non­
technical uses of them in Hegel's text. This, combined with the 
choices made of words with which to render the two terms, 
results in some bizarreries. For example, the Biblical phrase we 
know in English as "tree of knowledge of good and evil", 
which appears in German as "Baum der Erkenntnis des Guten 
und Bosen" , meets us back in the present translation as "tree 
of cognition of good and evil" (§ 24 A3). (The remark about 
the alleged logical significance, for Hegel, of Erkenntnis in 
"Baum der Erkenntnis des Guten und Bosen", like that of 
similar tenor regarding Dasein in "Dasein Gottes" above, is, as 
simple assertion, not discussible here.) My own suggestion, in 
line with what has already been said, is, when nothing hangs 
on it, simply to render them both by "know". 
(iv) Finally, the third term in the initial triptych involves no 
serious difficulty. Hegel does not use words in this set much, 
in the present work anyway, and does not give any explicit 
account of the meanings involved. But its everyday use has the 
sense of personal knowledge (e.g., kennenlernen, to meet) or 
practical knowledge, including information (e.g., Menschenken­
ner, a good judge of people, or in Kenntnis setzen, to inform or 
notify someone of something). Once more the OED provides 
what is wanted, expressly tying "known" in the sense of "to 
be acquainted with . . .  to be familiar with by experience, or 
through information or report" with kennen (vol. 3:745, col. 1, 
2:5). It is true that this does not bring out the etymological 
continuity with erkennen, but, then, no alternative does either. 
(8) formal 
Formal, most accurately and naturally rendered by "formal", or "for­
mally" , is the adjective corresponding to Form, which is correlative with 
Inhalt, "content" (§§ 133, 134). Roughly, Form signifies a state of affairs 
considered from the point of view of its structure. Form and Inhalt are two 

SOME MINORITY COMMENTS ON TERMINOLOGY 
xliii 
aspects of the same thing, and nothing pejorative attaches to "formal" or 
"formally" as such. 
But this is certainly the case with what is formell, das Formelle. Here form 
is abstracted from content altogether (see, for example, §§ 24 A 2, 63 R, 133 
A, 145 A, 160 A, 162 R, 164 R, 172 A, 213 A, 214 at W 8:84, 152, 266, 284, 
307, 310, 314, 323f, 369, 372), signifying predominance of subjectivity (§§ 25 
R, 162, 192 A at W 9:92, 309, 345), arbitrariness (§ 122 R at W 8:253), the 
operation of the "understanding" (§ 115 R at W 8:236). 
Thus it is obvious that the two terms cannot be satisfactorily translated 
into English by using the same term (namely, "formal") for both, as the 
present translation does. Formell might be generally rendered by "only 
formal" or "merely formal", were it not that Hegel more often than not 
qualifies formell with nur or bloft. When he does not, it may be so rendered. 
When he does, "formalistic" seems to be the best choice, suggested indeed 
by what is said in §§ 54 and 231 (at W 8:138, 383). One major exception is 
formelle Logik: "formal logic" is so strongly entrenched in English as to be 
untouchable. Formell is also used in § 140 A in a way which can be under­
stood only in the light of the foregoing comments, but needs a different 
rendering from any of those so far suggested. For further remarks on this, 
see the editorial note to that §. Distinguished both from formal and formell 
is formlich (§ 183 A), which signifies as much as "observing the correct 
forms", "by the book", and is probably best rendered by "official". (The 
English "formalised", meaning something like "formally arranged", does 
not correspond to any of the above meanings.) 
(9) formell, (das) Formelle, formlich. See formal. 
(10) Gegenstand 
This is an ordinary German word, which Hegel uses in both untechnical 
and technical senses. 
(i) In the technical sense, Gegenstand contrasts with Objekt, 
which designates objectivity in general, independence of the 
subject, Gegenstand signifying (as its etymology suggests) an 
object of consciousness, mediated by and thus changing in 
relation to it. (See §§ 193 and R, 194, Encyclopaedia, §§ 413 A, 
418 A at W 10:200, 207.) 
Now, the problem is that English does not have two appro­
priate words corresponding to these two German ones, the 
natural renderings of both, other things being equal, being 
"object". (The problem is similar in this respect to that with 
erkennen and wissen, on which see [7] [i] .) So how is the dis­
tinction to be marked? The path followed by the present 

xliv 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LoGIC 
translation is to do it typographically, using "ob-ject" for 
Gegenstand and "object" for Objekt. Now, if this general direc­
tion were the one to be taken, then it would be better to 
reverse the English renderings, as Gegenstand is used very 
much more frequently than Objekt, whilst "ob-ject" is not only 
not an ordinary word but not a word at all in the dictionary 
sense, and visually awkward, as a neologism. As an alterna­
tive I suggest that, for reasons already indicated, Gegenstand 
simply be rendered "object", and Objekt in the same way, but 
flagged somehow (for example, by the German after it in pa­
rentheses or in a footnote) or translated by a slight para­
phrase, like "object-in-general." 
(ii) In its untechnical sense, Gegenstand would be naturally ren­
dered by "object" (unbroken) or "subject matter" , according 
to context. The present translation recognises only to an ex­
tremely limited extent the difference between the technical 
and untechnical senses of Gegenstand. (Here is a piquant tid­
bit, Dasein-see previous remarks-being there too: 'The ob­
ject of Cosmology was being-there generally' for 'Die 
Kosmologie hatte . . .  uberhaupt das Dasein . . .  zum Gegen­
stand'!) So the work is strewn with broken "ob-jects". 
(11) Gehalt 
The noun "import", when not used as a pompous synonym for "mean­
ing" in general, is centrally employed to signify the gist of some utterance 
(in a certain context), where "gist" means "the substance or pith of a 
matter, the essence" (OED). So Gehalt. In this regard "basic import" is 
either a pleonasm or so close to one that the difference does not matter. 
(Cf. "basic essence", which results from substituting for "import" one 
formulation in the dictionary definition just transcribed.) Of course, "im­
port" can properly accept certain qualifying adjectives (for example, "natu­
ral", "ascribed", " surprising") but these do not relate to the meaning of 
"import" (the import of " import"). 
(12) gleich, Gleichheit 
The present translation renders these uniformly as "equal" and "equal­
ity" respectively. These renderings are sometimes but by no means always 
correct. Thus a translation of the very important §§ 117, 118 makes sense 
only if the words in question are translated as "like" and "likeness" (or 
"unlike" and "unlikeness"), as is standard in the English Hegel literature, 

SOME MINORITY COMMENTS ON TERMINOLOGY 
xlv 
or by "similar"I"similarity" ("dissimilar"I"dissimilarity"), which would be 
equally satisfactory. 
(13) indifferent, Indifferenz. See Unterschied. 
(14) kennen, (das) Kennen, Kenntnis(se). See erkennen, (das) Erkennen, 
Erkenntnis. 
(15) Objekt. See Gegenstand. 
(16) ungleich, Ungleichheit. See gleich, Gleichheit. 
(17) Unterschied 
The natural rendering of this word, which someone sufficiently familiar 
with both German and English would come up with spontaneously, is 
"difference", that being a sufficient explanation of the fact that this has 
been the standard choice of translators of Hegel into English. Another 
consideration in favour of this option is that Hegel holds that there is a 
general correspondence between, on the one hand, the sequence of catego­
ries as they are derived from one another in the system of logic and, on the 
other, the temporal sequence of positions in the history of philosophy. 
Now, "identity" and "difference" are a traditional couple, and to replace 
"difference" with anything else (as the present translation does with "dis­
tinction" ) is to obscure the historical dimension of Hegel's system of logic. 
Are there any arguments for replacing "difference"? Although I have 
been unable to follow much of what is said in I:THL in defence of "distinc­
tion" over "difference", I have been able to pick out two. One is that we 
should start from the cognate verb of Unterschied, namely, (sich) un­
terscheiden, and this is properly rendered "distinguish", wherefore Un­
terschied should be translated as "distinction" . But this begs the question 
at issue, for the verb may just as well be rendered "differentiate", and in 
this case the substantival cognate would be "difference". Moreover, even if 
the two arguments were not parallel, it would have to be shown that the 
advantage of having a cognate noun and verb was worth sacrificing the 
two advantages indicated in the first paragraph. The second argument in 
favour of rendering Unterschied by "distinction" rather than "difference" is 
that by proceeding thus we free the latter for translating Differenz. To 
evaluate this argument, we shall have to look at this term and related 
matters. 

xlvi 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
To start with, it is crucial to note that Hegel uses Differenz in two senses. 
(The two are systematically related, but the explanation of this point would 
take us too far afield.) (a) Differenz is used to designate the stage at which 
the initial apparent simplicity, unity, immediacy of a category is ruptured, 
when its implicit complexity becomes explicit and it shows itself to be 
mediated. The newly "posited" moments attain apparent independence. It 
is the stage of "particularity". (It is followed by a third stage, where the 
various moments of the category, thus revealed in the stage of Differenz, 
exhibit themselves as aspects of a unified whole.) For all this, see §§ 85, 171 
A, 215 A (at W 8:181, 322, 373, 388--also, in other works, Philosophy of 
Right § 181 [W 7:338]; Philosophy of Religion, Introduction, C,I, Secs. 2,3 [W 
16:68ff], and Part Ill, 11 [W 17:241£f]; History of Philosophy, Part Ill, Sec. 3, D 
[W 20:440ff]). (b) Differenz is also used in a way best approached through 
the adjective different. In EL the key passage in this regard is § 194 A. Here 
different is introduced through its negative, indifferent. Hegel writes that 
something is indifferent if it "contains difference [Unterschiedj, but the 
diverse items behave indifferently [gleichgultig] towards one another, and 
their combination is only external to them." Conversely, items are different 
if they "are what they are only through their relation to one another." (On 
this sense of Differenz, via its negative, Indifferenz, see also SL, 330, 374ff = 
W 5:392, 445ff, and Encyclopaedia, Part 11: Philosophy of Nature, §§ 323, 324, 
334.) Now, what is to be made of all this in English? To start with, there 
seems no alternative to translating indifferent by "indifferent". ("Neutral" 
would be a serious alternative except that Hegel also uses the equivalent 
German word.) The disadvantage of this is that the same word must surely 
be used for gleichgultig. But this is not a serious drawback, if only because 
indifferent is used comparatively seldom and can be flagged in some way 
(for example, by supplying the German word) if it is necessary to dis­
tinguish it. Different can then be rendered "nonindifferent", effectively 
distinguishing it from any cognate of "difference". (For suggestions here I 
am indebted to the French translation of EL by Bernard Bourgeois, p. 260, 
note on § 150.) These terms having been tied down thus, Indifferenz (as the 
negative of the second sense of Differenz) naturally can be translated as 
"indifference", and its negative as "nonindifference" . Finally, Differenz in 
sense (1) most naturally becomes "differentiation" (or, much less desirably, 
aesthetically speaking, "differentiatedness"), and Indifferenz (as the nega­
tive of sense (1) of Differenz) becomes "lack [or absence] of differentiation 
[or differentiatedness]" . 
All this may seem egregiously laborious, but the distinctions made are 
unawidable if sense is to be made of Hegel's text at a number of points. 
Decisive proof of this may be gained by an attempt to understand, for 
example, §§ 194 A, 200 A, or 203 in the present translation. 

SOME MINORITY COMMENTS ON TERMINOLOGY 
xlvii 
(18) Viele (das), Vielen (die), Vieles (ein). See Eins (das). 
(19) vorstellen, (die) Vorstellunٞ 
These are very common words indeed in ordinary German, and Hegel 
uses both of them in ordinary, untechnical senses as well as in a technical 
way. In ordinary senses, there are many English words appropriate for 
translating the German ones in various contexts. Thus vorstellen may, 
according to the particular use, be rendered by, for example, "imagine", 
"have in mind", "have/frame/form an idea" . The most commonly suitable 
rending of Vorstellung is "idea". This was, in fact, the word used by Ger­
man translators to render the English "idea" in the works of eighteenth­
century empiricists. So what more natural procedure than to reverse the 
exchange? One drawback is that "idea" has no natural cognate verb with 
which to translate vorstellen. But this is not a severe disadvantage, given 
the wide variety of English verbs available to translate it in different con­
texts. There is no danger of its being confused with the English equivalent 
of Idee either, because that always has an initial capital. In the technical 
context, 
the 
realm 
of vorstellen/Vorstellung 
is between anschauenl 
Anschauung (intuiting/intuition), on the one hand, and thought proper, 
involving concepts (Begriffe) proper, on the other. (See especially En­
cyclopaedia, § 451, and cf. EL, § 3 R) Roughly, it is thinking at the level of 
everyday life, involving mental contents that are not very "clear and dis­
tinct", that are comparatively unanalysed, ill-defined, "pictorial". It is 
thinking, all right, using universals, but thinking in which the universals 
are not brought into systematic relation to one another. For this special 
sense, "present" /"presentation" (less desirably, "represent" /"representa­
tion") are probably best. This translation allows only a very few untechni­
cal uses of the words in question and, since Hegel uses them mostly 
untechnically, becomes rather artificial and stiff. 
(20) wissen, (das) Wissen. See erkennen, (das) Erkennen, Erkenntnis. 
(21) Zusammenschlief3en 
This is an ordinary German word meaning to unite or amalgamate. 
Hegel uses its etymology to express the way in which, on his account, the 
inferring (schlief3en), which is the syllogism (Schluf3 from schlief3en), locks 
(schlief3en in another sense) together (zusammen) the "moments" of the 
Concept (universality, particularity, singularity). 
In the present translation, the Concept is said to "con-dude with itself." 
Having in mind "conclude", one at first is probably led to say that yoking 

xlviii 
the Concept with "with itself" simply makes no English sense. But, since 
"con-clude" is not an English word (in the dictionary sense), its creators 
presumably can do as they please with it. However, this freedom is pur­
chased at the price of matching an ordinary German word with one which 
not only is not an ordinary English one but is not English at all. 
My alternative suggestion is to use the phrase "close with itself" which 
(a) is perfectly good, ordinary English, (b) mimics the German ety­
mologically in large part, and (c) captures much of the meaning of the 
original, since the phrase means not only "grapple" (hook or fasten on to 
something) but also "come to terms". (Another possibility is "close on 
itself", which captures the main thrust of the meaning of zusam­
menschliefien, though it loses the etymological mimicry of zusammen.) 

G. W. F. Hegel 
ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF THE 
PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCES 
PART 1 


PREFACE TO THE FIRST 
EDITION (1817) 
The need to supply my listeners with a guiding thread for my philosophi­
cal lectures is the most immediate occasion for letting this survey of the 
whole range of philosophy see the light of day sooner than I was other­
wise minded to do. 
The nature of an outline not only rules out any exhaustive discussion of 
ideas in respect of their content, but also particularly cramps the tracing 
out of their systematic derivation. This derivation must embrace what was 
formerly understood by the "proof," i.e., the very thing that is quite indis­
pensable for a scientific philosophy. My title for this outline is partly meant 
to indicate the total range of the work; and partly, it makes plain my 
intention of reserving the single details for my oral presentation. 
Moreover, in an "outline," where the content is one that is already pre­
supposed and familiar and has to be presented in a short space already 
decided upon, what is aimed at is that the order and arrangement of the 
topics should be externally suitable. The present exposition is not like that; 
on the contrary, it sets out a new elaboration of philosophy, according to a 
method that will, I hope, be recognised eventually as the only genuine one, 
the only method that is identical with the content. So I might well have 
considered it to be of more advantage to the public-if only my circum­
stances had permitted this-to publish a book in which the other parts of 
philosophy were more fully discussed, on the model of the Logic that I 
have already delivered to the public as my treatment of the first part of the 
whole. But in any case, I believe that, although the side on which the 
content is closer to representative awareness· and to what is empirically 
familiar necessarily had to be restricted in the present exposition, I have 
still managed to make it evident enough (with respect to the transitions 
that can only be a mediation taking place through the Concept) that the 
method of the forward movement is quite distinct, both from the merely 
external order that the other sciences require, and from a certain mannerism 
in dealing with philosophical topics that has become quite usual.! This 
fashionable procedure presupposes a schema, and uses it to establish paral-
a. Vorstellung 
1 

2 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
lels in the material just as externally and even more arbitrarily than the 
external procedure of the other sciences; and, through a misunderstanding 
that is really quite remarkable, it claims to have given every satisfaction to 
the necessity of the Concept with accidents and arbitrary associations.' 
We have seen this same arbitrariness take charge of the content of phi­
losophy too, marching out upon adventures of thought, and imposing for a 
while upon the striving of honest and sincere minds, even though in other 
quarters it was regarded as a craziness that had risen to the pitch of mad­
ness.2 But instead of being either impressive or crazy, [its] import allowed us 
more often, and more properly, to [re]cognise familiar cliches, just as the 
form was merely a mannerism, a deliberate methodical trick that is easily 
acquired, a talent for baroque associations, and a strained complexity. Gen­
erally speaking, there was only self-deception, and deception of the public 
behind the serious air. On the other side, in contrast, we have seen shallow 
minds give their lack of thoughts the stamp of a scepticism that was wise in 
its own eyes, and of a critical philosophy that is modest in its claims for 
reason;3 they let their vanity and conceit advance in step, as their ideas grew 
ever more vacuous.-For a considerable period these two tendencies in our 
cultureb have aped our German seriousness, wearing down its deeper philo­
sophical need. The consequence has been indifference, and even such an 
outright contempt for philosophy as a science, that nowadays a self-styled 
modesty even imagines it can join in the discussion of the deepest problems 
of philosophy, that it may presume to pass judgment about them, and deny 
to philosophy the rational cognition that used to be comprehended under 
the form of "proof." 
The first of the phenomena touched upon here can in some measure be 
regarded as the youthful exuberance of the new age that has dawned in the 
realm of science just as it has in that of politics. If this exuberance greeted 
the sunrise of the rejuvenated spirit with revelling, and began enjoying the 
Idea at once without any hard labour, luxuriating for a while in the hopes 
and prospects that that sunrise offered, it also reconciles [us] more readily 
to its excesses because there is a kernel [of truth] at the bottom of it, and the 
morning mist that covers its surface is bound to clear spontaneously.4 But 
the other phenomenon is more repellent because we can [re]cognise ex­
haustion and impotence in it, and it strives to mask them under the conceit 
of a schoolmaster thinking to give lessons to the philosophical spirits of all 
the centuries, mistaking what they are, and most of all what it is itself. 
This makes it all the more pleasant, however, to perceive and to conclude 
by pointing out how the concern with philosophy and the earnest love for 
the higher cognition [that it produces] has maintained itself candidly and 
a. mit ZUfiilligkeit und WiIlkur der Verknupfungen 
b. Richtungen des Geistes 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 
3 
quite without vanity. Although this concern has sometimes cast itself too 
much in the fonn of an immediate knowing and of feeling, still it does attest to 
the continuing inner drive of rational insight, which alone gives man his 
dignity. It attests to it, above ail, because man reaches that standpoint of 
immediate knowing only as the result of philosophical knowledge, so that 
the philosophical knowing that it seems to despise is at least recognised by 
it as a condition.5-To this concern with the cognition of the truth, I dedicate 
my effort to supply an introduction, or a contribution to the satisfaction of 
this concern. May its purpose secure it a kindly reception. 
Heidelberg, May 1817 

PREFACE TO 
THE SECOND 
EDITION (1827) 
The well-disposed reader of this new edition will find many parts re­
worked in it, and developed into more detailed determinations. In my 
revision I have tried to moderate and also to reduce the formal [aspect 1 of 
the presentation; and I have also tried through more extended Remarks of 
a generally accessible kind to bring abstract concepts closer to the ordinary 
understanding and the more concrete notions of them. But the brevity and 
compression that an outline makes necessary, with materials that are in 
any case abstruse, will only permit this second edition to have the same vo­
cationa as the first one: it serves as a textbook that has to receive the eluci­
dation it needs through an oral commentary. On the face of it, of course, 
the title Encyclopaedia could leave room for a lesser degree of rigour in the 
scientific method, and for the compilation of external parts. But the nature 
of the matter entails that logical coherence must remain fundamental. 
There could be all too many inducements and stimuli present that seem to 
require that I should declare myself about the external bearing of my philo­
sophical activity upon the cultural concerns of our time, some of which are 
rich and others poor in spirit; and this can only be done in an exoteric way, 
as for instance in a Preface. For although these cultural concerns claim 
some relationship with philosophy for themselves, they do not permit of 
scientific discussion; so they do not enter into philosophy at all, but carry 
on their chatter-wars from outside and stay outside it. It is inappropriate 
and even risky to betake oneself to a field that is quite alien to science, 
since explanations and discussions of that sort do not advance the scien­
tific understanding which is all that matters for genuine cognition. But a 
discussion of some cultural phenomena may be useful or even mandatory. 
The scientific cognition of truth is what I have laboured upon, and still 
do labour upon always, in all of my philosophical endeavours. This is the 
hardest road to travel, but it is the only one that can be of interest and 
value for the spirit, once the spirit embarks upon the way of thought, 
a. Bestimmung 
4 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 
5 
without tumbling into vanity upon that road, but maintaining the will and 
the courage for the truth. It soon finds that only method can tie thought 
down, lead it to the matter, and maintain it there. A methodical pursuit of 
this kind proves to be nothing else but the reestablishing of that absolute 
import beyond which thought initially strove to go, and above which it 
posited itself; but it is a reestablishment in the element of the spirit, which 
is most proper to this content, and most free. 
There is a more naive state with a happier aspect-and one that is still 
not long gone by-in which philosophy went hand in hand with the 
sciences and with culture. The enlightened understanding was content in a 
measured way, balancing the needs of insight together with its religion, 
and similarly conciliating its natural law theory with state authority and 
politics; and its empirical physics bore the title of "natural philosophy." But 
the peace was superficial enough, and specifically there was in fact an 
inward contradiction between that pure insight and religion, just as there 
was between the natural law theory and the State. Then the parting of the 
ways came, and the contradiction developed to maturity; but in philosophy 
the spirit has celebrated its own reconciliation with itself, so that phi­
losophic science only contradicts that contradiction itself, and the effort to 
gloss over it. It is only an ill-minded prejudice to assume that philosophy 
stands antithetically opposed to any sensible appreciation of experience, or 
to the rational actuality of legal right and to simple-hearted religion and 
piety. These shapes [of consciousness] are themselves recognised by phi­
losophy, and even justified by it. Rather than opposing them, the thinking 
minda steeps itself in their basic import; it learns from them and grows 
strong, just as it does from the great intuitions of nature, history, and art; 
for this solid content, once it has been thought, is the speculative Idea 
itself. The collision with philosophy only occurs because this soil moves 
out of the character that is proper to it when its content is supposed to be 
grasped in categories, and is made dependent upon them, without the 
categories being led up to the Concept and brought to completion in the 
Idea. 
When the understanding of our universal scientific culture arrives at the 
discovery that no mediation with the truth is possible by the route of its 
finite concept, this important negative result usually has precisely the op­
posite consequence from the one that is immediately implicit in it. What I 
mean is that, instead of causing the finite relationships to be removed from 
[our theory of] cognition, this conviction has sublated the concern with the 
investigation of the categories along with all attentiveness and prudence in 
their use. The use of these finite relationships has only become more 
barefaced, less conscious, and less critical, as if we had fallen into a state of 
a. denkende Sinn 

6 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
despair. From the mistaken view that the inadequacy of finite categories to 
express truth entails the impossibility of objective cognition, we derive a 
justification for pronouncing and denouncing according to our feelings 
and subjective opinions. Assurances present themselves in place of proofs, 
along with stories about all the "facts" that are to be found in "conscious­
ness"; and the more uncritical they are, the more they count as "pure."l 
Without any further investigation of it, the highest needs of the spirit are 
to be established upon the category of immediacy-and arid as it is, they 
are to be decided by it.2 Especially where religious topics are being dealt 
with, we can soon discover that philosophising is expressly set aside in 
this way-as if every harm would be banished along with it, and security 
against error and deception would be achieved. Then the quest for truth is 
to be instituted by arguing on the basis of assumptions drawn from any­
where. In other words, we employ the ordinary thought-determinations of 
essence and appearance, ground and consequence, cause and effect, and 
so on; and we reason in the usual syllogistic fashion either from one 
relationship of finitude or from the other. "From the Evil One they are 
free, but the evil still remains'';3 and the evil is ten times worse than 
before, because they entrust themselves to it without any distrust or crit­
icism. As if philosophy-the very source of all harm that is kept at a 
distance-were anything else but the quest for truth, but with the con­
sciousness of the nature and worth of the thought-relationships that bind 
together and determine every content. 
But philosophy itself experiences its worst fate at the hands of those 
enemies when they deal with it directly themselves, both interpreting it 
and passing judgment on it. It is the factum4 of the physical or spiritual, but 
especially of religious vitality too, that is misshaped through the reflection 
that is incapable of grasping it. For itself, however, this interpreting has the 
sense of raising the factum for the first time into something-known, and 
the difficulty lies in this passage from the matter to cognition that is 
produced by meditating upon it.s In science itself, this difficulty is no 
longer present. For the factum of philosophy is cognition already elabo­
rated; so the interpreting can only be a "thinking-over" in the sense that it 
is a further thinking that comes later. Only critical evaluation would require 
a "thinking-over" in the ordinary meaning" of the word. But the uncritical 
understanding that we are discussing proves to be just as unfaithful in its 
naked apprehension of the Idea determinately expressed [i.e., in the ex­
pression of its immediate knowledge of God] . It has so little difficulty or 
doubt about the fixed presuppositions that it contains that it is even inca­
pable of repeating what the bare factum of the philosophical Idea is. This 
a. Bedeutung 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 
7 
understanding unites the following double perspective within itself in a 
quite marvelous way: it is struck by the complete divergence, and even by 
the express contradiction in the Idea against its own employment of the 
categories; yet at the same time it has no suspicion that there may be 
another way of thinking than its own, both present and in active use, so 
that it must here behave in another way than it does in its usual thinking. 
This is how it happens that the Idea of speculative philosophy is simply 
kept fixed in its abstract definition;-in the opinion that a definition must 
appear to be clear and definitive on its own account, and must have its 
methodic rule and touchstone only in presupposed notions; or at least 
without knowing that the sense of the definition, like its necessary proof, 
lies in its development alone-and precisely in its emergence as the result 
of the development. Now since, more precisely, the Idea is, quite generally, 
the concrete spiritual unity, whilst the understanding consists in the inter­
pretation of the Concept's determinations only in their abstraction, that is to 
say, in their one-sidedness and finitude, the spiritual unity is in this way 
made into an abstract spiritless identity. The result is that distinction is not 
present in this identity, but the All is One-and even Good and Evil are of 
one kind among all the rest. That is why the name Identity-System, or 
Philosophy of Identity, has already become the established one for specula­
tive philosophy. If someone makes his profession of faith by saying, "I 
believe in God the Father, the maker of Heaven and Earth," one would 
marvel if someone else could already bring forth from this first part of the 
Creed the consequence that the confessor of God the creator of Heaven held 
that the Earth was not created, and matter was eternal. It is a factum, and 
quite correct, that the first speaker declared in his confession that he be­
lieves in God the creator of Heaven, and yet this factum, as it is interpreted 
by others, is completely false; this is so absurd that the example must be 
regarded as incredible and trivial. And yet in the interpretation of the 
philosophical Idea, this violent splitting in half is what happens; and what 
follows is that, in order to avoid all misunderstandings about how the 
identity is constituted that is asserted to be the principle of speculative 
philosophy, the corresponding refutation is given; we are expressly in­
structed, for instance, that the subject is diverse from the object, likewise 
the finite from the infinite, etc.-as if the concrete spiritual unity lacked all 
inward determination, and did not itself contain distinction within it. As if 
any one of us did not know that the subject is diverse from the object, and 
the infinite diverse from the finite, and philosophy was so drowned in its 
school-wisdom that it needed the reminder that, outside the schoolroom, 
there is a wisdom to which that diversity is quite familiar. 
With reference to the diversity that it is supposedly unfamiliar with, 
philosophy is more specifically run down on that account for dropping the 

8 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
distinction between good and evil too; so its critics are usually fair-minded 
and magnanimous enough to concede "that in their presentation the phi­
losophers do not always develop the ruinous consequences that are bound 
up with their thesis' (and perhaps they do not do it because these conclu­
sions are not germane to it)." " Philosophy must disdain the merciful com­
passion that is here bestowed on it, for it is no more in need of mercy for 
its moral justification, than it lacks insight into the actual consequences of 
its principles, or than it falls short in drawing those consequences in ex­
press terms. I will briefly elucidate here the alleged consequence according 
to which the diversity of good and evil has to be made into a mere 
semblance-more as an example of the hollowness of the interpretation of 
philosophy that is involved, than as a justification of philosophy itself. To 
illustrate this we shall consider only Spinozism, the philosophy in which 
God is determined only as substance, and not as subject and spirit. This 
distinction concerns the determination of the unity; the determination is all 
that matters, but although this determination is a factum, those who are 
accustomed to call this philosophy "the Identity-System" know nothing 
a. Satz 
"The words are those of F. A. G. Tholuck in his Florilegium of Eastern Mysticism, p. 13. 
Tholuck, too, being a man of deep feeling, allows himself to be misled into following the 
customary highway of philosophical interpretation. The understanding (he says) can only 
draw conclusions in the following two ways: either there is a primal ground that conditions 
everything, and then the ultimate ground of my own self lies in that, so that my being and 
my free action are only illusory; or I am actually an essence diverse from the primal ground, 
one whose action is not conditioned and caused by the primal ground, and then the primal 
ground is not an absolute, all-conditioning essence, so that there is no infinite God but a 
multitude of Gods, etc. All philosophers who think more profoundly and acutely are sup­
posed to profess the first of these theses (though I do not know why the first one-sidedness 
should be any more profound and acute than the second); the consequences (which, of 
course, they do not always develop, as we said above) are "that even man's ethical standard 
has no absolute truth, but properly speaking [the author himself underlines this] good and evil 
are the same and are only diverse in their semblance." One would always do better, not to talk 
about philosophy at all as long as, in spite of one's depth of feeling, one is still so deeply 
entangled in the one-sidedness of the understanding, that one knows nothing better than the 
Either/Or: of a primal ground in which the individual's being and freedom is only an illusion, 
or of the absolute independence of the individuals; in other words, as long as no inkling of 
the Neither/Nor of these two one-sided views (of this "perilous" dilemma, as Tholuck calls it) 
has entered into one's experience at all. On page 14, to be sure, he does speak of those 
spirits-and they are said to be the authentic philosophers-who accept the second thesis 
(but this is now, it seems, the same as what was previously called the first thesis) and sublate 
the antithesis of unconditioned and conditioned being through the undifferentiated primal being 
in which all antitheses of a relative kind are mutually interfused. But when Tholuck speaks in 
this way, has he not noticed that the undifferentiated primal being, in which the antithesis is 
to be interfused, is altogether the same as that unconditioned being, whose one-sidedness 
was to be sublated? So that in the very same breath he is speaking of the sublation of that 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 
9 
about it. They may even employ the expression that according to this 
philosophy everything is one and the same, that good and evil are equal too. 
Al of this is the most spurious type of unity; it cannot be what is talked of 
in speculative philosophy, and only a thinking that is still barbaric can 
employ these thoughts in reference to Ideas. As for the allegation that in 
Spinoza's philosophy the diversity of good and evil is not valid in-itself or 
according to its authentic meaning, the question to be asked is: What does 
"authentic" mean here? If it refers to the nature of God, then no one will 
want evil to be located there; that substantial unity is the good itself; evil is 
only the splitting in two. So nothing is further from that unity than good 
and evil being of one kind; on the contrary, evil is excluded. Hence, the 
distinction between good and evil is not in God as such either; for this 
distinction is found only in what is split in two-i.e., in that in which evil 
itself is. Moreover, in Spinozism distinction occurs as well: man is diverse 
from God. In this respect, the system may not be theoretically satisfactory; 
for although man (and the finite in general) may later be downgraded to a 
"mode:' he only finds himself side by side with substance in the earlier 
one-sided being in a being that is exactly this same one-sided being; and hence he is express­
ing the continued subsistence of the one-sidedness instead of its sublation. If one is going to 
say what spirits do, then one must be able to apprehend the factum [deed] spiritually; other­
wise that factum has become falsified under one's hand.-I note, moreover, though somewhat 
redundantly, that what I have said, both here and further on, about Tholuck's notion of 
philosophy, cannot and should not be applied just to him individually, so to speak. We find 
the same statements in hundreds of books, and especially in the prefaces of theology books 
(among all the others). I have cited Tholuck's exposition, first because it chances to be what I 
have at hand; and secondly because the profound feeling that seems to set his writings in 
complete opposition to the theology of the understanding comes very near to true profundity 
of sense. For the fundamental determination of this feeling is reconciliation, which is not the 
unconditioned primal being, or any abstraction of that kind, but the basic import itself, which 
is the speculative Idea, and which the Idea expresses in thought-an import which that 
profound sense must on no account fail to recognise in the Idea. 
But what happens here (as much as everywhere else in his writings) is that Tholuck allows 
himself to fall into the currently fashionable talk about pantheism-about which I have spoken 
at greater length in one of the final remarks of my Encyclopaedia (§ 573). Here I shall only 
remark on the peculiar ineptitude and inversion into which Tholuck himself falls. He puts the 
primal ground on one side of his supposedly philosophical dilemma, and designates this side 
later on as pantheistic (pp. 33, 38). Similarly, he characterises the other side as that of the 
SOcinians, Pelagtans, and popular philosophers; and about this side he says that "there is no 
infinite God, but a great number of gods, namely the number of all the essences that are 
diverse from the so-called primal ground, and have a being and action of their own, alongside 
that so-called primal ground." So, in fact, we have on this side not merely a great number of 
gods, but all [things] are gods (since everything finite counts in this context as having a being of 
its own) . Hence, it is on this side in fact that Tholuck has his omnideism [Allesgotterei], or his 
pantheism fully expressed; not on the first side, where he expressly makes the one primal 
ground into its God-the first side, consequently, is only monotheism." 

10 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
discussion. It is here, then, in man, where distinction exists, that it exists 
essentially as the distinction between good and evil too; and this is where 
it authentically is, for only here is the determination that is proper to it. 
When we are studying Spinoza, if we have only the substance in mind, 
then there is of course no distinction between good and evil in it; but that 
is because--from this point of view-evil has no being at all, just as the 
finite, and the world in general have none--(see the Remark to § 50, be­
low). But when what we have in mind is the standpoint from which man, 
and the relationship of man to the substance, also occur in this system--the 
only standpoint where evil can have its place in its distinction from the 
good-then we must have read through the parts of the Ethics that deal 
with good and evil, or with the passions, human bondage, and human 
freedom; then we can tell the tale of the moral consequences of the system. 
We can convince ourselves beyond question regarding the high purity of 
this moral theory whose principle is the unalloyed love of God, just as 
readily as we can convince ourselves that this purity is the moral conse­
quence of the system. Lessing said in his time that people dealt with 
Spinoza like a dead dog;? and we cannot say that Spinozism, or indeed 
speculative philosophy generally, has been any better treated in more re­
cent times. For it is clear that those who discuss it and make judgments 
about it, do not ever make any effort to grasp the facts rightly, or to report 
and relate them correctly. This is the least that justice requires, and phi­
losophy can demand this much in any case. 
The history of philosophy is the story of the discovery of the thoughts 
about the Absolute which is their subject matter. Thus, for example, we can 
say that Socrates discovered the determination of purpose that was filled 
out as a determinate cognition by Plato, and more particularly by Aristotle. 
Brucker's history of philosophy!! is so uncritical, not only with respect to 
external historical data, but with respect to the reporting of thoughts, that 
one can find twenty, thirty, or more theses cited from the earlier Greek 
philosophers as their philosophical dicta, of which not one belongs to 
them. They are conclusions that Brucker draws after the manner of the bad 
metaphysics of his time, and falsely ascribes to those philosophers as their 
own assertions. Conclusions are of two kinds: some are simply the result 
of following out a principle into greater detail, and others are a regression 
toward deeper principles. To write history is precisely to record those 
individuals to whom a further deepening of thought in this way, and an 
unveiling of it, properly belongs. But Brucker's procedure is not simply 
improper because the early philosophers did not themselves draw the 
consequences that are supposed to lie in their principles, and hence merely 
failed to express them in so many words; but rather because his reasoning 
involves the direct ascription of validity to finite thought-relationships, and 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 
11 
the readiness to use them, [in spite of the fact that) these thought­
relationships are directly contrary to the sense of those philosophers (who 
were speculative in spirit); and (what is more) they only pollute and falsify 
the philosophical Idea. And if, in the case of ancient philosophers, only a 
few of whose statements have come down to us, this falsification has the 
excuse of being supposedly correct reasoning, this excuse falls away in the 
case of a philosophy that has both grasped its own Idea in determinate 
thoughts and has expressly investigated and determined the value of the 
categories as well. There can be no excuse when the Idea is interpreted in a 
mangled way in spite of that, and only One moment ("identity," for in­
stance) is extracted from the exposition and given out to be the totality; or 
when the categories are introduced quite naIvely, and all anyhow, just as 
they are deployed in all their one-sidedness and untruth in our everyday 
consciousness. Educated cognition of thought-relationships is the primary 
condition for the correct interpretation of a philosophical factum. But cru­
dity of thought is not only justified expressly by the principle of immediate 
knowing; it is made the law. The cognition of thoughts, and the cultural 
formation of subjective thinking along with it, is no more a [matter of) 
immediate knowing than any science or art and skill are. 
Religion is the mode, the type of consciousness, in which the truth is 
present for all men, or for all levels of education; but scientific cognition is 
a particular type of the consciousness of truth, and not everyone, indeed 
only a few men, undertake the labour of it. The basic import is the same, but 
just as Homer says about certain things that they have two names,9 one in 
the language of Gods, and the other on the tongues of us men, the crea­
tures of a day, so, too, there are two tongues for that import: the tongue of 
feeling, of representation, and of the thinking that nests in the finite cate­
gories and one-sided abstractions of understanding, and the tongue of the 
concrete Concept. And when we want to discuss and pass judgments 
about philosophy in a religious perspective, more is required than our just 
being quite accustomed to the language of the consciousness of our day. 
The foundation of scientific cognition is the inner basic import, the Idea 
that dwells in it, and the vitality of that Idea which is stirring in the spirit; 
just as religion involves no less a thoroughly disciplined heart and mind,' a 
spirit awakened to awareness,b and a fully formed import. In the most 
recent times religion has contracted the cultured expanse of its content 
more and more, and withdrawn itself into the intensity of piety, i.e., of 
feeling. Often, indeed, this feeling is one that manifests a very im­
poverished and barren import. But as long as religion has a creed, a doc-
a. durchgearbeitetes Gemiit 
b. Besinnung 

12 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
trine, and a dogmatics, philosophy can concern itself with that, and can in 
that way unite itself as such with religion. But here again, this claim is not 
to be taken up in the manner of the wrongly separative understanding in 
which our modern religious attitude is caught up. This attitude represents 
religion and philosophy as mutually exclusive, or as being generally separ­
able to such a degree that they consequently only link up in an external 
way. Instead, what is implied by all that we have said so far is that there 
may be religion without philosophy, but there cannot be philosophy with­
out religion, because philosophy includes religion within it. Genuine re­
ligion, the religion of the spirit, must have a creed, a content of this sort. 
The spirit is essentially consciousness, and hence [consciousness] of the 
content made into an ob-ject. As feeling, the spirit is just the not yet ob­
jective content itself (only a quale, to use an expression of Jakob Boehme);!O 
it is just the lowest stage of consciousness, in the form of the soul, which 
we have in common with the lower animals. It is thinking that first makes 
the soul-with which the lower animals are endowed too-into spirit; and 
philosophy is only a consciousness concerning that content, the spirit and 
its truth; i.e., concerning spirit in the shape and mode of the essentiality 
that is its own, which distinguishes it from the lower animals, and makes it 
capable of religion. The concentrated religious attitude that focuses strictly 
on the heart must make its contrition and mortification into the essential 
moment of its rebirth; but it must at the same time recollect that it is 
dealing with the heart of a spirit, and that the spirit is appointed as the 
power over the heart, and it can only be this power insofar as it is itself 
born again. This rebirth of the spirit out of the natural lack of knowledge, 
and equally out of natural error, happens through instruction, and through 
faith in the objective truth, the faith in the content that arises from the 
witness of the Spirit. This rebirth of the spirit is also an immediate rebirth 
of the heart (among other things) out of the vanity of the one-sided under­
standing, which leads it to boast of its knowledge of such [assumptions] as 
the diversity of the finite from the infinite, or that philosophy must either 
be polytheism, or-in the spirits that think most acutely-pantheism. It is 
a rebirth that liberates us from such lamentable insights as those, insights 
that enable pious humility to ride its high horse over both philosophy and 
theological cognition alike. When the religious attitude abides by its in­
tense feeling without any expansion, and hence without any spirit, it does, 
of course, only know of the antithesis between its narrowed and narrowing 
form of mind and the spiritual expansion of doctrine, whether religious as 
such or philosophical." However, the thinking spirit does not just restrict 
itself to finding its satisfaction in the "purer," i.e., the simple-hearted re­
ligious attitude; on the contrary, that standpoint is itself a result which has 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 
13 
emerged from reflection and argument. It is by the aid of the superficial 
understanding that the religious attitude has given itself this fine liberation 
from virtually all doctrines; and 'it is by using the thinking with which it is 
infected for its zealous attack on philosophy that it maintains itself by force 
on the rarefied peak of an abstract state of feeling without any content.-I 
cannot refrain from citing here some excerpts from the "Exhortation" of 
Franz von Baader about a configuration of piety of that kind, in the fifth 
volume of his Fermenta Cognitionis (Preface, p. ixff).13 
'"To return once more to Herr Tholuck, who can be regarded as the enthusiastic representative 
of the pietist current of thought, the lack of any doctrine in his essay "On the doctrine of Sin" 
(second edition [anonymous, Hamburg, 1825]), which has just come to my notice, is quite 
marked. I was struck by his treatment of the dogma of the Trinity in his essay The Speculative 
Doctrine of the Trinity in the Later Orient [Berlin, 1826]. I am deeply grateful to him for the 
historical notes that he has drawn from his sources with such industry. But he calls the 
doctrine a scholastic doctrine; and in any case it is much older than anything that we call 
"scholastic." He treats it only on its external side as being supposedly only a doctrine that 
arose historically from speculation about biblical passages under the influence of Platonic and 
Aristotelian philosophy (p. 41). Then, in his essay about sin, he dismisses the dogma in 
cavalier fashion, one might say, declaring that it can only be an artificial framework in which 
the doctrines of the faith (but which ones?) can be put in order (p. 220). Indeed, we must even 
say about this dogma, that to one standing on the bank (in the sand of the spirit perhaps?) it 
appears as a Fata Morgana (p. 219).11 The doctrine of the Trinity is not "a foundation" 
(Tholuck calls it the "tripod:' ibid., p. 221) "upon which our faith can be grounded ever again." 
But has not this doctnne (as the most sacred one) alway&-or from time immemorial 
anyway-been, as our Creed, the main content of the faith itself? And has not this Creed 
always been the foundation of subjective faith? How can the doctrine of reconciliation­
which Tholuck seeks so energetically to bring to our feelings in the essay under discussion­
have more than a moral sense (or, if you like, a pagan sense), how can it have a Christian 
sense without the dogma of the Trinity? There is nothing in this essay about other specific 
dogmas either. For instance, Tholuck leads the reader always to the passion and death of 
Christ, but no further; not to his resurrection and ascension to the right hand of the Father 
[nor yet to the pouring forth of the Spirit-1830]. One of the main determinations in the 
doctrine of reconciliation is the punishment for sin; in Tholuck's essay (pp. 119ff) this is the 
self-conscious burden (and the damnation bound up with it) that all must carry, who live 
apart from God, the one and only source of blessedness and holiness alike. This means that 
sin, the consciousness of guilt, and damnation cannot be thought separately from one another 
(so this is a place where even some thinking occurs, just as on p. 120 it is also demonstrated 
that the determinations flow out of the nature of God). This determination of the punishment 
for sin is what has been called the natural punishment of sin; and (like indifference about the 
doctrine of the Trinity) it is the result of the teaching of that reason and enlightenment that 
Tholuck decries so much.-Some time ago in the Upper House of the English Parliament, a 
bill concerning the sect of the Unitarians failed to pass; at this juncture, an English newspaper 
published a report about the great number of Unitarians in Europe and America. Then it 
added this comment: "At present Protestantism and Unitarianism are mostly synonymous on 
the continent of Europe.u12 Theologians may be left to decide whether Tholuck's dogmatics is 
distinct from the ordinary theology of the Enlightenment in anything save one or two 
points-and not even in those respects when it is closely examined. 

14 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
"For as long as religion and its doctrines have not regained in the eyes of 
science, a respect that is grounded upon free research, and hence upon 
genuine conviction" he says. " . . . For so long all of you, the pious and 
the impious, with all of your do's and don't's, and all your talk and action, 
will have no remedy against evil, and for so long will this unrespected 
religion not be loved; because only what is seen to be Sincerely respected 
and [re]cognised to be indubitably worthy of respect can be wholeheart­
edly and sincerely loved, just as religion can only be served with an amor 
generosus [generous love] of the same kind . . . .  In other words: If you 
want the practice of religion to flourish again, then you must make sure 
that we achieve a rational theory of it once more, and not leave your 
enemies (the atheists) in complete possession of the field with their irra­
tional and blasphemous assertion that no such theory of religion is to be 
thought of at all, that such a thinga is impossible because religion is a 
matter of the heart only, a region where one quite conveniently can, and 
indeed one must, divest oneself of one's head."* 
Regarding poverty of content we can remark further that this can only 
be talked of as the way in which the external state of religion appears at a 
particular time. A time of that kind may be lamented, because such an 
effort is needed just to bring forth the mere faith in God-a need that 
weighed so heavily on the noble Jacobi-and further to awaken only a 
concentrated Christianity of feeling. AIl the same, we cannot fail to recog­
nise the higher principles that announce themselves even here (see the 
Introduction to the Logic, § 64 Remark). But what lies before science is the 
rich content that hundreds and thousands of years of cognitive activity 
have brought forth for itself; and this content does not lie before it as 
historical information that only others possess. Then it would be some­
thing-dead-and-gone for us, just an occupation to exercise our memories 
and our acuteness in the critical evaluation of reports, not [a topic] for the 
cognition of the spirit and the [rational] concern with truth. What is most 
sublime, most profound, and most inward has been called forth into the 
light of day in the religions, philosophies, and works of art, in more or less 
pure, in clearer or more obscure shapes, often in very repulsive ones. We 
a. Sache 
"Tholuck quotes several passages from Anselm's treatise Cur Deus homo, and celebrates "the 
profound humility of this great thinker" (p. 127).14 But he is not mindful of, and does not cite, 
the passage from this same treatise that I have quoted below (at § 77 of the Encyclopaedia): 
Negligentiae mihi videtur si . . . non studemus quod credimus intelligere [It seems to me to 
be negligence if . . .  we do not study to understand what we believe).-Certainly when the 
Creed is shrivelled up into just a few articles, there is not much stuff left for cognitive effort, 
and little can come from the cognition of it. 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 
15 
can count it as a particular merit of Franz von Baader that he not only goes 
on bringing such forms to our recollection, but also with a profoundly 
speculative spirit he brings their basic import expressly into scientific 
honour because on that basis he expounds and confirms the philosophical 
Idea. The depth of Jakob Boehme, in particular, offers the occasion and the 
forms for this. The name "Teutonic Philosopher" has rightly been con­
ferred upon this mighty spirit.1s On the one hand, he has enlarged the 
basic import of religion, [taken] on its own account, to the universal Idea; 
within that basic import he formulated the highest problems of reason and 
tried to grasp spirit and nature in their determinate spheres and configura­
tions. [All this was possible] because he took as his foundation [the thesis] 
that the spirit of man and all things else are created in the image of God­
and, of course. of God as the Trinity; their life is just the process of their 
reintegration into that original image after the loss of it. On the other hand 
(and conversely), he forcibly misappropriated the forms of natural things 
(sulphur, saltpeter, etc.; the sharp, the bitter, etc.) as spiritual forms and 
forms of thought.16 The gnostic interpretation that von Baader attaches to 
configurations of this kind is his own special way of kindling and advanc­
ing the philosophical concern; it sets itself forcefully against any coming to 
rest in the barren void of enlightened polemics"-and equally against the 
piety that wants simply to remain intense. In all of his writings von Baader 
shows, incidentally, that he is far from taking this gnostic interpretation to 
be the exclusive mode of cognition. It has its inconveniences on its own 
account: its metaphysics does not push on to deal with the categories 
themselves, or with the methodical development of the content. Its weak­
ness is that the Concept is not well adapted to the wildness and spon­
taneous spirit of forms and configurations of this kind; just as its general 
weakness is that it has the absolute content as its presupposition, and that it 
offers explanations, arguments, and refutations on the basis of this 
presupposition. * 
It might be said that we have enough configurations of the truth, and all 
too many of them, some purer and others more cloudy, in the religions and 
mythologies, or in the gnostic and mystery-making philosophies of ancient 
a. Aufklirerei 
*1 am certainly delighted to leam that Rea von Baader agrees with many of my 
propositions-as is evident both from the content of several of his more recent writings and 
from his references to me by name. About most of what he contests-and even quite easily 
about everything-it would not be difficult for me to come to an understanding with him, 
that is to say, to show that there is, in fact no departure from his views in it There is only one 
complaint that I want to touch on. It occurs in the "Comments upon some anti-religious 
philosophical dicta of our time" [Leipzig], 1824, p. 5, cf. pp. 56ff. There he discusses a dictum 

16 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
and modern times. One may delight in the uncovering of the Idea in these 
configurations, and one may in this way satisfy oneself that the philosoph­
ical truth is not something merely solitary, but that, on the contrary, its 
effective action has been present-at least as a ferment-in these config­
urations. But when the conceit of immaturity undertakes a rehashing of 
these productions of the fermentation-as was the case with one imitator 
of von Baader-that conceit, in all its laziness and incapacity for scientific 
thinking, can easily exalt a gnosis of this kind into the exclusive mode of 
cognition. For it is less of a strain to let oneself go in these [symbolic] 
patterns,- and tie one's philosophical dicta onto them, than to take up the 
development of the Concept, and submit one's thinking, indeed, one's 
whole heart and mind, to the logical necessity of the Concept. Also, a 
conceited person will easily attribute to himself what he has learned from 
others, and he will believe this all the more easily when he is attacking or 
belittling those others; the truth is, rather, that he is irritated with them 
precisely because he has derived his in Sights from them. 
Although deformed, the impulse of thought announces itself in the very 
phenomena of the time that we have taken note of in this foreword; and 
that is why, for the thought that is cultivated to the high level of the spirit, 
which "having emerged from the school of the philosophy of nature, establishes a false 
concept of matter, in that it affirms regarding the transient essence of this world-which 
contains corruption within it-that it is immediately and eternally emergent and emerging 
from God, as the eternal outgoing ([self]-emptying)b of God which conditions his eternal re­
entry [into himself] (as spirit)" [Hegel's emphases] . As far as the first part of this representa­
tion is concerned-the emerging of matter from God-"emergence" is, in any case, a category 
that I do not use, because it is a picturing expression, and no category. But I do not see how to 
avoid admitting that this proposition is implied in the determination that God is the creator of 
the world. As far as the other part is concerned-that the eternal outgoing conditions the re­
entry of God as spirit-for one thing, van Baader posits the category of "condition" at this 
point where it is in and for itself out of place; hence I never use it to express this relation 
either. Please recollect the comments I made earlier about the uncritical exchanging of the 
determinations of thought. In what von Baader himself offers us about the concept of matter 
(pp. 54ff), I see nothing that departs from my own determinations concerning it. Nor do I 
understand what help there is for the absolute task of grasping the creation of the world as a 
concept, in what van Baader offers us on page 58, to wit, that matter "is not the immediate 
product of the unity, but of those principles (the empowered ones, the Elohim) which the unity 
calls forth, for this purpose." Whether the sense of this is that matter is the product of the 
principles--the grammatical structure does not make this completely clear--{)r alternatively 
that it is matter which has called forth these Elohim for itself, and that it has let itself be 
produced by them; [but in any case] the Elohim, or even the whole circle together [of matter 
and Elohim], must be posited in a relation to God. And this relation is not clarified at all by 
the insertion of the Elohim here. 17 
a. Gebilde 
b. Entauf1erung 

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 
17 
it is in and for itself a need (both for the thinker and for the time) that what 
was revealed as a mystery in earlier times should now be revealed for 
thinking itself. (The mystery remains a complete secret for formal thought, 
even in the purer configurations of its revelation, and still more in the 
cloudier ones.) This task alone is therefore worthy of our science, and in 
the absolute right of its freedom, thinking affirms the stubborn determina­
tion only to be reconciled with the solid content so far as that content has, 
at the same time, been able to give itself the shape that is most worthy of it. 
This is the shape of the Concept, the shape of the necessity that binds all, 
content and thoughts alike, and precisely thereby makes them free. If we 
are to renew what is old-and I speak only of the configuration as being 
old, because the basic import itself is ever young-then perhaps the con­
figuration of the Idea as Plato, and much more deeply Aristotle, gave it to 
us is infinitely more worthy of recollection [than any mysteries]. This is 
also because the unveiling of the Idea through its adaptation to our intel­
lectual culturea is at once not merely an understanding of that Idea, but an 
advance of science itself. But, of course, the understanding of such forms 
of the Idea as theirs does not lie so ready on the surface as the grasping of 
gnostic and cabalistic phantasmagorias; and the further development of 
those forms for our time happens even less spontaneously than the discov­
ery and identification of echoes of the Idea in those gnostic dreams. 
, Just as it was rightly said of the true that it is index sui et falsi [index both 
of itself and of the false p8 but that the true is not known by starting from 
the false, so the Concept is the understanding both of itself and of the 
shape without Concept, but the latter does not from its own inner truth 
understand the Concept. Science understands feeling and faith, but science 
itself can only be assessed through the Concept (as that on which it rests); 
and since science is the self-development of the Concept, an assessment of 
science through the Concept is not so much a judgment upon it as an 
advanCing together with it. That is the sort of judgment that I cannot but 
desire for this present endeavour, and it is only a judgment of that sort that 
I can be both respectful and responsive to. 
Berlin, 25 May 1827 
a. Gedankenbildung 

FOREWORD TO THE THIRD 
EDITION (1830) 
In this third edition improvements of many kinds have been made 
throughout, and a particular attempt has been made to increase the clarity 
and determinacy of the exposition. All the same, because of the purpose of 
the manual as a compendium, the style had to remain condensed, formal, 
and abstract. The book retains its [original] vocation: it is to receive the nec­
essary commentary only in my lectures. 
Since the second edition, a variety of assessments of my method of 
doing philosophy have appeared-and for the most part they have shown 
little or no calling for the task. Such careless responses to works that were 
thought through for many years, and worked over with all the seriousness 
that the subject matter and scientific discussion require, can bring no joy to 
the mind in view of all the evil passions that crowd upon you there: 
conceit, pride, envy, scorn, and the rest. Still less is anything to be learned 
from them. In the second book of his Tusculans [2.4] Cicero says: "Est philo­
sophia paucis contenta judicibus, multitudinem consulto ipsa fugiens, eique 
ipsi et invisa et suspecta; ut, si quis universam velit vituperare, secundo id 
populo facere possit." [Philosophy is content to have but few judges, and 
flies from the mob deliberately; by the mob itself philosophy is both envied 
and distrusted. So that if someone wanted to cry down philosophy as a 
whole, they could do it with the support of the people.] To run philosophy 
down is all the more popular, when one does it without insight or serious­
ness. How petty the adverse passion is can be grasped from the echo that 
comes back to it from others; and the absence of knowledge keeps it 
company just as naturally. Other ob-jects strike the senses, or are given to 
representation in global intuitions; if we are to converse about them, we 
feel the necessity of some acquaintance with them, however slight it may 
be; and they are more easily recollected by our common sense because 
they are there in their familiar, firm presence. But the fact that philosophy 
lacks all this is brought up against it without shame, or rather it is brought 
up against some fantastic empty image of philosophy that the ignorance of 
it dreams up and talks into being. This ignorance has nothing before it by 
18 

FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 
19 
which it can orient itself, so it runs loose completely in an indeterminate, 
empty, and senseless talk. I have undertaken elsewhere the ungrateful and 
fruitless task of exposing some of these phenomena woven out of passion 
and ignorance in all their obvious nakedness.l 
A little while ago it may have looked as if a more serious inquiry about 
God, divine things, and reason, in a broader range of scientific endeavour, 
would be called forth from the basis of theology and even of religious 
experience.2 But even the way that that movement began allowed no hope 
of such an outcome; for the impulse sprang from personalities, and neither 
the pretensions of piety nor the pretensions of free reason-neither the 
accuser nor the accused-rose up to the matter [itself], still less to the 
consciousness that the territory of philosophy must be entered upon if the 
matter was to be discussed. That personal attack, grounded upon very 
specific external details of religion, showed itself in the appalling presump­
tion of those who were ready to excommunicate certain individuals from 
Christianity upon their own full authority, and thereby put upon them the 
seal of damnation in this world and in eternity. Dante arrogated to himself 
the power of Peter's keys under the forceful inspiration of his divine po­
etry, and condemned many of his contemporaries to damnation in Hell by 
name-even Popes and Emperors-but they were dead already.3 One of 
the defamatory complaints made against a certain modern philosophy has 
been that in it [the]4 human individual posits hill'1:self as God; but com­
pared with this complaint based on a false inference, the presumption in 
which one assumes the role of the World's Judge, gives one's verdict against 
the Christianity of individuals, and utters the sentence of inmost damna­
tion upon them, is an actual presumption of quite another sort. The shib­
boleth of this absolute authority is the name of the Lord Christ and the 
assurance that the Lord dwells in the hearts of these judges. Christ says 
(Matt. 7:20), "By their fruits ye shall [re]cognise them," but the appalling 
insolence of condemnation and casting into outer darkness is no good 
fruit. Christ continues: "Not all that say unto me, 'Lord, Lord' shall enter 
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Many will say unto me on that day: 'Lord, 
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? Have we not in thy name cast 
out devils? Have we not done many deeds in thy name?' Then shall I 
profess unto them: 'I have never £reJcognised you, depart ye all from me, ye 
evildoers .' " Those who assure us that they are in exclusive possession of 
Christianity, and demand this same faith from others, have not carried 
their faith so far as to cast out devils. Instead, many of them, like those 
who have faith in the medium of Prevorst,5 are inclined to congratulate 
themselves about being on good terms with a mob of ghosts, of whom 

20 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
they stand in awe, instead of driving out and banishing these lies that 
belong to a servile and anti-Christian superstition. They are equally inca­
pable of speaking words of wisdom, and are completely unable to do great 
deeds of cognition and science, though that ought to be their vocation and 
their duty; mere erudition is not yet science. They busy themselves at great 
length with the mass of indifferent external matters of the faith; but then 
in contrast they stand by the name of the Lord Christ in a completely 
barren fashion as far as the basic import and intellectual content of the 
faith itself is concerned; and they deliberately and scornfully disdain the 
elaboration of doctrine that is the foundation of the faith of the Christian 
church. For the spiritual, fully thoughtful, and scientific expansion [of the 
doctrine] would upset, and even forbid or wipe out, the self-conceit of 
their subjective boasting which relies on the spiritless and fruitless 
assurance-rich only in evil fruits-that they are in possession of Chris­
tianity, and have it exclusively for their very own.-In the scriptures, the 
"spiritual expansion" that I mentioned is distinguished from mere "faith" 
in the most determinate and conscious way. Faith only comes to be truth 
through its expansion. "He who has faith in me altogether," says Christ 
Gohn 7:38), "out of his belly shall rivers of living water flow." Then, at once, 
this is elucidated and determined in verse 39: it is not the simple faith in 
the temporally sensible, present personality of Christ that works this won­
der, for he is not yet the truth as such. In verse 39 the faith meant is 
determined thus: that Christ spoke here about the Spirit which they that 
believed in him should receive; for the Holy Spirit was not yet there, because 
Jesus was not yet glorified. The still unglorified shape of Christ is the 
personality that was then sensibly present in time, or afterwards repre­
sented so (which is the same content). This is the immediate ob-ject of the 
faith. In this [historical] presence Christ himself revealed his external na­
ture to his disciples by word of mouth. He revealed his own vocation to 
reconcile God with himself, and man with him-the order of salvation and 
the doctrine of ethics. And the faith that the disciples had in him embraced 
all this within it. Notwithstanding all that, this faith which lacked not an 
atom of the strongest certainty, is declared to be only the beginning and 
the fundamental condition for what was still incomplete. Those who be­
lieved in that way still did not have the Spirit; they were still to receive it. 
The Spirit, the truth itself, the Spirit that leads us into all truth, comes only 
later than that faith. But our new disciples stand fast in the certainty which 
is only the condition; and that certainty, being itself only subjective, brings 
forth only the subjective fruit of formal assurances, and thereby further that 
of pride, calumny, and anathema. In defiance of Scripture, they hold fast 
only to the certainty, and against the spirit, which is the expansion of cogni­
tion, and only then the truth. 

FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 
21 
The new piety shares this barrenness of scientific and of spiritual import 
generally, with what it immediately makes into the ob-ject of its accusation 
and damnation: the enlightenment of the understanding. Through its for­
mal and abstract thinking, [which is] lacking all basic import, this en­
lightenment has emptied all content out of religion, just as the new piety 
has done, by its reduction of the faith to the shibboleth of the "Lord, 
Lord." In this respect, neither has any advantage over the other; and be­
cause they collide in simple antagonism, there is no stuff present within 
which they are in contact. and could reach a common soil and the possibil­
ity of entering into an inquiry, and finally reaching cognition and truth. For 
its own part, the enlightened theology; has stood stock still in its own 
formalism: i.e., its appeal to freedom of conscience, freedom of thought, 
freedom of teaching, and even to reason and science. To be sure, this free­
dom is the category of the infinite right of the spirit; and as such, it is the 
other particular condition of the truth, which goes with faith as the first one. 
But what the free and genuine conscience contains as rational determina­
tions and laws, what the free faith and thought has and teaches as its 
content, this material question they have refrained from broaching. They 
have taken their stand upon their formalism of the negative, and upon the 
freedom to fill out their freedom according to their own opinion and lik­
ing, so that the content itself is, in principle, indifferent. Another reason 
why this party cannot come near to any content is that the Christian 
community must be, and always ought to be, united by the bond of a 
doctrinal concept, or confession of faith, whilst the lifeless water of the 
understanding, with its generalities and its abstract rationalism,- cannot 
tolerate the specificity of an inwardly determinate, expressly formed Chris­
tian content and doctrinal concept. The other party, in contrast, relying on 
the formula "Lord, Lord" as their "Open Sesame," quite frankly disdains 
the fulfilling of the faith as spirit, import, and truth. 
In this way a great dust cloud of pride, malice, and personal abuse has 
certainly been raised-with empty generalities too. But the faith was 
stricken with unfruitfulness; it could not contain the matter, it could not 
lead to import and cognition.-Philosophy could well be content to be left 
out of the game. Its place is outside the terrain of those pretensions-both 
of personalities and of abstract generalities; and had it been drawn onto a 
field of that sort. only unpleasant and unprofitable results were to be 
expected. 
a. Die Allgemeinheiten und Abstraktionen des abgestandenen, nicht lebendigen rationalistischen 
Verstandeswassers. 

22 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Because the rich and deep import has rotted out of the supreme interest, 
or unconditional concern, of human nature, and the religious attitude-­
both the pious and the reflecting attitude together-has reached the point 
where it finds the highest contentment in being without content, philoso­
phy has become a contingent and subjective need. In both types of re­
ligious attitudes these unconditional concerns have been arranged (by 
[finite] argument and nothing else) in such a way that philosophy is no 
longer needed to satisfy those interests. On the contrary, it is rightly held 
that philosophy will only upset this newly created sufficiency and a con­
tentment that is so narrowly based." Philosophy, therefore, is left al­
together to the freely felt need of the subject. No pressing invitation at all 
is addressed to the subject; on the contrary, where the need is present, it 
has to be steadfast against insinuations and dire warnings. It exists only as 
an inner necessity that is stronger than the subject, by which his spirit is 
then driven without rest "that he may overcome:'7 and may create the 
gratification that the impulse of reason deserves. Thus, without the en­
couragement of any authority, even that of the religious authority (it is 
regarded, in fact, as a superfluity, and as a dangerous or at least doubtful 
luxury), our occupation with this science stands all the more freely upon 
our concern with the matter and with the truth alone. If, as Aristotle says, 
theoria is the most blessed, and among goods the best,S then those who 
participate in this gratification know what they have in it: the satisfaction 
of the necessity of their spiritual nature. They can refrain from making 
demands on others with respect to it, and can leave them to their own 
needs, and to the satisfactions that they themselves find for those needs. 
What is to be thought about the urge to do the business of philosophy 
without a caIling we have said above: that the more noise it makes, the less 
fitted it is to take part in the work. The deeper and more serious participa­
tion is lonelier at home, and more silent abroad. Vanity and superficiality is 
quickly ready, and feels driven to a hasty meddling; but serious concern 
about an inwardly great matter-<me for which only the long and difficult 
labour of a complete development suffices-submerges itself in it in quiet 
pursuit for a long time. 
The rapid exhaustion of the second edition of this encyclopaedic guiding 
thread (which, in accord with the way it was determined above, does not 
make the study of philosophy easy) has given me the satisfaction of seeing 
that, quite apart from the noise made by superficiality and vanity, a quieter 
a. ins Enge gezogen 

FOREWORD TO THE THIRD EDITION 
23 
and more rewarding participation in philosophy has taken place. I wish 
noW that, for this new edition too, it may continue. 
Berlin, 19 September 1830 

INTRODUCTION 
Philosophy lacks the advantage, which the other sciences enjoy, of being 
able to presuppose its ob-jects as given immediately by representation. And, 
with regard to its beginning and advance, it cannot presuppose the method 
of cognition as one that is already accepted. It is true that it does, initially, 
have its ob-jects in common with religion. Both of them have the truth in 
the highest sense of the word as their ob-ject, for both hold that God and 
God alone is the truth. Both of them also go on to deal with the realm of 
the finite, with nature and the human spirit, and with their relation to each 
other and to God as to their truth. Hence, philosophy can, of course. pre­
suppose some familiarity with its ob-jects; in fact it must presuppose this, 
as well as an interest in these ob-jects. The reason is that in the order of 
time consciousness produces representations of ob-jects before it produces 
concepts of them; and that the thinking spirit only advances to thinking 
cognition and comprehension by going through representation and by con­
verting itself to it. 
, it :: ?  A-;( 'f "l "lft tuwU. ' .lA it .{ lIJ.l(C' ;Jtlt!.{ .t}zf 
But when we consider something in thought, we soon become aware 
that thoughtful consideration implies the requirement that the necessity of 
its content should be shown, and the very being, as well as the determina­
tions, of its ob-jects should be proved. As a result, the familiarity with these 
ob-jects that was mentioned above is seena to be insufficient, and making­
or granting the validity of-presuppositions and assurances, is seen to be 
inadmissible. The difficulty of making a beginning arises immediately, 
because a beginning (being something immediate) does make a presupposi­
tion or, rather, it is itself just that. 
§ 2  
To begin with, philosophy can be determined in general terms as a thinking 
consideration of ob-jects. But if it is correct (as indeed it is), that the human 
a. erscheint 
24 

INTRODUCTION (§§ 1-18) 
25 
being distinguishes itself from txe lower animals by thinking, then every­
thing human is human becauseytl is brought about through thinking, and 
for that reason alone. Now, since philosophy is a peculiar mode of 
thinking-a mode by which thinking becomes cognition, and conceptually 
comprehensive cognition at that-philosophical thinking will also be di­
verse from the thinking that is active in everything human and brings 
about the very humanity of what is human, even though it is also identical 
with this thinking, and in-itself there is only One thinking. This distinction 
is connected with the fact that the human import of consciousness, which 
is based on thinking, does not appear in the form of thought straightaway, 
but as feeling, intuition, representation-which are forms that have to be 
distinguished from thinking itself as form. 
It is an old prejudice, a saying that is now a cliche, that man is 
distinguished from the lower animals by thinking; it may seem to 
be a cliche, but it must also seem remarkable that there is need to 
recall this old belief. Yet one can hold that the need is there, in 
view of the prejudice of our day and age, which separates feeling 
and thinking from each other in such a way that they are sup­
posedly opposed to each other, and are even so hostile that 
feeling-religious feeling in particular-is contaminated, perverted, 
or even totally destroyed by thinking, and that religion and re­
ligiosity essentially do not have their root and their place in think­
ing.1 Making a separation of this kind means forgetting that only 
man is capable of religion, and that the lower animals have no 
religion, any more than right and morality belong to them. 
When this separation between religion and thinking is asserted, 
one has in mind the thinking that can be called "thinking-over"­
the reflective thought that has thoughts as such as its content and 
brings them to consciousness. Because the distinction with regard 
to thinking that is clearly indicated by philosophy is neglected, the 
crudest notions and complaints against philosophy are brought 
forth. Religion, right, and ethical life belong to man alone, and that 
only because he is a thinking essence. For that reason thinking in 
its broad sense has not been inactive in these spheres, even at the 
level of feeling and belief, or of representation; the activity and pro­
ductions of thinking are present in them and are included in them. 
But it is one thing to have feelings and representations that are 
determined and permeated by thinking, and another to have thoughts 
about them. The thoughts about these modes of consciousness--­
generated by thinking them over-are what reflection, argumenta­
tion, and the like, as well as philosophy, are comprehended under. 

26 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
In this context it has happened-and the misunderstanding has 
prevailed quite often-that meditation of this kind [or "thinking­
over"]" was alleged to be the condition, or even the only way for 
us, to arrive at the representation of what is eternal and true and 
the belief that it is so. For instance, the (now rather obsolete) meta­
physical proofs that there is a God were passed off in this way, as if it 
were essentially and exclUSively through our being acquainted 
with them, and being convinced [of their validity], that the belief 
and conviction that there is a God could be brought about. This 
sort of assertion is like saying that we can only eat after we have 
become acquainted with the chemical, botanical, or zoological de­
terminations of our food, and that we should delay our digestion 
until we have completed the study of anatomy and physiology. If 
that were so, these sciences would certainly gain greatly in useful­
ness in their field, just as philosophy would in its field. Indeed 
their usefulness would be raised into an absolute and universal 
indispensability. But then too, instead of being indispensable, they 
would not exist at all. 
§ 3 
Whatever kind it may be, the content that fills our consciousness is what 
makes up the determinacy of our feelings, intuitions, images, and represen­
tations, of our purposes, duties; etc., and of our thoughts and concepts. 
Hence feeling, intuition, image, etc., are the forms of this content, a content 
that remains one and the same, whether it be felt, intuited, represented, or 
willed, and whether it be only felt, or felt, intuited, etc., with an admixture 
of thought, or whether it is thought quite without any admixture.2 In any 
one of these forms or in a mixture of several of them, the content is ob-ject 
of our consciousness. But in this ob-jectivity the determinacies of these forms 
join themselves onto the content;b with the result that each of these forms 
seems to give rise to a particular ob-ject, and that what is in-itself the same 
can look like a diverse content. 
Since the determinacies of feeling, of intuition, of desire, of will­
ing, etc., are generally called representations, inasmuch as we have 
knowledge of them, it can be said in general that philosophy puts 
thoughts and categories, but more preCisely concepts, in the place of 
representations. Representations in general [or "notions"] can be 
a. Nachdenken 
b. schlagen sich zum Inhalte 

INTRODUCTION (§§ 1-18) 
27 
regarded as metaphors of thoughts and concepts. But that we have 
these notions does not mean that we are aware of their signifi­
cance for thinking, i.e., that we have the thoughts and concepts of 
them. Conversely, it is one thing to have thoughts and concepts, 
and another to know what the representations, intuitions, and 
feelings are that correspond to them.-One side of what is called 
the unintelligibility of philosophy is related to this. The difficulty 
lies partly in the inability (which in-itself is just a lack of practice) to 
think abstractly, i.e., to hold on to pure thoughts and to move 
about in them. In our ordinary consciousness thoughts are af­
fected by and united with the sensible and spiritual material with 
which we are familiar; and in thinking about something, in reflect­
ing and arguing about it, we mix feelings, intuitions, and represen­
tations with thoughts. (Categories, like being, or singularity, are 
already mingled into every proposition, even when it has a com­
pletely sensible content: "This leaf is green.") But it is a very dif­
ferent thing to make the thoughts themselves, unmixed with any­
thing else, into ob-jects.-The other aspect of the unintelligibility 
of philosophy is an impatient wish to have before us, in the mode 
of representation, what is in our consciousness as thought and 
concept. There is a saying that, when we have grasped a concept, 
we still do not know what to think with it. But there is nothing to 
be thought with a concept save the concept itself. What this saying 
means, however, is that we long for an ordinary notion, one that we 
are already familiar with; consciousness feels as if, together with 
the mode of representation, the very ground, where it stands sol­
idly and is at home, has been pulled from under it. Finding itself 
displaced into the pure realm of the concept, it does not know 
where in the world it is.-Hence the writers, preachers, orators, 
etc., who tell their readers or listeners things that they already 
knew by heart, things that are familiar to them and even self­
explanatory, are the ones that are most readily "understood." 
§ 4  
In its relation to our ordinary consciousness, philosophy would first have 
to show the need for its peculiar mode of cognition, or even to awaken this 
need. But in relation to the ob-jects of religion, i.e., to truth altogether, it 
would have to prove that we have the ability to reach their cognition on our 
own; and in relation to any diversity that comes to light between religious 
notions and its own diverging determinations, it would have to justify the 
latter. 

28 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
§ 5 
In order to reach a provisional agreement about the distinction that has 
been mentioned and the insight connected with it, namely, that the gen­
uine content of our consciousness is preserved when it is translated into the 
form of thought and the concept, and even that it is not placed in its proper 
light until then, we can conveniently call to mind another old prejudice. 
This prejudgment holds that, when we want to experience what is true in 
ob-jects and occurrences, as well as in feelings, intuitions, opinions, no­
tions, etc., then we must think them over. And the very least that this 
thinking-over does in any case is to change our feelings, and notions, etc. 
into thoughts. 
But since philosophy claims that it is thinking that is the proper 
form of its business, and since every human is by nature able to 
think, what happens as a result of this abstraction, which leaves 
out the distinction that was indicated in § 3, is just the opposite of 
what we have mentioned already as the complaint about the unin­
telligibility of philosophy. Philosophic science is often treated with 
contempt by those who imagine and say-although they have not 
made any effort to come to grips with it-that they already under­
stand what philosophy is all about quite spontaneously,a and that 
they are able to do philosophy and to judge it just by holding on to 
what they have learnt at a very ordinary level, in particular from 
their religious feelings. In the case of the other sciences, we admit 
that one has to have studied them in order to know about them, 
and that one is only entitled to judge them in virtue of a studied 
acquaintance. We admit that in order to make a shoe, one has to 
have learnt and practiced how to do it, even though everyone of us 
has the required measure in his own feet, and we all have hands 
with a natural aptitude for the trade in question. It is only for 
doing philosophy that study, learning, and effort of this kind is 
supposedly not needed.-Of late, this convenient opinion has re­
ceived its confirmation through the doctrine of immediate know­
ing, [i.e.,] of knowing through intuition. 
§ 6  
It is equally important, on the other hand, that philosophy should be quite 
clear about the fact that its content is nothing other than the basic import 
that is originally produced and produces itself in the domain of the living 
a. von Haus QUS 

INTRODUCTION (§§ 1-18) 
29 
spirit. the content that is made into the world, the outer and inner world of 
consciousness; in other words, the content of philosophy is actuality. The 
first consciousness of this content is called experience. Within the broad 
realm of outer and inner thereness, a judicious consideration of the world 
already distinguishes that which is only appearance, transient and insignifi­
cant. from that which truly and in itself merits the name of actuality. Since 
philosophy is distinguished only in form from other ways of becoming 
conscious of this same identical import, its accord with actuality and expe­
rience is necessary. Indeed, this accord can be viewed as an outward 
touchstone, at least, for the truth of a philosophy; just as it has to be seen 
as the supreme and ultimate purpose of science to bring about the recon­
ciliation of the reason that is conscious of itself with the reason that is, or 
actuality, through the cognition of this accord. 
In the Preface to my Philosophy of Right p. xix3 the following propo­
sitions will be found: 
What is rational, is actual, 
and what is actual, is rational. 
These simple propositions have seemed shocking to many and 
they have been attacked, even by those who are not ready to re­
nounce the possession of philosophy, and certainly not that of 
religion. In the present context, we do not need to discuss religion, 
since the doctrines of the divine governance of the world express 
these propositions quite definitely. But as far as their philosophical 
meaning is concerned, we have to presuppose that the reader has 
enough education to know, not just that God is actual-that he is 
what is most actual, that he alone is genuinely actual-but also 
(with regard to the formal aspect) that quite generally, what is 
there is partly appearance and only partly actuality. In common life 
people may happen to call every brain wave, error, evil, and 
suchlike "actual," as well as every existence, however wilted and 
transient it may be. But even for our ordinary feeling, a contingent 
existence does not deserve to be called something-actual in the 
emphatic sense of the word; what contingently exists has no 
greater value than that which something-possible has; it is an exis­
tence which (although it is) can just as well not be. But when I 
speak of actuality, one should, of course, think about the sense in 
which I use this expression, given the fact that I dealt with actu­
ality too in a quite elaborate Logic, and I distinguished it quite 

30 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
clearly and directly, not just from what is contingent, even though 
it has existence too, but also, more precisely, from being-there, 
from existence, and from other determinations.4 
The notion that ideas and ideals are nothing but chimeras, and 
that philosophy is a system of pure phantasms, sets itself at once 
against the actuality of what is rational; but, conversely, the notion 
that ideas and ideals are something far too excellent to have actu­
ality, or equally something too impotent to achieve actuality, is 
opposed to it as well. However, the severing of actuality from the 
Idea is particularly dear to the understanding, which regards its 
dreams (L e., its abstractions) as something genuine, and is puffed 
up about the "ought" that it likes to prescribe, especially in the 
political field-as if the world had had to wait for it, in order to 
learn how it ought to be, but is not. If the world were the way it 
ought to be, what then would become of the pedantic wisdom of 
the understanding's "ought to be"? When the understanding turns 
against trivial, external, and perishable ob-jects, institutions, situa­
tions, etc., with its "ought"-ob-jects that may have a great relative 
importance for a certain time, and for particular circles-it may 
very well be in the right; and in such cases it may find much that 
does not correspond to correct universal determinations. Who is 
not smart enough to be able to see around him quite a lot that is 
not, in fact, how it ought to be? But this smartness is wrong when 
it has the illusion that, in its dealings with ob-jects of this kind and 
with their "ought," it is operating within the [true] concerns of 
philosophical science. This science deals only with the Idea­
which is not so impotent that it merely ought to be, and is not 
actual-and further with an actuality of which those ob-jects, in­
stitutions, and situations are only the superficial outer rind. 
§ 7 
It is, quite generally, meditative thinkinga that initially contains the principle 
of philosophy (also in the sense of "beginning"); and now that (since the 
times of the Lutheran Reformation) it has once more come into bloom in 
its [proper] independence, the name of philosophy has been given a wider 
significance. This is because, right from the start, our meditative thinking 
did not confine itself to its merely abstract mode (as it did in the philosoph­
ical beginnings made by the Greeks), but threw itself at the same time 
upon the material of the world of appearance-a material that seems to be 
measureless. Hence, the name "philosophy" was given to all of the know-
a. Nachdenken 

INTRODUCTION (§§ 1-18) 
31 
ing that deals with the cognition of fixed measure and of what is universal 
in the sea of singular empirical data, and with what is necessary, with the 
laws, in the seeming disorder of the infinite mass of what is contingent. In 
consequence, "philosophy" has at the same time taken its content from its 
own intuiting and perceiving of the outward and the inward, from the 
presence of nature as much as from the presence of spirit and from the 
human heart. a 
The principle of experience contains the infinitely important deter­
mination that, for a content to be accepted and held to be true, 
man must himself be actively involved with it,b more precisely, that 
he must find any such content to be at one and in unity with the 
certainty of his own self. He must himself be involved with it, 
whether only with his external senses, or with his deeper spirit, 
with his essential consciousness of self as well.-This is the same 
principle that is today called faith, immediate knowing, revelation 
in the outer [world], and above all in one's own inner [world]. We 
call the sciences that have the name "philosophy" empirical 
sciences, because of their point of departure. But their essential 
purpose and results are laws, universal principles, a theory; i.e., the 
thoughts of what is present. Thus, the Newtonian physics has been 
called philosophy of nature, whereas Hugo Grotius, for instance, 
established a theory that can be called philosophy of international 
law,s by classifying the modes of conduct of peoples toward each 
other, and by establishing universal principles on the basis of ordi­
nary argumentation.-The name "philosophy" still generally has 
this determination in England; and Newton continues to be cele­
brated as the greatest of philosophers. Even in the catalogues of 
instrument makers, the instruments, such as the thermometer, the 
barometer, etc., that are not classified under the heading of mag­
netic or electrical apparatus are called "philosophical instruments." 
But, surely, it is only thinking that ought to be called the instru­
ment of philosophy, and not some contraption of wood, iron, 
etc."-Our most recently emergent science of political economy, in 
a. aus dem prasenten Geiste und der Brust des Menschen 
h. selbst dabei sein musse 
"Even the journal that Thomson edits is called "Annals of Philosophy or Magazine of Chemistry, 
Mineralogy, Mechanics, Natural History, Agriculture, and Arts."-This title gives us automat­
ically a fair notion of what sort of materials are here called "philosophical."-Among the 
anouncements of newly published books I recently found the following in an English news­
paper: The Art of Preserving the Hair, on Philosophical Principles, neatly printed in post 
octavo, price 7 sh.-What is meant by "philosophical" principles of the preservation of the 
hair is probably chemical or physiological principles and the like. ' 

32 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
particular, is also called philosophy-the science that we usually 
call rational or intellectual political economy. * 
§ 8  
This cognition may be satisfactory enough within its own field. But, first 
of all, another circle of ob-jects shows up that are not part of this field: 
freedom, spirit, God. The reason that these are not to be found upon that 
soil is not because they ought not to belong to experience. It is true that 
they are not experienced by the senses, but everything that is in conscious­
ness at all is experienced. (This is even a tautological proposition.) The 
reason is that these ob-jects present themselves directly as infinite with 
regard to their content. 
There is an old saying that is usually (but falsely) attributed to 
Aristotle-as if it were supposed to express the standpoint of his 
philosophy: "Nihil est in intellectu, quod non fuerit in sensu."8 
(There is nothing in the intellect that has not been in sense­
experience. )' If speculative philosophy refused to admit this princi­
ple, that would have to be considered a misunderstanding. But 
conversely, philosophy will equally affirm: "Nihil est in sensu, 
quod non fuerit in intellectu" -in the most general sense that the 
nous, and more profoundly the spirit, is the cause of the world, and 
more precisely (see § 2) that feelings concerning right, ethical life, 
and religion are feelings-and hence an experience-of the kind of 
content that has its root and its seat in thinking alone. 
*When referring to the universal principles of political economy, English politicians often use 
the expression "philosophical principles", even in public speeches. In the House of Commons, 
on Feb. 2, 1825, Brougham, in his reply to the Speech from the Throne, talked of "the 
statesman-like and philosophical principles of Free Trade-for they are undoubtedly 
philosophical-upon the acceptance of which His Majesty has this day congratulated 
Parliamenl."-But it is not just this member of the opposition [who talks like that]. The 
annual dinner of the Shipowner's Society took place the same month, with the prime minister 
(the Earl of Liverpool) presiding; Lord Canning (the secretary of state) and Sir Charles Long 
(the paymaster-general of the army) were at his side. Here Lord Canning, in reply to the toast 
that was drunk to him, said: "a period has lately commenced when Ministers have had it in 
their power to apply to the state of the country the just maxims of profound philosophy."­
However great the difference between English and German philosophy may be, it is in any 
case a matter for rejoicing that the name of philosophy is still honoured in the mouth of an 
English cabinet minister, while elsewhere it is used only as a nickname and an insult, or as 
something to be hatedJ 
a. im Sin ne, in der Erfahrung 

INTRODUCTION (§§ 1-18) 
33 
§ 9 
Secondly, subjective reason wants further satisfaction with regard to form; 
this form is necessity in general (see § 1). In the kind of science mentioned 
above [see § 7], the universal (the genus, etc.) contained in it is not deter­
mined on its own account, nor is it intrinsically' connected with what is 
particular; but universal and particular are mutually external and con­
tingent, just as much as the particularities that are combined are, on their 
own account, external to each other and contingent. Moreover, the begin­
nings are immediate, found, or presupposed. In both respects, the form of 
necessity fails to get its due. Insofar as it aims at satisfying this need, 
meditative thinking is the thinking that is philosophical in the proper 
sense, [i.e., it is] speculative thinking. Hence, as a meditation, which in all its 
community with that first [empirically scientific] meditation is at the same 
time diverse from it, philosophical thinking has its own peculiar forms, apart 
from the forms that they have in common. The universal form of it is the 
Concept. 
Hence the relationship of speculative science to the other sciences 
is simply the following: speculative science does not leave the em­
pirical content of the other sciences aside, but recognises and uses 
it, and in the same way recognises and employs what is universal 
in these sciences, [i.e.,] the laws, the classifications,b etc., for its 
own content; but also it introduces other categories into these uni­
versals and gives them currency. So the distinction between spec­
ulative and empirical science relates only to this alteration of the 
categories. Speculative Logic contains the older logic and meta­
physics; it preserves the same forms of thought, laws, and ob-jects, 
but it develops and transforms them with further categories. 
What has usually been called a "concept" has to be dis­
tinguished from the Concept in the speculative sense. The asser­
tion, repeated many thousands of times, until it became a preju­
dice, that the Infinite cannot be grasped through concepts, is made 
only in the customary, or one-sided sense. 
§ 1O 
This thinking itself in the philosophical mode of cognition needs to be 
grasped in its necessity, as well as justified in respect of its ability to 
become cognizant of the absolute ob-jects. But any insight of this kind is 
a. fur sich 
b. die Gattungen 

34 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
itself philosophical cognition, and therefore it can only fall within philos­
ophy. 50 any preliminary explanation would have to be an unphilosophical 
one, and it could not be more than a tissue of presuppositions, assurances, 
and argumentations, i.e., of contingent asssertions, against which the op­
posite assurances could be made with the same right. 
a 
Arbeit 
One of the main points of view in the Critical Philosophy is the 
following: before we embark upon the cognition of God, or of the 
essence of things, etc., we should first investigate our faculty of 
cognition itself, to see whether it is capable of achieving this. We 
should first get to know about the instrument, before undertaking 
the taska that is supposed to be accomplished by means of it; for, 
otherwise, if the instrument is inadequate, then all further effort 
would have been expended in vain. 9_ This thought seemed to be 
so plausible that it has elicited the greatest admiration and assent; 
and it led our cognition, from its concern with ob-jects and its 
dealings with them, back to itself, back to the formal aspect [of 
cognition itself] .  But if we are not going to deceive ourselves with 
words, then it is obvious that other instruments can, of course, be 
investigated and judged in other ways than through the undertak­
ing of the peculiar task for which they are meant to be used. But 
the investigation of cognition cannot take place in any other way 
than cognitively; in the case of this so-called tool, the "investiga­
tion" of it means nothing but the cognition of it. But to want to 
have cognition before we have any is as absurd as the wise resolve 
of 5cholasticus to learn to swim before he ventured into the water.lO 
Reinhold, who recognised the confusion that prevails in begin­
nings of this kind, has proposed as the remedy for it, that we 
should commence provisionally with a hypothetical and problematic 
philosophising, and continue with this-Heaven knows how­
until somehow we happen, further along this road, to reach the 
original truth.b When we look at it more closely, we can see that it 
leads to the usual procedure, namely the analysis of an empirical 
foundation, or of a provisional assumption that has been trans­
formed into a definition. We should not overlook the correct con­
sciousness involved in Reinhold's proposal that the usual course of 
presuppositions and provisional statements is a hypothetical and 
problematic procedure. But his correct inSight does not alter the 
way that this procedure is constituted; on the contrary, it directly 
expresses the inadequacy of it. 11 
b. das Urwahre 

INTRODUCTION (§§ 1-18) 
35 
§ 11 
The need for philosophy can be determined more precisely in the follow­
ing manner. As feeling and intuition the spirit has what is sensible for its 
ob-ject; as fantasy, it has images; and as will, purposes, etc. But the spirit 
needs also, in antithesis to, or merely in distinction from these forms of its 
thereness and of its ob-jects, to give satisfaction to its highest inwardness, 
to thinking, and to make thinking into its ob-ject. In this way, spirit comes 
to itself, in the deepest sense of the word; for its principle, its unadulte­
rated selfhood, is thinking. But when it goes about its business in this way, 
what happens is that thinking gets entangled in contradictions; that is to 
say, it loses itself in the fixed nonidentity between thoughts, and therefore 
it does not reach itself, but rather stays stuck in its counterpart [in the 
world of ob-jectsl . The higher need goes against this result reached by a 
thinking that belongs to the understanding alone; it is grounded in the fact 
that thinking will not give up, but remains faithful to itself even in this 
conscious loss of its being at home with itself, "so that it may overcome,"12 
and may accomplish in thinking itself the resolution of its own contra­
dictions. 
The insight that the very nature of thinking is the dialectic, that, as 
understanding, it must fall into the negative of itself, into contra­
dictions, is an aspect of capital importance in the Logic. When 
thinking despairs of being able to bring about, from its own re­
sources," the resolution of the contradiction in which it has put 
itself, then it returns to the solutions and appeasements in which 
the spirit has participated in its other modes and forms. But it was 
not necessary to let this return degenerate into misology, an experi­
ence which Plato already confronted;13 thinking does not need to 
conduct itself polemically against itself, which is what happens 
when a so-called immediate knowing is asserted to be the exclusive 
form of the consciousness of truth. 
§ 12 
The coming into being of philosophy out of the need that has been men­
tioned has experience, the immediate and argumentative consciousness, as 
its starting point. With these needs as its stimulus, thinking conducts itself 
essentially so as to raise itself above the natural, sensible, and argumenta­
tive consciousness into its own unadulterated element; and it gives itself 
initially a self-distancing negative relationship to this beginning. Thus, 
a. aus sich 

36 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
thinking finds its first satisfaction in itself-in the Idea of the universal 
essence of these appearances; this Idea (the Absolute, God) can be either 
more or less abstract. Conversely, the experiential sciences carry with them 
the stimulus to vanquish the form in which the wealth of their content is 
offered only as something that is merely immediate and simply found, as a 
manifold of juxtaposition, and hence as something altogether contingent. 
They are stimulated to elevate this content to [the level of] necessity: this 
stimulus pulls thinking out of its abstract universality, and out of the 
satisfaction that is only warranted implicitly; and it drives thinking on to 
develop itself by its own means." On the one hand, this development is just a 
taking up of the content and of the determinations that it displays; but, on 
the other hand, it also gives these determinations the shape of coming 
forth freely (in the sense of original thinking) in accordance with the 
necessity of the matter itself alone. 
We shall have to speak more explicitly, and at greater length, below 
about the relationship of immediacy and mediation within con­
sciousness. At this point it is only necessary to draw attention, in a 
preliminary way, to the fact that, whilst each of these moments 
does also appear as distinct, neither of them can be wanting, and they 
are inseparably bound together.-In this way, our knowing of God, 
like our knowledge of all that is supersensible in general, essen­
tially involves an elevation above sensible feeling or intuition; 
hence, it involves a negative attitude toward the latter as first and in 
that sense it involves mediation. For mediation is a beginning, and 
a having advanced to a second, in such a way that this second is 
only there because one has come to it from something that is other 
vis-a.-vis this second. But the knowing of God is nonetheless inde­
pendent of that empirical side; it even gives itself its independence 
essentially through this negation and elevation.-If mediation is 
one-sidedly stressed and made into a condition, then we can say 
that philosophy owes its first beginningb to experience (to what is a 
posteriori).-But that is not saying very much, for thinking is in 
fact essentially the negation of something immediately given"­
just as we owe our eating to food because without it we could not 
eat. It is true that, in this context, eating is represented as ungrate­
ful, since it is the digesting of that to which it is supposed to owe 
itself. In this sense, thinking is no less ungrateful. 
a. von sich aus 
b. Entstehen 
c. Vorhandenes 

INTRODUCTION (§§ 1-18) 
37 
But thinking's own immediacy (that which is a priori) is in­
wardly reflected and hence inwardly mediated; it is universality, 
the overall being-at-home-with-itseH of thinking. In this univer­
sality, thinking is inwardly contented, and for that reason it has 
inherited an indifference towards particularisation, and hence to­
ward its development. Just as religion possesses the same intensive 
nature of contentment and bliss, whether it is more developed or 
less cultivated, developed into scientific consciousness, or held in 
naIve faith and in the heart. When thinking stops at the univer­
sality of the ideas-as was necessarily the case with the first phi­
losophies (for instance, with the Being of the Eleatic school, the 
Becoming of Heraclitus, and so on)-then it is rightly accused of 
formalism. It can happen, even in a developed philosophy, that 
only abstract principles or determinations are apprehended (for 
instance, "That in the Absolute all is one," "The identity of the 
subjective and the objective"), and that with regard to what is 
particular these same principles and determinations are simply 
repeated.14 With reference to the first abstract universality of think­
ing, there is a correct and more fundamental sense in which the 
development of philosophy is due to experience. On the one hand, 
the empirical sciences do not stop at the perception of single in­
stances of appearance; but through thinking they have prepareda 
the material for philosophy by finding universal determinations, 
genera, and laws. In this way they prepare the content of what is 
particular so that it can be taken up into philosophy. And, on the 
other hand, they contain the invitation for thinking, to advance to 
these concrete determinations. The assumption of this content, 
through which the immediacy that still clings to it, and its given­
ness, are sublated by thinking, is at the same time a developing of 
thinking out of itself. Thus, philosophy does owe its development 
to the empirical sciences, but it gives to their content the fully 
essential shape of of the freedom of thinking (or of what is a priori) 
as well as the validation of necessity (instead of the content being 
warranted because it is simply found to be present, and because it 
is a fact of experience). In its necessity the fact becomes the pre­
sentation and imitation of the activity of thinking that is original 
and completely independent. 
§ 13 
In the peculiar shape of external history, the coming to be of philosophy 
and its development is represented as the history of this science. This shape 
a. entgegen gearbeitet 

38 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
gives the form of a contingent succession to the stages of the Idea's develop­
ment, and it gives a kind of mere diversity to the principles and their 
exposition in the various philosophies of these stages. But the master 
workman of this labour of thousands of years is the One living Spirit, 
whose thinking nature is to bring to consciousness what it is; and when 
what it is has become ob-ject in this way, it is at once raised above this, and 
it is inwardly a higher stage. With regard to philosophies that appear 
diverse, the history of philosophy1S shows, on the one hand, that there is 
only One philosophy at diverse stages of its formation, and, on the other, 
that the particular principles on which each system is grounded one by one 
are only branches of one and the same whole. The philosophy that is the 
latest in time is the result of all the preceding philosophies; and it must 
therefore contain the principles of all of them; for this reason, it is the most 
unfolded, the richest, and the most concrete one-provided that it does 
deserve the name of philosophy. 
When we are faced with so many diverse philosophies, the univer­
sal must be distinguished from the particular according to its 
proper determination. Taken formally, and put side by side with the 
particular, the universal itself becomes something particular too. 
In dealing with the ob-jects of ordinary life, this juxtaposition 
would automatically strike us as inappropriate and awkward; as if 
someone who wants fruit, for instance, were to reject cherries, 
pears, raisins, etc., because they are cherries, pears, raisins, but not 
fruit. But in the case of philosophy we allow ourselves to justify 
the rejection of it by pointing out that philosophies are so diverse, 
and that each of them is only one philosophy, not the philosophy, 16 
just as if cherries were not fruit. It also happens that a philosophy 
whose principle is the universal is put side by side with one whose 
principle is something-particular, or even next to doctrines that 
assert that there is no philosophy at all, in the sense that both are 
only diverse views of philosophy-rather as if light and darkness 
were said to be just two diverse kinds of light. 
04 
The same development of thinking that is presented in the history of 
philosophy is presented in philosophy itself, but freed from that historical 
outwardness, i.e., purely in the element of thinking. Free and genuine 
thought is inwardly concrete; hence it is Idea, and in all its universality it is 
the Idea or the Absolute. The science of it is essentially a system, since what 
is concretely true is so only in its inward self-unfolding and in taking and 

INTRODUCTION (§§ 1-18) 
39 
holding itself together in unity, i.e., as totality. Only through the dis­
tinguishing, and determination of its distinctions, can what is concretely 
true be the necessity of these distinctions and the freedom of the whole. 
A philosophising without system cannot be scientific at all; apart 
from the fact that philosophising of this kind expresses on its own 
account a more subjective disposition, it is contingent with regard 
to its content. A content has its justification only as a moment of 
the whole, outside of which it is only an unfounded presupposi­
tion or a subjective certainty. Many philosophical writings restrict 
themselves like this-to the mere utterance of dispositions and 
opinions.-It is erroneous to understand by "system" a philosophy 
whose principle is restricted and [kept] distinct from other princi­
ples; on the contrary, it is the principle of genuine philosophy to 
contain all particular principles within itself. 
§ IS 
Each of the parts of philosophy is a philosophical whole, a circle that closes 
upon itself; but in each of them the philosophical Idea is in a particular 
determinacy or element. Every single circle also breaks through the restric­
tion of its element as well, precisely because it is inwardly [the] totality, 
and it grounds a further sphere. The whole presents itself therefore as a 
circle of circles, each of which is a necessary moment, so that the system of 
its peculiar elements constitutes the whole Idea-which equally appears in 
each single one of them. 
§ I6 
As an Encyclopaedia, science is not presented in the detailed development 
of its particularisation; instead, it has to be restricted to the beginnings and 
the fundamental concepts of the particular sciences. 
How much of each particular part is required to constitute a par­
ticular science is undetermined, insofar as the part must not be just 
an isolated moment, but in order to be something-true it must 
itself be a totality. The whole of philosophy genuinely forms One 
science; but it can also be considered as a whole made up of 
several particular sciences.-The philosophical encyclopaedia dis­
tinguishes itself from the other, ordinary encyclopaedia because 
the latter has to be some sort of aggregate of sciences, which are 
taken up contingently and empirically; and among them there are 

40 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
also some that are "sciences" only in name, since they are them­
selves no more than a mere collection of bits of information. In the 
case of such an aggregate, since the sciences in it are taken up 
externally, the unity in which the sciences are brought together is 
itself an external unity-an order. For the same reason, as well as 
because the materials are of a contingent nature too, this order has 
to remain tentative. It must always display aspects that do not 
really fit in. 
The philosophical encyclopaedia excludes, first of all, mere ag­
gregates of information, such as philology at first sight appears to 
be. Secondly, it also (just as decisively) excludes learning that is 
based on mere arbitrariness, such as heraldry, for instance. 
Sciences of this kind are positive through and through. Thirdly, 
there are other sciences that are called "positive," too, in spite of 
the fact that they have a rational basis and beginning. Here the 
rational component belongs to philosophy; but the positive side is 
peculiar to each one of them. And what is positive in the sciences 
is of diverse kinds: 
1. The implicitly rational beginning of the sciences passes over 
into what is contingent, because they have to bring the universal 
down to empirical singularity and actuality. In this field of altera­
bility and contingency, it is not the Concept that can be made to 
count, but only grounds. The science of jurisprudence, for instance, 
or the system of direct and indirect taxation, require ultimate and 
precise decisions. These lie outside the determinateness-in-and-for­
itself of the Concept, so that they leave a latitude for their 
determination-which can be grasped in one way upon one 
ground, and in another way on another ground, and which admits 
of no certain and ultimate ground. In the same way the Idea of 
nature loses itself in its dispersion of isolated contingencies; and 
natural history, geography, medicine, etc., fall into determinations of 
existence, species, and distinctions, etc., that are determined exter­
nally, by chance and by a play [of circumstances], not by reason. 
History, too, belongs here, inasmuch as, although the Idea is its 
essence, the appearing of this Idea takes place in contingency and 
in the field of freedom of choice. 
2. Sciences of this kind are also positive inasmuch as they do not 
recognise their determinations as finite, or show the passage of 
these and of their entire sphere into a higher one, but take these 
same determinations to be absolutely valid ones. 
3. The finitude of the ground of cognition is connected with this 
second finitude (which is the finitude of the form, just as the first 

INTRODUCTION (§§ 1-18) 
41 
was the finitude of the material). This cognitive ground is partly 
argumentation; partly feeling, belief, the authority of others; and, 
in general, the authority of inner or outer intuition. The philoso­
phy that wants to base itself on anthropology, on facts of con­
sciousness,17 on inward intuition or outward experience, belongs 
here too. 
4. It is also possible that only the form of the scientific presentation 
may be empirical, but that an insightful intuition orders what are 
only phenomena in a way that corresponds to the inner sequence 
of the Concept. In an empirical presentation of this kind the exter­
nal, contingent circumstances of the conditions are sublated through 
the opposition and manifoldness of the appearances that are put 
together; and the universal comes before the mind" as a result.­
An experimental physics, or a history, etc., that makes sense will 
present the rational science of nature and of human events and 
actions in this way, as an external image that mirrors the Concept. 18 
07 
With regard to the beginning that philosophy has to make, it seems, like the 
other sciences, to start in general with a subjective presupposition, i.e., to 
have to make a particular ob-ject, in this case thinking, into the ob-ject of 
thinking, just like space, number, etc., in the other sciences. But what we 
have here is the free act of thinking putting itself at the standpoint where it 
is for its own self, producing its own ob-ject for itself thereby, and giving it to 
itself. Within the Science this standpoint, which in this first act appears as 
immediate, must make itself into the result, and (what is more) into its last 
result, in which it reaches its beginning again and returns into itself. In this 
way, philosophy shows itself as a circle that goes back into itself; it does not 
have a beginning in the same sense as the other sciences, so that the 
beginning only has a relation to the subject whQ takes the decision to 
philosophise, but not to the science as such.19-Or, to put the same thing 
another way, the concept of the Science and therefore the first concept­
which, since it is the first one, contains the severance that thinking is ob­
ject for an (as it were external) philosophising subject-must be grasped by 
the Science itself. This is even its unique purpose, deed, and goal: to arrive 
at the Concept of its concept and so to arrive at its return [into itself] and 
contentment. 
a. VOT den Sinn 

42 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
§ IB 
Just as a provisional, or a general, notion of a philosophy cannot be given, 
because only the whole of the Science is the presentation of the Idea, so the 
division of it, too, can be comprehended only from the whole presentation; 
[at this point] the division is only something anticipated, like the [coming] 
presentation from which it has to be taken. But the Idea shows itself as the 
thinking that is strictly identical with itself, and this at once shows itself to 
be the activity of positing itself over against itself, in order to be for-itself, 
and to be, in this other, only at home with itself. Hence, the science falls 
into three parts: 
I. The Logic, the science of the Idea in and for itself. 
H. The Philosophy of Nature, as the science of the Idea in its otherness. 
Ill. The Philosophy of Spirit, as the Idea that returns into itself out of its 
otherness. 
In § 15 above, it was remarked that what distinguishes the particu­
lar philosophical sciences are only determinations of the Idea itself, 
and that it is only this Idea that presents itself in these diverse 
elements. In nature, it is not something-other than the Idea that is 
[re]cognised, but the Idea is in the form of [its] uttering,- just as in 
the spirit we have the same Idea as being for-itself, and coming to be 
in and for itself. A determination of this kind, in which the Idea 
appears, is at the same time a moment that flows; hence, the single 
science is just as much the cognition of its content as an ob-ject 
that is, as it is the immediate cognition in that content of its pas­
sage into its higher circle. The representation of division is therefore 
incorrect inasmuch as it puts the particular parts or sciences side by 
side, as if they were only immobile parts and substantial in their 
distinction, the way that species are. 
a. Entiiuflerung 

FIRST PART: 
THE SCIENCE OF LOGIC 


PRELIMINARY CONCEPTION 
§ 19 
The Logic is the science of the pure Idea, that is, of the Idea in the abstract 
element of thinking. 
a. formal 
What holds for all anticipatory concepts about philosophy applies 
to this determination just as it does to all the others contained in 
this Preliminary Conception; i.e., that they are determinations 
drawn from and subsequent to the survey of the whole. 
It can, of course, be said that logic is the science of thinking, of 
its determinations and laws, but thinking as such constitutes only 
the universal determinacy or the element in which the Idea is [sim­
ply] logical. The Idea is thinking, not as formala thinking, but as 
the self-developing totality of its own peculiar determinations and 
laws, which thinking does not' already have and find given within 
itself, but which it gives to itself. 
The Logic is the most difficult science, inasmuch as it has to do, 
not with [sensible] intuitions nor even, like geometry, with abstract 
sense-representations, but with pure abstractions, and inasmuch 
as it requires a trained ability at withdrawing into pure thought, 
holding onto it and moving within it. It could, on the other hand, 
be viewed as the easiest science, because its content is nothing but 
our own thinking and its ordinary determinations, and because 
these are both the simplest and what is elementary. They are also 
what we are most familiar with: being, nothing, etc.; determinacy, 
magnitude, etc.; being-in-itself, being-for-itself, one, many, and so 
on. But this familiarity only tends to make the study of the Logic 
more difficult. For one thing, we are prone to believe that it is not 
worthwhile to occupy oneself any further with what is so familiar. 
On the other hand, what we have to do is to become familiar with 
it in a way that is quite other than, and even opposed to, the one in 
which we are already used to it. 
45 

46 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
The usefulness of logic is a matter of its relationship to the sub­
ject, insofar as one gives oneself a certain formation for other 
purposes. The formation of the subject through logic consists in 
one's becoming proficient in thinking (since this science is the 
thinking of thinking) and in one's coming to have thoughts in one's 
head and to know them also as thoughts.-However, since the 
logical is the absolute form of the truth and, even more than that, 
the pure truth itself, it is really something quite other than any­
thing merely useful. But, just as that which is most excellent, most 
free, and independent is what is most useful, so the logical can be 
grasped as useful too. But in this case its usefulness is to be mea­
sured on quite another scale than as being just the formal exercise 
of our thinking [capacity] . 
Addition 1 .  The first question is: What is the subject matter of our science? The 
simplest and most intelligible answer to this question is that it is the truth. "Truth" 
is an elevated word and the thing itself stilI more so. As long as man's mind and 
spirit are healthy, his heart must begin at once to beat more quickly when it [truth] 
is mentioned. But very soon a reservation appears: can we also know the truth? 
There seems to be a lack of proportion between us men, limited as we are, and the 
truth as it is in and for itself; and the question arises of the bridge between the 
finite and the infinite. God is the Truth; how then are we to be cognizant of him? 
There seems to be a contradiction between any such project and the virtues of 
humility and modesty. 
But we also ask whether there could be any cognition of the truth in order to 
justify our continuing to be content with the coarseness of our finite purposes. So 
humility of this sort is not worth very much. Language such as: "How should a 
poor worm like me be able to discover what is true?" is a thing of the past; in its 
place has come self-assurance and presumption, and men imagine that they are in 
immediate contact with what is true. a-They have made the young believe that 
they already possess what is true (in religion and ethics), just as they stand. In 
particular, it has been said, from the same point of view, that the whole adult world 
is sunk, petrified, and ossified in untruth. A new dawn has appeared to youth, but 
the older world stilI lies in the slough and the morass of common day. 1 The special 
sciences have been pointed to as what we must in any case acquire, but simply as 
the means for the external purposes of life. Here it is not modesty that holds us 
back from the study and cognition of the truth, but rather the conviction that we' 
possess the truth in and for itself already. Older people certainly pin their hopes on 
the young, for it is the young who are to make progress for the world and in 
science.2 But we can only repose this hope in the young inasmuch as they do not 
just stay as they are, but take upon themselves the bitter labour of the spirit. 
There is still another shape assumed by modesty regarding truth. This is the sort 
of refined superiority toward truth that we see in Pilate when he confronts Christ. 
a. unmittelbar im Wahren zu sein 

PRELIMINARY CONCEPTION (§§ 19-83) 
47 
Pilate asked, "What is truth?" with the attitude of someone who has settled ac­
counts with everything, someone for whom nothing has a meaning any more-in 
the same sense in which Solomon says that "All is vanity" [Eccles. 1 :2] . All that 
remains at this point is subjective vanity. 
Then again, timidity hampers the cognition of the truth, too. It comes so easily 
to the slothful mind to say: "We do not mean to be serious about philosophising. 
We go to hear the logic lectures, too, of course, but they have to leave us un­
changed." We are of the opinion that if thinking goes beyond the circle of our 
familiar notions it must be going wrong; we are then entrusting ourselves to a sea 
on which we are beaten back and forth by the billows of thought, and in the end 
we land once more "upon this bank and shoal of time"3 which we left behind for 
nothing and in vain. What comes of such a view we can see in the world. One can 
acquire all manner of skills and all kinds of learning, become an official well versed 
in one's routine, and in every way train oneself for one's particular purposes. But it 
is quite another thing to cultivate one's spirit for higher things and to make efforts 
on behalf of that. We may hope that in our time a longing for something better has 
sprung up in the young, and that they will not be content with the mere straw of a 
cognition that remains on the outside of things. 
Addition 2 .  That thinking is the subject matter of logic, we are all agreed. But about 
thinking we can have a very low and also a very high opinion. Thus, we say on the 
one hand, "That is only a thought," and we mean thereby that thought is only 
subjective, arbitrary, and contingent, and not the matter that really counts, not what 
is true and actual. But, on the other hand, people can also have a high opinion of 
thought and take it in the sense that only thought attains to what is highest, God's 
nature, and that there is no cognition of God by means of the senses. We say that 
God is Spirit and that it is his will that we should worship him in spirit and in truth 
Uohn 4: 24]. But, we concede that the merely felt and sensible is not the spiritual; 
on the contrary, the inmost heart of the latter is thought, and only spirit can 
[re]cognise spirit. Of course, spirit can also behave as something that feels (e.g., in 
religion), but feeling as such, the mode of feeling, is one thing, while the content of 
feeling is another. Feeling as such is the general form of what is sensible; we have it 
in common with the animals. This form can indeed take hold of the concrete con­
tent, but the content does not belong to this form; feeling is the lowest form that 
the spiritual content can assume. It is only in thinking, and as thinking, that this 
content, God himself, is in its truth. In this sense, therefore, thought is not just mere 
thought; on the contrary, it is what is highest and, considered strictly, it is the one 
and only way in which what is eternal, and what is in and for itself can be grasped. 
People can have a high or a low opinion of the science of thought, just as they 
can of thought itself. Everybody can think without logic-so we say-just as we can 
digest without studying physiology. Even if you have studied logic, you still think 
afterwards the way you did before, perhaps more methodically, but with little 
change. If logic had nothing else to do than make us acquainted with the activity of 
merely formal thinking, it would not have brought forth anything that we could 

48 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
not have done just as well without studying logic. In fact, the traditional logic did 
no more than that. Still, to be acquainted with thinking as a merely subjective 
activity already does man honour, and has an interest for him; by knowing what he 
is and what he does, man distinguishes himself from the animals. 
But now, on the other hand, logic as the science of thinking also has a higher 
standpoint inasmuch as thought alone is able to experience what is highest, or 
what is true. Thus, if the Science of Logic considers thinking in its activity and its 
production (and thinking is not an activity without content, for it produces 
thoughts and Thought itself),' its content is in any event the supersensible world; 
and to be occupied with that world is to sojourn in it. Mathematics has to do with 
the abstractions of number and of space; but these are still something sensible, 
though in an abstract way and not as really being there. b Thought says farewell 
even to this last element of the sensible, and is free, at home with itself; it re­
nounces external and internal sensibility, and distances itself from all particular 
concerns and inclinations. Insofar as this is the terrain of logic, we must think more 
worthily of it than people are in the habit of doing. 
Addition 3 .  The need to understand logic in a deeper sense than that of the science 
of merely formal thinking is sparked by the interests of religion, of the State, of law, 
and of ethical life. In earlier times people saw no harm in thinking and happily 
used their own heads. They thought about God, nature, and the State, and were 
convinced that only by thinking would they become cognizant of what the truth is, 
not through the senses or through some chance notion or opinion. But, because 
they pushed on with thinking in this way, it turned out that the highest relation­
ships in life were compromised by it. Thinking deprived what was positive of its 
power. Political constitutions fell victim to thought; religion was attacked by 
thought; firm religious notions that counted as totally genuine revelations were 
undermined, and in many minds the old faith was overthrown. For example, the 
Greek philosophers set themselves against the old religion and destroyed its repre­
sentations. Consequently, philosophers were banished and killed4 for seeking to 
overthrow religion and the State (which essentially belonged together). In this way 
thinking asserted its validity in the actual world and exerted the most tremendous 
influence. Being thereby made aware of the power of thinking, people began to in­
vestigate its claims more closely, and professed to have discovered that it was 
presumptuous and could not accomplish what it had undertaken. Instead of arriv­
ing at the cognition of the essence of God, of Nature, and of Spirit or, in sum, of 
truth itself, this thinking overturned the State and religion. For this reason, a justi­
fication of thinking with regard to its results was demanded; and the inquiry into 
the nature and competence of thinking is just what has very largely constituted the 
concern of modern philosophy. 
a. das Denken . .  produziert Gedanken und den Gedanken 
b. obschon das abstrakt Sinnliche und Daseinslose 

PRELIMINARY CONCEPTION (§§ 19-83) 
49 
§ 20 
If we take thinking according to the most obvious notion of it, then it 
appears (a) first in its ordinary subjective significance, as one spiritual 
activity or faculty side by side with others such as sensation, intuition, 
imagination, etc., desire, volition, etc. What it produces, the determinacy or 
form of thought, is the universal, the abstract in general. Thus, thinking as 
an activity is the active universal, and indeed the self-actuating universal, 
since the act, or what is brought forth, is precisely the universal. Thinking 
represented as a subject is that which thinks, and the simple expression for 
the existing subject as thinker is "In . 
The determinations indicated here and in the coming paragraphs 
should not be taken as assertions or as my opinions about thinking; 
but since in this preliminary discussion no deduction or proof can 
take place, they can be counted as facta in the sense that, when 
anyone has thoughts and considers them, it is empirically given in 
his consciousness that universality, as well as the determinations 
that follow in its train, is found in them. Of course, the presence of 
a trained capacity for attention and abstraction is required for the 
observation of the facta of one's consciousness and of one's 
representa tions. 
Already in this preliminary exposition, we are speaking of the 
distinction between the sensible, representation, and thought; this 
distinction is altogether decisive for our grasp of the nature and 
the kinds of cognition; so it will clarify matters if we call attention 
to this distinction already at this point.-To elucidate the sensible 
we refer first to its external origin, to the senses of sense organs. 
But simply naming the organ does not give us the determination of 
what we apprehend with it. The distinction of the sensible from 
thought is to be located in the fact that the determination of the 
sensible is singularity, and since the singular (in quite abstract 
terms, the atom) stands also within a context, the sensible is a 
[realm of] mutual externality whose proximate abstract forms are 
juxtaposition and succession.-Representation has sensible material 
of this kind as its content; but it is posited in the determination of 
its being mine-that the represented content is in me-and of its 
universality, of its self-relation, or of its simplicity.-Apart from the 
sensible, however, representation also has material that has sprung 
from self-conscious thinking as its content, such as the notion of 
what is right, of what is ethical or religious, and also of thinking 
itself; and it is not very easy to see where the distinction between 
these representations and the thoughts of those contents is to be 

50 
a. meine 
b. mein 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
located. Here the content is a thought, and the form of universality 
is present too, for that form already belongs to a content as being 
in me, or, quite generally, as being a representation. The peculiarity 
of representation, however, is in general to be located in this fact 
also-that the content in it stands at the same time in isolation. 
"Right" and juridical and other similar determinations certainly do 
not stand in the sensible mutual externality of space. They do ap­
pear somehow in time, one after the other; but their content is not 
itself represented as affected by time, as passing away and chang­
ing in it. Nevertheless, these determinations, which are in them­
selves spiritual, stand at the same time in isolation upon the broad 
field of the inner, abstract universality of representation in general. 
In this isolation they are simple: right, duty, God. Representation 
either sticks to the claim that right is right, God is God, or, (at a 
more cultivated level) it points out determinations, such as that 
God is the Creator of the world, that he is all-wise, almighty, etc. 
Here, too, several isolated and simple determinations are strung 
together; but they remain external to each other, in spite of the link 
that is allotted to them in their subject. In this respect, representa­
tion agrees with the understanding, which is only distinct from it 
because it posits relationships of universal and particular, or of 
cause and effect, etc., and therefore necessary relations between 
the isolated determinations of representation-whereas represen­
tation leaves them side by side, in its undetermined space, linked 
only by the simple "and."-The distinction between representa­
tion and thought is all the more important because we can say in 
general that philosophy does nothing but transform representa­
tions into thoughts-although, of course, it does go on to trans­
form the mere thought into the Concept. 
Moreover, when the determinations of singularity and of mutual 
externality have been earmarked for the sensible, we can add that 
these determinations themselves are again thoughts and univer­
sals. It will be seen in the LogiC that this is just what thought and 
the universal are: that thought is itself and its other, that it over­
grasps its other and that nothing escapes it. And because language 
is the work of thought, nothing can be said in language that is not 
universal. What I only mean" is mine;b it belongs to me as this 
particular individual. But if language expresses only what is uni­
versal, then I cannot say what I only mean. And what cannot be said 

PRELIMINARY CONCEPTION (§§ 19-83) 
51 
-feeling, sensation-is not what is most important, most true, but 
what is most insignificant, most untrue. When I say "the singular," 
"this singular," "here," "now," all of these expressions are univer­
salities; each and every thing is a singular, a this, even when it is 
sensible-here, now. Similarly when I say "1," I mean me as this one 
excluding all others; but what I say ("1") is precisely everyone, an 
"1" that excludes all others from itself.-Kant5 employed the awk­
ward expression, that I "accompany" all my representations--and 
my sensations, desires, actions, etc., too. "1" is the universal in and 
for itself, and communality is one more form-although an exter­
nal one-of universality. All other humans have this in common 
with me, to be "1," just as all my sensations, representations, etc., 
have in common that they are mine. But, taken abstractly as such, 
"1" is pure relation to itself, in which abstraction is made from 
representation and sensation, from every state as well as from 
every peculiarity of nature, of talent, of experience, and so on. To 
this extent, "1" is the existence of the entirely abstract universality, 
the abstractly free. Therefore "1" is thinking as the subject, and since 
I am at the same time in all my sensations, notions, states, etc., 
thought is present everywhere and pervades all these determina­
tions as [their] category.6 
Addition. When we talk about "thinking," it appears at first to be a subjective 
activity, one faculty among many others, e.g., memory, representation, volition, 
and the like. If thinking were merely a subjective activity and, as such, the subject 
matter of the Logic, then the Logic would, like other sciences, have a determinate 
subject matter. It could then appear to be an arbitrary choice to make thinking­
and not willing, imagination, etc.-the subject matter of a particular science. The 
reason why thinking is accorded this honour might well be the fact that we con­
cede a certain authority to it, and that we regard it as what constitutes man's 
genuine nature, as that wherein his difference from animals consists. 
And it is interesting to become acquainted with thinking even as a merely sub­
jective activity. Its more precise determinations would in that case be rules and 
laws that we become acquainted with through experience. Thinking considered in 
this perspective, with regard to its laws, is what used formerly to constitute the 
content of logic. Aristotle is the founder of this science. He had the force of mind to 
assign to thinking what properly belongs to it. Our thinking is very concrete, but in 
its multiform content we must distinguish what belongs to thinking, to the abstract 
form of the activity. The activity of thinking is the gentle spiritual bond that con­
nects this entire content; and this bond, this form as such, is what Aristotle 
brought into relief and determined. Right up to the present day, this logic of 
Aristotle is still the content of logic, which has simply been spun out further, 
mainly by the mediaeval Scholastics.7 These still did not increase the material, but 
just developed it further. The work on logic that has been done in modern times 

52 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
has principally consisted in the simple omission of many logical determinations 
elaborated by Aristotle and the Scholastics, on the one hand, and in stuffing logic 
with a lot of psychological material, on the other. The point of this science is to 
become familiar with how finite thinking proceeds, and the science is correct when 
it corresponds to its presupposed subject matter. There is no doubt that working on 
this formal logic has its use. Through it, as people say, we sharpen our wits; we 
learn to collect our thoughts, and to abstract. For in ordinary consciousness we deal 
with sensible representations, which cut across one another and cause confusion; 
but in abstraction what happens is that the mind concentrates on one point, and we 
acquire in that way the habit of occupying ourselves with what is inward. Acquain­
tance with the forms of finite thinking can be used as a means of training in the 
empirical sciences, which proceed according to these forms, and it is in this sense 
that people have called logic "instrumental." We can, of course, speak in a more 
liberal way, and say that logic should be studied not for its usefulness, but for its 
own sake, because what is excellent should not be pursued for the sake of mere 
advantage. And, on the one hand, this is quite correct, to be sure; but, on the other, 
what is excellent is also what is the most advantageous. For it is what is substantial, 
what stands most firmly on its own, so that it is what sustains our particular 
purposes, which it furthers and brings to fulfillment. We must not regard these 
particular purposes as what comes first, but what is excellent furthers them nev­
ertheless. Religion, for example, has its absolute value within itself, but other 
purposes are supported and upheld by it at the same time. Christ said, "Seek ye 
first the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you" [Matt. 
6:33].-Our particular purposes can be attained only insofar as what is in and for 
itself is attained. 
§ 21 
(£S) When thinking is taken as active with regard to ob-jects, as the 
thinking-over of something, then the universal-as the product of this 
activity-contains the value of the matter, what is essential, inner, true. 
In §5 we mentioned the old belief that what is genuine in ob-jects, 
[their] constitutions, or what happens to them, [i.e.,] what is inner, 
what is essential, and the matter that counts, is not to be found in 
consciousness immediately; that it cannot be what the first look or 
impression already offers us, but that we must first think it over in 
order to arrive at the genuine constitution of the ob-ject, and that 
by thinking it over this [goal] is indeed achieved. 
Addition. Even the child is enjoined to think about things. For instance, we set 
children to connect adjectives with substantives.8 Here, they have to pay attention 
and to distinguish; they have to remember a rule and apply it to the particular case. 

PRELIMINARY CONCEPTION (§§ 19-83) 
53 
The rule is nothing but a universal, and the child must make the particular con­
form to this universal. 
Furthermore, in life we have purposes which we think about to see how we can 
attain them. Here the purpose is the universal, the governing factor, and we have 
means and instruments, the action of which we direct in accordance with the 
purpose.-In a similar way we actively think about moral situations. Here, to think 
about them means to be mindful of right and duty, or, in other words, of the 
universal to which we must conform our particular behaviour in given cases as to 
the fixed rule. The universal determination should be recognisably contained in 
our particular way of acting. 
We find the same thing, too, in our behaviour with regard to natural phenomena. 
For example, we take note of thunder and lightning. We are acquainted with this 
phenomenon and we often observe it. But man is not satisfied with this mere 
acquaintance, with the simple sensible phenomenon; he wants to look behind it; he 
wants to know what it is, wants to comprehend it. We think about it, therefore; we 
want to know the cause as something distinct from the phenomenon as such; 
we want to know what is inward as distinct from what is merely outward. So we 
reduplicate the phenomenon; we break it in two, the inward and the outward, force 
and its utterance, cause and effect. Here again, the inner side, or force, is the 
universal, that which persists; it is not this or that lightning, this or that plant, but 
what remains the same in all. What is sensible is something singular and transi­
tory; it is by thinking about it that we get to know what persists in it. Nature offers 
us an infinite mass of singular shapes and appearances. We feel the need to bring 
unity into this manifold; therefore, we compare them and seek to [re]cognise what 
is universal in each of them. Individuals are born and pass away; in them their kind 
is what abides, what recurs in all of them; and it is only present for us when we 
think about them. This is where laws, e.g., the laws of the motion of heavenly 
bodies, belong too. We see the stars in one place today and in another tomorrow; 
this disorder is for the spirit something incongruous, and not to be trusted, since 
the spirit believes in an order, a simple, constant, and universal determination [of 
things]. This is the faith in which the spirit has directed its [reflective] thinking 
upon the phenomena, and has come to know their laws, establishing the motion of 
the heavenly bodies in a universal manner, so that every change of position can be 
determined and [re]cognised on the basis of this law.-It is the same with regard to 
the powers that govern human action in its infinite diversity. Here, too, man be­
lieves in a ruling universal.-From all these examples we may gather how, in 
thinking about things, we always seek what is fixed, persisting, and inwardly 
determined, and what governs the particular. This universal cannot be grasped by 
means of the senses, and it counts as what is essential and true. Duties and rights, 
for example, are what is essential in actions, and the truth of actions consists in 
their conforming with those universal determinations. 
When we determine the universal in this way, we find that it forms the antithesis 
of something else, namely, the merely immediate, external, and singular, as against 
the mediated, the inward, and the universal. This universal does not exist exter­
nally as universal: the kind as such cannot be perceived; the laws of the motion of 
the heavenly bodies are not inscribed in the sky. So we do not see and hear the 

54 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
universal; only for the spirit is it present. Religion leads us to a universal, which 
embraces everything else within itself, to an Absolute by which everything else is 
brought forth, and this Absolute is not [there] for the senses but only for the spirit 
and for thought. 
§ 22 
('y) Thinking it over changes something in the way in which the content is 
at first [given] in sensation, intuition, or representation; thus, it is only 
through the mediation of an alteration that the true nature of the ob-ject 
comes into consciousness. 
Addition. When we think about something, what results is a product of our think­
ing. For instance, the laws that Solon gave to the Athenians he produced from his 
own head.9 On the other side of the coin, however, there is the fact that we also 
view the universal, the laws, as the opposite of something merely subjective, and 
we [re]cognise in them what is essential, genuine, and objective about things. In 
order to experience what is true in things, mere attention is not enough; on the 
contrary, our subjective activity, which transforms what is immediately before us, is 
involved. At first glance, to be sure, this seems to stand things on their heads, and 
to run counter to the proper purpose of cognition. But we can say, too, that it has 
been the conviction of every age that what is substantial is only reached through 
the reworking of the immediate by our thinking about it. It has most notably been 
only in modern times, on the other hand, that doubts have been raised and the 
distinction between the products of our thinking and what things are in them­
selves has been insisted on. It has been said that the In-itself of things is quite 
different from what we make of them. This separateness is the standpoint that has 
been maintained especially by the Critical Philosophy, against the conviction of the 
whole world previously in which the agreement between the matter [itself] and 
thought was taken for granted. The central concern of modern philosophy turns on 
this antithesis. But it is the natural belief of mankind that this antithesis has no 
truth. In ordinary life we think about things without the special reflection that that 
is how what is true comes forth; we think without hesitation, in the firm belief that 
our thought agrees with its matter, and this belief is of the highest importance. The 
sickness of our time, which has arrived at the point of despair, is the assumption 
that our cognition is only subjective and that this is the last word about it. But the 
truth is what is objective, and this truth ought to be the rule governing everyone's 
convictions, so that the convictions of a single mind are bad insofar as they do not 
correspond with this rule. But, according to the modern view, conviction as such, 
the mere form of being convinced, is already good (whatever its contents may be), 
since no criterion is available for its truth. 
We said earlier that it has been man's ancient faith that it is the vocation of the 
spirit to know the truth. This has the further implication that the ob-jects, both the 
outer and the inner nature, the object in general, is in-itself just as it is in thought, 

PRELIMINARY CONCEPTION (§§ 19-83) 
55 
and that thinking is therefore the truth of what is ob-jective. The business of 
philosophy consists only in bringing into consciousness explicitly what people have 
held to be valid about thought from time immemorial. Thus, philosophy estab­
lishes nothing new; what we have brought forth by our reflection here is what 
everyone already takes for granted without reflection. a 
§ 23 
Because it is equally the case that in this thinking-over the genuine nature 
[of the ob-ject] comes to light, and that this thinking is my activity, this true 
nature is also the product of my spirit, [of me] as thinking subject. It is mine 
according to my simple universality as [universality] of the "1" being simply 
at home with itself, or it is the product of my freedom. 
We often hear the expression "thinking for oneself,"lO as if it meant 
something important. But in fact one cannot think for someone 
else, any more than one can eat or drink for him; this expression is 
therefore a pleonasm.-Thinking immediately involves freedom, 
because it is the activity of the universal, a self-relating that is 
therefore abstract, a being-with-itself that is undetermined in re­
spect of subjectivity, and which in respect of its content is, at the 
same time, only in the matter [itself] and in its determinations. So 
when one speaks of humility or modesty, and of arrogance, with 
reference to the doing of philosophy, and when this humility or 
modesty consists in not attributing any particularity of feature or 
agency to one's subjectivity, then philosophising has to be absolved 
from arrogance at least, since thinking is only genuine with respect 
to its content insofar as it is immersed in the matter, and with 
respect to its form insofar so it is not a particular being or doing of 
the subject, but consists precisely in this, that consciousness con­
ducts itself as an abstract "1," as freed from all particularityb of 
features, states, etc., and does only what is universal, in which it is 
identical with all individuals.-When Aristotlell summons us to 
consider ourselves as worthy of conduct of this sort, then the 
worthiness that consciousness ascribes to itself consists precisely 
in the giving up of our particular opinions and beliefs and in allow­
ing the matter [itself] to hold sway over us. 
a. ist schon unmittelbares Varurteil eines jeden 
b. Partikularitat 

56 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
§ 24 
In accordance with these determinations, thoughts can be called objective 
thoughts; and among them the forms which are considered initially in 
ordinary logic and which are usually taken to be only forms of conscious 
thinking have to be counted too. Thus logic coincides with metaphysics, 
with the science of things grasped in thoughts that used to be taken to 
express the essentialities of the things. 
The relationship of forms such as concept, judgment, and syllog­
ism to others like causality, etc., can only establish itself within the 
Logic itself. But one can see already, though only in a preliminary 
way, that, since thought seeks to form a concept of things, this 
concept (along with judgment and syllogism as its most immediate 
forms) cannot consist in determinations and relationships that are 
alien and external to the things. As we said above, thinking things 
over leads to what is universal in them; but the universal is itself 
one of the moments of the Concept. To say that there is under­
standing, or reason, in the world is exactly what is contained in 
the expression "objective thought." But this expression is inconve­
nient preCisely because "thought" is all too commonly used as if it 
belonged only to spirit, or consciousness, while "objective" is used 
primarily just with reference to what is unspiritual. 
Addition 1 .  If we say that thought, qua objective, is the inwardness of the world, it 
may seem as if consciousness is being ascribed to natural things. Bur we feel a 
repugnance against conceiving the inner activity of things to be thinking, since we 
say that man is distinguished from what is merely natural by virtue of thinking. In 
this view we would have to talk about nature as a system of thought without 
consciousness, or an intelligence which, as 5chelling says, is petrified.12 50 in order 
to avoid misunderstanding, it is better to speak of "thought-determinations" in­
stead of using the expression "thoughts". 
In line with what has been said so far, then, the Logical is to be sought in a 
system of thought-determinations in which the antithesis between subjective and 
objective (in its usual meaning) disappears. This meaning of thinking and of its 
determinations is more precisely expressed by the Ancients when they say that 
nous governs the world. or by our own saying that there is reason in the world, by 
which we mean that reason is the soul of the world, inhabits it, and is immanent in 
it, as its own, innermost nature, its universal. An example closer at hand is that, in 
speaking of a definite animal, we say that it is [an] "animal." "Animal as such" 
cannot be pointed out; only a definite animal can ever be pointed at. "The animal" 
does not exist; on the contrary, this expression refers to the universal nature of 
single animals, and each existing animal is something that is much more concretely 
determinate, something particularised. But "to be animal," the kind considered as 

PRELIMINARY CONCEPTION (§§ 19-83) 
57 
the universal, pertains to the determinate animal and constitutes its determinate 
essentiality. If we were to deprive a dog of its animality we could not say what it is. 
Things as such have a persisting, inner nature, and an external thereness. They live 
and die, come to be and pass away; their essentiality, their universality, is the kind, 
and this cannot be interpreted merely as something held in common. 
Just as thinking constitutes the substance of external things, so it is also the 
universal substance of what is spiritual. In all human intuiting there is thinking; 
similarly, thinking is what is universal in all representations, recollections, and in 
every spiritual activity whatsoever, in all willing, wishing, etc. These are all of them 
just further specifications of thinking. When thinking is interpreted in this way, it 
appears in quite a different light than when we simply say that, along with and 
beside other faculties such as intuiting, representing, willing, and the like, we have 
a faculty of thinking. If we regard thinking as what is genuinely universal in 
everything natural and everything spiritual, too, then it overgrasps all of them and 
is the foundation of them all. As the next step, we can add to this interpretation of 
thinking in its objective meaning (as nous) [our account of) what thinking is in its 
subjective sense. First of all, we say that man thinks, but, at the same time, we say 
too that he intuits, wills, etc. Man thinks and is something universal, but he thinks 
only insofar as the universal is [present) for him. The animal is also in-itself 
something universal, but the universal as such is not [present) for it; instead only 
the singular is ever [there) for it. The animal sees something singular, for instance, 
its food, a man, etc. But all these are only something singular for it. In the same 
way our sense experience always has to do only with something singular (this pain, 
this pleasant taste, etc.). Nature does not bring the nous to consciousness for itself; 
only man reduplicates himself in such a way that he is the universal that is [pres­
ent) for the universal. This is the case for the first time when man knows himself to 
be an "I." When I say "I," I mean myself as this Singular, quite determinate person. 
But when I say "I," I do not in fact express anything particular about myself. 
Anyone else is also "I," and although in calling myself "1," I certainly mean me, this 
single [person), what I say is still something completely universal. 
"I" is pure being-for-itself, in which everything particular is negated and 
sublated--consciousness as ultimate, simple, and pure. We can say that "I" and 
thinking are the same, or, more specifically, that "I" is thinking as what thinks. 
What I have in my consciousness, that is for me. "I" is this void, this receptacle for 
anything and everything, that for which everything is and which preserves every­
thing within itself. Everyone is a whole world of representations, which are buried 
in the night of the "I." Thus, "I" is the universal, in which abstraction is made from 
everything particular, but in which at the same time everything is present, though 
veiled. It is not merely abstract universality therefore, but the universality that 
contains everything within itself. We start by using "I" in a wholly trivial manner, 
and it is only our philosophical reflection that makes it a subject matter of inquiry. 
In the "I;' we have thought present in its complete purity. Animals cannot say "I"; 
no, only man can do so, because he is thinking itself. In the "I" there is a manifold 
inner and outer content, and, according to the way in which this content is con­
stituted, we behave as sensing, representing, remembering, [beings), etc. But the 
"I" is there in all of these, or, in other words, thinking is present everywhere. Thus 

58 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
man is always thinking, even when he simply intuits; if he considers something or 
other he always considers it as something universal, he fixes on something singu­
lar, and makes it stand out, thus withdrawing his attention from something else, 
and he takes it as something abstract and universal, even though it is universal in a 
merely formal way. 
With our representations, two cases are possible: either the content is something 
thought but the form is not, or, conversely, the form belongs to thought but the con­
tent does not. If I say, e.g., "anger," "rose," "hope," I am familiar with all this 
through feeling,. but I express this content in a universal way, in the form of 
thought; I have left out a good deal of what is particular about it, and given only 
the content as universal, but that content remains sensible. Conversely, if I repre­
sent God to myself, then certainly the content is purely something thought, but the 
form is still sensible, just as I already find it immediately within me. In these 
representations, therefore, the content is not merely sensible, as when I simply 
look at something: either the content is sensible, while the form belongs to think­
ing, or conversely. In the first case, the material is given and the form belongs to 
thinking; in the other case, thinking is the source of the content, but through the 
form the content becomes something given, which therefore comes to the spirit 
from outside. 
Addition 2. In the Logic we have to do with pure thought or with the pure thought­
determinations. In the case of thought in the ordinary sense, we always represent 
to ourselves something that is not merely pure thought, for we intend by it some­
thing that is thought of, but which has an empirical content. In the Logic, thoughts 
are grasped in such a way that they have no content other than one that belongs to 
thinking itself, and is brought forth by thinking. So these thoughts are pure 
thoughts. Spirit is here purely at home with itself, and thereby free, for that is just 
what freedom is: being at home with oneself in one's other, depending upon one­
self, and being one's own determinant. In all drives I begin with an other, with 
what is for me something external. Hence, we speak of dependence in this case. 
Freedom is only present where there is no other for me that is not myself. The 
natural man, who is determined only by his drives, is not at home with himself; 
however self-willed he may be, the content of his willing and opining is not his 
own, and his freedom is only a formalb one. When I think, I give up my subjective 
particularity, sink myself in the matter, let thought follow its own course; and I 
think badly whenever I add something of my own. 
When, in accordance with what has been said so far, we consider the Logic as 
the system of pure thought-determinations, the other philosophical sciences-the 
Philosophy of Nature, and the Philosophy of Spirit-appear, in contrast, as applied 
logic, so to speak, for the Logic is their animating soul. Thus, the concern of those 
other sciences is only to [reJcognise the logical forms in the shapes of nature and 
spirit, shapes that are only a particular mode of expression of the forms of pure 
thinking. If we take the syllogism, for instance (not in the sense of the older formal 
logic, but in its truth), then it is that [thought-J determination in which the particu-
a. Empfil1dul1g 
b. formelle 

PRELIMINARY CONCEPTION (§§ 19-83) 
59 
lar is the middle that con-cludes13 the extremes of the universal and the singular. 
This syllogistic form is a universal form of all things. All of them are particulars 
that con-elude themselves as something universal with the singular. But it is a 
consequence of the impotence of nature that it cannot present the logical forms in 
their purity. The magnet, for instance, is an impotent presentation of the syllogism; 
it brings its poles together14 in the middle, at its point of Indifference,' and, as a 
result, the poles, though distinct, are immediately one. In physics, too, we become 
acquainted with the universal, the essence, and the distinction is only that the 
Philosophy of Nature makes us conscious of the genuine forms of the Concept in 
natural things. 
• 
In this way the Logic is the all-animating spirit of all sciences, and the thought­
determinations contained in the Logic are the pure spirits;ls they are what is most 
inward, but, at the same time, they are always on our lips, and consequently they 
seem to be something thoroughly well known. But what is well known in this 
manner is usually what is most unknown. Thus, Being, for example, is a pure 
thought-determination; but it never occurs to us to make "is" the subject matter of 
our inquiry. We usually suppose that the Absolute must lie far beyond; but it is 
precisely what is wholly present, what we, as thinkers, always carry with us and 
employ, even though we have no express consciousness of it. It is in language that 
these thought-determinations are primarily deposited.16 Hence, the instruction in 
grammar that is imparted to children has the useful role of making them uncon­
sCiously attentive to distinctions that occur in thinking. 
It is usually said that logic deals only with forms and that their content must be 
taken from elsewhere. It is not logical thoughts, however, that are "only" so-and­
so, in comparison with all other content; on the contrary, it is all other content that 
is an "only" in comparison with them. Logical thoughts are the ground that is in 
and for itself of everything.-Concern with such pure determinations does, to be 
sure, presuppose a superior level of education. Studying them in and for them­
selves signifies further that we deduce them from thinking itself, and see from 
their own [development] whether they are genuine. We do not take them up in an 
external way, and then define them or exhibit their value and validity by comparing 
them with how they actually occur in consciousness. If we did that we would be 
starting from observation and experience. We would say, for example, "We nor­
mally use 'force' in such and such a way." We call a definition of that sort correct if 
it agrees with what is found to be the case with its ob-ject in our ordinary con­
sciousness of it. In this way, however, a concept is not determined in and for itself 
but according to a presupposition, which then becomes the criterion, the standard 
of correctness. We do not have to use such a standard, however; we can simply let 
the inherently living determinations take their own course instead. The question 
about the truth of thought-determininations is bound to sound strange to our 
ordinary consciousness, for the determinations of thought seem to acquire truth 
only in their application to given ob-jects, and on this assumption it makes no 
sense to question their truth apart from this application. But this question is pre­
cisely the point at issue. Certainly, when we raise it, we must know what is to be 
a. lndifferenzpunkt 

60 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
understood by "truth." In the ordinary way, what we call "truth" is the agreement 
of an ob-ject with our representation of it. We are then presupposing an ob-ject to 
which our representation is supposed to conform. 
In the philosophical sense, on the contrary, "truth," expressed abstractly and in 
general, means the agreement of a content with itself. This is therefore a meaning 
of "truth" quite different from the one mentioned above. Besides, the deeper 
(philosophical) meaning of "truth" is also partly found in ordinary linguistic usage 
already. We speak, for instance, of a "true" friend, and by that we understand one 
whose way of acting conforms with the concept of friendship; and in the same way 
we speak also of a "true" work of art. To say of something that it is "untrue" is as 
much as to say that it is bad, that it involves an inner inadequacy. A bad State, in 
this sense, is an "untrue" State; and what is bad and untrue consists always in a 
contradiction between the ob-ject's determination or concept and its existence. We 
can form a correct representation of a bad ob-ject of this sort, but the content of this 
representation is something inwardly "untrue." We may have many examples of 
such things in our heads, examples that are correct and at the same time "untrue." 
God alone is the genuine agreement between Concept and reality; all finite 
things, however, are affected with untruth; they have a concept, but their existence 
is not adequate to it. For this reason they must go to the ground, and this manifests 
the inadequacy between their concept and their existence. The animal as some­
thing singular has its concept in its kind, and the kind frees itself from singularity 
through death. 
The consideration of truth in the sense explained here, that of agreement with 
itself, constitutes the proper concern of logical thinking. The question of the truth 
of the thought-determinations does not arise in our ordinary consciousness. The 
business of the Logic can also be expressed by saying that it considers how far the 
thought-determinations are capable of grasping what is true. So the central ques­
tion becomes: which of them are the forms of the Infinite, and which are the forms 
of the finite? In ordinary consciousness we see nothing wrong with the finite 
determinations of thought; they are held to be valid without further question. But 
all our illusions arise from thinking and acting according to finite determinations. 
Addition 3. We become cognizant of what is true in various modes, and the modes 
of cognition must be considered only as forms. Thus, we can certainly become 
cognizant of what is true through experience, but this experience is only a form. 
With experiences everything depends on the mind with which we approach actu­
ality. A great mind> has great experiences, and in the motley play of appearance 
spots the crucial point. b The Idea is present and actual, not something over the hiIls 
and far away. A great mind, the mind of a Goethe, for instance, has great experi­
ences, when it looksc into nature or history; it sees what is rational and expresses 
it. Furthermore, we can also become cognizant of what is true through reflection; 
we are then determining it through relationships of thought. But what is true in 
and for itself is not present in its proper form in either of these cognitive modes. 
a. Sinn 
b. erblickt das, worauf es ankommt 
c. blickt 

PRELIMINARY CONCEPTION (§§ 19-83) 
61 
The most perfect mode of cognition is that which takes place in the pure form 
of thinking. Here, man behaves in a way that is thoroughly free. That the form of 
thinking is the absolute one, and that the truth appears within it as it is in and for 
itself-this is what philosophy in general asserts. Proving this means, to start with, 
showing that those other forms of cognition are finite. The high scepticism of 
antiquity accomplished this by showing that every one of those forms contained a 
contradiction within itself.17 When this scepticism was applied to the forms of 
reason also, it first foisted something finite onto them in order to have something 
to lay hold of. All the forms of finite thinking will come before us in the course of 
their logical development, and, what is more, they will come forth in their neces­
sary order of appearance: here (in the introduction) they have had to be taken up 
first in an unscientific way, as something given. In the logical treatise itself, not 
only the negative but also the positive side of these forms will be exhibited. 
When we are comparing the various forms of cognition with one another, it can 
easily appear that the first one, that of immediate knowledge, is the most adequate, 
the finest, and the highest. It includes everything that is called innocence in the 
moral sphere, as well as religious feeling, simple trust, love, fidelity, and natural 
faith. Both of the other forms, first reflective cognition and then philosophical 
cognition too, step out of that immediate natural unity. Insofar as they have this in 
common with one another, the mode of cognition that consists in wanting to grasp 
the truth through thinking can easily appear as the human conceit that wants to 
recognise the true by its own strength. This standpoint of universal separation can 
certainly be looked on as the origin of all wickedness and evil, as the original 
transgression; and on this view it seems that thinking and cognition must be given 
up in order to return [to unity] and become reconciled again. As for the abandon­
ment of natural unity here, this marvellous inward schism of the spiritual has been 
something of which all peoples from time immemorial have been conscious. a An 
inner schism like this does not occur in nature, and natural things do not do evil. 
We have an old account of the origin and consequences of this schism in the 
Mosaic myth of the Fall.18 The content of this myth forms the foundation of an 
essential doctrine of faith, the doctrine of the natural sinfulness of man, and his 
need of help to overcome it. It appears appropriate to consider the myth of the Fall 
at the very beginning of the Logic, because the Logic is concerned with cognition, 
and the myth too deals with cognition, with its origin and significance. Philosophy 
should not shy away from religion, and adopt the attitude that it must be content if 
religion simply tolerates it. And, on the other hand, we must equally reject the view 
that myths and religious accounts of this kind are something obsolete, for they 
have been venerated for millenia by the peoples of the world. 
Let us now consider the myth of the Fall more closely. As we remarked earlier, 
what is expressed here is the general relationship of cognition to the spiritual life. 
In its immediate shape spiritual life appears first as innocence and simple trust; but 
it is of the essence of spirit to sublate this immediate state, since spiritual life 
distinguishes itself from natural life, and more precisely from the life of animals, by 
the fact that it does not abide in its being-in-itself, but is for itself. In like manner, 
however, this stage of schism must itself be sublated in turn, and spirit must return 
a. van alters her ein Gegenstand des Bewufitseins der Viilker gewesen 

62 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
through its own agency to union with itself. This resulting union is a spiritual one, 
and the guiding principle of that return lies in thinking itself. It is thinking that 
both inflicts the wound and heals it again. 
Now, it says in our myth that Adam and Eve, the first human beings, or human­
kind as such, found themselves in a garden, in which there were both a tree of life 
and a tree of cognition of good and evil. We are told that God had forbidden this 
human pair to eat of the fruits of the latter tree; at this point there is no more talk 
of the tree of life. So what this means is that humanity should not come to cogni­
tion, but remain in a state of innocence. We also find this representation of the 
original state of humanity as one of innocence and of union, among other peoples 
that have reached a deeper consciousness. What is correct in it is the implication 
that the schism in which we find everything human involved can certainly not be 
the last word; but, on the other hand, it is not correct to regard the immediate, 
natural unity as the right state either. Spirit is not something merely immediate; on 
the contrary, it essentially contains the moment of mediation within itself. Child­
like innocence does certainly have something attractive and touching about it, but 
only insofar as it reminds us of what must be brought forth by the spirit. The 
harmonious union that we see in children as something natural is to be the result 
of the labour and culture of the spirit.-Christ says, "Except ye become as little 
children," etc. [Matt. 18:3]; but that does not say that we must remain children. 
In our Mosaic myth, moreover, we find that the occasion for stepping out of the 
unity [of innocence] was provided for humanity by external instigation (by the 
serpent). But in fact, the entry into the antithesis, the awakening of consciousness, 
lies within human beings themselves, and this is the story that repeats itself in 
every human being. The serpent expounds divinity as consisting in the knowledge 
of good and evil, and it is this cognition that was in fact imparted to man when he 
broke with the unity of his immediate being and ate of the forbidden fruit. The first 
reflection of awakening consciousness was that the human beings became aware 
that they were naked. This is a very naive and profound trait. For shame does 
testify to the severance of human beings from their natural and sensible being. 
Hence animals, which do not get as far as this severance, are without shame. So the 
spiritual and ethical origin of clothing is to be sought for in the human feeling of 
shame; the merely physical need, on the contrary, is something only secondary. 
At this point there follows the so-called Curse that God laid upon human beings. 
What this highlights is connected with the antithesis of man and nature. Man must 
labour in the sweat of his brow, and woman must bring forth in sorrow. What is 
said about labour is, more precisely, that it is both the result of the schism and also 
its overcoming. Animals find what they need for the satisfaction of their wants 
immediately before them; human beings, by contrast, relate to the means for the 
satisfaction of their wants as something that they themselves bring forth and 
shape. Thus, even in what is here external, man is related to himself. 
But the myth does not conclude with the expulsion from paradise. It says fur­
ther, "God said: Behold Adam is become as one of us, to know good and evil" 
[Gen. 3:22]. Cognition is now called something divine and not, as earlier, what 
ought not to be. So in this story there lies also the refutation of the idle chatter 
about how philosophy belongs only to the finitude of spirit; philosophy is cogni-

PRELIMINARY CONCEPTION (§§ 19-83) 
63 
tion, and the original calling of man, to be an image of God, can be realised only 
through cognition.-The story now goes on to say that God drove man out of the 
garden of Eden, so that he should not eat of the tree of life; this means that man is 
certainly finite and mortal on the side of his nature, but that he is infinite in 
cognition. 
That mankind is by nature evil is a well-known doctrine of the Church, and this 
natural state of evil is what is called Original Sin. But in this connection, we must 
give up the superficial notion that Original Sin has its ground only in a contingent 
action of the first human pair. It is part of the concept of spirit, in fact, that man is 
by nature evil; and we must not imagine that this could be otherwise. The rela­
tionship' [of man to nature] in which man is a natural essence, and behavesb as 
such, is one that ought not to be. Spirit is to be free and is to be what it is through 
itself. Nature is, for man, only the starting point that he ought to transform. The 
profound doctrine of the Church concerning Original Sin is confronted by the 
modern Enlightenment doctrine that man is by nature good and should therefore 
remain true to nature. When man goes beyond his natural being he thereby dis­
tinguishes his self-conscious world from an external one. But this standpoint of 
separation, which belongs to the concept of spirit, is not one that man should 
remain at either. All the finitude of thinking and willing falls within this standpoint 
of schism. Here man creates his purposes from himself, and it is from himself that 
he draws the material of his action. Inasmuch as he takes these purposes to their 
ultimate limits, knows only himself, and wills in his particularity without reference 
to the universal, he is evil, and this evil is his subjectivity. At first glance we have a 
double evil here; but both evils are in fact the same. Insofar as he is spirit, man is 
not a natural being; insofar as he behaves as a natural essence and follQWs the 
purposes of desire, he wills to be a natural essence. Thus, man's natural evil is not 
like the natural being of animals. Man's belonging to nature is further determined 
by the fact that the natural man is a single [individual] as such, for nature lies 
everywhere in the bonds of isolation. So, insofar as man wills this state of nature, 
he wills Singularity. But this acting on the basis of drives and inclinations that is 
characteristic of natural singularity is then, of course, confronted by the law or 
universal determination too. This law may be an external power or may have the 
form of divine authority. Man is in servitude to the law so long as he continues his 
natural behaviour. Among his inclinations and feelings, man does also have benev­
olent and social inclinations that reach beyond his selfish singularity-sympathy, 
love, etc. But, insofar as these inclinations are immediate in character, their content, 
though implicitly universal, still has the form of subjectivity; self-seeking and con­
tingency still have free play here. 
§ 25 
The expression objective thoughts signifies the truth which ought to be the 
absolute ob-ject, not just the goal of philosophy. But at the same time 
a. Verhiiltnis 
b. sich verhii It 

64 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
this expression indicates in any case an antithesis-indeed, the very one 
whose determination and validity is the focus of our philosophical interest 
at the present time, and around which the quest for truth and for the cog­
nition of it revolves. If the thought-determinations are afflicted with a fixed 
antithesis, i.e., if they are only of a finite nature, then they are inadequate 
to the truth which is absolutely in and for itself, and the truth cannot enter 
into thinking. The thinking that brings forth only finite determinations and 
moves within these alone is called understanding (in the more precise sense 
of the word). The finitude of the thought-determinations has further to be 
taken in two ways: first, they are only subjective and are permanently in 
antithesis to the objective; secondly, being quite generally of limited content, 
they persist both in their antithesis to each other, and (even more) in their 
antithesis to the Absolute. As a further introduction, we now ought to 
consider the positions available to thinking with respect to objectivity, in order 
to clarify the meaning of the Logic and to lead into the standpoint that is 
here given to it. 
In my Phenomenology of Spirit,19 which was for this reason de­
scribed, when it was published, as the first part of the system of 
science, the procedure adopted was to begin from the first and 
simplest appearance of the spirit, from immediate consciousness, 
and to develop its dialectic right up to the standpoint of philosoph­
ical science, the necessity of which is shown by the progression. 
But for this purpose it was not possible to stick to the formal 
aspect of mere consciousness; for the standpoint of philosophical 
knowing is at the same time inwardly the richest in basic import 
and the most concrete one; so when it emerged as the result [of 
the development], it presupposed also the concrete shapes of con­
sciousness, such as morality, ethical life, art, and religion. Hence, 
the development of the content, or of the subject matters of special 
parts of philosophical science, falls directly within that develop­
ment of consciousness which seems at first to be restricted just to 
what is formal; that development has to take place behind the back 
of consciousness so to speak, inasmuch as the content is related to 
consciousness as what is in-itself. This makes the presentation 
more complicated, and what belongs to the concrete parts [of the 
System] already falls partly within that introduction.-The exam­
ination that will be undertaken here has the even greater inconve­
nience that it can only be conducted descriptively· and argumen­
tatively; but its principal aim is to contribute to the insight that the 
questions about the nature of cognition, about faith and so on, that 
a. historisch 

A. THE FIRST POSITION OF THOUGHT (§§ 26-36) 
65 
A 
confront us in the [realm of] representation, and which we take to 
be fully concrete, are in point of fact reducible to simple 
determinations of thought, which only get their genuine treatment 
in the Logic. 
The First Position of Thought 
with Respect to Objectivity 
METAPHYSICS 
§ 26 
The first position is the nai"ve way of proceeding, which, being still uncon­
scious of the antithesis of thinking within and against itself, contains the 
belief that truth is [re]cognised, and what the objects genuinely are is 
brought before consciousness, through thinking about them. In this belief, 
thinking goes straight to the ob-jects; it reproduces the content of sense­
experience and intuition out of itself, as a content of thought, and is 
satisfied with this as the truth. All philosophy in its beginnings, all of the 
sciences, even the daily doing and dealing of consciousness, lives in this 
belief. 
§ 27 
Because it is unconscious of its antithesis, this thinking can, in respect of its 
basic import, equally well be authentic speculative philosophising; but it can 
also dwell within finite thought-determinations, i.e., within the still unre­
solved antithesis. Here, in the introduction, our concern can only be to 
consider this position of thinking with regard to its limit; so we shall begin 
by taking up this [finite] way of philosophising.-In its most determinate 
development, which is also the one closest to us, this way of thinking was 
the metaphysics of the recent past, the way it was constituted among us 
before· the Kantian philosophy. It is only in relation to the history of phi­
losophy, however, that this metaphysics belongs to the past; for, on its own 
account, it is always present as the way in which the mere understanding 
views the ob-jects of reason. Hence, a closer examination of its procedure­
and its principal content has this more directly present interest for us too. 
a. Manier 

66 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
§ 28 
This science regarded the thought-determinations as the fundamental deter­
minations of things; and, in virtue of this presupposition, that the cognition 
of things as they are in-themselves results from the thinking of what is, it 
stood at a higher level than the later critical philosophising. But two points 
should be noted. First, these determinations, in their abstraction, were 
taken to be valid on their own account, and capable of being predicates of 
what is true. In any case, this metaphysics presupposed that cognition of 
the Absolute could come about through the attaching of predicates to it; and 
it investigated neither the peculiar content and validity of the determina­
tions of the understanding, nor yet this form of determining the Absolute 
by attaching predicates to it. 
Being there, for instance, is a predicate of this kind like in the 
proposition, "God is there";> or finitude and infinity, in the ques­
tion whether the world is finite or infinite; or simple and composite, 
in the proposition, "The soul is simple";-<Jr, again, "The thing is 
one, a whole," etc.-There was no investigation of whether predi­
cates of this kind are something true in and for themselves, nor of 
whether the form of the judgment could be the form of truth. 
Addition. The presupposition of the older metaphysics was that of naive belief 
generally, namely, that thinking grasps what things are in-themselves, that things 
only are what they genuinely are when they are [captured] in thought. Nature and 
the mind and heart of man are protean, constantly in a process of transformation, 
and the reflection that things as they immediately present themselves are not the 
things in themselves is an obvious one.-The standpoint of the older metaphysics 
referred to here is the opposite of the one that resulted from the Critical Philoso­
phy. We can fairly say that this latter standpoint sends man to feed upon husks and 
chaff. 
But, to be more precise about the procedure of the older metaphysics, we should 
note that it did not go beyond the thinking of mere understanding. It took up the 
abstract determinations of thought immediately, and let them count in their imme­
diacy as predicates of what is true. When we are discussing thinking we must distin­
guish finite thinking, the thinking of the mere understanding, from the infinite 
thinking of reason. Taken in isolation, just as they are immediately given, the 
thought-determinations are finite determinations. But what is true is what is in­
finite within itself; it cannot be expressed and brought to consciousness through 
what is finite. 
H we adhere to the modem notion that thinking is always restricted, then the 
expression "infinite thinking" may appear quite astonishing. But, in fact, thinking 
is inwardly and essentiallyb infinite. To put the point formally, "finite" means what-
a. Gatt hat Daseyn; literally, "God has thereness" 
b. seinem Wesen nach in sich 

A. THE FiRST POSITION OF THOUGHT (§§ 26-36) 
67 
ever comes to an end, what is, but ceases to be where it connects with its other, and 
is thus restricted by it. Hence, the finite subsists in its relation to its other, which is 
its negation and presents itself as its limit. But thinking is at home with itself, it 
relates itself to itself, and is its own ob-ject. Insofar as my ob-ject is a thought, I am 
at home with myself. Thus the I, or thinking, is infinite because it is related in 
thinking to an ob-ject that is itself. An ob-ject as such is an other, something 
negative that confronts me. But if thinking thinks itself, then it has an ob-ject that is 
at the same time not an ob-ject, i.e., an ob-ject that is sublated, ideal. Thus thinking 
as such, thinking in its purity, does not have any restriction within itself. 
Thinking is only finite insofar as it stays within restricted de terminations, which 
it holds to be ultimate. Infinite or speculative thinking, on the contrary, makes 
determinations likewise, but, in determining, in limiting, it sublates this defect 
again. Infinity must not be interpreted as an abstract, ever-receding beyond (the 
way it is in our ordinary notion of it), but in the simple manner specified above. 
The thinking of the older metaphysics was finite, because that metaphysics 
moved in thought-determinations whose restrictions counted for it as something 
fixed, that would not be negated again. Thus, the question was asked, "Does 
thereness belong to God?" and "being-there" was thus treated as something purely 
positive, something ultimate and excellent. But we shall see later that being-there is 
in no way a merely positive determination, but one that is too lowly for the Idea, 
and unworthy of God.-Or again, the question of the finitude or infinity of the 
world was raised. Here infinity is sharply contrasted with finitude, yet it is easy to 
see that if the two are set against one another, then infinity, which is nevertheless 
supposed to be the whole, appears as one side only, and is limited by the finite. 
But a limited infinity is itself only something finite. In the same sense the 
question was raised whether the soul is simple or composite. Thus simplicity, too, 
was counted as an ultimate determination, capable of grasping what is true. But 
"simple" is a determination just as poor, abstract, and one-sided as "being-there." a 
determination which, as we shall see later, is incapable of grasping what is true 
because it is itself untrue. If the soul is considered only as simple, then it is deter­
mined as one-sided and finite by an abstraction of that kind. 20 
Thus, the older metaphysics was concerned with the cognition of whether predi­
cates of the kind here mentioned could be attached to its ob-jects. However, these 
predicates are restricted determinations of the understanding which express only a 
restriction, and not what is true.-We must notice particularly, at this point, that 
the metaphysical method was to "attach" predicates to the ob-ject of cognition, 
e.g., to God. This then is an external reflection about the ob-ject, since the deter­
minations (the predicates) are found ready-made in my representation, and are 
attached to the ob-ject in a merely external way. Genuine cognition of an ob-ject, on 
the other hand, has to be such that the ob-ject determines itself from within itself, 
and does not acquire its predicates in this external way. If we proceed by way of 
predication, the spirit gets the feeling that the predicates cannot exhaust what they 
are attached to. 
From this point of view, therefore, the Orientals are quite right to call God the 
being who is Many-Named or Infinitely Named.21 Our mind and heart find no 
satisfaction in any of those finite determinations, so that the Oriental cognition 

68 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
consists in a restless seeking out of such predicates. In the case of finite things it is 
certainly true that they must be determined by means of finite predicates, and here 
the understanding with its activity has its proper place. Being itself finite, the 
understanding is cognizant only of the nature of the finite. Thus, if I call an action a 
"theft," for instance, the action is thereby determined with regard to its essential 
content, and to [re]cognise this is sufficient for the judge. In the same way, finite 
things behave as "cause" and "effect," as "force" and "utterance"; and when they 
are grasped according to these determinations, they are known in their finitude. 
But the ob-jects of reason cannot be determined through such finite predicates, and 
the attempt to do this was the defect of the older metaphysics. 
§ 29 
Predicates of this kind are, on their own account, a restricted content, and 
they show themselves to be inappropriate to the fullness of the representa­
tion (of God, nature, spirit, etc.) which they do not at all exhaust. Moreover, 
although they are connected with each other because they are predicates 
of One subject, they are nevertheless diverse through their content, so that 
they are taken up from outside and in opposition to one another." 
The Orientals sought to correct the first defect; for instance, in the 
case of the determination of God, through the many names they 
attach to him; but at the same time, the names had to be infinitely 
many. 22 
§ 30 
Secondly, the ob-jects of this metaphysics were, it is true, totalities that 
belong in and for themselves to reason, to the thinking of the inwardly 
concrete universal: the soul, the world, God. But this metaphysics took them 
from representation, and when it applied the determinations-of-the­
understanding to them, it grounded itself upon them, as ready-made or 
given subjects, and its only criterion of whether the predicates fitted, and 
were satisfactory or not, was that representation. 
§ 31 
The representations of the soul, of the world, of God, seem at first to 
provide thinking with a firm hold. But apart from the fact that the character 
of a particular subjectivity is mingled with them, and that therefore they 
a. gegeneinander 

A. THE FIRST POSITION OF THOUGHT (§§ 26--36) 
69 
can have a most diverse significance, what they need all the more is to 
receive their firm determination only through thinking. Every proposition 
expresses this need, because in it what the subject, i.e., the initial represen­
tation, is ought only to be indicated by the predicate (that is to say, in 
philosophy, by the thought-determination). 
In the proposition "God is eternal, etc.," we begin with the repre­
sentation "God"; but what he is, is not yet known; only the predi­
cate states expressly what he is. In logical thinking, therefore, 
where the content is only and exclusively determined in the form 
of thought, it is first of all superfluous to make these determina­
tions into predicates of propositions whose subject is God, or more 
vaguely the Absolute, and in addition there is the disadvantage 
that doing this sends us back to a criterion other than the nature of 
thought itself.-In any case, the form of the proposition, or more 
precisely that of the judgment, is incapable of expressing what is 
concrete (and what is true is concrete) and speculative; because of 
its form, the judgment is one-sided and to that extent false.23 
Addition. This metaphysics was not a free and objective thinking, for it did not 
allow the ob-ject to determine itself freely from within, but presupposed it as 
ready-made.-As for free thinking, Greek philosophy thought freely, but Scholasti­
cism did not, since, like this metaphysics, it adopted its content as something given, 
and indeed given by the Church.-We modems are initiated, through our whole 
education, into representations that it is in the highest degree difficult to tran­
scend, because they have a content of the deepest sort. We must imagine the 
ancient philosophers as men who stand right in the middle of sensory intuition, 
and presuppose nothing except the heavens above and the earth beneath, since 
mythological representations had been thrown aside. In this simply factual en­
vironment, thought is free and withdrawn into itself, free of all [given] material, 
purely at home with itself. When we think freely, voyaging on the open sea, with 
nothing under us and nothing over us, in solitude, alone by ourselves-then we are 
purely at home with ourselves. 
§ 32 
Thirdly, this metaphysics became dogmatism because, given the nature of 
finite determinations, it had to assume that of two opposed assertions (of the 
kind that those propositions were) one must be true, and the other false. 
Addition. Dogmatism has its first antithesis in scepticism. The ancient Sceptics gave 
the general name of "dogmatism" to any philosophy that sets up definite theses.24 

70 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
In this wider sense scepticism also counted properly speculative philosophy as 
dogmatic. But in the narrower sense dogmatism consists in adhering to one-sided 
determinations of the understanding whilst excluding their opposites. This is just 
the strict "either-or," according to which (for instance) the world is either finite or 
infinite, but not both. On the contrary, what is genuine and speculative is precisely 
what does not have any such one-sided determination in it, and is therefore not 
exhausted by it; on the contrary, being a totality, it contains the determinations that 
dogmatism holds to be fixed and true in a state of separation from one another 
united within itself. 
It often happens in philosophy that a one-sided view sets itself up beside the 
totality, claiming to be something particular and fixed vis-a-vis the latter. But, in 
fact, what is one-sided is not fixed and does not subsist on its own account; instead, 
it is contained within the whole as sublated. The dogmatism of the metaphysics of 
the understanding consists in its adherence to one-sided thought-determinations in 
their isolation, whereas the idealism of speculative philosophy involves the princi­
ple of totality and shows itself able to overgrasp the one-sidedness of the abstract 
determinations of the understanding. Thus, idealism will say, "The soul is neither 
just finite nor just infinite, but is essentially both the one and the other, and hence 
neither the one nor the other." In other words, these determinations are not valid 
when they are isolated from one another but only when sublated. 
This idealism occurs even in our ordinary consciousness too. Accordingly, we 
say of sensible things that they are alterable, i.e., that they are and that they are 
not.-Regarding the determinations of the understanding we are more stubborn. 
As thought-determinations they count as more fixed, and indeed as fixed abso­
lutely. We regard them as separated from one another by an infinite abyss, so that 
determinations that stand opposed to one another are never able to reach each 
other. The struggle of reason consists precisely in overcoming what the under­
standing has made rigid. 
§ 33 
In its orderly shape this metaphysics had, as its first part, Ontology,25 the 
doctrine of the abstract determinations of essence. In their manifoldness and 
finite validity, these determinations lack a principle; they must therefore be 
enumerated empirically and contingently, and their more precise content can 
only be based upon representation, [Le.,] based upon the assurance that by 
one word one thinks precisely this, or perhaps also upon the word's ety­
mology. What can be at issue in this context is merely the correctness of the 
analysis as it corresponds with the usage of language, and the empirical 
exhaustiveness, not the truth and necessity of these determinations in and 
for themselves. 
The question whether being, being-there, or finitude, Simplicity, 
compositeness, etc., are concepts that are in and for themselves true, 

A. THE FIRST POSITION OF THOUGHT (§§ 26-36) 
71 
must be surprising, if one is of the opinion that one can speak only 
of the truth of a proposition, and that the only question that can be 
raised with regard to a concept is whether (as people say) it can be 
truthfully " attached" to a subject or not. Untruth would depend on 
the contradiction to be found between the subject of the represen­
tation and the concept to be predicated of it. But since the Concept 
is something-concrete, and since it is itself every determinacy with­
out exception, it is essentially, and within itself, a unity of distinct 
determinations. So, if truth were nothing more than lack of contra­
diction, one would have to examine first of all, with regard to each 
concept, whether it does not, on its own account, contain an inner 
contradiction of this kind. 
§ 34 
The second part was Rational Psychology or Pneumatology. This is concerned 
with the metaphysical nature of the soul, that is to say, of the spirit [taken] 
as a thing. 
Immortality was looked for in the sphere where compositeness, time, 
qualitative alteration, quantitative increase or decrease have their place. 
Addition. Psychology was called "rational" in antithesis to the empirical mode of 
observing the manifestations of the soul. Rational Psychology considered the soul 
according to its metaphysical nature, as it was determined by abstract thinking. It 
wanted to recognise the inner nature of the soul, as it is in-itself, as it is for 
thought.-Nowadays, "the soul" is not often mentioned in philosophy; we speak 
rather of "the spirit." But spirit is distinct from the soul (which is, so to speak, the 
middle term between corporeity and the spirit, or what forms the bond between 
the two). As soul, the spirit is sunk in corporeity, and the soul is what animates the 
body. 
The older metaphysics considered the soul as a thing. But "thing" is a very 
ambiguous expression. By a thing we understand first of all something that exists 
immediately, so that we have a sensible representation of it, and people have 
spoken of the soul in this way. The question has been raised therefore of where the 
soul has its seat. But if the soul has a seat, then it is in space, and is represented in 
a sensible way. And when we ask whether the soul is simple or composite, the 
same way of interpreting it as a thing is involved. This was a specially important 
question in connection with the immortality of the soul, which was considered 
to be conditional upon the simplicity of the soul. But, in fact, abstract simplicity is 
a determination that no more corresponds to the essence of the soul than com­
positeness. 
As for the relationship between rational and empirical psychology, the first 
stands higher than the second in virtue of the fact that it sets itself the task of 

72 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
achieving the cognition of spirit through thought and of proving what it thinks as 
well; whereas empirical psychology starts from perception, and simply enumerates 
and describes what lies to hand there. If we want to grasp the spirit in thought, 
however, we must not be so coy about its particular characteristics. Spirit is activity 
in the sense in which the Schoolmen already said of God that he is absolute 
actuosity.26 The spirit's being active implies, however, that it manifests itself out­
wardly. Accordingly, it is not to be considered as an ens lacking all process, the way 
it was regarded in the older metaphysics, which separated a spirit's inwardness that 
lacked process from its outwardness. It is essential that the spirit be considered in 
its concrete actuality, in its energy, and more precisely in such a way that its 
utterances are recognised as being determined through its inwardness. 
§ 35 
The third part, Cosmology, dealt with the world, with its contingency, neces­
sity, and eternity, with its being limited in space and time, with the formal 
laws and their modifications, and further with the freedom of man and the 
origin of evil. 
In this context, the following were taken to be absolute antitheses: 
contingency and necessity; external and internal necessity; effi­
cient and final causes, or causality in general and purpose; es­
sence, or substance, and appearance; form and matter; freedom 
and necessity; happiness and suffering; good and evil. 
Addition. The ob-ject of cosmology was both nature and also spirit in its external 
entanglements, or its appearance; in short, the ob-ject of cosmology was being­
there generally, the comprehensive sum of the finite. It did not treat its ob-ject as a 
concrete whole, however, but only according to abstract determinations. It dealt, for 
instance, with questions such as whether chance or necessity ruled the world, and 
whether the world is eternal or created. It was therefore one main concern of this 
discipline to establish what were called universal cosmological laws, such as the 
one that says that "nature makes no leaps," for example. "Leap" means here 
qualitative distinction and qualitative alteration, which appear to take place without 
mediation, whilst, on the contrary, what is (quantitatively) gradual presents itself 
as something mediated. 
With regard to the way spirit appears in the world, the main questions raised in 
this cosmology were those concerning the freedom of man and the origin of evil. 
These are certainly questions of the highest interest; but to answer them in a 
satisfactory way, it is above all necessary not to cling to the abstract determinations 
of the understanding as if they were ultimate-as if each of the two terms of an 
antithesis could stand on its own, and were to be considered as something substan­
tial and genuine in its isolation. This, however, was the standpoint of the older 
metaphysics, and also the general framework of these cosmological discussions. 

A. THE FIRST POSITION OF THOUGHT (§§ 26-36) 
73 
Because of this, they could not attain their purpose, namely, a comprehension of 
the phenomena of the world. The distinction between freedom and necessity was 
subjected to inquiry, for example, and these determinations were applied to nature 
and spirit in such a way that the operations of nature were considered to be subject 
to necessity, while those of spirit were free. This distinction is certainly essential, 
and it is grounded in the very core of spirit; but considered as abstractly confront­
ing one another, freedom and necessity pertain to finitude only and are valid only 
on its soil. A freedom that had no necessity within it, and a mere necessity without 
freedom, are determinations that are abstract and hence untrue. Freedom is essen­
tially concrete, eternally determinate within itself, and thus necessary at the same 
time. When people speak of necessity, it is usually initially understood as just 
determination from without; for instance, in finite mechanics, a body moves only 
when another body collides with it, and precisely in the direction imparted to it by 
this collision. This is a merely external necessity, however, not a genuinely inner 
necessity, for that is freedom. 
The situation is the same with the antithesis between good and evil--one that is 
typical of the modern world, self-absorbed as it is. It is quite correct to consider evil 
as something that has a fixed character of its own, as something that is not the 
good-giving the antithesis its due-but only because its merely apparent and 
relative character should not be taken to mean that evil and good are all one in the 
Absolute, or, as it has lately been said, that evil is only something in the eye of the 
beholder. What is wrong here is that evil is looked on as something fixed and 
positive, whereas it is the negative that does not subsist on its own account, but 
only wants to be on its own account, and is in fact only the absolute semblance of 
inward negativity. a 
§ 36 
The fourth part, Natural or Rational Theology, considered the concept of 
God or its possibility, the proof of his being-there and his attributes. 
(a) In this account of God from the point of view of the under­
standing, what counts above all is which predicates agree or not 
with what we represent to ourselves as "God." The antithesis of 
reality and negation is here absolute; hence, what remains for the 
concept, as it is taken to be by the understanding, is, in the end, 
only the empty abstraction of indeterminate essence, of pure reality 
or positivity, the dead product of the modern Enlightenment. (b) 
In any case, the procedure of finite cognition in proving something 
stands things on their heads by requiring that an objective ground 
should be specified for God's being-which, on that score, pre­
sents itself as something that is mediated by something else. This 
a. Emphasis added 

74 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
mode of proof, which follows the rule of the identity that belongs 
to the understanding, labours under the difficulty that it must 
make a transition from the finite to the infinite. Thus, it is either 
unable to free God from the abidingly positive finitude of the 
world that is there, so that he would have to be determined as the 
immediate substance of his world (Pantheism); or God remains as 
an object vis-a.-vis the subject, and in this way, and for that reason, 
he is something-finite (Dualism). (c) After all, the attributes are 
supposed to be determinate and diverse ones, but, strictly speak­
ing, they have disappeared in the abstract concept of pure reality, 
or indeterminate essence. But insofar as the finite world remains a 
true being, and God is represented as facing it, the representation 
of diverse relationships that are determined as attributes comes 
into focus; and on the one hand, as relationships to finite situa­
tions,' these attributes must themselves be of a finite kind (for 
instance, justice, benevolence, might, wisdom, etc.), but on the 
other hand, they are at the same time supposed to be infinite. 
From this point of view, the only solution that this contradiction 
allows for is a quite obscure one: to push these attributes through 
quantitative enhancement into indeterminacy, into the sensus emi­
nentiar.27 But in fact this nullifies the attribute, and what is left of it 
is merely a name. 
Addition. The concern of this part of the older metaphysics was to establish how far 
reason could take us on its own account in the cognition of God. To have cognition 
of God through reason is certainly the highest task of science. Religion initially 
contains representations of God; these representations are communicated to us 
from our youth up as the doctrines of our religion, compiled in the Creed; and, 
insofar as the individual has faith in these teachings, and they are the truth for 
him, he has what he needs as a Christian. Theology, however, is the science of this 
faith. If theology provides a merely external enumeration and compilation of re­
ligious teachings, then it is not yet science. Even the merely historical treatment of 
its subject matter that is in favour nowadays (for instance, the reporting of what 
this or that Church Father said) does not give theology a scientific character. 
Science comes only when we advance to the business of philosophy, i.e., the mode 
of thinking that involves comprehension. Thus, genuine theoЖogy is essentially, at 
the same time, Philosophy of Religion, and that is what it was in the Middle Ages 
too. 
When we look more closely at the Rational Theology of the older metaphysics, we 
can see that it was a science of God that rested not upon reason but on the 
understanding, and its thinking moved only in abstract thought-determinations. 
a. Zustiinde 

A THE FIRST POSITION OF THOUGHT (§§ 26-36) 
75 
Whilst what was treated was the concept of God, it was the representation of God 
that formed the criterion for cognition. Thinking, however, must move freely 
within itself; all the same, it must be remarked at once that the result of this free 
thinking agrees with the content of the Christian religion, for the Christian religion 
is a revelation of reason. The rational theology of the older metaphysics, however, 
did not achieve any such agreement Since it set out to determine the notion of God 
by means of thinking, what emerged as the concept of God was only the abstrac­
tion of positivity or reality in general, to the exclusion of negation, and God was 
accordingly defined as the Supremely Real Essence.28 But it is easy to see that, since 
negation was excluded from it, this Supremely Real Essence is precisely the op­
posite of what it should be and of what the understanding intended it to be. 
Instead of being what is richest, and utter fullness, it is instead rather the poorest, 
and utter emptiness-all on account of this abstract apprehension of it. The mind 
and heart rightly long for a concrete content, but concreteness is only present if the 
content contains within it determinacy, i.e., negation. When the concept of God is 
apprehended merely as that of the abstract or Supremely Real Essence, then God 
becomes for us a mere Beyond, and there can be no further talk of a cognition of 
God; for where there is no determinacy, no cognition is possible either. Pure light 
is pure darkness. 
In the second place, this rational theology was concerned to prove that God is 
there. The main thing here is that a proof, as it is envisaged by the understanding, 
is the dependence of one determination on another. In this sort of proof something 
fixed is presupposed and from it something else follows. Thus, what is exhibited 
here is the dependence of a determination upon a presupposition. But, if we 
suppose that it can be proved in this way that God is there, this means that the 
being of God must depend upon other determinations, which therefore constitute 
the ground of the being of God. So we can sӮe at once that what must emerge is 
something distorted, since God is supposed to be precisely the sole ground of 
everything, and thus not to depend on anything else. In this connection, modern 
theologians have said that God's being-there cannot be proved, but that we must 
have immediate cognition of this. But reason understands by proof something 
quite different than the understanding and common sense do. Certainly the pro­
cess of proof characteristic of reason also has something other than God as its 
starting point, but its progress does not leave this other in the status of something 
immediate which merely is; instead, because the process of proof exhibits the other 
as mediated and posited, this has the simultaneous result that God must be consid­
ered to contain mediation sublated within himself, hence to be genuinely immedi­
ate, original, and resting upon himself.-When we say, "Consider nature, for it will 
lead you to God, and you will find an absolute final purpose," this does not mean 
that God is mediated, but only that we make the journey from an other to God, in 
the sense that God, being the consequence, is at the same time the absolute ground 
of what we started with, so that the position of the two is reversed: what appears 
as the consequence also shows itself to be the ground, while what presented itself 
as ground to start with is reduced to [the status of] consequence. And that is 
precisely the path of rational proot 

76 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
If we cast another glance at the general procedure of this metaphysics in the light 
of our explanation, we find that it consisted in grasping the ob-jects of reason in 
abstract, finite determinations of the understanding, and making abstract identity 
into the [main] principle.29 But this infinity of the understanding, this pure Es­
sence, is itself only something finite, for particularity is excluded from it, and this 
exclusion restricts and negates it. Instead of achieving concrete identity, this meta­
physics held onto abstract identity; but what was good about it was the conscious­
ness that thought alone constitutes the essentiality of what is. The material of this 
metaphysics was furnished by the earlier philosophers, and especially by the 
Scholastics. The understanding is, of course, one moment of speculative philoso­
phy, but it is a moment at which we should not stop. Plato is not a metaphysician of 
this sort, and Aristotle still less so, although people usually believe the contrary. 
B 
The Second Position of Thought 
with Respect to Objectivity 
1. EMPIRICISM 
§ 37 
Empiricism30 was the initial result of a double need: there was the need first 
for a concrete content, as opposed to the abstract theories of the under­
standing that cannot advance from its universal generalisations to par­
ticularisation and determination on its own, and secondly for a firm hold 
against the possibility of proving any claim at all in the field, and with the 
method, of the finite determinations. Instead of seeking what is true in 
thought itself, Empiricism proceeds to draw it from experience, from what 
is outwardly or inwardly present. 
Addition. Empiricism owes its origin to the need, indicated in the preceding para­
graph, for a concrete content and a firm footing, a need which cannot be satisfied by 
the abstract metaphysics of the understanding. As for this concreteness of content, 
it simply means that the ob-jects of consciousness are known as inwardly deter­
mined, and as a unity of distinct determinations. As we have seen, however, this is 
in no way the case with any metaphysics based upon the principle of the under­
standing. As mere understanding, thinking is restricted to the form of the abstract 
universal, and is unable to advance to the particularisation of this universal. For 
example, the older metaphysics made the attempt to bring out, through thinking, 
what the essence or the basic determination of the soul is, and it was decided that 
the soul is simple. This simplicity ascribed to the soul has here the significance of 
abstract simplicity, excluding all distinction, which, as compositedness, was consid­
ered the basic determination of the body and then further of matter generally. 
Abstract simplicity, however, is a very poor determination, in which it is completely 

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
77 
impossible to capture the wealth of the soul and of the spirit as well. Since abstract 
metaphysical thinking thus proved itself to be inadequate, the need was felt to take 
refuge in empirical psychology. The same situation arose in rational physics. To say, 
for instance, that space is infinite, and that nature makes no leaps, etc., is com­
pletely unsatisfactory in view of the fullness and life of nature. 
§ 38 
In one respect, Empiricism has this source in common with metaphysics 
itself, which likewise has representations-i.e., the content that comes 
originally from experience-as the guarantee for the authentication of its 
definitions (its presuppositions as well as its more determinate content). 
But on the other side, this or that single perception is distinct from experi­
ence, and Empiricism elevates the content that belongs to perception, feel­
ing, and intuition into the form of universal notions, principles, and laws, etc. 
This only happens, however, in the sense that these universal determina­
tions (for instance, "force") are not supposed to have any more significance 
and validity on their own account than that which is taken from percep­
tion, and no justification save the connection that can be demonstrated in 
experience. On its subjective side, empirical cognition gets a firm hold from 
the fact that in perception consciousness has its own immediate presence and 
certainty. 
In Empiricism there lies this great principle, that what is true must 
be in actuality and must be there for our perception. This principle 
is opposed to the "ought" through which reflection inflates itself, 
and looks down upon what is actual and present in the name of a 
Beyond that can only have its place and thereness in the subjective 
understanding. Philosophy, like Empiricism, is cognizant (§ 7) only 
of what is; it does not know that which only ought to be, and for 
that reason is not there . -On the subjective side we must recognise 
also the important principle of freedom that lies in Empiricism; 
namely, that what ought to count in our human knowing, we 
ought to see for ourselves, and to know ourselves as present in it.­
But inasmuch as, so far as content is concerned, Empiricism re­
stricts itself to what is finite, the consistent carrying through of its 
programme denies the supersensible altogether or at least its cog­
nition and determinacy, and it leaves thinking with abstraction 
only, [Le.,] with formal universality and identity.-The fundamen­
tal illusion in scientific empiricism is always that it uses the meta­
physical categories of matter, force, as well as those of one, many, 

78 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LoGIC 
universality, and the infinite, etc., and it goes on to draw conclu­
sions, guided by categories of this sort, presupposing and applying 
the forms of syllogising in the process. It does all this without 
knowing that it thereby itself contains a metaphysics and is en­
gaged in it, and that it is using those categories and their connec­
tions in a totally uncritical and unconscious manner. 
Addition. From Empiricism the call went out: "Stop chasing about among empty 
abstractions, look at what is there for the taking,- grasp the here and now, human 
and natural, as it is here before us, and enjoy it!" And there is no denying that this 
contains an essentially justified moment. This world, the here and now, the present, 
was to be substituted for the empty Beyond, for the spiderwebs and cloudy shapes 
of the abstract understanding. That is precisely how the firm footing, i. e., the 
infinite determination, that was missing in the older metaphysics was gained. The 
understanding only picks out finite determinations; these by themselves are shaky 
and without footing, and the building erected on them collapses upon itself. To 
find an infinite determination was always the impulse of reason; but the time was 
not yet ripe to find it in thinking [itself] . Thus, this drive took hold of the present, 
the "Here:' the "This," which has the infinite form in it, even though this form 
does not have its genuine existence. What is external is implicitly what is true, for 
the true is actual and must exist. Thus the infinite determinacy which reason seeks 
is in the world, although it is there in a sensible, singular shape, and not in its 
truth.-More precisely, perception is the form in which comprehension was sup­
posed to take place, and this is the defect of Empiricism. Perception as such is 
always something singular that passes away, but cognition does not stop at this 
stage. On the contrary, in the perceived singular it seeks what is universal and 
abides; and this is the advance from mere perception to experience. b 
In order to find things out, c Empiricism makes use, especially, of the form of 
analysis. In perception we have something multifariously concrete, whose deter­
minations must be pulled apart from one another, like an onion whose skins we 
peel off. So this dismembering means that we loosen up, and take apart, the 
determinations that have coalesced, d and we add nothing except the subjective 
activity of taking them apart. Analysis, however, is the advance from the imme­
diacy of perception to thought, inasmuch as the determinations that the analysed 
ob-ject contains united within it acquire the form of universality by being sepa­
rated. Empiricism falls into error in analysing ob-jects if it supposes that it leaves 
them as they are, for, in fact, it transforms what is concrete into something abstract. 
As a result it also happens that the living thing is killed, for only what is concrete, 
what is One, is alive. Nevertheless, the division has to happen in order for com-
a. schaut auf eure Hiinde 
b. Erfahrung 
c. Um Erfahrungen zu machen 
d. zusammengewachsen 

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
79 
prehension to take place, and spirit itself is inward division. But this is only one 
side, and the main issue is the unification of what has been divided. Insofar as 
analysis remains at the standpoint of division, we can apply to it the words of the 
poet: 
Encheiresin naturae, says Chemistry now, 
Mocking itself without knowing how. 
Then they have the parts and they've lost the whole, 
For the link that's missing was the living soul. 31 
Analysis starts with the concrete, and in this material it has a great advantage over 
the abstract thinking of the older metaphysics. Analysis itself fixes the distinctions, 
and this is of great importance; but these distinctions are themselves only abstract 
determinations once more, i.e., thoughts. And since these thoughts count as what 
the ob-jects are in-themselves, we meet again the presupposition of the older meta­
physics, namely, that what is genuine in things lies in thought. 
Let us now push the comparison of the standpoint of Empiricism with that of 
the older metaphysics a bit further with respect to content. As we saw earlier, the 
content of this last was the universal ob-jects of reason, God, the soul, and the world 
generally; this content was adopted from representation, and the business of phi­
losophy consisted in tracing it back to the form of thoughts. The situation was 
much the same in Scholastic philosophy, for which the dogmas of the Christian 
church formed the presupposed content, and the issue was to determine and sys­
tematise this content more precisely through thought. 
The presupposed content of Empiricism is of quite another sort. It is the sensible 
content of Nature and the content of finite spirit. Here we have before us a material 
that is finite, while in the older metaphysics we had one that was infinite (and that 
then was made finite through the finite form of the understanding). In Empiricism 
we have the same finitude of form; in addition, the content is now finite too. 
Besides, the method is the same in both ways of philosophising, inasmuch as both 
begin from presuppositions that are taken to be something fixed. For Empiricism, 
what is true is quite generally what is external, and even if it concedes something 
supersensible, no cognition of it is supposed to be possible. We have to confine 
ourselves to what belongs to perception. The full working out of this principle, 
however, has produced what was later called "Materialism" -the view in which 
matter as such counts as what is genuinely objective. But matter is itself already 
something abstract, something which cannot be perceived as such. We can there­
fore say that there is no "matter"; for whenever it exists it is always something 
determinate and concrete. Yet this abstract "matter" is supposed to be the founda­
tion of everything sensible, i.e., the sensible in general, the realm of absolute 
isolation into oneself, and where everything is external to everything else. Since for 
Empiricism this sensible domain is and remains something given, this is a doctrine 
of unfreedom, for freedom consists precisely in my not having any absolute other 
over against me, but in my being dependent upon a content that is just myself. 
From this point of view, moreover, reason and unreason are only subjective, in 
other words, we have to accept the given as it is, and we have no right to ask 
whether, and to what extent, it is rational within itself. 

80 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
§ 39 
In reflecting upon this principle it has been observed, to begin with, that 
in what is called "experience" and what has to be distinguished from 
merely singular perceptions of single facts, there are two elements; one of 
them is the infinitely manifold material that isolates itself into single [bits] 
that stand on their own,· the other is the form, the detenninations of 
universality and necessity. It is true that empirical observation does show 
many perceptions of the same kind, even more than we can count; but 
universality is altogether something other than a great number. It is true 
that empirical observation also provides perceptions of alterations that 
follow one after the other, and of ob-jects that lie side by side; but it does not 
provide any necessary connection.b Since, however, perception is to remain 
the foundation of what counts as truth, universality and necessity appear 
to be something unjustified, a subjective contingency, a mere habit, the 
content of which may be constituted the way it is or in some other way. 
An important consequence of this is that in this empirical ap­
proach juridical and ethical determinations and laws, as well as the 
content of religion, appear to be something contingent, and that 
their objectivity and inner truth have been given up. 
Hume's scepticism,32 from which this reflective observation 
mainly starts, should be very carefully distinguished from Greek 
scepticism. In Humean scepticism, the truth of the empirical, the 
truth of feeling and intuition is taken as basic; and, on that basis, 
he attacks all universal determinations and laws, precisely because 
they have no justification by way of sense-perception. The old 
scepticism was so far removed from making feeling, or intuition, 
into the principle of truth that it turned itself against the sensible 
in the very first place instead. (Concerning modern scepticism as 
compared with ancient, see Kritisches Journal der Philosophie. 
SchelIing and Hegel, eds., 1802, vol. 1, no. 2.)33 
lI. CRITICAL PHILOSOPHY 
§ 40 
Critical Philosophy has in common with Empiricism that it accepts experi­
ence as the only basis for our cognitions; but it will not let them count as 
truths, but only as cognitions of appearances. 
a. der fur sich vereinzelte, unendlich mannigfaltige Staff 
b. einen Zusammenhang der Natwendigheit 

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
81 
The distinction between the elements found in the analysis of 
experience-the sensible material and its universal relations-serves as the 
first starting point. Combined with this we have the reflection (mentioned 
in the preceding paragraph [§ 39]) that only what is singular and only what 
happens are contained in perception [taken] on its own account. But at the 
same time, Critical Philosophy holds on to the factum that universality and 
necessity, being also essential determinations, are found to be present in 
what is called experience. And, because this element does not stem from 
the empirical as such, it belongs to the spontaneity of thinking, or is a 
priori.-The thought-determinations or concepts of the understanding make 
up the objectivity of the cognitions of experience. In general they contain 
relations, and hence synthetic a priori judgments34 (i.e., original relations of 
opposed terms) are formed by means of them. 
The Humean scepticism does not deny the fact that the determina­
tions of universality and necessity are found in cognition. But in 
the Kantian philosophy, too, this is nothing else but a presupposed 
fact; in the ordinary language of the sciences, we can say that this 
philosophy has only advanced another explanation of that fact. 
§ 41 
First of all, the Critical Philosophy subjects to investigation the validity of 
the concepts of the understanding that are used in metaphysics, but also in 
the other sciences and in ordinary representation. This critique does not 
involve itself with the content, however, or with the determinate mutual 
relationship of these thought-determinations to each other; instead, it con­
siders them according to the antithesis of subjectivity and objectivity in 
general. In the way that it is taken here, this antithesis relates to the 
distinction of the elements within experience (see the preceding paragraph 
[§ 40]). In this context "objectivity" means the element of universality and 
necessity, i.e., of the thought-determinations themselves-the so-called a 
priori.35 But the Critical Philosophy extends the antithesis in such a way 
that experience in its entirety falls within subjectivity; i.e., both of these 
elements together are subjective, and nothing remains in contrast with 
subjectivity except the thing-in-itself. 
The more detailed forms of the a priori, i.e., of thinking which, in spite of 
its objectivity, is interpreted as a merely subjective activity, are presented 
as follows-in a systematic order which, it may be remarked, rests only 
upon psychological-historical foundations. 
Addition 1 .  Subjecting the determinations of the older metaphysics to investigation 
was without doubt a very important step. NaIve thinking went about unsuspec-

82 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
tingly in the thought-determinations that were formed directly and spontaneously. 
No one asked, at that stage, to what extent these determinations would have value 
and validity [if taken] on their own account. We have already remarked earlier that 
thinking that is free is without presuppositions. By this standard, the thinking of 
the older metaphysics was not free, because, without further ado, it let its deter­
minations count as something given in advance, or as an a priori, although reflec­
tion had not put them to the test. 
By contrast, the Critical Philosophy set itself the task of investigating just how far 
the forms of thinking are in general capable of helping us reach the cognition of 
truth. More precisely, the faculty of cognition was to be investigated before cogni­
tion began. This certainly involves the correct insight that the forms of thinking 
themselves must be made the ob-ject of cognition; but there soon creeps in, too, 
the mistaken project of wanting to have cognition before we have any cognition, or 
of not wanting to go into the water before we have learned to swim. Certainly, the 
forms of thinking should not be used without investigation; but this process of 
investigation is itself a process of cognition. So the activity of the forms of thinking, 
and the critique of them, must be united within the process of cognition. The 
forms of thinking must be considered in and for themselves; they are the ob-ject 
and the activity of the ob-ject itself; they investigate themselves, [and] they must 
determine their own limits and point out their own defects. This is the same 
activity of thinking that will soon be taken into particular consideration under the 
name "dialectic"; and we can only remark here, in a preliminary way, that it is not 
brought to bear on the thought-determinations from outside; on the contrary, it 
must be considered as dwelling within them. 
The very first [task] in the Kantian philosophy, therefore, is for thinking to 
investigate how far it is capable of cognition. Nowadays we have gone beyond the 
Kantian philosophy, and everyone wants to go further. There are two ways of going 
further, however: one can go forward or backward. Looked at in the clear light of 
day, many of our philosophical endeavours are nothing but the (mistaken) pro­
cedure of the older metaphysics, an uncritical thinking on and on, of the kind that 
anyone can do. 
Addition 2. Kant's investigation of the thought-determinations suffers essentially 
from the defect that he did not consider them in and for themselves, but only to 
see whether they were subjective or objective. In ordinary language, to be "objec­
tive" is to be present outside us and to come to us from outside through percep­
tion. Kant denied that the thought-determinations (cause and effect, for instance) 
were "objective" in this sense, i.e., that they were given in perception; instead he 
regarded them as pertaining to our thinking itself or to the spontaneity of thinking, 
and so in this sense as subjective. 
But all the same Kant calls the thought-product36-and, to be precise, the univer­
sal and the necessary-"objective," and what is only sensed, he calls "subjective." 
As a result, the linguistic usage mentioned above appears to have been stood on its 
head, and for that reason Kant has been charged with linguistic confusion. This, 
however, is a great injustice. More precisely, the situation is as follows: What 

8. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
83 
ordinary consciousness is confronted with, what can be perceived by the senses 
(e.g., this animal, this star, etc.), appears to it as what subsists on its own account, 
or as what is independent. Thoughts, on the other hand, count for it as what is not 
self-standing, but rather dependent upon an other. In fact, however, what can be 
perceived by the senses is really secondary and not self-standing, while thoughts, 
on the contrary, are what is genuinely independent and primitive. It is in this sense 
that Kant called what measures up to thought (the universal and the necessary) 
"objective"; and he was certainly quite right to do this. On the other hand, what is 
sensibly perceptible is certainly "subjective," in that it does not have its footing 
within itself, and is as fleeting and transient as thought is enduring and inwardly 
stable. Nowadays we find this same determination of the distinction between the 
"objective" and "subjective," which Kant validated in the linguistic usage of the 
more highly educated consciousness. For example, people demand that the judg­
ment of a work of art should be "objective" and not "subjective," and this is under­
stood to mean that it should not be based on a contingent, particular feeling or 
mood of the moment, but should keep in mind the points of view that are universal 
and grounded in the essence of art. When dealing with something scientifically, we 
can distinguish between an "objective" and a "subjective" concern in the same 
sense. 
Moreover, even the objectivity of thinking in Kant's sense is itself again only 
subjective in its form, because, according to Kant, thoughts, although they are 
universal and necessary determinations, are still only our thoughts, and are cut off 
from what the thing is in-itself by an impassable gulf. On the contrary, the true 
objectivity of thinking consists in this: that thoughts are not merely our thoughts, 
but at the same time the In-itself of things and of whatever else is ob-jective. 
"Objective" and "subjective" are convenient expressions which we employ CUr­
rently; but their use can very easily give rise to confusion too. So far our explana­
tion has shown that "objectivity" has a threefold significance. To start with, it has 
the significance of what is externally present, as distinct from what is only 
subjective, meant, dreamed, etc. ; secondly, it has the Significance, established by 
Kant, of what is universal and necessary as distinct from the contingent, particular, 
and subjective that we find in our sensation; and thirdly, it has the last-mentioned 
significance of the In-itself as thought-product, the significance of what is there, as 
distinct from what is only thought by us, and hence still distinct from the matter 
itself, or from the matter in-itself. 
§ 42 
(a) The theoretical faculty, cognition as such. 
This philosophy points to the original identity of the "I" within thinking 
(the transcendental unity of self-consciousness)37 as the determinate 
ground of the concepts of the understanding. The representations that are 
given through feeling and intuition are a manifold with regard to their 
content. They are equally manifold through their form, [i.e.,] through the 

84 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
mutual externality of sensibility in its two forms, space and time,38 which as 
forms of intuiting (as what is universal in it) are themselves a priori. Since 
the "I" relates this manifold of sense-experience and intuiting to itself and 
unites it inwardly as within One consciousness (pure apperception), this 
manifold is brought into an identity, into an original combination. The 
determinate modes of this relating are the pure concepts of the under­
standing, the categories. 39 
We are all well aware that Kant's philosophy took the easy way in 
its finding of the categories. "I," the unity of self-consciousness, is 
totally abstract and completely undetermined. So how are we to 
arrive at the de terminations of the 1, or at the categories? For­
tunately, we can find the various kinds of judgment already specified 
empirically in the traditional logic. To judge, however, is to think a 
determinate ob-ject. So, the various modes of judgment that have 
already been enumerated give us the various determinations of 
thinking.-It remains the profound and enduring merit of Fichte's 
philosophy40 to have reminded us that the thought-determinations 
must be exhibited in their necessity, and that it is essential for them 
to be deduced.-Fichte's philosophy ought to have had at least this 
effect upon the method of presenting a treatise on logic: that the 
thought-determinations in general, or the usual logical material, 
the species of concepts, judgments, and syllogisms, are no longer 
just taken from observation and thus apprehended only em­
pirically, but are deduced from thinking itself. If thinking has to be 
able to prove anything at all, if logic must require that proofs are 
given, and if it wants to teach us how to prove [something], then it 
must above all be capable of proving its very own peculiar content, 
and able to gain insight into the necessity of this content. 
Addition 1 .  Thus Kant's assertion is that the thought-determinations have their 
source in the Ego, and that the Ego therefore furnishes the determinations of 
universality and necessity.-If we consider what we have before us to begin with, 
we find that, in general terms, it is a manifold; the categories, then, are simple 
terms with respect to which this manifold is related. The sensible, by contrast, 
consists of what is mutually external as well as external to itself; this is the proper 
and basic determination of it. Thus "now," for instance, only has being in relation 
to a "before" and an "after." Similarly, red is only present because yellow or blue 
stands against it. But this other is outside this or that sensible [thing] which only is 
because it is not the other, and only because the other is.-The situation of think­
ing, or the Ego, is precisely the contrary of what holds for the sensible, which is 
mutually external as well as external to itself. The Ego is what is originally identical, 
at one with itself, and utterly at home with itself. If I say "I," this is the abstract self-

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
85 
relation, and what is posited in this unity is infected by it, and transformed into it. 
Thus the Ego is, so to speak, the crucible and the fire through which the indifferent 
multiplicity is consumed and reduced to unity. This, then, is what Kant calls "pure 
apperception," as distinct from ordinary apperception; the latter takes up the man­
ifold into itself, as a manifold, whereas pure apperception must be considered the 
activity of making [the ob-ject] mine. 
Now this certainly expresses correctly the nature of all consciousness. What 
human beings strive for in general is cognition of the world; we strive to appropri­
ate it and to conquer it. To this end the reality of the world must be crushed as it 
were; i.e., it must be made ideal. At the same time, however, it must be remarked 
that it is not the subjective activity of self-consciousness that introduces absolute 
unity into the multiplicity in question; rather, this identity is the Absolute, genuine­
ness itself. Thus it is the goodness of the Absolute, so to speak, that lets singular 
[beings] enjoy their own selves, and it is just this that drives them back into 
absolute unity. 
-1' .ill.lJJ ) 
Addition 2. Expressions like "transcendental unity of self-consciousness" look very 
difficult, as if something monstrous were concealed there; but what is really in 
question- is simpler than that. What Kant understands by "transcendental" is clear 
from the distinction between "transcendental" and "transcendent."41 The "tran­
scendent" here is (quite generally) whatever goes beyond the determinacy of the 
understanding, and in this sense it occurs first in mathematics. For instance, it is 
said in geometry that one must imagine the circumference of a circle to consist of 
an infinite number of infinitely small straight lines. Determinations that count as 
utterly diverse for the understanding (straight line and curve) are expressly posited 
here as identical. Another example of something that is transcendent in this sense 
is the self-consciousness that is self-identical and inwardly infinite, as distinct from 
the ordinary consciousness, that is determined by finite material. However, Kant 
called that unity of self-consciousness "transcendental" only, and by this he under­
stood that it is only subjective, and does not also pertain to ob-jects themselves as 
they are in-themselves. 
Addition 3. That the categories are to be regarded as belonging only to us (or as 
"subjective") must seem very bizarre to the ordinary consciousness, and there is 
certainly something awry here. This much is correct about it, however: that the 
categories are not contained in immediate sensation. Consider, for example, a piece 
of sugar. It is hard, white, sweet, etc. We say that all these properties are united in 
one ob-ject, and this unity is not found in sensation. The situation is the same when 
we regard two events as standing to one another in the relationship of cause and 
effect; what is perceived here is the two isolated events, which succeed one another 
in time. But that one is the cause and the other the effect (the causal nexus between 
them) is not perceived; on the contrary, it is present merely for our thinking. Now, 
although the categories (e.g., unity, cause and effect, etc. ) pertain to thinking as 
such, it does not at all follow from this that they must therefore be merely some-
a. die Sache 

86 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
thing of ours, and not also determinations of ob-jects themselves. But, according to 
Kant's view, this is what is supposed to be the case, and his philosophy is subjective 
idealism, inasmuch as the Ego (the knowing subject) furnishes both the form and 
also the material of knowing-the former as thinking and the latter as sensing 
subject. 
Regarding the content of this subjective idealism we do not have to lift a finger. 
One might perhaps think, at first, that ob-jects are deprived of reality because their 
unity has been transferred to the subject. But neither we nor the ob-jects would 
gain anything merely because being pertained to them. What matters is the content, 
and whether the content is a true one. The fact that things merely are is of no help 
to them. Time catches up with what is, and so what is will soon be what is not as 
well.-You could also say that, according to subjective idealism, man is entitled to 
have a high opinion of himself. But if his world is a mass of sense-intuitions he has 
no cause to be proud of it. So nothing at all hangs upon the distinction between 
subjectivity and objectivity in this sense; instead, everything hangs upon the con­
tent, and tha t  is both subjective and objective. Even a crime is objective in the sense 
that it merely exists, but its existence is inwardly null-and it is precisely this 
nullity that comes to be there in the punishment. 
§ 43 
On the one hand, it is the categories that elevate mere perception into 
objectivity, into experience; but, on the other hand, these concepts, which 
are unities merely of subjective consciousness, are conditioned by the 
given material. They are empty on their own account42 and have their 
application and use only in experience, whose other component, the deter­
minations of feeling and intuition, is equally something merely subjective. 
Addition. To assert that, by themselves, the categories are empty is unfounded, 
because they have a content in any case, just by being determinate. But, of course, 
the content of the categories is not one that is perceptible to the senses. Nor is it 
spatiotemporal; but this is not to be regarded as a defect, since it is really a merit. 
That is why this is already recognised even in ordinary life, specifically, for exam­
ple, when people say that a book or a speech is the richer in content because more 
thoughts, general conclusions, etc., are to be found in it; while they will not, 
conversely, count a book (perhaps more specifically a novel) as rich in content just 
because a great crowd of isolated incidents, situations, and the like are thrown 
together in it. In this way even ordinary consciousness recognises that there is more 
to "content" than the sensible material; but this "more" consists of thoughts, and 
here in the first place the categories. 
In this regard it must also be remarked that the assertion that the categories by 
themselves are empty is certainly correct in the sense that we ought not to rest 
content with them and the totality which they form (the logical Idea), but to 

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
87 
advance to the real" domains of Nature and Spirit. This advance, however, should 
not be interpreted as meaning that the logical Idea comes to receive an alien 
content that stems from outside it; on the contrary, it is the proper activity of the 
logical Idea to determine itself further and to unfold itself into Nature and Spirit. 
§ 44 
The categories, therefore, are unfit to be determinations of the Absolute, 
which is not given in perception; hence the understanding, or cognition 
through the categories, cannot become cognizant of things-in-themselves. 
The thing-in-itself (and here "thing" embraces God, or the spirit, as 
well)44 expresses the ob-ject, inasmuch as abstraction is made of all 
that it is for consciousness, of all determinations of feeling, as well 
as of all determinate thoughts about it. It is easy to see what is left, 
namely, what is completely abstract, or totally empty, and deter­
mined only as what is "beyond"; the negative of representation, of 
feeling, of determinate thinking, etc. But it is just as simple to 
reflect that this caput mortuum45 is itself only the product of think­
ing, and precisely of the thinking that has gone to the extreme of 
pure abstraction, the product of the empty "I" that makes its own 
empty self-identity into its ob-ject. The negative determination that 
contains this abstract identity as [its] ob-ject is likewise entered 
among the Kantian categories,46 and, like that empty identity, it is 
something quite familiar.-We must be quite surprised, therefore, 
to read so often that one does not know what the thing-in-itself is; 
for nothing is easier to know than this. 
§ 45 
Now, it is reason, the faculty of the unconditioned, that sees what is condi­
tioned in all this empiricial awarenessb of things. What is here called ob­
ject of reason, the unconditioned or infinite, is nothing but the self­
equivalent; in other words, it is that original identity of the I in thinking 
which was mentioned in § 42. This abstract "1," or the thinking that makes 
this pure identity into its ob-ject or purpose, is called "reason." (See the 
remark to the preceding paragraph.) Our empirical cognitionsc are not 
a. real" 
b. Erfahrungskenntnisse 
c. Erfahrungs-Erkenntnisse 

88 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
appropriate for this identity that lacks determinations altogether, because 
they are always determinate in content. When an unconditioned of this sort 
is accepted as the Absolute and the Truth" of reason (or as the Idea), then, 
of course, our empirical awareness is declared to be untrue, to be [only] 
appearances. 
Addition. Kant was the first to emphasise the distinction between understanding 
and reason47 in a definite way, establishing the finite and conditioned as the subject 
matter of the former, and the infinite and unconditioned as that of the latter. It 
must be recognised that to have established the finitude of the cognition that is 
based merely on experience and belongs to the understanding, and to have termed 
its content "appearance," was a very important result of the Kantian philosophy. 
But we ought not to stop at this negative result, or to reduce the unconditioned 
character of reason to the merely abstract identity that excludes distinction. Since, 
upon this view, reason is regarded as simply going beyond the finite and condi­
tioned character of the understanding, it is thereby itself degraded into something 
finite and conditioned, for the genuine infinite is not merely a realm beyond the 
finite: on the contrary, it contains the finite sublated within itself. The same holds 
for the Idea too, which Kant did indeed restore to honour, in that he vindicated it 
for reason, distinguishing it from the abstract determinations of the understanding 
and from merely sensible representations (all of which, even the latter, being 
habitually called "ideas" in ordinary life). But, with regard to the Idea too, he 
halted at the negative aspect and at a mere "ought." 
As for the interpretation of the ob-jects of our immediate consciousness, which 
form the content of empirical cognition, as mere appearances, this anyway must be 
regarded as a very important result of the Kantian philosophy. For our ordinary 
consciousness (i. e., the consciousness at the level of sense-perception and under­
standing) the ob-jects that itb knows count as self-standing and self-founded in 
their isolation from one another; and when they prove to be related to each other, 
and conditioned by one another, their mutual dependence upon one another is 
regarded as something external to the ob-ject, and not as belonging to their nature. 
It must certainly be maintained against this that the ob-jects of which we have 
immediate knowledge are mere appearances, i.e., they do not have the ground of 
their being within themselves, but within something else. The further question, 
then, is how this other is determined. According to the Kantian philosophy, the 
things that we know about are only appearances for us, and what they are in­
themselves remains for us an inaccessible beyond. 
The naive consciousness has rightly taken exception to this subjective idealism, 
according to which the content of our consciousness is something that is only ours, 
something posited only through us. In fact, the true situation is that the things of 
which we have immediate knowledge are mere appearances, not only for us, but 
also in-themselves, and that the proper determination of these things, which are in 
a. das Absolute und Wahre 
b. reading es not er 

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
89 
this sense "finite", consists in having the ground of their being not within them­
selves but in the universal divine Idea. This interpretation must also be called 
idealism, but, as distinct from the subjective idealism of the Critical Philosophy, it 
is absolute idealism. Although it transcends the ordinary realistic consciousness, 
still, this absolute idealism can hardly be regarded as the private property of 
philosophy in actual fact, because, on the contrary, it forms the basis of all religious 
consciousness. This is because religion, too, regards the sum total of everything 
that is there, in short, the world before us, as created and governed by God. 
§ 46 
But the need arises to be cognizant of this identity or of the empty thing­
in-itself. To be cognizant, however, means nothing else but the knowing of 
an ob-ject according to its determinate content. A determinate content, how­
ever, contains a manifold connection within itself and is the basis for con­
nections with many other ob-jects. So, this [Kantian] reason has nothing 
but the categories for its determination of the thing-in-itself, or of that in­
finite; and when it wants to use them for this purpose, it flies off (and 
becomes "transcendent").-
This is where the second side of the critique of reason comes in, and 
this second side is more important than the first one. The first one, 
to be precise, is the view discussed above, that the categories have 
their source in the unity of self-consciousness; hence it is the view 
that in fact cognition through the categories contains nothing ob­
jective, and that the objectivity that is ascribed to them (§§ 40, 41) is 
itself only something subjective. If this is all that is taken into 
account, then the Kantian critique is only a subjective (vulgar) ideal­
ism, one which has nothing to do with the content, and has before 
it only the abstract forms of subjectivity and objectivity; and on top 
of that it sticks one-sidedly with the former, i.e., subjectivity, as the 
ultimate, and thoroughy affirmative, determination. But when we 
consider the so-called application of the categories by reason in the 
cognition of its ob-jects, then the content of the categories becomes 
a topic of discussion, at least with regard to some of their 
determinations--or at any rate we have here an occasion for some 
discussion to occur. It is especially interesting to see how Kant 
judges this application of the categories to the Unconditioned; in other 
words, metaphysics itself. His procedure will be briefly described 
and criticised here. 
a. wird sie iiberfliegend (transzendent) 

90 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
§ 47 
(1) The first unconditioned that he considers is the soul48 (see § 34).-ln my 
consciousness 1 always find myself (a) as the determining subject, (13) as a 
singular or as something abstractly simple, (-y) as what is One and the same 
in everything manifold of which 1 am conscious-as something-identical, (8) 
as something that distinguishes me as thinking from everything outside me. 
The procedure of the traditional metaphysics is correctly specified [by 
saying] that it sets the corresponding categories, or thought-de terminations, 
in the place of these empirical determinations. This gives rise to four prop­
ositions: (a) the soul is a substance; (13) it is a simple substance; (-y) it is 
numerically identical with respect to the various times of its being-there; (8) 
it stands in relationship to what is spatial. 
Kant draws attention to the flaw involved in this transition: that two 
types of determination are confounded (paralogism), namely, empirical de­
terminations with categories; concluding from the former to the latter, or in 
general replacing the first with the second, is quite unjustified. 
It is obvious that this criticism expresses nothing other than the comment 
of Hume that we referred to above (§ 39): that thought-determinations 
in general-universality and necessity--are not found in perception, and 
that, both in its content and in its form, the empirical is diverse from the 
determination of thought. 
If the empirical were to authenticate our thought, then it would 
certainly be requisite that the thought can be precisely exhibited in 
our perceptions.-In Kant's critique of metaphysical psychology, 
the only reason that substantiality, simplicity, self-identity, and the 
independence that maintains itself in its community with the ma­
terial world cannot be attributed to the soul, is that the determina­
tions which the consciousness of the soul lets us experience are not 
exactly those that are produced by thinking in the same context. 
But, according to our presentation here, Kant himself makes cogni­
tion in general, and even experience, consist in the fact that our 
perceptions are thought; i.e., that the determinations which first be­
long to perception are transformed into thought-determinations.­
But it must be counted as one good result of the Kantian critique in 
any case that philosophising about the spirit has been freed from 
the soul-things and their categories; and hence from questions 
about whether the soul is simple or composite, whether it is material, 
and so on.-Even for ordinary human understanding, after all, the 
genuine point of view about the inadmissibility of such forms is not 
the fact that they are thoughts, but rather that in and for them­
selves these thoughts do not contain the truth.-If thought and 

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
91 
appearance do not completely correspond with each other, we 
have a choice, initially, of which of them to regard as the deficient 
one. In Kant's idealism, so far as it concerns the rational, the defect 
is shifted onto the thoughts; they are found to be unsatisfactory 
because they do not match up with what is perceived, or with a 
consciousness that restricts itself to the range of perception, [so 
that] these thoughts are not to be found in a consciousness of this 
sort. The content of the thought, on its own account, does not 
come under discussion here. 
Addition. "Paralogisms" are basically defective syllogisms, whose defect consists, 
more precisely, in the fact that one and the same word is used in the two premises 
in diverse senses. According to Kant, the procedure of the older metaphysics in 
Rational Psychology is supposed to rest upon paralogisms of this kind; to be 
precise, merely empirical determinations of the soul are regarded by this psychol­
ogy as pertaining to the soul in and for itself. 
For that matter, it is quite correct to say that predicates like "simplicity," "un­
alterableness," etc., cannot be applied to the soul. This is not for the reason that 
Kant gives, however (viz., that reason would thereby overstep the limit assigned to 
it), but because the abstract determinations of the understanding are not good 
enough for the soul, which is something quite other than the merely simple, 
unalterable, etc. For instance, the soul is certainly simple self-identity; but at the 
same time, because it is active, it distinguishes itself inwardly, whereas what is only 
simple, i.e., simple in an abstract way, is (for that very reason) also dead at the same 
time.-The fact that, through his polemic against the older metaphysiCS, Kant 
removed those predicates from the soul and the spirit must be regarded a great 
result, but the reason that he gives for doing this is quite wrong. 
§ 48 
(2) In reason's attempt to be cognizant of the unconditioned [aspect] of the 
second ob-ject (§ 35), i.e., of the world,49 it gets involved in antinomies, i.e., in 
the assertion of two opposed propositions about the same ob-ject; and it 
finds, moreover, that each of the propositions must be affirmed with equal 
necessity. What follows from this is that the content of this "world," whose 
determinations give rise to contradictions of this sort, cannot be in-itself, 
but can only be appearance. The solution is that the contradiction does not 
fall in the ob-ject in and for itself, but is only attributable to reason and to 
its cognition of the ob-ject. 
What is made explicit here is that it is the content itself, namely, 
the categories on their own account, that bring about the contra­
diction. This thought, that the contradiction which is posited by 

92 
a. Manier 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
the determinations of the understanding in what is rational is 
essential and necessary, has to be considered one of the most im­
portant and profound advances of the philosophy of modern 
times. But the solution is as trivial as the viewpoint is profound; it 
consists merely in a tenderness for the things of this world. The 
stain of contradiction ought not to be in the essence of what is in 
the world; it has to belong only to thinking reason, to the essence of 
the spirit. It is not considered at all objectionable that the world as 
it appears shows contradictions to the spirit that observes it; the 
way the world is for subjective spirit, for sensibility, and for the 
understanding, is the world as it appears. But when the essence of 
what is in the world is compared with the essence of spirit, it may 
surprise us to see how naiVely the humble affirmation has been 
advanced, and repeated, that what is inwardly contradictory is not 
the essence of the world, but belongs to reason, the thinking es­
sence. It does not help at all to express this by saying that reason 
only falls into contradiction through the application of the categories. 50 
For it is also asserted that this application is necessary, and that, for 
the purpose of cognition, reason has no determinations other than 
the categories. Cognition really is determining and determinate 
thinking; if reason is only empty, indeterminate thinking, then it 
thinks nothing. But if reason is ultimately reduced to that empty 
identity (see the following paragraph), then it is, in the end, lucky 
to be freed from contradiction after all-through the easy sacrifice 
of all and import content. 
It may also be remarked that, as a result of his failure to study 
the antinomy in more depth, Kant brings forward only four 
antinomies. He arrived at them by presupposing the table of cate­
gories just as he did in the case of the so-called paralogisms. While 
doing this he followed the procedure, a which became so popular 
afterwards, of simply subsuming the determinations of an ob-ject 
under a ready-made schema, instead of deducing them from the 
Concept. I have pointed out further deficiencies in the treatment of 
the antinomies at appropriate points in my Science of Logic. sI-The 
main point that has to be made is that antinomy is found not only 
in the four particular ob-jects taken from cosmology, but rather in 
all objects of all kinds, in all representations, concepts, and ideas. 
To know this, and to be cognizant of this property of ob-jects, 
belongs to what is essential in philosophical study; this is the 

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
93 
property that constitutes what will determine itself in due course 
as the dialectical moment of logical thinking. 
Addition. In the perspective of the older metaphysics it was assumed that, where 
cognition falls into contradictions, this is just an accidental aberration and rests on 
a subjective error in inferring and arguing. For Kant, on the contrary, it lies in the 
very nature of thinking to lapse into contradictions ("antinomies") when it aims at 
cognition of the infinite. In the remark to the above paragraph we have mentioned 
that the pointing out of the antinomies should be regarded as a very important 
advance for philosophical cognition, because in that way the rigid dogmatism of 
the metaphysics of the understanding is set aside and attention is directed to the 
dialectical movement of thinking. But, at the same time, it must be noted that here 
again Kant stopped at the merely negative result (that how things are in­
themselves is unknowable), and did not penetrate to the cognition of the true and 
positive significance of the antinomies. This true and positive significance (ex­
pressed generally) is that everything actual contains opposed determinations 
within it, and in consequence the cognition and, more exactly, the comprehension 
of an ob-ject amounts precisely to our becoming conscious of it as a concrete unity 
of opposed determinations. As we showed earlier, in dealing with the metaphysical 
cognition of the ob-jects it was concerned with, the older metaphysics went to work 
by employing one set of abstract determinations of the understanding, and exclud­
ing those opposed to them; Kant, on the contrary, sought to demonstrate that other 
assertions of opposite content can, with equal justification and equal necessity, be 
set against the assertions that result from this procedure. In exhibiting these anti­
nomies Kant confined himself to the cosmology of the older metaphysics; and in 
his polemic against it, taking the schema of the categories as a basis, he produced 
four antinomies. 
The first of these concerns the question of whether or not the world should be 
thought of as limited in space and time. The second antinomy deals with the 
dilemma of whether matter is to be regarded as infinitely divisible or as consisting 
of atoms. The third antinomy relates to the antithesis between freedom and neces­
sity; more precisely, the question is raised of whether everything in the world is to 
be regarded as conditioned by the causal nexus or whether free beings, i.e., abso­
lute starting points of action in the world, must also be assumed. Finally, Kant 
adds, as the fourth antinomy, the dilemma of whether the world as a whole has a 
cause or not. 
The procedure that he employs in his discussion of these antinomies is as 
follows: he first sets up the opposing determinations contained in them as thesis 
and anti-thesis,52 and proves both (that is, he seeks to present them as necessary 
results of reflection). In doing this he expressly defends himself against the accusa­
tion that he has sought out tricks in order to support what is only a lawyer's 
"proof." But, in fact, the proofs that Kant brings forward for his theses and anti­
theses must be regarded as mere pseudoproofs, because what is supposed to be 
proved is always already contained in the presuppositions that form the starting 
point, and the semblance of a mediation is produced only through Kant's proliX, 
apagogic procedure. 

94 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Nevertheless, the setting-up of the antinomies remains a very important result of 
the Critical Philosophy, and one that is worthy of recognition: for what is brought 
out in this way (even if it is only done in the first instance [i.e., by Kant himself) in a 
subjective and immediate manner) is the factual unity of the determinations which 
the understanding clings to in their separation from one another. For instance, it is 
implied in the first of the cosmological antinomies listed above that space and time 
are to be considered not only as continuous, but also as discrete, whereas the older 
metaphysics stood firm at mere continuity, and as a result the world was consid­
ered to be unlimited in space and time. It is quite correct to say that we can go 
beyond any determinate space and similarly beyond any determinate time; but it is no 
less correct to say that space and time are only actual in virtue of their determinacy 
(i.e., as "here" and "now"), and that this determinacy lies in their very concept. 
The same holds for the other antinomies adduced above, too; for instance, when 
the antinomy of freedom and necessity is more closely considered, the situation is 
that what the understanding takes to be freedom and necessity are in fact only 
ideal moments of true freedom and true necessity; neither of them has any truth if 
separated from the other. 
§ 49 
(3) The third object of reason is GOd53 (§ 36); he has to be cognised, i.e., 
determined by thinking. But as opposed to simple identity, all determination 
is for the understanding only a restriction, i.e., a negation as such. Hence, 
all reality is to be taken only without restriction, i.e., as indeterminate, and 
God, as the essential sum of all realities or as the supremely real Essence, 
becomes the simple abstraction; while the only determination that remains 
available for him is the just as strictly abstract determinacy of being. Ab­
stract identity (which is what is here also is called "concept") and being are 
the two moments that reason seeks to unify; this unification is the Ideal of 
reason. 
§ 50 
Two ways or forms are admissible for this unification: we can begin with 
being and pass on from there to the abstraction of thinking; or, conversely, 
we can effect the passage from the abstraction to being. 
As far as beginning with being is concerned, this being, as what is 
immediate, presents itself as determined as an infinite manifold, as a world 
in all its fullness. This world can be determined more precisely as a collec­
tion of whatever infinitely many contingencies [there are] (in the cosmologi­
cal proof); or as a collection of infinitely many purposes and purposive 
relationships (in the physico-theological proof). YL-Thinking of this fullness 
of being means stripping it of the form of the singularities and contingen-

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
95 
cies, and grasping it as a universal being, necessary in and for itself, one 
that is self-determining and active in accordance with universal purposes, 
one that is diverse from that contingent and singular collection: [i.e.,] 
grasping it as God.-The critique of this procedure is directed mainly 
against its being a syllogising, a passage [from one being to another]. As 
such and in themselves, our perceptions, and their aggregate "the world," 
do not show the universality that results from the purification of that 
content by thinking; so this universality is not justified by that empirical 
notion of the world. This elevation of thought from the empirical notion of 
the world to God is countered with the Humean standpoint55 (as was the 
case with the paralogisms; see § 47), the standpoint that proclaims the 
thinking of our perceptions to be inadmissible; i.e., the eliciting of the 
universal and necessary out of these perceptions. 
a. Gang 
Since man is a thinking being, neither sound common sense nor 
philosophy will ever give up raising itself out of the empirical 
worldview to God. This elevation has the thinking consideration of 
the world as its only foundation, not the merely sensory one that 
we have in common with the animals. It is for thinking, and for 
thinking alone, that the essence, the substance, the universal might, 
and purposive determination of the world are [present]. The so­
called proofs that God is there have to be seen simply as the 
descriptions and analyses of the inward journey' of the spirit. It is a 
thinking journey and it thinks what is sensory. The elevation of 
thinking above the sensible, its going out above the finite to the 
infinite, the leap that is made into the supersensible when the 
sequences of the sensible are broken off, all this is thinking itself; 
this transition is only thinking. To say that this passage ought not to 
take place means that there is to be no thinking. And in fact, 
animals do not make this transition; they stay with sense­
experience and intuition; for that reason they do not have any 
religion either. 56 Both generally and in particular, two remarks 
have to be made about this critique of the elevation of thinking. 
First of all, where this elevation is given the form of syllogisms (the 
so-called proofs that God is there), the starting point is always the 
view of the world determined somehow or other as an aggregate 
of contingencies, or of purposes and purposive relations. It may 
seem that in thinking, where it constructs syllogisms, this starting 
point may seem to remain and to be left there as a fixed foundation­
one that is just as empirical as the material is to begin with. In this 

96 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
way, the relation of the starting point to the point of arrival is 
represented as affirmative only, as a concluding from one [reality] 
that is, and remains, to an other that equally is as well. But this is 
the great mistake: wanting cognition of the nature of thinking only 
in this form that is proper to the understanding. On the contrary, 
thinking the empirical world essentially means altering its empiri­
cal form, and transforming it into something-universal; so thinking 
exercises a negative activity with regard to that foundation as well: 
when the perceived material is determined by universality, it does 
not remain in its first, empirical shape. With the removal and nega­
tion of the shell, the inner import of what is perceived is brought 
out (cf. §§ 13, 23). The metaphysical proofs that God is there are 
deficient explanations and descriptions of the elevation of the 
spirit from the world to God, because they do not express, or 
rather they do not bring out, the moment of negation that is con­
tained in this elevation-for the very fact that the world is con­
tingent implies that it is only something incidental, phenomenal, 
and in and for itself null and void." This elevation of the spirit 
means that although being certainly does pertain to the world, it is 
only semblance, not genuine being, not absolute truth; for, on the 
contrary, the truth is beyond that appearance, in God alone, and 
only God is genuine being. And while this elevation is a passage 
and mediation, it is also the sublating of the passage and the media­
tion, since that through which God could seem to be mediated, i.e., 
the world, is, on the contrary, shown up as what is null and void. It 
is only the nullity of the being of the world that is the bond of the 
elevation; so that what does mediate vanishes, and in this media­
tion, the mediation itself is sublated.-In his attack upon the way 
that the understanding conducts its proofs, lacobi concentrates 
mainly on the relationship [between the world and God] that is 
grasped only as affirmative, as a relationship between two beings; 
he rightly objects that in this procedure conditions (i.e., the world) 
are sought and found for the Unconditioned, and that in this way 
the Infinite (God) is represented as grounded and dependent. How­
ever, the way that the elevation itself takes place in the spirit cor­
rects this semblance; indeed, its whole import is the correction of 
this semblance. But Jacobi did not [re]cognise this as the genuine 
nature of essential thinking: that, in its mediation, it sublates medi­
ation itself. Hence, he wrongly regarded the objection, which he 
makes quite correctly against the mere reflecting of the under-
a. ein Fallendes, Erscheinendes, an und fur sich Nichtiges 

6. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
97 
standing, as an objection against thinking in general-and hence 
as one that strikes against the thinking of reason as well. 
The objection that is made against Spinozism-that it is a panthe­
ism and an atheism--can be used as an example to elucidate the 
overlooking of the negative moment. It is true that the absolute 
substance of Spinoza is not yet the absolute spirit, and it is rightly 
required that God must be determined as absolute spirit. But if 
Spinoza's determination [of God] is represented as the confusing of 
God with nature or with the finite world, and he is said to have 
made the world into God, what is presupposed is that the finite 
world possesses genuine actuality, affirmative reality. Upon this 
assumption the unity of God with the world implies that God, too, 
becomes radically finite, and is degraded into the merely finite, 
external manifoldness of existence. Apart from the fact that Spin­
oza does not define God as the unity of God and the world, but as 
the unity of thinking and extensions7 (the material world), this 
unity does already imply--even when it is taken in that first very 
clumsy way-that, on the contrary, the world is determined in the 
Spinozist system as a mere phenomenon without genuine reality, 
so that this system must rather be seen as acosmism.58 At the very 
least, a philosophy that maintains that God, and only God, is, 
should not be passed off as atheism. We ascribe religion even to 
peoples who worship apes, the cow, statues of stone or iron, etc., 
as God. But within this representational mode" it goes even more 
against the grain to give up the presupposition that is peculiar to 
it,59 namely that this aggregate of finitude which they call the 
"world" has actual reality. That there is no world, as it might be put 
in this mode, to assume something like that is easily dismissed as 
quite impossible, or at least much less possible than that it might 
come into a man's head that there is no God. People believe much 
more easily (and this is certainly not to their credit) that a system 
rejects God than that it rejects the world; they find it much more 
comprehensible that God should be rejected than that the world 
should be. 
The second remark concerns the critique of the basic import that 
this thinking elevation initially acquires. If this content consists 
only in the determinations of the substance of the world, of its 
necessary essence, of a cause that disposes and directs it according to 
purpose, etc., then it is surely not proportionate to what is under-
a. Aber im Sinne der Vorstellung 

98 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
stood, or ought to be understood, by "God:' But, setting aside this 
way of presupposing a certain notion of God, and judging the 
result by the standard of that presupposition, these determina­
tions are already of great value and are necessary moments in the 
Idea of God. But in this line of thought, if we want" to bring the 
import before thinking in its genuine determination, Le., the gen­
uine Idea of God, then we must not take our starting point from a 
subordinate content. The merely contingent things of the world are 
a very abstract determination. The organic formations and their 
purposive determinations belong to a higher circle, to life. But 
apart from the fact that the study of living nature, and of the 
general relation of given things to purposes, can be vitiated by the 
triviality of the purposes, or even by imputations of purposes and 
their relations that are outright childish. So, nature itself as merely 
alive is still not really that in terms of which the genuine determina­
tion of the Idea of God can be grasped; God is more than living, he 
is spirit. Insofar as thinking adopts a starting point and wants to 
adopt the closest one, spiritual nature alone is the worthiest and 
most genuine starting point for the thinking of the Absolute. 
§ 51 
The other way of unification, through which the Ideal is to be established, 
starts from the abstraction of thinking and goes on to the determination for 
which being alone remains; this is the ontological proof that God is there. The 
antithesis that occurs here is the one between thinking and being, whereas 
in the first way being is common to both sides, and the antithesis concerns 
only the distinction between what is singularised and what is universal. 
What the understanding sets against this second way is in-itself the same 
as was alleged before, namely that, just as the universal is not found to be 
present in the empirical, so, conversely, the determinate is not contained in 
the universal-and the determinate here is "being." In other words, 
"being" cannot be deduced from the concept or analysed out of it. 
One reason why Kant's critique of the ontological proof has been 
taken up, and accepted with so much unconditional acclaim, is 
undoubtedly that, in order to make quite clear what sort of distinc­
tion there is between thinking and being, Kant used the example 
of the hundred dollars.60 With respect to their concept, these are 
a. Urn in diesern Wege 

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
99 
a. formal 
equally one hundred, whether they are merely possible or actual; 
whereas, for the state of my fortune, this distinction is an essential 
one.-Nothing can be more obvious than that what I think or 
represent to myself is not yet actual because of that: nothing is 
more obvious than the thought that representing, or even the 
concept, falls short of being.-Calling such things as one hundred 
dollars a "concept" can rightly be called a barbarism; but quite 
apart from that, those who repeat over and over again in their 
objections to the philosophical Idea, that thinking and being are 
diverse, surely ought to presuppose from the first that philoso­
phers are familiar with this fact too. Can there in fact be a more 
trivial point of information than this? But then, too, we have to 
bear in mind that when we speak of "God," we are referring to an 
ob-ject of quite another kind than one hundred dollars, or any 
other particular concept, notion, or whatever other name you want 
to give it. In fact what makes everything finite is this and only this: 
that its being-there is diverse from its concept. But God has to be 
expressly that which can only be "thought as existing,"61 where the 
Concept includes being within itself. It is this unity of the Concept 
and of being that constitutes the concept of God.-It is true that 
this is still a formala determination of God, and one which, for that 
reason, only in fact contains the nature of the Concept itself. But it 
is easy to see that, even if it is taken in its totally abstract sense, the 
Concept includes being within itself. For however the Concept may 
be further determined, it is itself minimally the immediate relation 
to itself that emerges through the sublation of its mediation, and 
being is nothing else but that.-We might well say that it would be 
very odd if spirit's innermost core, the Concept, or even if I, or 
above all the concrete totality that God is, were not rich enough to 
contain within itself even so poor a determination as being is-for 
being is the poorest and the most abstract one of all. For thought, 
nothing can have less import than being. Only the notion that we 
have when we hear the word "being", b namely an external, sensible 
existence (like that of the paper which I have here in front of me), 
may be even poorer; but [at this point] we do not want to speak of 
the sensible existence of a restricted, perishable thing at all.­
Besides, the trivial remark that thought and being are diverse may, 
at the most, hinder, but not abolish, the movement of man's spirit 
from the thought of God to the certainty that God is. Moreover, it is 
b. was man sich etwa beim Sein zuniichst vorstellt 

100 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
this passage, the absolute inseparability of the thought of God 
from his being, that has been restored to its rightful position by 
the theory· of "immediate knowing" or "faith," which will be Con­
sidered later. 
§ 52 
For the thinking that goes on in this way, even when it reaches its highest 
point, determinacy remains something external; what is still meant by "rea­
son" then is just a radically abstract thinking. It follows as a result that this 
"reason" provides nothing but the formal unity for the simplification and 
systematisation of experiences; it is a canon, not an organon of truth; it 
cannot provide a doctrine of the Infinite, but only a critique of cognition.62 
In the last analysis, this critique consists in the assertion that within itself 
thinking is only indeterminate unity, and the activity of this indeterminate 
unity. 
Addition. Kant did, of course, interpret reason as the faculty of the unconditioned; 
but his exclusive reduction of reason to abstract identity directly involves the re­
nunciation of its unconditionedness, so that reason is in fact nothing but empty 
understanding. Reason is unconditioned only because it is not externally deter­
mined by a content that is alien to it; on the contrary, it determines itself, and is 
therefore at home with itself in its content. For Kant, however, the activity of 
reason expressly consists only in systematising the material furnished by percep­
tion, through the application of the categories, i.e., it consists in bringing that 
material into an external order, 
and hence its principle is merely that of 
noncontradiction. 
§ 53 
(b) Practical reason is grasped as the will that determines itself-and it does 
so, of course, in a universal way-Le., as the will that is thinking. It has to 
give imperative, objective laws of freedom, i.e., laws of the kind that say 
what ought to happen.63 The justification for accepting that thinking is here 
an activity that is objectively determining (as a "reason" in the true sense of 
the word) is supposed to be that practical freedom is proven through experi­
ence; i.e., it can be shown to appear within self-consciousness. Against this 
experience within consciousness there recurs everything that determinism 
can bring forward against it (from experience likewise). In particular there 
a. Ansicht 

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
101 
is the sceptical (as well as the Humean) induction of the infinite diversity of 
what counts as right and duty among mankind,64 i.e., of the laws of free­
dom which ought to be objective. 
§ 54 
Once more, there is nothing available for what practical thinking makes 
into its law, as the criterion of its inward self-determining, except the same 
abstract identity of the understanding, i.e., that in this determining there 
should be no contradiction; hence practical reason does not get beyond the 
fonnalism that was supposed to be the last word of theoretical reason. 
But this practical reason not only posits the univeral determina­
tion, i.e., the good, within itself;65 on the contrary, it is-only "practi­
cal" in the more proper sense, when it requires that the good 
should be there in the world, a that it should have external objec­
tivity; in other words, that thought should not be merely subjective, 
but altogether objective. More later about this postulate of practical 
reason. 
Addition. The free self-determination that Kant denied to theoretical reason, he 
expressly vindicated for practical reason. It is this aspect of the Kantian philosophy 
especially that has won great favour for it, and that is, of course, perfectly justified. 
To appreciate what we owe to Kant in this regard, we have first to recall the shape 
of the practical philosophy, and more precisely of the moral philosophy, that pre­
vailed when Kant came on the scene. This prevalent moral theory was, generally 
speaking, the system of Eudaemonism66 which, in response to the question of the 
vocation of man, imparted the answer that he must posit his happiness as his aim. 
Insofar as happiness was understood to be the satisfaction of man's particular 
inclinations, wishes, needs, etc., what is accidental and personal was made into the 
principle of his willing and its exercise. In reaction against this Eudaemonism, 
which lacked any firm footing, and opened the door to every sort of caprice and 
whim, Kant set up practical reason; and by so doing he expressed the demand for a 
determination of the will that is universal and equally binding upon all. 
As we have remarked in the preceding paragraphs, theoretical reason is for Kant 
merely the negative faculty of the infinite, and, being without a positive content of 
its own, it ought to be restricted to insight into the finite aspect of empirical 
cognition; in contrast with this restriction, he expressly recognised the positive 
infinity of practical reason, specifically by ascribing to willing the faculty of deter­
mining itself in a universal manner, that is to say, through thinking. Of course, the 
will certainly possesses this faculty, and it is of great importance to know that man 
is only free insofar as he possesses that will and employs it when he acts; but the 
a. weltliches Dasein habe 

102 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
recognition of this faculty does not yet answer the question of what the content of 
willing or of practical reason is. If it is said that man should make the Good the 
content of his willing, the question of the content, i.e., of the determinacy of this 
content, immediately recurs; reference to the mere principle that willing should be 
self-consistent, and the demand that people should do their duty for the sake of 
duty, do not advance things a single step. 
§ 55 
(c) The principle of an intuitive understanding67 is ascribed to the reflecting 
faculty of judgment; i.e., an understanding in which the particular, which is 
contingent for the universal ([i.e., the] abstract identity) and cannot be de­
duced from it, would be determined through this universal itself; and this 
is experienced in the products of art and of organic nature. 
The outstanding merit of the Critique of Judgment is that Kant has 
expressed in it the notion and even the thought of the Idea. The 
notion of an intuitive understanding, of inner purposiveness, etc., is 
the universal concurrently thought of as concrete in itself. It is only 
in these notions that Kant's philosophy shows itself to be specula­
tive. Many, and Schiller6B in particular, have found in the Idea of 
artistic beauty, or of the concrete unity between thought and sense­
representations, a way of escape from the abstractions of the 
separative understanding; others have found it in the intuition and 
consciousness of living vitality' in general, whether it be natural or 
intellectual. 69-Both the product of art and the living individuality 
are, of course, restricted in their content; but the Idea that is al1-
embracing even with respect to content is set up by Kant as the 
postulated harmony between nature (or necessity) and the pur­
pose of freedom; i.e., as the final purpose of the world thought of 
as realised. In dealing with this highest Idea, however, the laziness 
of thought, as we may call it, finds in the "ought" an all too easy 
way out, since, in contrast to the actual realisation of the final 
purpose, it is allowed to hold on to the divorce between concept 
and reality. But the presenceb of living organisations and of artistic 
beauty shows the actuality of the Ideapo even for the senses and for 
intuition. That is why Kant's reflections about these ob-jects were 
particularly well adapted to introduce consciousness to the grasp­
ing and thinking of the concrete Idea. 
a. Lebendigkeit 
b. Gegenwart 

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37-60) 
103 
§ 56 
What is here established is the thought of a relationship between the 
universal of the understanding and the particular of intuition other than the 
one that is fundamental in the doctrine of theoretical and practical reason. 
But the insight that this universal is what is genuine, and is even the truth 
itself, is not linked with this thought. On the contrary, this unity is merely 
taken up, just as it comes into existence in finite appearances, and is 
exhibited within experience. First then, within the subject, experience of 
this sort is secured in one way by genius,?! or by the ability to produce 
aesthetic ideas, i.e., representations produced by the free imagination, 
which serve an idea and provide food for thought, without this content's 
being expressed in a concept, or being capable of such expression; it is also 
provided in another way by the judgment of taste, by the feeling of the 
agreement between the intuitions or representations (in all their freedom) 
and the understanding (in its law-abiding character). 
§ 57 
Moreover, the principle of the reflecting faculty of judgment is determined, 
with respect to the living products of nature, as purpose,72 as the active 
Concept, as the universal that is inwardly detennined and determining. At 
the same time, what is discarded is the representation of external or finite 
purposiveness, where the purpose is only an external form for the means 
and the material in which it realises itself. On the contrary, within the 
living [being], the purpose is a determination and an activity that is imma­
nent in its [bodily] matter, and all of its members are means for each other 
as well as ends. a 
§ 58 
The relationship between endsb and means, between subjectivity and ob­
jectivity, as determined by the understanding, is sublated in an idea of this 
kind; but all the same (and in contradiction to this) the purpose is again 
explained as a cause that exists and is active only as representation, i.e., as 
something-subjective; and hence the purposive determination, too, is de­
clared to be a principle of judging that belongs only to our understanding. 73 
a. Zweck 
b. Zweck 

104 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Even after the Critical Philosophy had arrived at the final view that 
reason could only be cognizant of appearances, there was still, re­
garding living nature, a choice between two equally subjective 
modes of thought, as well as the obligation, according to the Kant­
ian presentation itself, not to restrict the cognition of the products 
of nature to the categories of quality, cause and effect, composi­
tion, constituents, etc. If the principle of inner purposiveness had 
been adhered to and developed in its scientific application, it 
would have brought about a completely different, much higher 
way of envisaging this purposiveness. 
§ 59 
If this principle were followed without any restriction at all, the Idea would 
be that the universality that is determined by reason-the absolute final 
purpose, the good-is made actual in the world, and this through a third, 
through the might that itself posits this final purpose and realises it-i.e., it 
is made actual by God, in whom, since he is the absolute truth, those 
antitheses of universality and singularity, of subjectivity and objectivity, 
are resolved and declared to be not self-standing- and untrue. 
§ 60 
However, the good-which is posited as the final purpose of the world-is 
determined, from the very beginning, simply as our good, or as the moral 
law of our practical reason; so that the unity does not go beyond the 
correspondence of the state of the world, and of what happens in it, with 
our morality.* Moreover-even with this restriction-the final purpose, or 
the good, is an abstraction lacking all determination, and the same applies 
to what is supposed to be duty. More precisely, the antithesis, which is 
posited in its content as untrue, is here revived and reasserted against this 
harmony, so that the harmony is determined as something merely subjec­
tive-as what only ought to be; i.e., what does not at the same time have 
a. unselbstiindig 
*In Kant's own words: "Final purpose is merely a concept of our practical reason. It cannot be 
deduced from any data of experience for the making of theoretical judgments about nature nor 
even related to its cognition. The only possible use of this concept is for practical reason 
according to moral laws; and the final purpose of creation is that constitution of the world 
which agrees with the only purpose that we can specify as determined according to laws, i.e., 
with the final purpose of our pure practical reason-and that [only] insofar as it ought to be 
practical." Critique of Judgment, § 8874 [our translation; Hegel's emphasis]. 

8. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37--60) 
105 
reality. It is something believed that can only claim subjective certainty, not 
truth; i.e., not that objectivity which corresponds to the Idea.-If this con­
tradiction seems to be palliated by transferring the Idea into time, into a 
future where the Idea also is, [we must say that] any such sensible condi­
tion, as time, is really the opposite of a solution of the contradiction; and 
the representation of the understanding that corresponds to this, i.e., the 
infinite progress,75 is simply' nothing but the contradiction itself, posited as 
forever recurring. 
Another general remark can be made about the result that the 
Critical Philosophy has yielded regarding the nature of cognition; 
this result has grown into one of the prejudices, i.e., one of the 
general presuppositions, of our time. 
In any dualistic system, but in the Kantian system particularly, 
its fundamental defect reveals itself through the inconsistency of 
uniting what, a moment earlier, was declared to be independent, 
and therefore incompatible. Just as, a moment before, what is 
united was declared to be what is genuine, so now it is said that 
both moments (whose subsisting-on-their-own was denied by [as­
serting] that their unification is their truth) have truth and actuality 
only by being separate-and this, therefore, is what is genuine 
instead. What is lacking in a philosophising of this kind is the 
simple consciousness that, in this very to-ing and fro-ing, each of 
the simple determinations is declared to be unsatisfactory; and the 
defect consists in the simple incapacity to bring two thoughts 
together-and in respect of form there are only two thoughts pres­
ent. Hence, it is the supreme inconsistency to admit, on the one 
hand, that the understanding is cognizant only of appearances, 
and to assert, on the other, that this cognition is something absolute 
-by saying: cognition cannot go any further, this is the natural, 
absolute restriction of human knowing. Natural things are re­
stricted, and they are just natural things inasmuch as they know 
nothing of their universal restriction, inasmuch as their determinacy 
is a restriction only for us, not for them. Something is only known, 
or even felt, to be a restriction, or a defect, if one is at the same 
time beyond it. Living things have the privilege of pain compared 
with the lifeless; even for them, a single determinacy becomes the 
feeling of something-negative, because as living things they do 
have, within them, the universality of living vitalityb which is 
a. unmittelbar 
b. Lebendigkeit 

106 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
beyond the singular, and because they maintain themselves even in 
the negative of themselves, and are sensible of this contradiction as 
existing within them. This contradiction is in them only because 
both the universality of its sense of vitality,- and the singularity 
that is negative with regard to it, are [found] in the One subject. In 
cognition, too, restriction and defect are only determined as re­
striction and defect by comparison with the Idea that is present-the 
Idea of the universal, of something-whole and perfect. It is only 
lack of consciousness, therefore, if we do not see that it is precisely 
the designation of something as finite or restricted that contains 
the proof of the actual presence of the Infinite, or Unrestricted, and 
that there can be no knowledge of limit unless the Unlimited is on 
this side within consciousness. 
There is this further remark that can be added about the result 
reached by Kant's philosophy regarding cognition: that this phi­
losophy cannot have had any influence on the way we deal with 
the sciences. It leaves the categories and the usual method of cognition 
totally uncontested. Although scientific writings of that period 
sometimes began with propositions taken from the Kantian phi­
losophy, it becomes clear in the course of the treatise itself that 
those propositions were only a superfluous ornament, and that the 
same empirical content would have come out even if all these 
initial pages had been left out. .. 
As far as the more precise comparison ofKant's philosophy with 
metaphysical empiricism77 is concerned, [it should be noticed that] 
although nai"ve empiricism attaches itself to sensible perception, it 
also concedes that there is a spiritual actuality, a supersensible 
world-no matter how its content is constituted, whether it comes 
from thought or from fantasy, etc. In respect of form, this content 
has its attestation in spiritual authority,78 just as the other content 
of empirical knowing has its own attestation in the authority of 
outward perception. But the empiricism that reflects, and makes 
consistency its principle, attacks this dualism with respect to the 
ultimate, highest content; it negates the independence of the think­
ing principle and of a self-developing spiritual world within it. The 
a. Lebensgefuhl 
"Even Hermann's Handbook of Prosody76 begins with some paragraphs taken from Kant's 
philosophy. In § 8 the conclusion is reached that the law of rhythm must be (1) an objective, (2) 
a formal, (3) an a priori determinate law. With these requirements and the principles of 
causality and reciprocal action that follow later, we should compare the treatment of the 
verse-measures themselves, upon which these formal principles do not exercise the slightest 
influence. 

B. THE SECOND POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 37--60) 
107 
consistent system of empmclsm is materialism, or naturalism.­
Kant's philosophy sets the principle of thinking and of freedom in 
strict opposition to this empiricism, and allies itself with naive 
empiricism without derogating in the least from the universal 
principle of empiricism. The world of perception and of the under­
standing that reflects upon it remains on one side of its dualism. 
This world is passed off as a world of appearances, to be sure; but 
that is just a title, a merely formal determination, since the source, 
the basic import, and the method of study remain exactly the 
same. The other side, in contrast, is the independence of the think­
ing that grasps itself, the principle of freedom, which this philoso­
phy has in common with the metaphysics of the older tradition; 
but it empties all the content out of it, and is not able to put any 
back into it. Being thus robbed of all determination, this thinking, 
now called "reason," is set free from all authority. The main effect 
of Kant's philosophy has been that it has revived the consciousness 
of this absolute inwardness. Although, because of its abstraction, 
this inwardness cannot develop itself into anything, and cannot 
produce by its own means any determinations, either cognitions or 
moral laws, still it altogether refuses to allow something that has 
the character of outwardness to have full play in it, and be valid for 
it. From now on the principle of the independence of reason, of its 
absolute inward autonomy,' has to be regarded as the universal 
principle of philosophy, and as one of the assumptionsb of our 
times. 
Addition 1 .  The Critical Philosophy deserves great credit, negatively speaking, for 
establishing the conviction that the determinations of the understanding are finite, 
and that the cognition that moves within them falls short of the truth. But the one­
sided ne ss of this philosophy consists all the same in the fact that the finitude of 
those determinations of the understanding is identified with their belonging 
merely to our subjective thinking, while the thing-in-itself is supposed to remain 
an absolute beyond. In fact, however, the finitude of the determinations of the 
understanding does not lie in their subjectivity; on the contrary, they are finite in 
themselves, and their finitude should be exhibited in these determinations them­
selves. For Kant, by contrast, what we think is false just because we think it. 
It should be regarded as a further defect of this philosophy that it provides only 
an informative descriptionBO of thinking, and a mere inventory of the moments of 
consciousness. To be sure, this inventory is mainly correct; but the necessity of 
what is thus empirically apprehended is not discussed in the process. The result of 
a. Selbstiindigkeit 
b. Vorurteile'" 

108 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
the reflections about the various stages of consciousness is then said to be that the 
content of all that we know about is only appearance. We must agree with this 
conclusion up to a point: finite thinking certainly has to do only with appearances. 
But this stage of appearance is not the end of it. On the contrary, there is still a 
higher land; but for the Kantian philosophy it remains an inaccessible beyond. 
Addition 2 .  Initially, the principle that thinking determines itself from within' was 
established in a merely formal way in the Kantian philosophy; Kant did not dem­
onstrate the manner and extent of this self-determination of thinking. On the con­
trary, it was Fichte who recognised this defect; and when he made his demand for 
a deduction of the categories, he also tried at the same time to furnish an actual 
deduction too. Fichte's philosophy makes the Ego the starting point for the devel­
opment of philosophical thinking; and the categories are supposed to result from 
its activity. But the Ego does not genuinely appear as free, spontaneous activity 
here, since it is regarded as having been aroused only by a shockS! from outside; 
the Ego is then supposed to react to this shock, and to achieve consciousness of 
itself through this reaction. 
On this view, the nature of the shock remains something outside of cognition, 
and the Ego is always something conditioned which is confronted by an other. So, 
in this way Fichte, too, comes to a halt at Kant's conclusion that there is cognition 
only of the finite, and the infinite transcends thinking. What Kant calls "the thing­
in-itself" is for Fichte the shock from outside, this abstraction of something other 
than the Ego, which has no determination other than that it is negative; it is the 
Non-Ego in general. So the Ego is regarded as standing in relation to the Non-Ego. 
It is only the Non-Ego that arouses its self-determining activity, and it does this in 
such a way that the Ego is only the continuous activity of self-liberation from the 
shock. But it never achieves actual liberation, since the cessation of the shock 
would mean the cessation of the Ego, whose being is simply its activity. Moreover, 
the content that the activity of the Ego brings forth is nothing else but the usual 
content of experience, with the added proviso that this content is merely 
appearance. 
C 
The Third Position of Thought 
with Respect to Objectivity 
IMMEDIATE KNOWING82 
§ 61 
In the Critical Philosophy, thinking is interpreted as being subjective, and 
its ultimate, un surpassable determination is abstract universality, or formal 
a. ails sich selbst 

C. THE THIRD POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 61-78) 
109 
identity; thus, thinking is set in opposition to the truth, which is inwardly 
concrete universality. In this highest determination of thinking, which is 
reason, the categories are left out of account.-From the opposed stand­
pOint thinking is interpreted as an activity of the particular, and in that way, 
too, it is declared to be incapable of grasping truth. 
§ 62 
As an activity of the particular, thinking has the categories as its only 
product and content. The way the understanding fixes them, these catego­
ries are restricted determinations, forms of what is conditioned, dependent, 
and mediated. The Infinite, or the true, is not [present] for a thinking that is 
restricted in this way. Unlike the proofs that God is there, a Critical Philoso­
phy cannot make the passage 
to 
the Infinite. 
These 
thought­
determinations are also called "concepts"; and hence to "comprehend" an 
ob-ject means nothing more than to grasp it in the form of something 
conditioned and mediated; so that inasmuch as it is what is true, infinite, 
or unconditioned, it is transformed into something conditioned and medi­
ated, and, instead of what is true being grasped in thinking, it is perverted 
into untruth. 
This is the simple, one and only polemic that is advanced by the 
standpoint which asserts that God and the true can only be known 
immediately. In earlier times, every type of so-called an­
thropomorphic representation was banished from God as finite, 
and hence unworthy of the Infinite; and as a result he had already 
grown into something remarkably empty. But the thought­
determinations were not generally considered anthropomorphic; 
on the contrary, thinking counted as what stripped the representa­
tions of the Absolute of their finitude-in accordance with the 
prejudice of all times, mentioned above, that it is only through 
[reflective] thinking that we arrive at the truth. But now, finally, 
even the thought-determinations in general are declared to be an­
thropomorphic, and thinking is explained as the activity of just 
making [the ob-ject] finite . B4-In Appendix VII of his Letters on 
Spinoza,85 Jacobi has expounded this polemic in the most determi­
nate way, deriving it indeed from Spinoza's philosophy itself, and 
then using it to attack cognition in general. In this polemic, cogni­
tion is interpreted only as cognition of the finite, as the thinking 
progression through sequences, from one conditioned item to an­
other conditioned one, where each condition is itself just 
something-conditioned once more. In other words, cognition is a 
a. (gegen die Beweise vam Dasein Gattes)" 

110 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
progression through conditioned conditions. To explain and to com­
prehend, therefore, means to show that something is mediated 
through something else. Hence, every content is only a particular, 
dependent, and finite one. God, or what is infinite and true, lies 
outside the mechanism of a connection of this kind to which cog­
nition is supposed to be restricted.-Since Kant's philosophy 
posited the finitude of the categories most notably in the formal 
determination of their subjectivity alone, it is important that, in this 
polemic, the categories are dealt with in their determinacy, and the 
category as such is [re]cognised as being finite.-Jacobi had in 
view particularly the splendid successes of the natural sciences 
(the sciences exactes)86 in the cognition of the forces and laws of 
nature. But, of course, the Infinite does not allow itself to be found 
immanent in this domain of the finite;87 Lalande88 could say that he 
had searched all through the heavens, but he had not found God 
(cf. the Remark to § 60). The final result arising from investigations 
conducted in this domain was the universal as the indeterminate 
aggregate of finite outwardness"'-matter; and Jacobi saw, quite 
rightly, that this path of a mere progression by way of mediations 
can have no other issue. 
§ 63 
At the same time, it is asserted that the truth is for the spirit-so much so 
that it is through reason alone that man subsists, and this reason is the 
knowledge of God.89 But since mediated knowledge is supposed to be re­
stricted simply to a finite content, it follows that reason is immediate know­
ing, faith. 
Knowing, believing, thinking, intuiting are the categories that occur 
at this standpoint; and since these categories are presupposed as 
already familiar, they are often employed in accordance with 
merely psychological notions and distinctions. What their nature 
and concept is, is not investigated-though that is what everything 
depends on. Thus, we find knowing commonly opposed to believing, 
even though believing is at the same time determined as immedi­
ate knowing, and hence directly recognised as a [kind of] know­
ing, too. Indeed, it is found to be an empirical fact that what we 
believe is in our consciousness, so that we do at least know about it; 
a. des iiuflerlichen Endlichen 

C. THE THIRD POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 61-78) 
111 
also that what we believe is in our consciousness as something 
certain, and hence that we know it.-Most notably, thinking is set 
in opposition to immediate knowing and believing, and par­
ticularly to intuiting. [But] when intuiting is determined as "intel­
lectual," this can only mean an intuiting that is thinking-unless, 
even here where God is the ob-ject, we still want to understand by 
"intellectual" only the images and representations of our fantasy. 
In the language used by those who philosophise in this way, it 
happens that "believing" is also used in relation to the common 
things which are sensibly present. We believe, says Jacobi, that we 
have a body,90 we believe in the existence of sensible things. But, 
when we talk about faith in what is true and eternal, or about God 
being revealed, or given, in immediate knowing and intuition, 
these are not sensible things at all, but a content that is inwardly 
universal, i.e., ob-jects that are [present] only for the thinking spirit. 
Also, when singularity is understood as I, when personality itsel£­
not an empirical I, a particular personality-is meant, above all 
when the personality of God is present to consciousness, then 
what is at issue is pure-i.e., inwardly universal-personality; and 
this is a thought and pertains only to thinking.-Pure intuiting, 
moreover, is altogether the same as pure thinking. "Intuiting" and 
"believing" express initially the determinate representations that 
we associate with these words in our ordinary consciousness; it is 
true that in this usage, they are diverse from thinking, and just 
about everyone is able to understand the distinction. But at this 
point believing and intuiting ought to be taken in a higher sense, 
as faith in God, as intellectual intuition of God; and this means 
that abstraction is to be made precisely from what constitutes the 
distinction between intuiting, or believing, and thinking. When 
they are promoted to this higher region, we cannot say how be­
lieving and intuiting are still diverse from thinking. One may think 
that with distinctions of this sort that have become empty, one is 
saying and asserting something very important; the determina­
tions that one intends to attack are the same as the ones that one is 
asserting. -The expression " believing", however, carries with it 
the particular advantage that it calls Christian religious faith to 
mind, and seems to include it; it may quite easily even seem to be 
the same. Hence, this fideistic philosophising looks essentially 
pious and Christian; and on the ground of this piety it claims for 
itself the freedom to make its assurances with even more preten­
sion and authority. But we must not let ourselves be deceived by a 
semblance that can only sneak in because the same words are 

112 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
used. We must maintain the distinction firmly. The Christian faith 
implies an authority that belongs to the church, while, on the 
contrary, the faith of this philosophising standpoint is just the 
authority of one's own subjective revelation. Moreover, the Chris­
tian faith is an objective content that is inwardly rich, a system of 
doctrine and cognition; whereas the content of this [philosophical] 
faith is inwardly so indeterminate that it may perhaps admit that 
content too-but equally it may embrace within it the belief that 
the Dalal-Lama, the bull, the ape, etc., is God, or it may, for its own 
part, restrict itself to God in general, to the "highest essence."91 
Faith itself, in that would-be philosophical sense, is nothing but the 
dry abstraction of immediate knowing-a totally formal deter­
mination, which should not be mistaken for, or confounded with, 
the spiritual fullness of the Christian faith, either on the side of the 
faithful heart and the Holy Spirit that inhabits it, or on the side of 
the doctrine that is so rich in content. 
Besides, what is called believing and immediate knowing here is 
just the same as what others have called inspiration, revelation of 
the heart, a content implanted in man by nature, and in particular 
sane human understanding (or "common sense")a as well. All of 
these forms similarly make immediacy-Le., the way that a content 
is found within consciousness, and is a fact in it-into their 
principle. 
§ 64 
What this immediate knowing knows is that the Infinite, the Eternal or 
God, that is [present] in our representation also is-that within our con­
sciousness the certainty of its being is immediately and inseparably com­
bined with our representation of it. 
The last thing philosophy would want to do is to contradict these 
propositions of immediate knowing; on the contrary, it can con­
gratulate itself upon the fact that its own old propositions, which 
even express its entire universal content, have somehow become 
also the general prejudices of the times-though in a quite un­
philosophical way, to be sure. All there is to be surprised about, 
rather, is the fact that anyone could be of the opinion that these 
propositions are opposed to philosophy: namely, the propositions 
that what is held to be true is immanent in the spirit (§ 63), and 
a. English in Hegel's text 

C. THE THIRD POSITION OF THOUGHT (§§ 61-78) 
113 
that truth is [present] for the spirit (ibid.). In a formal perspective, 
the proposition that God's being is immediately and inseparably 
linked with the thought of God and that objectivity inseparably goes 
with the subjectivity that thought initially has, is particularly inter­
esting. Indeed, the philosophy of immediate knowing goes so far 
in its abstraction that the determination "existence" is inseparably 
linked, not only with the thought of God alone, but just as much 
(in intuition) with the representation of my body and of external 
things.-When philosophy attempts to prove a unity of this sort, 
i.e., when it wants to show that the nature of thought or of subjec­
tivity implies that they are inseparable from being or from objec­
tivity, then (whatever the status of such proofs may be) philosophy 
must in any case rest entirely content with the assertion and dem­
onstration that its propositions are also facts of consciousness and 
hence that they are in agreement with experience.-The distinction 
between the assertions of immediate knowing and philosophy 
simply comes down in the end to this: that immediate knowing 
adopts an excluding posture or, in other words, it sets itself against 
the doing of philosophy.-But the proposition "Cogito, ergo sum," 
which stands at the very centre, so to speak, of the entire concern 
of modern philosophy, was also uttered by its author in the mode 
of immediacy. Anyone who takes this proposition as a syllogism 
must know little more about the nature of the syllogism than that 
"ergo" occurs in it. For where can the middle term be here? Yet the 
middle term belongs much more essentially to the syllogism than 
the word "ergo". But if, in order to justify the name, we want to 
call the linkage in Descartes an un-mediated' syllogism, then this 
redundant form designates nothing but a connection of distinct 
determinations that is mediated by nothing. And in that case, the 
connection of being with our representations, which is expressed 
in the proposition of immediate knowing, is a syllogism too, nei­
ther more nor less.-I take the following citations in which De­
scartes himself expressly declares that the proposition "Cogito, 
ergo sum" is not a syllogism from Mr. Hotho's dissertation about 
the Cartesian philosophy that was published in 1825.92 The pas­
sages are the responses to the Second Objections; De Methodo IV; 
and Ep. I. 118. 93 I quote the more precise statements from the first 
passage. That we are thinking essences, says Descartes, is "prima 
quaedam notio quae ex nullo syllogismo concluditur" ["a certain 
primary concept that is not concluded from any syllogism"], and 
a. unmittel-baren 

114 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
he continues: "neque cum quis dicit: ego cogito, ergo sum sive 
existo, existentiam ex cogitatione per syllogismum deducit" ["and 
when someone says 'I am thinking; therefore 1 am, or 1 exist,' he 
does not deduce existence from thought by means of a syllogism"]. 
Since Descartes knows what belongs to a syllogism, he adds that if 
with this proposition there had to be a deduction through a syllog­
ism, then the required major premise would be: "illud omne, quod 
cogitat, est sive existit" [" everything that thinks is, or exists"] .  But, 
on the contrary, this last proposition is one that is only deduced 
from the first one. 
What Descartes says about the proposition that my being is 
inseparable from my thinking is that this connection is contained 
and indicated in the simple intuition of consciousness, that this 
connection is what is absolutely first; i.e., it is the principle, or 
what is most certain and evident, so that we cannot imagine any 
scepticism so extravaganta 94 as not to admit it. These statements 
are so eloquent and precise that the modern theses of Jacobi and 
others about this immediate connection can only count as useless 
repetitions. 
§ 65 
This standpoint is not content when it has shown that mediate knowing, 
taken in isolation, is inadequate for the [cognition of] truth; its peculiarity is 
that immediate knowing can only have the truth as its content when it is 
taken in isolation, to the exclusion of mediation.-Exclusions of this kind 
betray that this standpoint is a relapse into the metaphysical understand­
ing, with its Either-Or; and hence it is really a relapse into the relationship 
of external mediation based upon clinging to the finite; i.e., to one-sided 
determinations beyond which this view mistakenly thinks that it has risen. 
But let us not push this point; exclusively immediate knowing is only 
asserted as a fact, and here, in the introduction, it only has to be taken up 
under the aspect of this external reflection. The important issue in-itself is 
the logical thinking of the antithesis of immediacy and mediation. But the 
standpoint of immediate knowing rejects the study of the nature of the 
matter, i.e., of the Concept, as one that leads to mediation and even to 
cognition. The genuine treatment of this topic, that of logical thinking,b 
must find its own place within the Science itself. 
a. kein Skeptizismus so enorm vorgestellt werden kiinne 
b. die des Logischen 

C. THE THIRD POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 61-78) 
115 
The entire second part of the Logic, the doctrine of Essence, deals 
with the essential self-positing unity of immediacy and mediation. 
§ 66 
So we stand by the position that immediate knowing has to be taken as a 
fact. But this means that our study is directed at the field of experience, and 
toward a psychological phenomenon.-In this connection we should point 
out, as one of the most common experiences, that truths, which we know 
very well to be the result of the most complicated, highly mediated studies, 
can present themselves immediately in the consciousness of those who are 
well versed in that kind of cognition. Like anyone who has been instructed 
in a science, a mathematician has solutions at his fingertips that were 
arrived at by a very complicated analysis; every educated human being has 
a host of general points of view and principles immediately present in his 
knowing, which have only emerged from his meditation on many things, 
and from the lைfe experience of many years. The facility that we achieve in 
any kind of knowing, and also in art and technical skill, consists precisely 
in the fact that, when the occasion arises, we have this know-how, these 
ways of handling things, immediately in our consciousness, and even in our 
outwardly directed activity and in the limbs of our body.-Not only does 
the immediacy of knowing not exclude its mediation in all of these cases, 
but they are so far connected that the immediate knowing is even the 
product and result of the mediated knowing. 
The connection of immediate existence with its mediation is just as 
trivial an insight; the seed and the parents are an immediate, orig­
inating existence with regard to the children, etc., which are the 
offspring. But, for all that the seed and the parents (in virtue of 
their just existing) are immediate, they are offspring as well; and, in 
spite of the mediation of their existence, the children, etc., are now 
immediate, for they are too. That I am in Berlin, which is my 
immediate present, is mediated by the journey I made to come here, 
etc. 
§ 67 
As far as the immediate knowing of God, or what is right, or what is ethical is 
concerned-and all the other determinations of instinct, of implanted or 
innate ideas, of common sense, of natural reason, etc., fall in this same 
category-whatever form may be given to this primordial [elementl, the 
universal experience is that (even for Platonic reminiscence)95 education or 

116 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
development is required to bring what is contained in it to consciousness. 
Although Christian baptism is a sacrament, it implies, of itself, the further 
responsibility of providing a Christian education. This means that, for all 
that religion and ethical life are a matter of believing, or immediate knowing, 
they are radically conditioned by mediation, which is called development, 
education, and culture. 
Both those who assert that there are innate ideas and those who 
deny it have been dominated by an antithesis of [mutually] exclu­
sive determinations, similar to the one that we have just been 
considering; namely, the antithesis between what may be formu­
lated as the essential, immediate combination of certain universal 
determinations with the soul, and another combination that would 
take place in an external way and would be mediated by given ob­
jects and representations. The empirical objection to the assertion 
of innate ideas was that all humans would have to have these ideas. 
For instance, they would have to have the principle of contradic­
tion in their consciousness, and to know it, since this principle, 
and the others like it, were counted among the innate ideas. This 
objection can be said to depend upon a misunderstanding, be­
cause, although the determinations in question may be innate, 
they do not, just for that reason, have to be already in the form of 
ideas, of representations, or of what is known. But this objection is 
qUite appropriate when it is directed against immediate knowing, 
since the former explicitly asserts that its determinations are 
within consciousness.-If the standpoint of immediate knowing 
does perhaps grant that, for religious faith in particular, a develop­
ment and a Christian or religious education are necessary,96 then it 
is quite arbitrary to want to ignore this when we come to talk 
about believing; and it is sheer mindlessness not to know that 
when the necessity of education is granted, it is just the essential 
requirement of mediation that is expressed. 
Addition. The claim in the Platonic philosophy that we remember the Ideas means 
that the Ideas are implicitly in the human mind' and are not (as the Sophists 
maintained) something alien that comes to the mind from outside. In any case, this 
interpretation of cognition as "reminiscence" does not exclude the development of 
what is implicit in the human mind, and this development is nothing but media­
tion. The situation is the same with the "innate ideas" that occur in Descartes and 
the Scottish philosophers; these ideas are also initially only implicit and must be 
considered as present in the mind by way of an aptitude. 97 
a. im Menschen 

C. THE THIRD POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 61-78) 
117 
§ 68 
In the experiences that we have mentioned, there is an appeal to what 
shows itself to be bound up with immediate knowing. Although this bond 
may be taken initially to be just an external, or empirical, connection, it 
does show itself to be essential and inseparable, even when it is studied 
only empirically, because it is constant. But also, if this immediate knowing 
is taken on its own account, just as it is in experience, then, inasmuch as it 
is the knowing of God and of the divine, a consciousness of this kind is 
universally described as an elevation above the sensible and the finite, as 
well as above the immediate desires and inclinations of the natural heart. 
This elevation passes over into faith in God and in the divine, and it ends 
there, so that this faith is an immediate knowing and persuasion,- al­
though it does, nonetheless, have this process of mediation as its presup­
position and condition. 
We have noted already that the so-called "proofs that God is 
there," which start from finite being, express this elevation and are 
not inventions of an artificial reflection, but the necessary media­
tions that belong to spirit-although they do not have their correct 
and complete expression in the traditional form of those proofs. 
§ 69 
It is the transition, mentioned in § 64, from the subjective Idea to being 
that constitutes the main focus of interest for the standpoint of immediate 
knowing; this passage is what is essentially asserted as an original connec­
tion without mediation. Taken entirely without regard to seemingly em­
piricalb associations, this central point exhibits within itself the mediation, 
which is determined the way it truly is, not as a mediation with and 
through something-external, but as one that comes to its own inward 
resolve.c 
§ 70 
For what is asserted from this standpoint is that neither the Idea, as a 
merely subjective thought, nor a mere being on its own account, is what is 
true; for being on its own account, any being that is not that of the Idea, is 
the sensible, finite being of the world. But what is immediately asserted by 
a. Furwahrhalten 
b. empirisch scheinende Verbindungen 
c. als sich in sich selbst beschliepend 

118 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
this is that the Idea is what is true only as mediated by being, and, con­
versely, that being is what is true only as mediated by the Idea. What the 
principle of immediate knowing rightly insists on is not an indeterminate, 
empty immediacy, abstract being, or pure unity on its own account, but the 
unity of the Idea with being. But it is quite mindless not to see that the 
unity of distinct determinations is not just a purely immediate, i.e., a totally 
indeterminate and empty unity, but that what is posited in it is precisely 
that one of the determinations has truth only through its mediation by the 
other; or, in other words, that each of them is mediated with the truth only 
through the other.-It is thereby shown to be a factum, that the determina­
tion of mediation is contained in that very immediacy, against which the 
understanding (in accordance with its own fundamental principle of imme­
diate knowing) is not allowed to have any objections. It is only the ordi­
nary abstract understanding that takes the de terminations of immediacy 
and mediation to be absolute, each on its own account, and thinks that it 
has an example of a firm distinctiona in them; in this way, it engenders for 
itself the unsurmountable difficulty of uniting them-a difficulty which, as 
we have shown, is not present in the factum, while within the speculative 
Concept it vanishes too. 
§ 71 
The one-sidedness of this standpoint brings determinations and con­
sequences with it whose main features have still to be highlighted, now 
that the explanation of their very foundation has been given. In the first 
place, since it is not the nature of the content, but the factum of consciousness, 
that has been made into the criterion of truth, therefore it is subjective 
knowing, and the assertion that I find a certain content to be present within 
my consciousness, that are the foundation of what is alleged to be the 
truth. What I find to be present in my consciousness is thereby promoted 
into something present in the consciousness of everyone, and given out as 
the nature of consciousness itself. 
In the past, the consensus gentium to which Cicero98 already ap­
pealed was cited among the so-called proofs that God is there. The 
consensus gentium is an authority of significance, and it is very 
easyb to pass from [the fact] that a content can be found in every­
one's consciousness to [the conclusion] that it lies in the nature of 
consciousness itself and is necessary to it. Implicit in this category 
a. etwas Festes van Unterscheidung 
b. es liegt nahe bei der Hand 

C. THE THIRD POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 61-78) 
119 
of universal agreement was the essential consciousness, which 
does not escape even the least cultivated mind, that any single 
consciousness is always something-particular or contingent. If the 
nature of this consciousness itself is not investigated, i.e., if what is 
particular or contingent in it is not separated out-an operation of 
laborious meditation, which is the only way to find out what is 
universal in and for itself in this consciousness--then it is only 
when everyone agrees about a content that the prejudice that this 
content belongs to the nature of consciousness itself is respectably 
grounded. But the need of thinking to know that what shows itself 
as universally present is necessary is still not satisfied by the con­
sensus gentium. For even if it were accepted that the universality of 
the factum was a satisfactory proof, the consensus gentium has been 
abandoned as a proof for the belief in God because experience 
shows that there are individuals and peoples in or among whom 
no belief in God is found." But there is nothing quicker and easier 
than making the simple assertion that I find a content in my con­
sciousness, together with the certainty of its truth, and therefore 
that this certainty does not belong to me, as this particular subject, 
but to the nature of spirit itself. 
"Whether we find atheism or faith in God spread more or less widely in experience depends 
on whether we are content with the determination of a God in general, or require a more 
determinate cognition of God. In the Christian world, at least, it is not conceded that idols like 
those of China and India, or the fetishes of Africa, or even the gods of Greece are God. Those 
who believe in them therefore do not believe in God. But if we consider, on the other hand, 
that implicitly the general belief in God is present in any such belief in idols, just as the kind is 
implicit in the particular individual, then the idolatry also counts as belief, not just in an idol, 
but in God. Conversely, the Athenians" treated the poets and philosophers who held that 
Zeus, and so on, were only clouds, and asserted perhaps [that there is] only a God in general, 
as atheists.-What counts is not what is contained in an ob-ject in-itself, but what part of it 
stands out' for consciousness. If we could accept the interchange of these determinations as 
valid then every human sense-intuition, even the most ordinary one, would be religion, since 
in every one of them, in everything spiritual, the principle is at least implicitly contained, 
which, when developed and purified, enhances itself into religion. But to be capable of religion 
is one thing (and our "contained in-itself" expresses the capacity and possibility); but to have 
religion is something else.-In modern times, travelers (for instance, the captains Ross and 
Parry)IOO have again found tribes (the Esquimaux), which they claim have no religion at all, 
not even the tiny trace of it that may still be found in African sorcerers (the "wonder-workers" 
of Herodotus). 101 On the other hand, the Englishman who spent the first months of the last 
JUbilee year in Rome, says in the account of his travels that among the Romans of today the 
common people are bigots, while those who can read and write are all atheists.-The main 
reason why the accusation of atheism has become less frequent in modern times is that the 
basic import and requirements in the matter of religion have been reduced to a minimum 
(see § 73). 
a. heraus isf 

120 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
§ 72 
In the second place, it follows from the supposition that immediate knowing 
is the criterion of truth, that all superstition and idolatry is proclaimed as 
truth, and the most unjust and unethical content of the will is justified. It is 
not because of so-called mediated knowing, argumentation, and syllogis­
ing that the Indian looks on the cow or the ape, the Brahmin or the Lama, 
as God, but he believes in it. The natural desires and inclinations automat­
ically deposit their interests in consciousness, and immoral purposes are 
found in it quite immediately. A good or evil character expresses the deter­
minate being of the will, which is known in its interests and purposes, and 
therefore in the most immediate way. 
§ 73 
Finally, the immediate knowing of God is only supposed to extend to [the 
affirmation] that God is, not what God is; for the latter would be a cogni­
tion and would lead to mediated knowing. Hence God, as the ob-ject of 
religion, is expressly restricted to God in general, to the indeterminate 
supersensible, and the content of religion is reduced to a minimum. 
If it were actually necessary to bring about just the maintenance of 
the belief that there is a Gad" or even the establishment of this 
belief, then the only matter for surprise would be the poverty of 
the times, which lets us count the most indigent [form] of religious 
knowing as a gain, and has reached the point of returning in its 
church to the altar dedicated to the unknown God [Acts 17:23] that 
was long ago found in Athens. 
§ 74 
The general nature of the farm of immediacy has still to be indicated briefly. 
For it is this form itself which, because it is one-sided, makes its very 
content one-sided and hence finite. It gives the universal the one-sidedness 
of an abstraction, so that God becomes an essence lacking all determina­
tion; but God can only be called spirit inasmuch as he is known as in­
wardly mediating himself with himself. Only in this way is he concrete, living, 
and spirit; and that is just why the knowing of God as spirit contains 
mediation within it.-The form of immediacy gives to the particular the 
determination of being, or of relating itself to itself. But the particular is 
a. es sei ein Gott 

C. THE THIRD P<?SITION OF THOUGHT (§§ 61-78) 
121 
precisely the relating of itself to another outside it; through that form the 
finite is posited as absolute. Being totally abstract, this form is indifferent to 
every content and, just for that reason, it is receptive to any content; so it 
can sanction an idolatrous and immoral content just as easily as the re­
verse. Only the insight that the content is not independent, but is mediated 
through an other, reduces it to its finitude and untruth. And since the 
content brings mediation with it, this insight [too] is a knowing that con­
tains mediation. But a content can only be [re]cognised as what is true, 
inasmuch as it is not mediated with an other, i.e., is not finite, so that it 
mediates itself with itself, and is in this way both mediation and immediate 
self-relation all in one.-That same understanding, which thinks that it has 
emancipated itself from finite knowing, and from the the understanding's 
identity [which is the principle] of metaphysics and of the Enlightenment, 
immediately makes this immediacy, i.e., the abstract self-relation, or the ab­
stract identity, into the principle and criterion of truth once more. Abstract 
thinking (the form of reflective metaphysics) and abstract intuiting (the form 
of immediate knowing) are one and the same. 
Addition. When the form of immediacy is held onto as firmly opposed to the form 
of mediation, then it becomes one-sided, and this one-sidedness is imparted to any 
content that is traced back to this form alone. In general, immediacy is abstract self­
relation, and hence it is abstract identity or abstract universality at the same time. 
So if the universal in and for itself is taken only in the form of immediacy, it 
becomes just abstractly universal, and God acquires from this standpoint the sig­
nificance of an Essence that is utterly indeterminate. To go on speaking of God as 
"spirit" is simply to use an empty word, for, being both consciousness and self­
consciousness, spirit is in any case a distinguishing of itself from itself and from an 
other, so that it is at once mediation. 
§ 75 
The evaluation of this third position, that has been assigned to thinking 
with regard to the truth, can only be undertaken in the way that is imme­
diately and inwardly indicated by this very standpoint, and allowed by it. 
That there is' an immediate knowing, i.e., a knowing without mediation 
(either with another, or inwardly with itself), is hereby shown to be fac­
tually false. Likewise, it has been shown up as factually untrue that think­
ing only proceeds by way of finite and conditioned determinations that are 
mediated by something else-and untrue that this mediation does not also 
sublate itself in the mediation. But for the factum that there is a cognition 
a. es gebe 

122 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
of this kind, which proceeds neither in one-sided immediacy nor in one­
sided mediation, the Logic itself and the whole of philosophy is the example. 
§ 76 
If we consider the principle of immediate knowing in relation to our start­
ing point, which was the metaphysics that we have called "naive," then the 
comparison shows that this principle is a return to the beginning which 
this metaphysics made in modern times as the Cartesian philosophy. Both 
of them assert the following: 
(1) The simple inseparability of the thinking and the being of the 
thinker: cogito ergo sum is exactly the same as the fact that the 
being, reality, and existence of the I are immediately revealed to 
me within consciousness (Descartes explains at once and explicitly 
that by "thinking" he understands consciousness in general and as 
such; Princ. Phil. 1 .9);102 and that this inseparability is the very first 
cognition, which is not mediated, or proven, as well as the most 
certain one. 
(2) Likewise the inseparability of the notion of God from his 
existence; so that this existence is contained in the very notion of 
God, which cannot be without that determination-an existence 
that is therefore necessary and external." 
(3) With regard to the equally immediate consciousness of the 
existence of external things, this is nothing else than sensible 
consciousness; that we have a consciousness of this kind is the 
least of all cognitions. All that is of interest here is to know that 
this immediate knowing of the being of external things is deception 
and error, and that there is no truth in the sensible as such, but 
that the being of these external things is rather something-
"Descartes, Princ. Phil. 1 . 15: "Magis hoc (ens summe perfectum existere) credet, si attendat, 
nullius alterius rei ideam apud se inveniri, in qua eodem modo necessariam existentiam 
contineri animadvertat; . . . intelliget, illam ideam exhibere veram et immutabilem naturam, 
quaeque non potest non existere, cum necessaria existentia in ea confineatur" ["The mind will 
be even more ready to accept this (i.e., that a supremely perfect being exists) if it considers 
that it cannot find within itself an idea of any other thing such that necessary existence is seen 
to be contained in the idea in this way. And from this it understands that the idea of a 
supremely perfect being is not an idea which was invented by the mind, or which represents 
some chimera, but that it represents a true and immutable nature which cannot but exist, 
since necessary existence is contained within it"].!O' A phrase that follows, and which sounds 
like a mediation and a proof, does not prejudice this first fundamental claim. Exactly the same 
is found in Spinoza: that God's essence, i.e., the abstract notion, includes existence. The first 
definition of Spinoza is that of the causa sui: it is that "cujus essentia involvit existentiam; Slve 
id, cujus natura non potest concipi nisi existens" ["that whose essence involves existence, or 

C. THE THIRD POSITION OF THOUGHT (§ § 61-78) 
123 
contingent, something that passes away, or a semblance; they are 
essentially this: to have only an existence that is separable from 
their concept, or their essence. 
§ 77 
The two standpoints are, however, distinct in the following ways: (1) The 
philosophy of Descartes proceeds from these unproven and unprovable 
presuppositions to a further developed cognition, and in this way it has 
given rise to the sciences of modern times. But the more recent standpoint, 
in contrast, has reached the result-which is important on its own account 
(§ 62)-that a cognition that proceeds by way of finite mediations is only 
cognizant of what is finite and contains no truth; and it also demands that 
our consciousness of God should stand fast upon that [immediate] faith­
which is a wholly abstract belief. * 
(2) On the one hand, this modern standpoint changes nothing in the 
method of ordinary scientific cognition that was initiated by Descartes, 
and the sciences of what is empirical and finite that have originated from 
that method are carried on by it in exactly the same way. But, on the other 
hand, it rejects this method, and hence all methods, since it does not know 
of any other method [appropriate] for the knowing of what is infinite in 
import. Therefore it surrenders itself to the untamed arbitrariness of imag­
inations and assurances, to moral conceit and haughtiness of feeling, or to 
opinions and arguments without norm or rule"-all of which declare 
themselves to be most strongly opposed to philosophy and philosophical 
theses. For philosophy will not tolerate any mere assurances or imaginings, 
nor does it allow thinking to swing back and forth while using this type of 
arbitrary reasoning. b 
that whose nature cannot be conceived except as existing"]; the inseparability of the Concept 
from being is the fundamental determination and presupposition. But what Concept is it to 
which this inseparability from being belongs? Not the concept of finite things, for these are 
precisely such that their existence is contingent and created.-That the eleventh proposition of 
Spinoza: "That God necessarily exists," and likewise the twentieth: "That God's existence and 
his essence are one and the same," are both followed by a proof-is a redundant relic of the 
formalism of [geometric] demonstration. God is the Substance (and the only one at that), but 
the Substance is causa sui, therefore God necessarily exists--this only means that God is the 
one whose Concept and Being are inseparable. 104 
*Anselm, on the contrary, says: "Negligentiae mihi videtur, si postquam confirmati sumus 
in fide, non studemus, quod credimus, intelligere" ["Once we are confirmed in the faith, I 
would consider it negligence not to strive to understand what we believe."] (Tractat. Cur Deus 
Homo).los--Given the concrete content of the Christian doctrine, Anselm faced a cognitive 
problem of quite another [order of] difficulty, than the one contained in this modern "faith." 
a. einem maf310sen Gutdiinken und Riisonnement 
b. beliebiges Hin-und Herdenken des Riisonnements 

124 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
§ 78 
The antithesis between an independent immediacy of the content or of 
knowing, and, on the other side, an equally independent mediation that is 
irreconcilable with it, must be put aside, first of all, because it is a mere 
presupposition and an arbitrary assurance. All other presuppositions or as­
sumptions· must equally be given up when we enter into the Science, 
whether they are taken from representation or from thinking; for it is this 
Science, in which all determinations of this sort must first be investigated, 
and in which their meaning and validity like that of their antitheses must 
be [reJcognised. 
Being a negative science that has gone through all forms of cogni­
tion, scepticism might offer itself as an introduction in which the 
nullity of such presuppositions would be exposed. But it would 
not only be a sad way, but also a redundant one, because, as we 
shall soon see, the dialectical moment itself is an essential one in 
the affirmative Science. Besides, scepticism would only have to 
find the finite forms empirically and unscientifically, and to take 
them up as given. To require a consummate scepticism of this 
kind, is the same as the demand that the Science should be pre­
ceded by universal doubt, i.e., by total presuppositionlessness. Strictly 
speaking, this requirement is fulfilled by the freedom that ab­
stracts from everything, and grasps its own pure abstraction, the 
simplicity of thinking-in the resolve of the will to think purely. 
a. VorurteilelO6 

MORE PRECISE 
CONCEPTION AND 
DIVISION OF THE LOGIC 
§ 79 
With regard to its form, the logical has three sides: (a) the side of abstraction 
or of the understanding, (13) the dialectical or negatively rational side, [and] ('Y) 
the speculative or positively rational one. 
These three sides do not constitute three parts of the Logic, but are 
moments of everything logically real; i.e., of every concept or of ev­
erything true in general. All of them together can be put under the 
first moment, that of the understanding; and in this way they can be 
kept separate from each other, but then they are not considered in 
their truth.-Like the division itself, the remarks made here con­
cerning the determinations of the logical are only descriptive antic­
ipations· at this point. 
§ 80 
(a) Thinking as understanding stops short at the fixed determinacy and its 
distinctness vis-a.-vis other determinacies; such a restricted abstraction 
counts for the understanding as one that subsists on its own account, and 
[simply] is. b 
Addition. When we talk about "thinking" in general or, more precisely, about 
"comprehension," we often have merely the activity of the understanding in mind. 
Of course, thinking is certainly an activity of the understanding to begin with, but 
it must not stop there and the Concept is not just a determination of the 
a. antizipiert und historisch 
b. als fur sich bestehend und seiend 
125 

126 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
understanding.-The activity of the understanding consists generally in the be­
stowing of the form of universality on its content; and the universal posited by the 
understanding is, of course, an abstract one, which is held onto in firm opposition 
to the particular. But as a result, it is itself determined also as a particular again. 
Since the understanding behaves toward its ob-jects in a way that separates and 
abstracts them, it is thereby the opposite of immediate intuition and feeling,' 
which, as such, deal entirely with the concrete and stick to that. 
The oft-repeated complaints that are regularly made against thinking in general 
are connected with this antithesis between understanding and sense-experience. 
The burden of the complaints is that thinking is hard and one-sided and, if pur­
sued consistently, leads to ruinous and destructive results. The first answer to these 
charges, insofar as they are justified in content, is that they do not apply to all 
thinking, and specifically not to rational thinking, but only to the thinking of the 
understanding. 
But it should be added that even the thinking of the understanding must un­
questionably be conceded its right and merit, which generally consists in the fact 
that without the understanding there is no fixity or determinacy in the domains 
either of theory or of practice. First, with regard to cognition, it begins by ap­
prehending given ob-jects in their determinate distinctions. Thus, in the considera­
tion of nature, for example, distinctions are drawn between matters, forces, kinds, 
etc., and they are marked off, each on its own account, in isolation one from 
another. In doing all this, thinking functions as understanding, and its principle 
here is identity, simple self-relation. So it is first of all this identity by which the 
advance from one determination to another is conditioned in cognition. Thus, for 
instance, in mathematics, magnitude is the one determination with respect to which 
a progression happens, all others being left out. In the same way we compare 
figures with one another in geometry, bringing out what is identical in them. In 
other areas of cognition, too, for instance, in jurisprudence, it is identity that is the 
primary means of progress. For, since we here infer one determination from an­
other, our inferring is nothing but an advance in accordance with the principle of 
identity. 
Understanding is just as indispensable in the practical sphere as it is in that of 
theory. Character is an essential factor in conduct, and a man of character is a man 
of understanding who (for that reason) has definite purposes in mind and pursues 
them with firm intent. As Goethe says,ID7 someone who wants to do great things 
must know how to restrict himself. In contrast, someone who wants to do every­
thing really wants to do nothing, and brings nothing off. There is a host of interest­
ing things in the world; Spanish poetry, chemistry, politics, music are all very 
interesting, and we cannot blame a person who is interested in them. But if an 
individual in a definite situation is to bring something about, he must stick to 
something determinate and not dissipate his powers in a great many directions. 
Similarly, in the case of any profession, the main thing is to pursue it with under­
standing. For instance, the judge must stick to the law and give his verdict in 
accordance with it; he must not let himself be sidetracked by this or that; he must 
a. Empfindung 

CONCEPTION AND DIVISION OF THE LOGIC (§§ 79-83) 
127 
admit no excuse, and look neither to right nor left.-Furthermore, the understand­
ing is an essential moment in culture generally. A cultivated person is not satisfied 
with what is cloudy and indeterminate; indeed, he grasps subject matters in their 
fixed determinacy, whilst someone who is uncultivated sways uncertainly hither 
and thither, and it often takes much effort to come to an understanding with such a 
person as to what is under discussion, and get him to keep the precise point at 
issue steadily in view. 
Our earlier explanation showed that logical thinking in general must not be 
interpreted merely in terms of a subjective activity, but rather as what is strictly 
universal and hence objective at the same time. It should be added that this applies 
to the understanding as well, which is the first form of logical thinking. The 
understanding must therefore be regarded as corresponding to what people call 
the goodness of God,IOB where this is understood to mean that finite things are, that 
they subsist. For instance, we recognise the goodness of God in nature by the fact 
that the various kinds and classes, of both animals and plants, are provided with 
everything they need in order to preserve themselves and prosper. The situation is 
the same with man, too, both for individuals and for whole peoples, who similarly 
possess what is required for their subsistence and their development. In part this is 
given to them as something that is immediately present (like climate, for example, 
or the character and products of the country, etc.); and in part they possess it in the 
form of aptitudes, talents, etc. Interpreted in this way, then, the understanding 
manifests itself everywhere in all the domains of the ob-jective world, and the 
"perfection" of an ob-ject essentially implies that the principle of the understand­
ing gets its due therein. For example, a State is imperfect if a definite distinction 
between estates and professions has not yet been achieved in it, and, similarly, if 
the conceptually diverse political and governmental functions have not yet formed 
themselves into particular organs--just like the various functions of sensation, 
motion, digestion, etc., in the developed animal organism. 
From the discussion so far, we can also gather that even in the domains and 
spheres of activity which, in our ordinary way of looking at things, seem to lie 
furthest from the understanding, it should still not be absent, and that, to the 
degree that it is absent, its absence must be considered a defect. This holds es­
pecially for art, religion, and philosophy. In art, for example, the understanding 
manifests itself in the fact that the forms of the beautiful, which are conceptually 
diverse, are maintained in their conceptual distinctness and are presented dis­
tinctly. The same holds for single works of art, too. It is a feature of the beauty and 
perfection of a dramatic work, therefore, that the characters of the various persons 
should be sustained in their purity and determinacy, and, similarly, that the 
various purposes and interests that are involved should be presented clearly and 
decisively.-As to what follows next, the domain of religion, the superiority of 
Greek over Nordic mythology, for instance, essentially consists (apart from any 
further diversity of content and interpretation) in the fact that in the former each 
figure of the Gods is developed into a sculptural determinacy, whilst in the latter 
they flow into one another in a fog of murky indeterminacy.-And finally, after 
what has been said already, it scarcely requires special mention that philosophy 
cannot do without the understanding either. Philosophising requires, above aI!, 

128 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
that each thought should be grasped in its full precision and that nothing should 
remain vague and indeterminate. 
But again, it is usually said also that the understanding must not go too far. This 
contains the valid point that the understanding cannot have the last word. On the 
contrary, it is finite, and, more precisely, it is such that when it is pushed to an 
extreme it overturns into its opposite. It is the way of youth to toss about in 
abstractions, whereas the man of experience does not get caught up in the abstract 
either-or, but holds onto the concrete. 
§ 81 
(;) The dialectical moment is the self-sublation of these finite determina­
tions on their own part, and their passing into their opposites. 
(1) The dialectical, taken separately on its own by the understand­
ing, constitutes scepticism, especially when it is exhibited in scien­
tific concepts. Scepticism contains the mere negation that results 
from the dialectic. (2) Dialectic is usually considered as an external 
art, which arbitrarily produces a confusion and a mere semblance of 
contradictions in determinate concepts, in such a way that it is this 
semblance, and not these determinations, that is supposed to be 
null and void, whereas on the contrary what is understandable 
would be true. Dialectic is often no more than a subjective seesaw 
of arguments that sway back and forth, where basic import is 
lacking and the [resulting] nakedness is covered by the astuteness 
that gives birth to such argumentations.-According to its proper 
determinacy, however, the dialectic is the genuine nature that 
properly belongs to the determinations of the understanding, to 
things, and to the finite in general. Reflection is initially the tran­
scending of the isolated determinacy and a relating of it, whereby 
it is posited in relationship but is nevertheless maintained in its 
isolated validity. The dialectic, on the contrary, is the immanent 
transcending, in which the one-sidedness and restrictedness of the 
de terminations of the understanding displays itself as what it is, 
i.e., as their negation. 109 That is what everything finite is: its own 
sublation. Hence, the dialectical constitutes the moving soul of 
scientific progression, and it is the principle through which alone 
immanent coherence and necessity enter into the content of science, 
just as all genuine, nonexternal elevation above the finite is to be 
found in this principle. 
Addition 1 .  It is of the highest importance to interpret the dialectical [moment] 
properly, and to [re]cognise it. It is in general the principle of all motion, of all life, 

CONCEPTION AND DIVISION OF THE LOGIC (§§ 79--83) 
129 
and of all activation in the actual world. Equally, the dialectical is also the soul of all 
genuinely scientific cognition. In our ordinary consciousness, not stopping at the 
abstract determinations of the understanding appears as simple fairness, in accor­
dance with the proverb "live and let live", so that one thing holds and the other 
does also. But a closer look shows that the finite is not restricted merely from the 
outside; rather, it sublates itself by virtue of its own nature, and passes over, of 
itself, into its opposite. Thus we say, for instance, that man is mortal; and we regard 
dying as having its ground only in external circumstances. In this way of looking at 
things, a man has two specific properties, namely, he is alive and also mortal. But 
the proper interpretation is that life as such bears the germ of death within itself, 
and that the finite sublates itself because it contradicts itself inwardly. 
Or again, the dialectic is not to be confused with mere sophistry, whose essence 
consists precisely in making one-sided and abstract determinations valid in their 
isolation, each on its own account, in accord with the individual's interest of the 
moment and his particular situation. For instance, it is an essential moment of my 
action that I exist and that I have the means to exist. But if I consider this aspect, 
this principle of my well-being, on its own, and derive the consequence from it that 
I may steal, or that I may betray my country, then we have a piece of sophistry.-In 
the same way, my subjective freedom is an essential principle of my action, in the 
sense that in my doing what I do, I am [there] with my insights and convictions. 
But if I argue abstractly from this principle alone, then my argument is likewise a 
piece of sophistry, and all the principles of ethical life are thrown overboard in 
arguments like that.-The dialectic diverges essentiaIly from that procedure, since 
it is concerned precisely with considering things [as they are] in and for them­
selves, so that the finitude of the one-sided determinations of the understanding 
becomes evident. 
Besides, the dialectic is not a new thing in philosophy. Among the Ancients, 
Plato is caIled the inventor of the dialectic,IIO and that is qUite correct in that it is in 
the Platonic philosophy that dialectic first occurs in a form which is freely scien­
tific, and hence also objective. With Socrates, dialectical thinking still has a pre­
dominantly subjective shape, consistent with the general character of his phi­
losophising, namely, that of irony. Socrates directed his dialectic first against 
ordinary consciousness in general, and then, more particularly, against the So­
phists. He was accustomed to pretend in his conversations that he wanted to be 
instructed more precisely about the matter under discussion; and in this connec­
tion he raised all manner of questions, so that the people with whom he conversed 
were led on to say the opposite of what had appeared to them at the beginning to 
be correct. When the Sophists called themselves teachers, for instance, Socrates, by 
a series of questions, brought the Sophist Protagoras111 to the point where he had 
to admit that alI learning is merely recollection. 
And by means of a dialectical treatment, Plato shows in his strictly scientific 
dialogues the general finitude of all fixed determinations of the understanding. 
Thus, for example, in the Parmenides,112 he deduces the Many from the One, and, 
notwithstanding that, he shows that the nature of the Many is simply to determine 
itself as the One. This was the grand manner in which Plato handled the 
dialectic.-In modern times it has mainly been Kant who reminded people of the 

130 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
dialectic again and reinstated it in its place of honour; as we have already seen 
(§ 48), he did this by working out the so-called antinomies of reason, which in no 
way involve a simple seesawing between [opposite 1 grounds as a merely subjective 
activity, but rather exhibit how each abstract determination of the understanding, 
taken simply on its own terms, overturns immediately into its opposite. 
And, however much the understanding may, as a matter of habit, bristle at the 
dialectic, still the latter must in no way be regarded as present only for philosophi­
cal consciousness; on the contrary, what is in question here is found already in all 
other forms of consciousness, too, and in everyone's experience. Everything around 
us can be regarded an example of dialectic. For we know that, instead of being 
fixed and ultimate, everything finite is alterable and perishable, and this is nothing 
but the dialectic of the finite, through which the latter, being implicitly the other of 
itself, is driven beyond what it immediately is and overturns into its opposite. We 
said earlier (§ 80) that the understanding must be regarded as what is contained in 
the notion of the goodness of God. We must now add that the principle of the 
dialectic in the same (objective) sense corresponds to the notion of God's might. 
We say that all things (i.e., everything finite as such) come to judgment, and in 
that saying we catch sight of the dialectic as the universal, irresistible might 
before which nothing can subsist, however firm and secure it may deem itself to 
be. This determination certainly does not exhaust the depth of the divine essence, 
the concept of God; but it still forms an essential moment in all religiol:ls con­
sciousness. 
Furthermore, the dialectic also asserts itself in all the particular domains and 
formations of the natural and spiritual world. In the motion of the heavenly bodies, 
for example, a planet is now in this position, but it also has it in-itself to be in 
another position, and, through its motion, brings this, its otherness, into existence. 
Similarly, the physical elements prove themselves to be dialectical, and the mete­
orological process makes their dialectic apparent. The same principle is the founda­
tion of all other natural processes, and it is just this principle by virtue of which 
nature is driven beyond itself. As to the occurrence of the dialectic in the spiritual 
world, and, more precisely, in the domain of law and ethical life, we need only to 
recall at this point how, as universal experience confirms, the extreme of a state or 
action tends to overturn into its opposite. 
This dialectic is therefore recognised in many proverbs. The legal proverb, for 
instance, says, "Summum ius summa iniuria", which means that if abstract justice 
is driven to the extreme, it overturns into injustice. Similarly, in politics, it is well 
known how prone the extremes of anarchy and despotism are to lead to one 
another. In the domain of individual ethics, we find the consciousness of dialectic 
in those universally familiar proverbs: "Pride goes before a fall", "Too much wit 
outwits itself", etc.-Feeling, too, both bodily and spiritual, has its dialectic. It is 
well known how the extremes of pain and joy pass into one another; the heart 
filled with joy relieves itself in tears, and the deepest melancholy tends in certain 
circumstances to make itself known by a smile. 
Addition 2 .  Scepticism should not be regarded merely as a doctrine of doubt; rather, 
it is completely certain about its central point,- i.e., the nullity of everything finite. 
a. Sache 

CoNCEPTION AND DIVISION OF THE LOGIC (§§ 79-83) 
131 
The person who simply doubts still has the hope that his doubt can be resolved, 
and that one or other of the determinate [views] between which he wavers back 
and forth will turn out to be a firm and genuine one. Scepticism proper, on the 
contrary, is complete despair about everything that the understanding holds to be 
firm, and the disposition that results is imperturbability and inward repose. This is 
the high ancient scepticism, as we find it presented specifically in Sextus Em­
piricus,113 and as it was developed in the later Roman period as a complement to 
the dogmatic systems of the Stoics and the Epicureans. This ancient high scepti­
cism must not be confused with the modern one that was mentioned earlier (§ 39), 
which partly preceded the Critical Philosophy and partly grew out of it. This 
consists simply in denying that anything true and certain can be said about the 
supersensible, and in designating, on the contrary, the sensible and what is present 
in immediate sense-experience as what we have to hold onto. 
Even nowadays, of course, scepticism is often regarded as an irresistible foe of 
any positive knowledge, and hence of philosophy too, so far as the latter deals with 
positive cognition. In response to this it needs to be remarked that in fact it is only 
the finite and abstract thinking of the understanding that has anything to fear from 
scepticism, and that cannot resist it; philosophy, on the other hand, contains the 
sceptical as a moment within itself-specifically as the dialectical moment. But then 
philosophy does not stop at the merely negative result of the dialectic, as is the case 
with scepticism. The latter mistakes its result, insofar as it holds fast to it as mere, 
i.e., abstract, negation. When the dialectic has the negative as its result, then, 
precisely as a result, this negative is at the same time the positive, for it contains 
what it resulted from sublated within itself, and it cannot be without it. This, 
however, is the basic determination of the third form of the Logical, namely, the 
speculative or positively rational [moment]. 
§ 82 
('Y) The speculative or positively rational apprehends the unity of the deter­
minations in their opposition, the affirmative that is contained in their 
dissolution and in their transition. 
(1) The dialectic has a positive result, because it has a determinate 
content, or because its result is truly not empty, abstract nothing, but 
the negation of certain determinations, which are contained in the 
result precisely because it is not an immediate nothing, but a result. 
(2) Hence this rational [result}, although it is something-thought 
and something-abstract, is at the same time something-concrete, be­
cause it is not simple, formal unity, but a unity of distinct determina­
tions. For this reason philosophy does not deal with mere abstrac­
tions or formal thoughts at all, but only with concrete thoughts. (3) 
The mere logic of the understanding is contained in the speculative 
Logic and can easily be made out of the latter; nothing more is 
needed for this than the omission of the dialectical and the ra-

132 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
tional; in this way it becomes what is usually called logic, a descrip­
tive collectiona of determinations of thought put together in various 
ways, which in their finitude count for something infinite. 
Addition. In respect of its content, what is rational is so far from being just the 
property of philosophy that we must rather say that it is there for all people, 
whatever level of culture and spiritual development they possess. That is the sense 
in which, from time immemorial, man has been called, quite correctly, a rational 
essence. The empirically universal way of knowing about what is rational is that of 
prejudgment and presupposition; and, as we explained earlier (§ 45), the general 
character of what is rational consists in being something unconditioned which 
therefore contains its determinacy within itself. In this sense, we know about the 
rational above all, because we know about God, and we know him as [the one] who 
is utterly self-determined. But also, the knowledge of a citizen about his country 
and its laws is a knowledge about what is rational, inasmuch as these things count 
for him as something unconditioned, and at the same time as a universal, to which 
he must subject his individual will; and in the same sense, even the knowing and 
willing of a child is already rational, when it knows its parents' will, and wills that. 
To continue then, the speculative is in general nothing but the rational (and 
indeed the positively rational), inasmuch as it is something thought. The term 
"speculation" tends to be used in ordinary life in a very vague, and at the same 
time, secondary sense--as, for instance, when people talk about a matrimonial or 
commercial speculation. All that it is taken to mean here is that, on the one hand, 
what is immediately present must be transcended, and, on the other, that whatever 
the content of these speculations may be, although it is initially only something 
subjective, it ought not to remain so, but is to be realised or translated into objec­
tivity. 
The comment made earlier about the Idea holds for this ordinary linguistic usage 
in respect of "speculations," too. And this connects with the further remark that 
very often those who rank themselves among the more cultivated also speak of 
"speculation" in the express sense of something merely subjective. What they say is 
that a certain interpretation of natural or spiritual states of affairs or situations may 
certainly be quite right and proper, if taken in a merely "speculative" way, but that 
experience does not agree with it, and nothing of the sort is admissible in actuality. 
Against these views, what must be said is that, with respect to its true significance, 
the speculative is, neither provisionally nor in the end either, something merely 
subjective; instead, it expressly contains the very antitheses at which the under­
standing stops short (including therefore that of the subjective and objective, too), 
sublated within itself; and precisely for this reason it proves to be concrete and a 
totality. For this reason, too, a speCUlative content cannot be expressed in a one­
sided proposition. If, for example, we say that "the Absolute is the unity of the 
subjective and the objective," that is certainly correct; but it is still one-sided, in that 
it expresses only the aspect of unity and puts the emphasis on that, whereas in fact, 
of course, the subjective and the objective are not only identical but also distinct. 
a. eine Historie 

CONCEPTION AND DIVISION OF THE LOGIC (§§ 79-83) 
133 
It should also be mentioned here that the meaning of the speculative is to be 
understood as being the same as what used in earlier times to be called "mystical", 
especially with regard to the religious consciousness and its content. When we 
speak of the "mystical" nowadays, it is taken as a rule to be synonymous with what 
is mysterious and incomprehensible; and, depending on the ways their culture and 
mentality vary in other respects, some people treat the mysterious and in­
comprehensible as what is authentic and genuine, whilst others regard it as belong­
ing to the domain of superstition and deception. About this we must remark first 
that "the mystical" is certainly something mysterious, but only for the understand­
ing, and then only because abstract identity is the principle of the understanding. 
But when it is regarded as synonymous with the speculative, the mystical is the 
concrete unity of just those determinations that count as true for the understanding 
only in their separation and opposition. So if those who recognise the mystical as 
what is genuine say that it is something utterly mysterious, and just leave it at that, 
they are only declaring that for them, too, thinking has only the Significance of an 
abstract positing of identity, and that in order to attain the truth we must renounce 
thinking, or, as they frequently put it, that we must "take reason captive." As we 
have seen, however, the abstract thinking of the understanding is so far from being 
something firm and ultimate that it proves itself, on the contrary, to be a constant 
sublating of itself and an overturning into its opposite, whereas the rational as such 
is rational precisely because it contains both of the opposites as ideal moments 
within itself. Thus, everything rational can equally be called "mystical"; but this 
only amounts to saying that it transcends the understanding. It does not at all 
imply that what is so spoken of must be considered inaccessible to thinking and 
incomprehensible. 
The Logic falls into three parts: 
I. The Doctrine of Being 
11. The Doctrine of Essence 
§ 83 
Ill. The Doctrine of the Concept and [of the] Idea 
In other words [it is divided] into the doctrine of thought: 
I. In its immediacy-the doctrine of the Concept in-itself 
11. In its reflection and mediation-[the doctrine of] the being-for-itself and 
shine [or semblance] of the Concept 
Ill. In its being-returned-into-itself and its developed being-with-itself-[the 
doctrine of] the Concept in- and for-itself 
Addition. Like our whole explanation of thinking so far, the division of the Logic 
that has here been given must be regarded simply as an anticipation; and its 
justification or proof can only result from the completed treatment of thinking, 

134 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
since, in philosophy, "proving" amounts to exhibiting how the ob-ject makes itself 
what it is through and of itself.-The relationship in which the three main stages of 
thought or of the logical Idea that we have mentioned here stand to one another 
must be interpreted in the following general terms. Only the Concept is what is 
true, and, more precisely, it is the truth of Being and of Essence. So each of these, if 
they are clung to in their isolation, or by themselves, must be considered at the 
same time as untrue-Being because it is still only what is immediate, and Essence 
because it is still only what is mediated. At this point, we could at once raise the 
question why, if that is the case, we should begin with what is untrue and why we 
do not straightaway begin with what is true. The answer is that the truth must, 
precisely as such, validate itself and here, within logical thinking itself, validation 
consists in the Concept's showing itself to be what is mediated through and with 
itself, so that it shows itself to be at the same time the genuinely immediate. This 
same relationship of the three stages of the logical Idea is exhibited in a more real' 
and concrete shape in the fact that we achieve cognition of God, who is truth, in 
this his truth, i.e., as absolute spirit, only when we recognise that the world created 
by him-nature and finite spirit-is not true in its distinction from God. 
a. real [not: reell] 

FIRST SUBDIVISION OF THE 
LOGIC 
THE DOCTRINE OF BEING 
§ 84 
Being is the Concept only in-itself; its determinations [simply] are;" in their 
distinction they are others vis-a.-vis each other, and their further determina­
tion (the form of the dialectical) is a passing-over into another. This process 
of further determination is both a setting-forth, and thus an unfolding, of 
the Concept that is in-itself, and at the same tiIlU? the going-in to-itself of 
being, its own deepening into itself. The explication of the Concept in the 
sphere of Being becomes the totality of being, just as the immediacy of 
being, or the form of being as such, is sublated by it. 
§ 85 
Being itself, as well as the following determinations (the logical determina­
tions in general, not just those of being), may be looked upon as defini­
tions of the Absolute, as the metaphysical definitions of God; more precisely, 
however, it is always just the first simple determination of a sphere that can 
be so regarded and again the third, the one which is the return from 
differenceb to simple self-relation. For to define God metaphysically means 
to express his nature in thoughts as such; but the Logic embraces all 
thoughts while they are still in the form of thoughts. The second 
determinations, on the other hand, which constitute a sphere in its dif­
ference, are the definition of the finite. But if the form of definitions were 
used, then this form would entail the hovering of a substrate of representa­
tion before the mind; for even the Absolute,3 as what is supposed to express 
God in the sense and form of thought, remains in its relationship to the 
predicate (which is its determinate and actual expression in thought) only 
a. sind seiendel 
h. Differenz2 
135 

136 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
what is meant to be a thought,- a substrate that is not determined on its 
own account. Because the thought, the matter which is all that we are here 
concerned about, is contained only in the predicate, the propositional 
form, as well as the subject [of the proposition], is something completely 
superfluous (cf. § 31, and the chapter on Judgment below [i.e., §§ 166-80]). 
Addition. Each sphere of the logical Idea proves to be a totality of determinations 
and a presentation of the Absolute. In particular, this is the case with Being too, 
which contains within it the three stages of quality, quantity, and measure. Quality 
is, to begin with, the determinacy that is identical with being, in such a way that 
something ceases to be what it is if it loses its quality. Quantity, on the contrary, is 
the determinacy that is external to being, indifferent for it. For example, a house 
remains red whether it be bigger or smaller, and red remains red, whether it be 
brighter or darker. The third stage of Being, measure, is the unity of the first two, it 
is qualitative quantity. Everything has its measure; i.e., things are quantitatively 
determinate, and their being of this or that magnitude is indifferent for them; but at 
the same time, there is a limit to this indifference, the overstepping of which by a 
further increase or decrease means that the things cease to be what they were. 
From measure there follows then the advance to the second major sphere of the 
Idea, to Essence. 
Precisely because they come first, the three forms of Being that have been men­
tioned here are also the poorest in content, i.e., the most abstract. Insofar as it also 
involves thinking, our immediate, sensible consciousness is mainly limited to the 
abstract determinations of quality and quantity. This sense-consciousness is usually 
considered to be the most concrete and therefore at the same time the richest; but 
this is the case only with regard to its material, whereas in respect of its thought­
content, on the other hand, it is in fact the poorest and most abstract. 
A 
Quality 
A. BEING 
§ 86 
Pure being makes the beginning, because it is pure thought as well as the 
undetermined, simple immediate, [and because] the first beginning cannot 
be anything mediated and further determined. 
a. gemeinter Gedanke 

A. QUALITY (§§ 86-98) 
137 
All of the doubts and recollections that can be brought against 
beginning the science with abstract empty being are disposed of by 
the simple consciousness of what the nature of the beginning im­
plies. Being can be determined as I = I, as absolute Indifference or 
Identity, and so on. Where there is the need to begin, either with 
something strictly certain, i.e., with the certainty of oneself, or with 
a definition or intuition of what is absolutely true, these and other 
similar forms can be looked upon as the ones that must come first. 
But since there is already mediation within each of these forms, 
they are not truly the first; [for] mediation consists in having al­
ready left a first behind, to go on to a second, and in a going forth 
from moments that are distinct. When I = I, or even intellectual 
intuition, is truly taken just as the first, then in this pure imme­
diacy it is nothing else but being; just as, conversely, pure being, 
when it is no longer taken as this abstract being, but as being that 
contains mediation within itself, is pure thinking or intuiting. 
If being is enunciated as a predicate of the Absolute, then we 
have as its first definition: "The Absolute is being". This is the 
definition that is (in thought) absolutely initial, the most abstract 
and the poorest. It is the definition given by the Eleatics, but at the 
same time it is the familiar [assertion] that God is the essential sum 
of all realities." That is to say, one has to abstract from the restric­
tedness which is [there] in every reality, so that God is only what 
is realb in all reality, the Supremely Real. Since "reality" already 
contains a reflection, this is expressed more immediately in what 
Jacobi says of Swit,loza's God, that he is the "principium of being in 
all that is there.C_ I 
Addition 1 .  When thinking is to begin, we have nothing but thought in its pure lack 
of determination, for determination requires both one and another; but at the 
beginning we have as yet no other. That which lacks determination, as we have it 
here, is the immediate, not a mediated lack of determination, not the sublation of 
all determinacy, but the lack of determination in all its immediacy, what lacks 
determination prior to all determinacy, what lacks determinacy because it stands at 
the very beginning. But this is what we call "being". Being cannot be felt, it cannot 
be directly perceived nor can it be represented; instead, it is pure thought, and as 
such it constitutes the starting point. Essence lacks determination too, but, because 
it has already passed through mediation, it already contains determination as 
sublated within itself. 
a. der Inbegriff aller Realitaten 
b. das Reale 

138 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Addition 2. We find the various stages of the logical Idea in the history of philoso­
phy in the shape of a succession of emerging philosophical systems, each of which 
has a particular definition of the Absolute as its foundation. Just as the unfolding 
of the logical Idea proves to be an advance from the abstract to the concrete, so the 
earliest systems in the history of philosophy are the most abstract and therefore at 
the same time the poorest. But the relationship of the earlier to the later philosoph­
ical systems is in general the same as the relationship of the earlier to the later 
stages of the logical Idea; that is to say, the earlier systems are contained sublated 
within the later ones. This is the true significance of the fact (which is so often 
misunderstood) that in the history of philosophy one philosophical system refutes 
another, or, more precisely, that an earlier philosophy is refuted by a later one. 
When people talk about a philosophy's being refuted, they usually take this first 
in a merely abstract, negative sense-in other words, as meaning that the refuted 
philosophy is simply no longer valid at all, that it is set aside and done with. If this 
were the case, then the study of the history of philosophy would have to be 
considered an utterly mournful affair indeed, since it only shows how all the 
philosophical systems that have emerged in the course of time have met their 
refutations. But, although it must certainly be conceded that all philosophies have 
been refuted, it must also equally be affirmed that no philosophy has ever been 
refuted, nor can it be. This is the case in two ways. First, every philosophy worthy 
of the name always has the Idea as its content, and second, every philosophical 
system should be regarded as the presentation of a particular moment, or a par­
ticular stage, in the process of development of the Idea. So, the "refuting" of a 
philosophy means only that its restricting boundary has been overstepped and its 
determinate principle has been reduced to an ideal moment. 
Consequently, so far as its essential content is concerned, the history of philoso­
phy does not deal with the past, but with what is eternal and strictly present; it 
does not result in a gallery of aberrations of the human spirit, but must instead be 
compared with a pantheon of divine shapes. These divine shapes are the various 
stages of the Idea, as they emerge successively in their dialectical development. It 
must be left to the history of philosophy to show more precisely the extent to 
which the unfolding of its content coincides with the dialectical unfolding of the 
pure logical Idea on the one hand, and deviates from it on the other; but we must 
at least pOint out here that the starting point of the Logic is the same as the starting 
point of the history of philosophy in the proper sense of the word. This starting 
point is to be found in Eleatic philosophy, and, more precisely, in the philosophy of 
Parmenides, who apprehends the Absolute as being. For he says that, "Only being 
is, and nothing is not."s This must be taken as the proper starting point of philoso­
phy, because philosophy as such is cognition by means of thinking, and here pure 
thinking was firmly adhered to for the first time and became ob-jective for itself. 
Of course, humans have been thinkers from the first, for it is only by thinking 
that they distinguish themselves from the animals; but it has taken millennia for 
them to grasp thinking in its purity, and, at the same time, as what is wholly 
objective. The Eleatics are famous as daring thinkers; but this abstract admiration is 
often coupled with the remark that, all the same, these philosophers surely went 
too far, because they recognised only being as what is true, and denied truth to 

A. QUALITY (§§ 8fr-98) 
139 
every other ob-ject of our consciousness. And, of course, it is quite correct that we 
must not stop at mere being; but it shows only lack of thought to treat the further 
content of our consciousness as discoverable somewhere "beside" and "outside" 
being, or as something that is just given "also." On the contrary, the true situation 
is that being as such is not firm and ultimate, but rather something that overturns 
dialectically into its opposite-which, taken in the same immediate way, is nothing. 
So, when all is said and done, being is the first pure thought; and whatever else 
may be made the starting point (I = I, absolute Indifference, or God himself)6 is 
initially only something which is represented, rather than thought. With regard to 
its thought-content, it is quite simply being. 
§ 87 
But this pure being is the pure abstraction, and hence it is the absolutely 
negative, which when taken immediately, is equally nothing.7 
(1) From this the second definition of the Absolute followed, that it 
is nothing; in fact, this definition is implied when it is said that the 
thing-in-itself is that which is indeterminate, absolutely without 
form and therefore without content-or again when it is said that 
God is just the supreme essence and no more than that, for to call 
him that expresses precisely the same negativity; the nothing, 
which the Buddhists8 make into the principle of everything (and 
into the ultimate enda and goal of everything too), is this same 
abstradion.-(2) When the antithesis is expressed in this imme­
diacy, as being and nothing, then it seems too obvious that it is null 
and void, for people not to try to fix being and to preserve it 
against the passage [into nothing] . In this situation, we are bound, 
as we think it over, to start searching for a stable determination for 
being by which it would be distinguished from nothing. For exam­
ple, being is taken as what persists through all variation as the 
infinitely determinable [prime] matter, and so on; or even without 
thinking it over at all, as any single existence whatever, anything 
readily available, be it sensible or spiritual. But none of these addi­
tional and more concrete determinations of this kind leave us with 
being as pure being, the way it is here in the beginning, in its 
immediacy. Only in this pure indeterminacy, and because of it, is 
being nothing-something that cannot be said; what distinguishes it 
from nothing is something merely meant.-All that really matters 
here is consciousness about these beginnings: that they are 
nothing but these empty abstractions, and that each of them is as 
a. ietzten Endzweck 

140 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
empty as the other; the drive to find in being or in both [being and 
nothing] a stable meaning is this very necessity, which leads being 
and nothing further along and endows them with a true, i.e., con­
crete meaning. This progression is the logical exposition and 
course [of thought] that presents itself in what follows. The think­
ing them over that finds deeper determinations for them is the 
logical thinking by which these determinations produce them­
selves, not in a contingent but in a necessary way. 
Every subsequent meaning that they acquire must therefore be 
regarded as only a more articulate determinationa and a truer defini­
tion of the Absolute; hence, any such determination or definition is 
no longer an empty abstraction like being and nothing, but is, 
instead, something concrete within which both being and nothing 
are moments.-In its highest form of explicitationb nothing would 
be freedom. But this highest form is negativity insofar as it inwardly 
deepens itself to its highest intensity; and in this way it is itself 
affirmation-indeed absolute affirmation. 9 
Addition. Being and nothing are at first only supposed to be distinguished, i.e., the 
distinction between them is initially only in-itself, but not yet posited. Whenever we 
speak about a distinction we have in mind two items, each of which possesses a 
determination that the other does not have. But being is precisely what strictly 
lacks determination, and nothing is this same lack of determination also. So the 
distinction between these two [terms) is only meant to be such, a completely 
abstract distinction, one that is at the same time no distinction. In all other cases of 
distinguishing we are always dealing also with something common, which em­
braces the things that are distinguished. For example, if we speak of two diverse 
kinds, then being a kind is what is common to both. Similarly, we say that there are 
natural and spiritual essences. Here, being an essence is what they have in com­
mon. By contrast, in the case of being and nothing, distinction has no basis, C and, 
precisely because of this, it is no distinction, since neither determination has any 
basis. d Someone might want to say that being and nothing are still both thoughts, 
and so to be a thought is what is common to them both. But this would be 
overlooking the fact that being is not a particular, determinate thought, but is the 
still quite undetermined thought which, precisely for this reason, cannot be dis­
tinguished from nothing. 
We certainly also represent being as absolute riches, and nothing, on the con­
trary, as absolute poverty. But, when we consider the entire world, and say simply 
that everything is, and nothing further, we leave out everything determinate, and, 
a. niihere Bestimmung 
b. Die hochste Form des Nichts fur sich 
c in seiner Bodenlosigkeit 
d. dieselbe Bodenlosigkeit 

A. QUALITY (§§ 86-98) 
141 
in consequence, have only absolute emptiness instead of absolute fullness. The 
same applies to the definition of God as mere being. Against it there stands, with 
equal justification, the definition of the Buddhists that God is nothing-from which 
it follows that man becomes God by annihilating himself. 
§ 88 
And similarly, but conversely, nothing, as this immediate [term] that is 
equal to itself, is the same as being. Hence, the truth of being and nothing 
alike is the unity of both of them; this unity is becoming. 
(1) In representation, or for the understanding, the proposition: 
"Being and nothing is the same," appears to be such a paradoxical 
proposition that it may perhaps be taken as not seriously meant. 
And it really is one of the hardest propositions that thinking dares 
to formulate, for being and nothing are the antithesis in all its 
immediacy, i.e., without the prior positing of any determination in 
one of the two which would contain its relation to the other. But as 
was shown in the preceding paragraph, they do contain this deter­
mination; i.e., the one that is precisely the same in both. The 
deduction of their unity is to this extent entirely analytic; just as, 
quite generally, the whole course of philosophising, being method­
ical, i.e., necessary, is nothing else but the mere positing of what is 
already contained in a concept.-But correct as it is to affirm the 
unity of being and nothing, it is equally correct to say that they are 
absolutely diverse too-that the one is not what the other is. But 
because this distinction has here not yet determined itself, pre­
cisely because being and nothing are still the immediate-it is, as 
belonging to them, what cannot be said, what is merely meant. 
(2) No great expense of wit is needed to ridicule the proposition 
that being and nothing are the same, or rather to produce absurd­
ities which are falsely asserted to be consequences and applica­
tions of this proposition; e.g., that, on that view, it is all the same 
whether my house, my fortune, the air to breathe, this city, the 
sun, the law, the spirit, God, are or are not. In examples of this 
kind, it is partly a matter of particular purposes, the utility that 
something has for me, being sneaked in. One then asks whether it 
matters to me that the useful thing is or that it is not. But philoso­
phy is in fact the very discipline that aims at liberating man from 
an infinite crowd of finite purposes and intentions and at making 
him indifferent with regard to them, so that it is all the same to 
him whether such matters are the case or not. But wherever and as 

142 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
soon as one speaks about a content, a connection is already posited 
with other existences, purposes, etc., that are presupposed as valid, 
and whether the being or nonbeing of a determinate content is the 
same or not has now become dependent on these presuppositions. A 
distinction that is full of content has been sneaked into the empty 
distinction of being and nothing.-In part, however, it is purposes 
that are in themselves essential, absolute existences and Ideas, that 
are just posited under the determination of being or nonbeing. 
Concrete ob-jects of this kind are something much more than what 
only is or is not. Poor abstractions, like being and nothing-which, 
precisely because they are only the determinations of the begin­
ning, are the poorest of all-are quite inadequate to the nature of 
these ob-jects; genuine content has already left these abstractions 
themselves and their antithesis far behind.-Whenever something 
concrete is sneaked into being and nothing, it is just business as 
usual for the unthinking [mind]:- something else altogether ap­
pears before it and it speaks about that as if it were what is at issue, 
whereas at the moment only abstract beiெg and nothing are at 
issue. 
(3) It is easy to say that we do not comprehend the unity of being 
and nothing. But the concept of both has been indicated in the 
preceding paragraphs, and it is nothing more than what has been 
indicated; to comprehend their unity means no more than to grasp 
this. But what is understood by "comprehension" is often some­
thing more than the concept in the proper sense; what is desired is 
a more diversified, a richer consciousness, a notion such that this 
sort of "concept" can be presented as a concrete case of it, with 
which thinking in its ordinary practice would be more familiar. 
Insofar as the inability to comprehend only expresses the fact that 
one is not used to holding onto abstract thoughts without any 
sensible admixture or to the grasping of speculative propositions, 
all we can say is that philosophical knowing is indeed quite diverse 
in kind from the knowing that we are used to in everyday life, just 
as it is diverse from what prevails in the other sciences too. But if 
noncomprehension only means that one cannot represent the unity 
of being and nothing, this is really so far from being the case, that 
on the contrary everyone has an infinite supply of notions of this 
unity; saying that one has none can only mean that one does not 
[re]cognise the present concept in any of those notions, and one 
a. die Gedankenlosigkeit 

A. QUALITY (§§ 86-98) 
143 
does not know them to be examples of it. The readiest example of 
it is becoming. Everyone has a notion of becoming and will also 
admit moreover that it is One notion; and further that, if it is 
analysed, the determination of being, but also that of nothing, the 
stark C>ther of being, is found to be contained in it; further, that 
these two determinations are undivided in this One notion; hence 
that becoming is the unity of being and nothing.-Another exam­
ple that is equally ready to hand is the beginning; the matter [itself] 
is not yet in its beginning, but the beginning is not merely its 
nothing: on the contrary, its being is already there, too. The begin­
ning itself is also becoming, but it expresses already the reference 
to the further progression.-In conformity with the most usual 
procedure of the sciences, one could begin the Logic with the 
notion of "beginning" thought purely, i.e., with the notion of be­
ginning as beginning, and one could analyse this notion; and then 
it would perhaps be more readily conceded, as a result of the 
analysis, that being and nothing show themselves to be undivided 
within a unity.-
(4) It remains to be noted, however, that the expression: "Being 
and nothing is the same," or "the unity of being and nothing"-like 
all other unities of this kind (the unity of subject and object, etc.)­
can fairly be objected to, because it is misleading and incorrect 
insofar as it makes the unity stand out; and although diversity is 
contained in it (because it is, for instance, being and nothing whose 
unity is posited), this diversity is not expressed and recognised 
along with the unity. So we seem only to have abstracted quite 
improperly from this diversity, and to have given no thought to it. 
The fact is that no speculative determination can be expressed 
correctly in the form of such a proposition; what has to be grasped 
is the unity in the diversity that is both given and posited at the 
same time. As their unity, becoming is the true expression of the 
result of being and nothing; it is not just the unity of being and 
nothing, but it is inward unrest-a unity which in its self-relation is 
not simply motionless, but which, in virtue of the diversity of 
being and nothing which it contains, is inwardly turned against 
itself.-Being-there, on the contrary, is this unity or becoming in 
this form of unity; that is why it is one-sided and finite. It is, as if the 
antithesis had disappeared; it is contained in the unity, but only in­
itself, not as posited in the unity. 
a. a/s in Einern ungetrennt 

144 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
(5) To the proposition that being is the passing into nothing and 
that nothing is the passing into being-to the proposition of becom­
ing, is opposed the proposition: "From nothing, nothing comes," 
"Something only comes from something," the proposition of the 
eternity of matter, or of pantheism. The AncientslO made the sim­
ple reflection that the proposition: "Something comes from some­
thing," or "From nothing, nothing comes," does indeed sublate 
becoming; for that from which there is becoming and that which 
comes to be are one and the same; all we have here is the proposi­
tion of the abstract identity of the understanding. But it must strike 
one as amazing to see the propositions: "From nothing, nothing 
comes," or "Something comes only from something," advanced 
quite naiVely, without any consciousness that they are the founda­
tion of pantheism; and equally without any awareness that the 
Ancients have already dealt with these propositions exhaustively. 
Addition. Becoming is the first concrete thought and hence the first concept, 
whereas being and nothing, in contrast, are empty abstractions. If we speak of the 
concept of being, this can only consist in becoming, for as being it is the empty 
nothing, but as the latter it is empty being. So, in being we have nothing, and in 
nothing being; but this being which abides with itself in nothing is becoming. The 
unity of becoming cannot leave out the distinction, for without that we would 
return once more to abstract being. Becoming is simply the positedness of what 
being is in its truth. 
We often hear it asserted that thinking is opposed to being. Regarding such an 
assertion the first thing to ask is what is understood here by "being". If we take 
"being" in the way that reflection determines it, we can only assert of it that it is 
what is thoroughly identical and affirmative; and if we then consider "thinking", it 
cannot escape us that thinking is, at least, in like manner, what is thoroughly self­
identical. So the same determination accrues to both "being" and "thinking". But 
this identity of being and thinking is not to be taken concretely; it must not be 
taken as saying that a stone, insofar as it is, is the same as a human thinker. 
Something concrete is always quite different from the abstract determination as 
such. But, in the case of being, we are not speaking of anything concrete, for being 
is precisely just what is wholly abstract. In consequence, the question of the being 
of God, i.e., [of the being of] what is infinitely concrete within itself,lI is also of very 
little interest. 
As the first concrete determination of thought, becoming is also the first genuine 
one. In the history of philosophy it is the system of Heraclitus that corresponds to 
this stage of the logical Idea. When Heraclitus says, "Everything flows" (panta hrei), 
then it is becoming that is thereby pronounced to be the basic determination of 
everything that is there; whereas on the contrary, as we said earlier, the Eleatics 
took being, rigid being without process, to be what is uniquely true. In connection 

A. QUALITY (§§ 86-98) 
145 
with the principle of the Eleatics Heraclitus12 says further, "Being is no more than 
not-being" (ouden mal/on to on tou me ontos esti); what this expresses is precisely the 
negativity of abstract being, and the identity, posited in becoming, between it and 
nothing, which, in its abstraction, is equally unstable.-We have here, too, an 
example of the genuine refutation of one philosophical system by another. The 
refutation consists precisely in the fact that the principle of the refuted philosophy 
is exhibited in its dialectic and reduced to an ideal moment of a higher concrete 
form of the Idea. 
But now, furthermore, even becoming is, by itself, still a very poor determina­
tion; and it must inwardly deepen itself a lot more, and fill itself OUt.13 An inward 
deepening of becoming is what we have, for example, in life. This is a becoming, 
but its concept is not exhausted by that. We find becoming in a still higher form in 
spirit. This, too, is a becoming, but one that is more intensive, richer than the 
merely logical becoming. The moments whose unity is Spirit are not those mere 
abstractions, being and nothing, but the system of the logical Idea and of Nature. 
B. BEING-THERE 
§ 89 
In becoming, being, as one with nothing, and nothing as one with being, 
are only vanishing [terms]; because of its contradiction becoming collapses 
inwardly, into the unity within which both are sublated; in this way its 
result is being-there. 
In this first example we have to recall once and for all what was 
indicated in § 82 and the Remark there: the only way that a pro­
gression and a development in knowing can be grounded is to 
hold firmly onto the results in their truth.-There is nothing at all 
anywhere, in which contradiction-i.e., opposed determinations-­
cannot and should not be exhibited. The abstracting activity of the 
understanding is a clinging on to One determinacy by force, an 
effort to obscure and to remove the consciousness of the other one 
that is contained in it.-But if the contradiction is exhibited and 
recognised in any ob-ject or concept whatever, then the conclusion 
thavs usually drawn is: "Therefore this ob-ject is nothing." Thus 
Zeno first showed that movement contradicts itself, and that it 
therefore is not;i4 likewise the Ancients recognised coming to be 
and passing away, the two kinds of becoming, as untrue determina­
tions, by saying that the. One, i.e., the Absolute, does not come into 
being or pass awaYr1his dialectic does not go beyond the negative 
''''---

146 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
side of the result, and abstracts from what is effectively given at 
the same time: a determinate result, which here is not a pure 
nothing but a nothing which includes being within itself, and equally 
a being, which includes nothing. It follows that (1) being-there is 
the unity of being and nothing, in which the immediacy of these 
determinations, and therewith their contradiction, has disap­
peared in their relation-a unity in which they are only moments. 
(2) Because the result is the sublated contradiction, it is in the form 
of simple unity with itself or even as a being, but [as] a being with 
its negation or determinacy; it is becoming posited in the form of 
one of its moments, of being. 
Addition. Even our representation of it implies that, if there is a becoming, some­
thing comes forth and that becoming therefore has a result. But at this point the 
question arises of why becoming does not remain mere becoming but has a result. 
The answer to this question follows from what becoming has previously shown 
itself to be. That is to say, becoming contains being and nothing within itself and it 
does this in such a way that they simply overturn into one another and reciprocally 
sublate one another as well as themselves. In that way becoming proves itself to be 
what is thoroughly restless, but unable to maintain itself in this abstract restless­
ness; for, insofar as being and nothing vanish in becoming-and just this is its 
concept-becoming is thereby itself something that vanishes, like a fire, that dies 
out within itself by consuming its material. But the result of this process is not 
empty nothing; instead it is being that is identical with negation, which we call 
being-there-and its significance proves to be, first of all, this: that it is what has 
become." 
§ 90 
(a) Being-there is being with a determinacy, that is [givேnl as immediate 
determinacy or as a determinacy that [simply] is: quality. As reflected into 
itself in this its determinacy, being-there is that which is there,b something.­
The categories that develop in respect of being-there only need to be 
indicated in a summary way. 
Addition. Quality is, in general, the determinacy that is immediate, identical with 
being, as distinct from quantity (which will be considered next). Of course, quantity 
is likewise [a] determinacy of being, though it is a determinacy that is not imme­
diately identical with being, but rather one that is indifferent with respect to being 
and external to it.-Something is what it is by virtue of its quality, and if it loses its 
quality it ceases to be what it is. Furthermore, quality is essentially only a category 
of the finite-and for that reason it has its proper place only in nature and not in 
a. geworden zu sein 
b. Daseiendes 

A. QUALITY (§§ 86-98) 
147 
the spiritual world. Thus, for instance, the so-called simple matters," oxygen, nitro­
gen, etc., must be considered as existent qualities within nature. 
Within the sphere of spirit, on the other hand, qualITy occurs only in a secondary 
way, and never so that it exhausts the content of any determinate shape of spirit. 
For example, if we consider subjective spirit, which forms the subject matter of 
psychology, we can certainly say that the logical significance of what people call 
"character" is that of quality. But this is not to be understood as if character were a 
determinacy that pervades the soul and is immediately identical with it, as is the 
case in nature with the simple matters referred to above. Nevertheless, quality 
shows itself in a more determinate way in spirit, too, where the latter is found in an 
unfree, morbid state. This is the case in states of passion, and especially where 
passion has risen to the height of derangement. We can properly say of a deranged 
person whose consciousness is completely pervaded by jealousy, fear, etc., that his 
consciousness is determined in the manner of quality. 
§ 91 
As determinacy that [simply] is vis-a.-vis the negation which it contains but 
which is distinct from it, quality is reality. The negation is no longer ab­
stract nothing, but as a being-there and as something, it is only a form of 
the something: it is as otherness. Since this otherness is quality's own deter­
mination, though at first distinct from it, quality is being-for-another-an 
expanse of being-there, of something. The being of quality as such, vis­
a-vis this relation to another, is being-in-itself. b 
Addition. The basis of all determinacy is negation (omnis determinatio est negatio, as 
Spinoza says).15 Unthinking opinion considers determinate things to be merely 
positive and holds them fast in the form of being. Mere being is not the end of the 
matter, however, for, as we saw earlier, that is something utterly empty and at the 
same time unstable. Still, this confusion of being-there (as determinate being) with 
abstract being implies the correct insight that the moment of negation is certainly 
already contained in being-there, but only shrouded as it were; it emerges freely 
and comes into its own only in being-for-itself. 
If we now go on to consider being-there as determinacy that is, we have the 
same as what is generally understood by "reality". We speak, for instance, of the 
reality of a plan or of an intention, and we understand by this that such things are 
no longer merely something inner and subjective, but have moved out into being­
there. In the same sense the body can be called the reality of the soul, and this [or 
that] lawc can be called the reality of freedom; or, quite universally, the world is the 
reality of the divine Concept. But, in addition, we often speak of "reality" in still 
a. Stoffe 
b. An-sich-sein 
c. dies Rechtl6 

148 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
another sense, understanding by it that something behaves in accordance with its 
essential determination or its concept. For example, someone may say: "This is a 
real occupation;' or: "This is a real person." Here it is not a question of what is 
immediately and externally there, but rather of the correspondence between what 
is there and its concept. Interpreted in this way, however, reality is not distinct from 
ideality, which we shall first become acquainted with as being-for-itself. 
§ 92 
(;) The being that is kept firmly distinct from the determinacy, being-in­
itself, would be only the empty abstraction of being. In being-there the 
determinacy is one with being and is at the same time posited as negation; 
this determinacy is limit, restrictionY Thus, otherness is not something­
indifferent outside it, but its own moment. In virtue of its quality, something 
is first finite and secondly alterable, so that the finitude and alterability 
belong to its being. 
Addition. In being-there negation is still immediately identical with being, and this 
negation is what we call "limit". Something only is what it is within its limit and by 
virtue of its limit. We cannot regard limit, therefore, as merely external to being­
there; on the contrary, limit totally permeates everything that is there. The inter­
pretation of limit as a merely external determination of being-there is based on a 
confusion of quantitative with qualitative limit. Here we are dealing first with 
qualitative limit. When we are considering a piece of land three acres in area, for 
example, that is its quantitative limit. But, in addition, this piece of land is also a 
meadow and not a wood or a pond, and this is its qualitative limit.-Humans who 
want to be actual must be there, and to this end they must limit themselves. Those 
who are too fastidious toward the finite achieve nothing real at all, but remain in 
the realm of the abstract and peter out. 
Let us now consider more closely what a limit implies. We find that it contains a 
contradiction within itself, and so proves itself to be dialectical. That is to say, limit 
constitutes the reality of being-there, and, on the other hand, it is the negation of it. 
But, furthermore, as the negation of the something, limit is not an abstract nothing 
in general, but a nothing that is, or what we call an "other". In something we at 
once hit upon the other, and we know that there is not only something, but also 
something else. But the other is not such that we just happen upon it; it is not as if 
something could be thought without that other; rather, something is in itself the 
other of itself, and the limit of a something becomes objective to it in the other. 
When we ask what the distinction between the something and the other is, then it 
turns out that both are the same; and this identity is expressed in Latin by calling 
the pair aliud-aliud. The other, as opposed to the something, is itself a something 
and accordingly we call it "something else".lB On the other hand, the first some­
thing opposed to an other that is similarly determined as a something is itself 
something else. When we say "something else" we think initially that something 
taken by itself is only something, and the determination of being something else 

A. QUALITY (§§ 86-98) 
149 
only accrues to it in virtue of a merely external point of view. Thus we suppose, for 
instance, that the moon, which is something else than the sun, could quite well 
exist if the sun did not. But, in fact, the moon (as something) has its other in itself, 
and this constitutes its finitude. 
Plato says: "God made the world from the nature of the One and the Other (tou 
heterou); he brought them together and formed a Third out of them, which is of the 
nature of the One and the Other."19-This expresses the general nature of the finite 
which, being something, does not stand over against the other indifferently, but in 
such a way that it is in-itself the other of itself and hence it alters. Alteration 
exhibits the inner contradiction with which being-there is burdened from the start, 
and which drives it beyond itself. In representation, being-there appears initially to 
be simply positive and to be quietly persisting within its limit as well; but, of 
course, we also know that everything finite (and being-there is finite) is subject to 
alteration. But this alterability of being-there appears in our representation as a 
mere possibility, whose realisation is not grounded within being-there itself. In 
fact, however, self-alteration is involved in the concept of being-there, and is only 
the manifestation of what being-there is in-itself. The living die, and they do so 
simply because, insofar as they live, they bear the germ of death within themselves. 
§ 93 
Something becomes an other, but the other is itself a something, so it 
likewise becomes an other, and so on ad infinitum. 
§ 94 
This infinity is spurious or negative infinity,20 since it is nothing but the 
negation of the finite, but the finite arises again in the same way, so that it 
is no more sublated than not. In other words, this infinity expresses only 
the requirement that the finite ought to be sublated. This progress ad 
infinitum does not go beyond the expression of the contradiction, which 
the finite contains, [i.e.,] that it is just as much something as its other, and 
[this progress] is the perpetual continuation of the alternation between 
these determinations, each bringing in the other one. 
Addition. If we let something and other, the moments of being-there, fall asunder, 
the result is that something becomes an other, and this other is itself a something, 
Which, as such, then alters itself in the same way, and so on without end. Reflec­
tion takes itself to have arrived here at something very elevated, indeed the most 
elevated [truth] of all. But this infinite progression is not the genuine Infinite, 
which consists rather in remaining at home with itself in its other, or (when it is 
eXpressed as a process) in coming to itself in its other. It is of great importance to 
grasp the concept of true Infinity in an adequate way, and not just to stop at the 
spurious infinity of the infinite progress. When the infinity of space and time are 

150 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
spoken of, it is first the infinite progression that we usually stop at So we say, for 
example, "this time," "now," and then we keep continually going beyond this limit, 
backward and forward. It is the same with space, about whose infinity astronomers 
with a taste for edification have preached many empty sermons. 
Of course, it is also usually maintained that thinking must surrender as soon as it 
begins to deal with this infinity. Well, one thing is certainly correct, and that is that 
we must ultimately abandon the attempt to pursue this consideration further and 
further; but we do so not because of the sublimity, but rather because of the tedium 
of this occupation. It is tedious to go on and on in the consideration of this infinite 
progression because the same thing is continually repeated. A limit is set, it is 
exceeded, then there is another limit, and so on without end. So we have nothing 
here but a superficial alternation, which stays forever within the sphere of the 
finite. If we suppose that we can liberate ourselves from the finite by stepping out 
into that infinitude, this is in fact only a liberation through flight. And the person 
who flees is not yet free, for in fleeing, he is still determined by the very thing from 
which he is fleeing. So if people then add that the infinite cannot be attained, what 
they say is quite correct, but only because the determination of being something 
abstractly negative is being lodged in the infinite. Philosophy does not waste time 
with such empty and otherworldly stuff. What philosophy has to do with is always 
something concrete and strictly present. 
The task of philosophy has, indeed, also been formulated in such a way that it 
has to answer the question of how the Infinite comes to the resolve to go out of 
itself. This question, which presupposes a rigid antithesis between infinite and 
finite, can only be answered by saying that the antithesis is something untrue, and 
that the Infinite is in fact eternally gone from itself, and also eternally not gone 
from itself.-Besides, if we say that the infinite is the "nonfinite," then by saying 
that we have already expressed what is true: for, since the finite itself is the first 
negative, the nonfinite is the negative of the negation, the negation that is identical 
with itself, so that it is at the same time true affirmation. 
The infinity of reflection discussed here is merely the attempt to attain true 
Infinity; it is a wretched intermediate thing. Generally speaking, this is the philo­
sophical standpoint that has recently prevailed in Germany. In this view, the finite 
only ought to be sublated; and the infinite ought not to be merely something 
negative but something positive as well. This "ought" always implies impotence: 
the fact that something is recognised as justified, and yet can never make itself 
prevail. With regard to the ethical domain, the Kantian and the Fichtean philoso­
phies got stuck at this standpoint of the "ought." Perpetual approximation to the 
law of reason is the utmost that can be attained on this path; and even the immor­
tality of the soul has been based on this postulate. 
§ 95 
('Y) What is indeed given is that something becomes another, and the other 
becomes another quite generally. In its relationship to an other, something 
is already an other itself vis-a-vis the latter; and therefore, since what it 

A. QUALITY (§§ 86-98) 
151 
passes into is entirely the same as what passes into it-neither having any 
further determination than this identical one of being an other-in its pass­
ing into another, something only comes together with itself; and this rela­
tion to itself in the passing and in the other is genuine Infinity.21 Or, if we 
look at it negatively: what is changed is the other, it becomes the other of 
the other. In this way being is reestablished, but as negation of the nega­
tion. It is now being-for-itself. 
Dualism, which makes the opposition of finite and infinite in­
superable, fails to make the simple observation that in this way the 
infinite itself is also just one of the two, [and] that it is therefore 
reduced to one particular, in addition to which the finite is the 
other one. Such an infinite, which is just one particular, beside the 
finite, so that it has precisely its restriction, its limit, in the latter, is 
not what it ought to be. It is not the Infinite, but is only finite. In 
this relationship, where one is situated here, and the other over 
there, the finite in this world and the infinite in the other world, an 
equal dignity of subsistence and independence is attributed to the 
finite and to the infinite; the being of the finite is made into an 
absolute being; in this Dualism it stands solidly on its own feet. If it 
were touched by the infinite, so to speak, it would be annihilated; 
but it is supposed to be not capable of being touched by the in­
finite; there is supposed to be an abyss, an impassable gulf, be­
tween the two; the infinite has to remain absolutely on the other 
side and the finite on this side. This assertion of the solid per­
sistence of the finite vis-a.-vis the infinite supposes itself to be 
beyond all metaphysics, but it stands simply and solely on the 
ground of the most vulgar metaphysics of the understanding. 
What happens at this point is just what the infinite progress ex­
presses; it is first admitted that the finite is not in and for itself, that 
it has no title to independent actuality, or to absolute being, but that 
it is only something that passes; then in the next moment, this is 
forgotten, and the finite is represented as merely facing the in­
finite, radically separate from it and rescued from annihilation, 
[i.e., represented] as independent, and persisting on its own.­
Although thinking means in this way to elevate itself to the In­
finite, what happens to it is just the opposite-it arrives at an 
infinite which is only a finite, and the finite which it had left 
behind is, on the contrary, just what it always maintains and makes 
into an absolute. 
After the above consideration of the nullity of the antithesis set 
up by the understanding between the finite and the infinite (with 
which it would be useful to compare Plato's Philebus [23-38]), one 

152 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
can easily fall back upon the expression that the finite and the 
infinite are therefore One, that the True, or the genuine Infinity, is 
determined and expressed as the unity of the infinite and the 
finite. And this expression does indeed contain something correct, 
but it is equally misleading and false, just as we said earlier in the 
case of the unity of being and nothing. It leads, moreover, to the 
justified complaint about the Infinite having been made finite, 
about a finite infinite. For in the above expression ("The Infinite is 
the unity of the infinite and the finite"), the finite appears to be left 
as it was; it is not explicitly expressed as sublated.-Or, if we were 
to reflect upon this fact that the finite, when posited as one with 
the infinite, could surely not remain what it was outside of this 
unity, and would at the every least be somewhat affected in its 
determination (just as an alkali when combined with an acid loses 
some of its properties), then the same would happen to the in­
finite, which as the negative would, for its part, also be blunted 
upon the other. And this is, indeed, what does happen to the 
abstract, one-sided infinite of the understanding. But the genuine 
Infinite does not merely behave like the one-sided acid; on the 
contrary it preserves itself; the negation of the negation is not a 
neutralisation; the Infinite is the affirmative, and it is only the finite 
which is sublated. 
In being-for-itself the determination of ideality has entered. 
Being-there, taken at first only according to its being or its affirma­
tion, has reality (§ 91); and hence finitude, too, is under the deter­
mination of reality at first. But the truth of the finite is rather its 
ideality. In the same way the infinite of the understanding, which 
is put beside the finite, is itself also only one of two finites, 
something-untrue, something-ideal. This ideality of the finite is the 
most important proposition of philosophy, and for that reason 
every genuine philosophy is Idealism.22 Everything depends on not 
mistaking for the Infinite that which is at once reduced in its 
determination to what is particular and finite.-That is why we 
have here drawn attention to this distinction at some length; the 
basic concept of philosophy, the genuine Infinite, depends on it. 
This distinction is established by the reflections contained in the 
paragraph. They may seem to be unimportant, because they are 
quite simple, but they are irrefutable. 

A. QUALITY (§§ 86-98) 
153 
C. BEING-FOR-ITSELF 
§ 96 
(a) As relation to itself, being-for-itself is immediacy, and as relation of the 
negative to itself it is what-is-for-itself, the One-that which lacks inward 
distinction, thereby excluding the Other from itself. 
Addition. Being-for-itself is quality completed, and as such it contains being and 
being-there within itself as its ideal moments. As being, being-for-itself is simple 
self-relation, and as being-there it is determined; but this determinacy is no longer 
the finite determinacy of the something in its distinction from the other, but the 
infinite determinacy that contains distinction within it as sublated. 
The most familiar example of being-for-itself is the "I." We know ourselves to be 
beings who are there, first of all distinct from other such beings, and related to 
them. But secondly, we also know that this expanse of being-there is, so to speak, 
focused into the simple form of being-for-itself. When we say "I," that is the 
expression of the infinite self-relation that is at the same time negative. It may be 
said that man distinguishes himself from the animals, and so from nature gener­
ally, because he knows himself as "I"; what this says, at the same time, is that 
natural things never attain to free being-for-oneself, but, being restricted to being­
there, are always just being-for-another. 
But again, being-for-itself has to be interpreted generally as ideality,23 just as, in 
contrast, being-there was earlier designated as reality. Reality and ideality are fre­
quently considered as a pair of determinations that confront one another with 
equal independence, and therefore people say that apart from reality, there is 
"also" an ideality. But ideality is not something that is given outside of and apart 
from reality. On the contrary, the concept of ideality expressly consists in its being 
the truth of reality, or in other words, reality posited as what it is in-itself proves 
itself to be ideality. So we must not believe that we have given to ideality all the 
honour that is due to it, if we simply allow that reality is not all, but that we have to 
recognise an ideality outside it as well. An ideality of this kind, set beside or even 
above reality, would in fact be only an empty name. Ideality has a content only 
because it is the ideality of something: and this "something" is not merely an 
indeterminate this or that-on the contrary, it isuhܲ:e characterisܳ as . 
"reality" -to which, when it is maintained on its own, no truth pertains.-
I (. ;. : •
.
 
" 
• 
The distinction between nature and spirit has been interpreted quite correctly as 
meaning that we must trace nature back to "reality" as its basic determination, and 
spirit to "ideality." But nature is not just something fixed and complete on its own 
account, which could therefore subsist even without spirit; rather, it is only in spirit 
that nature attains to its goal and its truth. Similarly, spirit, for its part, is not just an 
abstract world beyond nature; on the contrary, it only genuinely is, and proves to 
be spirit, insofar as it contains nature sublated within itself. 

154 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
At this point we should remember the double meaning of the German expres­
sion "aufheben". On the one hand, we understand it to mean "clear away" or 
"cancel", and in that sense we say that a law or regulation is cancelled (aufgehoben). 
But the word also means "to preserve", and we say in this sense that something is 
well taken care of (wohl aufgehoben). This ambiguity in linguistic usage, through 
which the same word has a negative and a positive meaning, cannot be regarded as 
an accident nor yet as a reason to reproach language as if it were a source of 
confusion. We ought rather to recognise here the speculative spirit of our language, 
which transcends the "either-or" of mere understanding. 
§ 97 
(؆) The relation of the negative to itself is negative relation, and therefore 
distinguishing of the One from itself, the repulsion of the One, i.e., the 
positing of many Ones. In keeping with the immediacy of what-is-for-itself, 
these many [simply] are,' and as a result the repulsion of the ones that 
[simply] are becomes their repulsion against each other as given, or their 
reciprocal exclusion. 
Addition. When we speak of the One, the manyb usually come to mind at the same 
time. So the question ·arises here as to where the many come from. Within repre­
sentational thinking there is no answer to this question, because the many is there 
regarded as immediately present, and the One counts only as one among the 
many. c But in accordance with its concept, the One forms the presupposition of the 
many, and it lies in the thought of the One to posit itself as what is many. In other 
words, the One which is for-itself is under that aspect not something that lacks 
relation, like being; instead it is relation, just as being-there is. But now it is not 
related as something to something else; being the unity of the something and the 
other, it is relation to itself instead, and, of course, this relation is a negative one. In 
consequence, the One proves to be what is strictly incompatible with itself, it expels 
itself out of itself, and what it posits itself as is what is many. d We can designate this 
side of the process of being-for-itself by the figurative expression "repulsion" . The 
term "repulsion" is primarily used with reference to matter; and what is under­
stood by it is precisely that matter, as a many, e behaves, in each of these many ones, 
as exclusive of all the others. Besides, we must not interpret this process of repul­
sion to mean that Onef is what repels while the manyg are what is repelled; instead, 
as we said earlier, it is the One that is just what excludes itself from itself and posits 
a. sind diese Viele Seiende 
b. die Vielen 
c. das Viele 
d. das Viele 
e. ein Vieles 
f. Eins 
g. die Vielen 

A. QUALITY (§§ 86-98) 
155 
itself as what is many;" each of the many, however, is itself One, and because it 
behaves as such, this all-round repulsion turns over forthwith into its opposite­
attraction. 
§ 98 
But the many are each one what the other is, each of them is one or also 
one of the many; they are therefore one and the same. Or, when the 
repulsion is considered in itself then, as the negative behaviour of the many 
ones against each other, it is just as essentially their relation to each other; 
and since those to which the One relates itself in its repelling are ones, 
in relating to them it relates itself to itself. Thus, repulsion is just as es­
sentially attraction; and the excluding One or being-for-itself sublates it­
self. 
Qualitative determinacy, 
which in the One has reached its 
determinateness-in-and-for-itself, has thus passed over into determinacy as 
!;ublated, i.e., into being as quantity. 
The atomistic philosophy is the standpoint from which the Abso­
lute determines itself as being-for-itself, as One, and as many 
Ones. The repulsion which shows itself in the concept of the One 
was assumed to be its fundamental force; it is not attraction, how­
ever, but chance, i.e., what is without thought, that is supposed to 
bring them together. Since the One is fixed as One, its coming 
together with others does, indeed, have to be considered as some­
thing quite external.-The void, which is assumed to be the other 
principle [added] to the atoms, is repulSion itself, represented as 
the nothingness that is between the atoms.24 Modern Atomism­
and physics still maintains this principle-has abandoned the 
atoms, in that it just holds onto small parts or molecules; by doing 
that it has come closer to sensible representation, but has aban­
doned the determination by thought.-And since a force of attrac­
tion is put beside the force of repulSion, the antithesis has indeed 
been made complete, and the discovery of this so-called force of 
nature has occasioned much pride. But the relation of both forces 
with one another, which constitutes what is concrete and genuine 
in them, needs to be rescued from the muddy confusion in which 
it is left, even in Kant's Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Sci­
ence.25-In modem times, the atomistic view has become even 
more important in the political [realm] than in the physical [one] . 
According to this view, the will of the single [individuals] as such is 
a. das Viele 

156 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
the principle of the State; what produces the attraction is the par­
ticularity" of needs [and] inclinations; and the universal, the State 
itself, is the external relationship of a contract. 
Addition 1 .  The philosophy of Atomism forms an essential stage in the historical 
development of the Idea, and the overall principle of this philosophy is being-for­
itself in the shape of what is many. b Since Atomism is still held in high esteem 
nowadays among those natural scientists who do not want anything to do with 
metaphysics, it should be remembered in this connection that we do not escape 
metaphysics (or, more precisely, the tracing back of nature to thoughts) by 
throwing ourselves into the arms of Atomism, because, of course, the atom is itself 
a thought, and so the interpretation of matter as consisting of atoms is a meta­
physical one. 
It is true that Newton expressly warned physics to beware of metaphysics;26 but, 
to his honour, let it be said that he did not conduct himself in accordance with this 
warning at all. Only the animals are true blue physicists by this standard, since 
they do not think; whereas humans, in contrast, are thinking beings, and born 
metaphysicians. All that matters here is whether the metaphysics that is employed 
is of the right kind; and specifically whether, instead of the concrete logical Idea, 
we hold on to one-sided thought-determinations fixed by the understanding, so 
that they form the basis both of our theoretical and of our practical action. This is 
the reproach that strikes down the philosophy of Atomism. 
Like many thinkers nowadays, the ancient atomists regarded everything as a 
many; and it was supposed to be chance that brings the atoms together, as they 
float about in the void. But the relation of the many to one another is not a merely 
accidental one at all; instead their relation is grounded in the many themselves (as 
we said before). It is Kant who deserves the credit for having perfected the theory< 
of matter by considering it as the unity of repulsion and attraction. This involves 
the correct insight that attraction should certainly be recognised as the other of the 
two moments in the concept of being-for-itself, and hence attraction belongs to 
matter just as essentially as repulsion. But Kant's so-called dynamic construction of 
matter suffers from the defect that repulsion and attraction are postulated as pres­
ent without further ado, rather than being deduced. The "how" and the "why" of 
this merely asserted unity would have followed logically from a proper deduction. 
Besides, Kant expressly insisted that we must not regard matter as present on its 
own account, and only fitted out afterwards ("on the side" as it were) with the two 
forces of repulsion and attraction here referred to; on the contrary, matter consists 
in nothing else but their unity. 
German physicists were satisfied with this pure dynamics for a time, but in more 
recent times the majority of them have found that it suited them better to return 
once more to the standpoint of Atomism; and, in spite of the warning of their 
colleague, the late lamented Kastner,27 they regard matter as then consisting of 
infinitely small particles, called atoms. They suppose these atoms to be set in 
a. die Partikularitiit 
b. des Vielell 
c. Auffassullg 

B. QUANTITY (§§ 99-106) 
157 
relation with each other through the play of the forces (attractive, repulsive, or 
whatever) that attach to them. This is a "metaphysics," too; and there is certainly a 
sufficient ground to beware of it, because there is so little thought in it. 
Addition 2. The passage from quality to quantity indicated in the preceding para­
graph is not found in our ordinary consciousness. In the ordinary way, quality and 
quantity count as a pair of determinations standing independently side by side; 
and we say, therefore, that things are not only qualitatively, but "also" quan­
titatively, determined. We make no further inquiry as to where these determina­
tions come from, or what relationship they have to one another. We have seen, 
however, that quantity is nothing but sublated quality, and it is through the dialec­
tic of quality considered here that this sublation comes about. 
Initially we had being, and its truth turned out to be becoming; this formed the 
passage to being-there, whose truth we saw to be alteration. But alteration showed 
itself in its result to be being-for-itself, that is exempt from relation to another and 
passage into another. And finally, being-for-itself (in the two sides of its process, 
repulsion and attraction) has proved itself to be the sublating of itself, and hence of 
quality altogether, in the totality of its moments. This sublated quality, however, is 
neither an abstract nothing nor the similarly abstract being (lacking all determina­
tion), but only a being that is indifferent with regard to determinacy; and this is the 
shape of being that occurs, even in our ordinary representation, as quantity. Ac­
cordingly, we consider things first from the point of view of their quality--and this 
means for us the determinacy that is identical with their being. When we move on 
to the consideration of quantity, this gives us at once the representation of an 
indifferent, external determinacy, such that a thing still remains what it is, even 
when its quantity alters and it becomes greater or smaller. 
B 
Quantity 
A. PURE QUANTITY 
§ 99 
Quantity is pure being in which determinacy is no longer posited as one 
with being itself, but as sublated or indifferent. 
(1) Magnitude is not an apt expression for quantity insofar as it 
especially designates determinate quantity. (2) In mathematics mag­
nitude is usually defined as what can be increased or decreased. This 
definition is faulty, since it still contains what is to be defined; but 
it does at least imply that the determination of magnitude is such 

158 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
that it is posited as alterable and indIfferent, so that, notwithstand­
ing a change of this determination (whether it be an extensive or 
an intensive increase), the thing in question,. for instance a house, 
or red, would not cease to be a house, or red. (3) "The Absolute is 
pure quantity" -this standpoint coincides in general with the at­
tribution of the determination of matterb to the Absolute, [a matter] 
in which, it is true, form would be present, but only as an indif­
ferent determination. Quantity also constitutes the fundamental 
determination of the Absolute, if it is so grasped that, being what 
is absolutely-undifferentiated, distinctions in it are only quantita­
tive.-Pure space, time, etc., may also be taken as examples of 
quantity, insofar as the real is supposed to be grasped as an indIf­
ferent filling for space or time. 
Addition. The usual definition of magnitude in mathematics, as "what can be in­
creased or decreased", seems at first sight to be more illuminating and more 
plausible than the conceptual determination contained in the present paragraph. 
When we look at it more closely, however, it contains, in the form of presupposi­
tion and representation, the same [content] that has emerged as the concept of 
quantity simply by pursuing the path of logical development. In other words, when 
it is said of magnitude that its concept consists in the possibility of being increased 
or decreased, what is meant by that is just that magnitude (or, more correctly, 
quantity)-in distinction from quality-is a determination with respect to whose 
alteration this or that thing< is indifferent. As for the defect in the usual definition 
of quantity which was the subject of a reproach made above, this, when examined 
more closely, turns out to consist in the fact that to increase and to decrease means 
precisely to determine the magnitude differently. Consequently, quantity would 
basically be just something alterable as such. But quality is alterable, too, and the 
distinction between quantity and quality that was previously mentioned is here 
expressed by the reference to "increasing or decreasing." This implies that, in 
whatever direction the determination of magnitude is changed, the thing in ques­
tion remains what it is. 
We should, moreover, take note here that philosophy has absolutely nothing at 
all to do with merely correct definitions and even less with merely plausible ones, 
i.e., definitions whose correctness is immediately evident to the consciousness that 
forms representations; it is concerned, instead, with definitions that have been 
validated, i.e., definitions whose content is not accepted merely as something that 
we come across, but is recognised as grounded in free thinking, and hence at the 
same time as grounded within itself. This applies to the present case. For, however 
correct and immediately evident the usual definition of quantity in mathematics 
may be, the requirement that we should know how far this particular thought is 
a. die Sache 
h. Materie 
c. Sache 

B. QUANTITY (§§ 99-106) 
159 
grounded in universal thinking, and is therefore necessary, still remains quite 
unsatisfied. 
There is another relevant consideration here too. If quantity is adopted directly 
from our representational consciousness without being mediated by [pure] think­
ing, it can happen very easily that its range of validity is exaggerated, and indeed 
that quantity is elevated to the rank of an absolute category. This is what does 
happen in fact when only those sciences whose ob-ject can be submitted to a 
mathematical calculus are recognised as exact sciences. Here the bad metaphysics 
mentioned above (§ 98 Addition) appears once more-the metaphysics that sub­
stitutes one-sided and abstract determinations of the understanding for the con­
crete Idea. There would indeed be something badly amiss with our cognition if we 
had to renounce the possibility of exact cognition of ob-jects such as freedom, law, 
ethical life, and even God himself, because they cannot be measured and computed 
or expressed in a mathematical formula. 
It is immediately obvious what pernicious practical consequences would follow 
if we had in general to be satisfied with a quite indeterminate representation of 
these ob-jects and to abandon them, as far as their more precise or particular 
character is concerned, to the pleasure of every single [person] to make of them 
what he will. For that matter, when we look closely at the exclusively mathematical 
standpOint that is here referred to (according to which quantity, which is a definite 
stage of the logical Idea, is identified with the Idea itself) we see that it is none 
other than the standpoint of Materialism. This can be confirmed completely in the 
history of the scientific consciousness, especially in France since the middle of the 
last century. "Matter" is an abstraction precisely because form is present in it, to be 
sure, but only as an indifferent and external determination. 
Besides, it would be a serious mistake to interpret the above discussion as 
disparaging the dignity of mathematics, or as supplying a clear conscience for 
inertia and superficiality, because it designates the quantitative determination as a 
merely external and indifferent one. We are not maintaining that quantitative deter­
minations can be left to take care of themselves, or even that they do not have to be 
treated as precisely as possible. Quantity is, in any case, a stage of the Idea, and it 
must be accorded its due as such, first as a logical category, and then in the world 
of ob-jects, both natural and spiritual. 
But here again a distinction shows up at once, namely, that determinations of 
magnitude do not have the same importance in the ob-jects of the natural world as 
in those of the spiritual world. In nature, specifically, where the Idea has the form 
both of otherness and of self-externality, quantity also has-precisely for this 
reason-greater importance than in the world of the spirit, which is a world of free 
inwardness. It is true that we consider spiritual content, too, from the point of view 
of quantity. But it is evident at once that, when we consider God as the Trinity, the 
number "three" has a much more subordinate significance here than when we are 
considering, for example, the three dimensions of space or even the three sides of a 
triangle, for which the basic determination is precisely to be just a surface limited 
by three lines. 
Even within nature this same distinction between a greater and a lesser impor­
tance of quantitative determination has its place; for it is certainly the case that 
quantity plays what we may call a more important role in morganic nature than in 

160 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
organic. And if we make a further distinction, within inorganic nature, between the 
mechanical domain, and the physical and chemical domain in the narrower sense, 
then again the same distinction shows up, since mechanics is generally recognised 
as the scientific discipline that can least do without the help of mathematics. For in 
mechanics, of course, hardly any step can be taken without it, and mechanics is for 
that reason regarded, next to mathematics, as the exact science par excellence. At 
this point, we should recall our earlier comment about the coincidence of the 
exclusively mathematical standpoint with materialism. 
Moreover, in the light of all that we have said here, we must designate the highly 
popular effort to find all distinction and all determinacy in the world of ob-jects 
merely in what is quantitative, as one of the most obstructive prejudices that stand 
in the way of any exact and thorough cognition. For example, spirit is in any case 
more than nature, and animals are more than plants; but we know very little about 
these things and the distinction between them, if we simply stick to a "more or 
less" of this kind, and do not advance to some grasp of specific determinacy, which 
is here in the first place qualitative. 
§ 100 
To begin with, in its immediate relation to itself, or in the determination of 
self-equivalence posited by attraction, quantity is continuous magnitude; in 
the other determination which it contains-that of the One-it is discrete 
magnitude. But continuous quantity is also discrete, for it is only continuity 
of the many; and discrete quantity is also continuous, for its continuity is 
the One as that in which the many ones are the same, unity.a 
(1) Hence, continuous and discrete magnitude should not be 
looked upon as species, as if the determination of the one did not 
belong to the other, but they distinguish themselves only in this, 
that the same whole is posited first under one of its determinations, 
and then under the other. (2) The antinomy of space, of time, or of 
matter (with regard to its divisibility ad infinitum or, conversely, 
with regard to its being composed of indivisibles) is nothing but 
the affirmation of quantity, first as continuous, then as discrete. If 
space, time, etc., are posited only with the determination of contin­
uous quantity, then they are divisible ad infinitum; but under the 
determination of discrete magnitude they are in-themselves divided 
and consist of indivisible ones; each affirmation is as one-sided as 
the other. 
Addition. As the proximate result of being-for-itself, quantity contains within itself 
as ideal elements both sides of its process (repulsion and attraction). Hence it is 
both continuous and discrete. Each of these two moments contains the other 
a. die Einheit-See also p. xxxix above. 

B. QUANTITY (§§ 99-106) 
161 
within itself, so that there is no such thing as a merely continuous or a merely 
discrete magnitude. If we happen to speak of them as two particular and contrast­
ing species of magnitude, that is just the result of our abstractive reflection. In the 
consideration of determinate magnitudes, this reflection prescinds now from the 
one and then from the other of the two moments that are contained in the concept 
of quantity in inseparable unity. So we say, for instance, that the space that this 
room takes up is a continuous magnitude, whilst the hundred people who are 
gathered in it form a discrete magnitude. But the space is both continuous and 
discrete at once, so that we also speak of spatial points and subdivide every space­
e.g., a certain length into so and so many feet, inches, etc., which can only occur on 
the presupposition that space is in-itself discrete too. On the other hand, the dis­
crete magnitude consisting of a hundred people is equally and at the same time 
continuous; and what is common to them, the species mankind, which pervades all 
of the single instances and unites them with each other, is that wherein the con­
tinuity of this magnitude is grounded. 
B. QUANTUM 
§ 10l 
Quantity, posited essentially with the excluding determinacy that it con­
tains, is quantum or limited quantity. 
Addition. Quantum is the way that quantity is there, whereas pure quantity corre­
sponds to being, and degree (which will come next) corresponds to being-far-itself. 
-As for the details of the advance from pure quantity to quantum, this progress is 
grounded in the fact that, whereas distinction is initially present in pure quantity 
only implicitly (as the distinction between continuity and discreteness), in quan­
tum, on the other hand, distinction is posited. It is, indeed, posited in such a way 
that from now on quantity appears always as distinguished or limited. But as a 
result quantum also breaks up at the same time into an indeterminate multitude of 
quanta or determinate magnitudes. Each of these determinate magnitudes, as dis­
tinct from the others, forms a unit, just as, on the other hand, considered all by 
itself, it is a many. And in this way quantum is determined as number. 
§ 102 
Quantum has its development and perfect determinacy in number, which 
contains the One within itself as its element. As its qualitative moments, 
number contains according to its moment of discreteness, annumeration,' 
and according to its moment of continuity, unit. 
a. Anzahl 

62 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
In arithmetic the kinds of calculation are usually presented as con­
tingent ways of treating numbers. If a necessity and hence a [mat­
ter for] understanding is to be found in them, then it has to lie in a 
principle; and this [in turn] can only be found in the determina­
tions that are contained within the concept of number itself. This 
principle must be briefly expounded at this point.-The deter­
minations of the concept of number are annumeration and unit; and 
number itself is the unity of the two. But unity, when applied to 
empirical numbers, is only their equality; hence, the principle of 
the kinds of calculation has to be the positing of numbers in the 
relationship of unit and annumeration and the production of the 
equality of these determinations. 
Since the ones, or the numbers, are themselves indifferent to­
ward each other, the unity into which they are transposed appears 
to be an external combination. To calculate, therefore, is quite gen­
erally to count; the distinction between the kinds of calculation lies 
only in the qualitative character of the numbers which are counted 
together, and the principle of that charactera is the determination 
of unit and annumeration. 
Numbering comes first: the making of numbers generally, which 
is the combining of as many ones as we want.-But it is the count­
ing together of what are no longer merely ones but already num­
bers that is a kind of calculation. 
Immediately and to begin with, numbers are just numbers in gen­
eral without any [further] determination, and hence they are gen­
erally unequal too; the combination or counting of such numbers 
is addition. 
The next determination is that the numbers [to be calculated] are 
equal throughout, so that they form One unit, and there is an 
annumeration of them; the counting of these numbers is multiplica­
tion-in this case it does not matterb how the determinations of 
annumeration and unit are distributed between the two numbers 
that are the factors (which of them is taken as the annumerator28 
and which as the unit). 
The third and last determinacy is the equality of the annumerator 
and the unit. The counting together of numbers thus determined is 
the raising of the power-and first of all squaring . -Raising the 
power further is the continued multiplication of the number with 
itself, a continuation which is [a] formal continuation that leads 
Beschaffenheit .
est ist g/eichgultig 

B. QUANTITY (§§ 99-106) 
163 
once more to the indefinite annumeration.-Since the complete 
equality of the only distinction that is available-that of annumera­
tion and of unit-is reached in this third determination, there 
cannot be more than these three kinds of calculation.-To [each 
form of] counting together there corresponds the dissolution of 
the numbers according to the same determinations. There are 
therefore three negative kinds of calculation beside the three that 
have been indicated (which are on that account called the positive 
ones). 
Addition. Since number is just quantum in its completed determinacy, we can 
employ it not only for the determination of so-called discrete magnitudes but 
equally for so-called continuous ones as well. And hence, number must also be 
utilised in geometry, wherever there is a question of specifying determinate figura­
tions of space and their relationships. 
C. DEGREE 
§ 103 
The limit is identical with the whole of the quantum itself; as multiple 
within itself it is extensive magnitude, but as determinacy that is simple 
within itself, it is intensive magnitude or degree. 
Hence, the distinction between continuous and discrete magnitude 
and extensive and intensive magnitude consists in this: that the 
former concerns quantity in general, whereas the latter concerns 
the limit or determinacy of quantity as such.-Like continuous and 
discrete magnitude, extensive and intensive magnitude are not two 
species (each of which would contain a determinacy that would be 
lacking in the other); whatever has extensive magnitude has inten­
sive magnitude as well, and vice versa. 
Addition. Intensive magnitude or degree is conceptually diverse from extensive magni­
tude or quantum; we must therefore label as a mistake the frequent failure to 
recognise this distinction, and to identify the two forms of magnitude without 
further ado. This is notably the case in phYSics, where a distinction in specific 
gravity, for instance, is explained by saying that a body whose specific gravity is 
twice that of another contains within the same space twice as many material parts 
(atoms) as the other. It would be the same with heat and light, if the various 

164 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
degrees of temperature and brightness were to be explained in terms of a greater or 
lesser number of heat or light particles (or molecules). When physicists who em­
ploy such explanations are reproached with the untenability of this procedure they 
usually try, of course, to wriggle out of it by saying that they do not at all mean to 
decide about the (admittedly unknowable) character of these phenomena in­
themselves, and that they use these expressions only because they are more con­
venient. 
First then, this greater convenience is supposed to be connected with the easier 
application of the methods of calculation; but it is hard to see why intensive 
magnitudes, which do, of course, equally have their determinate expression in 
number, should not be just as convenient for calculation as extensive magnitudes. 
Surely, it would be even more convenient to give up calculation altogether, and 
thinking as well. Another comment that should be made against this excuse is that 
when physicists engage in explanations of this sort, they are, in any case, overstep­
ping the domain of perception and experience; they are taking refuge in the do­
main of metaphysics and speculation (which they declare on other occasions to be 
idle, and even pernicious). We do find by experience, to be sure, that if one of two 
purses filled with dollars is twice as heavy as the other, it is because the first purse 
contains two hundred dollars and the second only one hundred. We can see these 
pieces of money, and can always perceive them with our senses; but, atoms, mole­
cules, and the like lie outside the domain of sense-perception, and it is the task of 
thinking to decide about their admissibility and significance. 
As we said earlier (in the Addition to § 98), it is the abstract understanding that 
fixes the moment of the many contained in the concept of being-for-itself in the 
shape of atoms, and sticks to this moment as to something ultimate; and it is the 
same abstract understanding which, in the present case, contradicts both unpre­
judiced perception and genuinely concrete thinking, by considering extensive mag­
nitude to be the one and only form of quantity. So, where intensive magnitudes are 
found, it fails to recognise them in their own determinacy, and tries to reduce them 
to extensive magnitudes by force instead, on the basis of an hypothesis which is in 
itself untenable. 
Among the reproaches that have been levelled against recent philosophy, the one 
that is heard very frequently is the claim that it reduces everything to identity; and 
hence it has even been given the nickname "Philosophy of Identity" . 29 But the 
argumentation that we have just presented shows that it is precisely philosophy 
that insists on distinguishing between what is, both conceptually and experimen­
tally, diverse; on the contrary, it is the professed empiricists who elevate abstract 
identity to the highest principle of cognition, and whose philosophy should there­
fore more properly be called the "Philosophy of Identity". 
For the rest, it is quite correct. that there are no merely intensive and merely 
extensive magnitudes, any more than there are merely continuous and merely 
discrete ones; and hence, these two determinations of quantity are not independent 
species that confront one another. Any intensive magnitude is also extensive, and 
conversely. So, a certain degree of temperature, for instance, is an intensive magni­
tude, to which, as such, there corresponds a wholly simple sensation; and if we 

8. QUANTITY (§§ 99-106) 
165 
then go to the thermometer we find that a certain expansion of the column of 
mercury corresponds to this degree of temperature, and this extensive magnitude 
changes together with the temperature taken as an intensive magnitude. It is the 
same in the domain of spirit, too; a more intense character exerts influence over a 
wider range than a less intense one. 
§ 104 
In degree, the concept of quantum is posited. Degree is magnitude as indif­
ferent for-itself and simple, but in such a way that the magnitude has the 
determinacy in virtue of which it is quantum, strictly outside of it in other 
magnitudes. In this contradiction-that although it is for-itself, the indif­
ferent limit is absolute externality-the infinite quantitative progress is 
posited. This is an immediacy that immediately turns over into its opposite, 
into its being mediated (a going beyond the just posited quantum), and vice 
versa. 
Number is thought, but it is thought as a being that is completely 
external to itself. Number does not belong to intuition, because it is 
thought, but it is thought that has the externality of intuition as its 
determination.-Hence, it is not only the case that quantum can be 
increased or decreased ad infinitum; by its very concept, quantum 
is just this expulsion beyond itself. Similarly the infinite quantita­
tive progress is that unthinking repetition of that one and the 
same contradiction, which is quantum in general and (when 
posited in its determinacy) degree. It is superfluous to express this 
contradiction in the form of an infinite progress; on this topic Zen 0 
rightly says (in Aristotle's report)30 that it is the same to say some­
thing once and to say it over and over again. 
Addition 1 .  According to the usual definition of it in mathematics (discussed in § 
99), magnitude is what can be increased or decreased; and there is nothing against 
the correctness of the intuition that underlies this. But the prior question still 
remains of how we come to assume this capacity for increase or decrease. A simple 
appeal to experience does not suffice to answer this question, because, quite apart 
from the fact that in experience we have only the representation of magnitude and 
not the thought of it, this capacity would prove to be just a possibility (of increasing 
and decreasing), and we should lack all insight into the necessity of this state of 
affairs. By contrast, the path of our logical development has not only brought us to 
quantity as a stage of self-determining thinking, but has shown us also that it lies 
strictly in the concept of quantity to project beyond itself, so that what we have to 
do with here is not merely possible but necessary also. 
Addition 2. It is mainly the quantitative infinite progression that the reflective 
understanding usually relies upon when it has to deal with infinity in general. But. 

166 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
to begin with, what we said earlier about the qualitatively infinite progress holds 
good for the quantitative form of the infinite progress too, namely, that it is the 
expression not of true Infinity but only of the spurious infinity that never gets 
beyond what merely ought to be the case, so that in fact it gets stuck in the finite. As 
for the specifically quantitative form of this finite progession, which Spinoza rightly 
calls a merely imaginary infinity (infinitum imaginationis),31 the poets, too, (Hailer 
and Klopstock are good examples) have quite often availed themselves of this 
representation in order to depict not only the infinity of nature but also that of God 
himself. There is a famous description of the infinity of God in Hailer, for example: 
I heap up monstrous numbers, 
Mountains of millions, 
Time I pile on time 
And world on top of world; 
And when from the awful height 
I cast a dizzy look on Thee: 
Then all the might of number, 
Numbered itself a thousand times, 
Is not yet a simple part of Thee. 32 
Here we have at once the perpetual projection of quantity-or more precisely, 
number-beyond itself, which Kant describes as "terrible," though the only really 
terrible thing about it would be the tedium of continually positing a limit which is 
again done away with, so that one stays forever at the same spot. But then, the 
same poet ends his description of that spurious infinity with the very relevant 
conclusion: 
These I remove, and thou Hest all before me. 
This expresses precisely the fact that the genuine Infinite is not to be considered 
merely as what is beyond the finite, and that we must renounce that progressus in 
infinitum in order to reach the consciousness of the genuine Infinite. 
Addition 3. It is well known that Pythagoras33 philosophised with numbers, and 
conceived number to be the basic determination of things. To the ordinary mind 
this interpretation must at first sight appear to be thoroughly paradoxical, and 
indeed quite mad. So the question arises, what we are to make of it. To answer this 
question we must first r(;!member that the task of philosophy consists just in tracing 
things back to thoughts, and to determinate thoughts at that. Now, number is 
certainly a thought, and indeed it is the thought which stands closest to the sen­
sible world; more precisely, it expresses the thought of the sense-world itself, be­
cause we understand generally by that what is mutually external and what is 
many. a So we can recognise in the attempt to interpret the universe as Number the 
first step toward metaphysics. 
a. das Viele 

B. QUANTITY (§§ 99-106) 
167 
It is also well known that in the history of philosophy Pythagoras stands be­
tween the Ionian philosophers and the Eleatics. As Aristotle already remarked, the 
lonians went no further than to regard the essence of things as something material 
(as a hu/e); the Eleatics, however, and in particular Parmenides, advanced to pure 
thinking in the form of being. Thus, the principle of the Pythagorean philosophy 
forms as it were the bridge between the sensible and the supersensible. This tells 
us how we should assess the view of those who hold that Pythagoras obviously 
went too far in interpreting the essence of things as consisting in pure numbers, 
and who comment that, whilst there is nothing objectionable in the view that 
things are certainly countable, still, things are more than mere numbers. As for the 
"more" that is here ascribed to things, we must, of course, willingly concede that 
things are more than mere numbers; but the real question concerns how this 
"more" is to be understood. Consistently with its own standpoint, the ordinary 
sensible consciousness will not hesitate to answer the question by referring to what 
is sensibly perceptible; hence, it will remark that things are not merely countable 
but also visible, odorous, palpable, etc. 
So, putting this in our modern way, the reproach levelled against the 
Pythagorean philosophy reduces to the claim that it is too idealistic. In fact, how­
ever, the situation is quite the opposite, as can already be inferred from what we 
have just said about the historical position of the Pythagorean philosophy. In other 
words, the concession that things are "more" than mere numbers must be under­
stood as meaning that the mere thought of number does not suffice to express the 
determinate essence or concept of things. So, instead of maintaining that 
Pythagoras went too far with his philosophy of numbers, we ought to say, on the 
contrary, that he did not go far enough; and, of course, it was the Eleatics who 
already took the next step toward pure thinking. 
Moreover, even if there are no things whose determinacy rests essentially on 
definite numbers and relationships of numbers, still there are states of things, and 
all sorts of natural phenomena that rest on them. This is especially the case with 
the differences of tone and their harmonic concord; everyone knows the story that 
it was the perception of this phenomenon that prompted Pythagoras to apprehend 
the essence of things as numbers. Now it is certainly an important scientific con­
cern to trace back the phenomena that rest on determinate numbers to the right 
ratios; but, by the same token, it is quite inadmissible to regard the determinacy of 
thought generally as a merely numerical one. 
We may, of course, be prompted at first to connect the most general determina­
tions of thought with the first numbers, and to say therefore that one is what is 
simple and immediate, two is distinction and mediation, and three the unity of 
both. But these combinations are completely external, and there is nothing in these 
numbers as such to make them the expression of precisely these determinate 
thoughts. Besides, the further we advance in applying this method, the more ob­
vious becomes the sheer arbitrariness of combining determinate numbers with 
determinate thoughts. For instance, [the number] 4 can be considered the unity of 1 

168 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
and 3, and of the thoughts connected with them; but 4 is also just as much twice 2, 
and, similarly, 9 is not only the square of 3, but also the sum of 8 and 1, of 7 and 2, 
etc. Even today some secret societies place great weight on all manner of numbers 
and figures; but this can only be regarded a harmless game, on the one hand, and 
as a sign of ineptitude in thinking, on the other. Of course, it is also claimed that 
there is a deep meaning concealed in all this, and that one could find a lot to think 
about here. But what is important in philosophy is not that we can think about 
something, but that we really do think, and the genuine element of thought must 
be sought not in arbitrarily chosen symbols but only in thinking itself. 
§ 105 
In its determinacy of being on its own account quantum is external to itself. 
This self-externality constitutes its quality; it is in this very self-externality 
that it is itself and is related to itself. In this way, the externality, i.e., the 
quantitative, and the being-for-itself, the qualitative, are united.-Posited 
upon itself in this way, quantum is quantitative relationship [or ratio], [i.e., 
the] determinacy that is both an immediate quantum (the exponent), and 
mediation (namely the relation of any quantum to another )-the two terms 
of the ratio, which do not count according to their immediate value, since 
their value is only [determined] in this relation. 
Addition. The quantitative infinite progress appears at first as a perpetual projec­
tion of numbers beyond themselves. However, when we look more closely, it turns 
out that in this progression quantity returns to itself, for the thought that is con­
tained in it is in any event the determination of number by number, and this gives 
us quantitative ratio. If we speak of the ratio 2:4, for example, then we have two 
magnitudes whose significance does not lie in their immediate character as such, 
but only in their reciprocal relation to one another. But this relation (the exponent 
of the ratio) is itself a magnitude, which is distinguished from the magnitudes that 
stand in relation to one another by virtue of the fact that altering them changes the 
ratio, whereas the ratio remains indifferent to the alteration of its two sides and 
stays the same, just as long as the exponent is not altered. So we can substitute 3:6 
for 2:4, without altering the ratio, because the exponent, 2, remains the same in 
both cases. 
a. an ihm selbst 

8. QUANTITY (§§ 99-106) 
169 
§ 106 
The terms of the ratio are still immediate quanta, and the qualitative and 
quantitative determinations are still external to each other. But according to 
their truth-that, even in its externality, the quantitative itself is relation to 
itself, or that the being-for-itself and the indifference of the determinacy 
are united-the ratio is measure. 
Addition. In virtue of the dialectical movement of quantity through its moments 
which we have considered so far, quantity has turned out to be a return to quality. 
Initially, we had the concept of quantity as sublated quality, that is, as determinacy 
which is not identical with being, but, on the contrary, indifferent to it, and only 
external with regard to it. This is also the concept which (as we said earlier) 
underlies the usual definition of magnitude in mathematics, as what can be in­
creased or decreased. Now, it may seem at first sight that according to this defini-
-- tion magnitude is simply what is alterable as such-for both increasing and de­
creasing mean just determining the magnitude differently. But by this definition, 
magnitude would not be distinct from being-there (the second stage of quality) 
which, according to its concept, is alterable in like manner. So the content of that 
definition of magnitude would have to be completed by adding that in quantity we 
have something which is alterable, but which still remains the same in spite of its 
alteration. As a result, the concept of quantity turns out to contain a contradiction, 
and it is this contradiction that constitutes the dialectic of quantity. But the result of 
this dialectic is not a mere return to quality, as if the latter were what is true, and 
quantity34 on the contrary what is untrue. Instead, the result is the unity and truth 
of the two of them: it is qualitative quantity or measure. 
One more comment in place at this point is that when we are concerned with 
quantitative determinations in the study of the world of ob-jects, it is in fact always 
measure that we have in mind as the goal of our endeavours. This is indeed 
indicated in our language by the fact that we call the ascertaining of quantitative 
determinations and ratios "measuring". For instance, we measure the length of 
various strings that have been made to vibrate, with an eye to the corresponding 
distinction between the sounds that are brought about by the vibration. Likewise, 
in chemistry, we calculate the quantity of the substances that have been brought 
into combination, so as to be cognizant of the measure by which these combina­
tions are conditioned-in other words, to discover the quantities that underlie 
determinate qualities. And in statistics, too, the numbers with which we are oc­
cupied have an interest only on account of the qualitative results which are condi­
tioned by them. By contrast, mere numerical findings as such, apart from the 
guiding interest which we have discussed here, rightly count as empty curiosities 
that satisfy neither a theoretical nor a practical concern. 

170 
C 
Measure 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
§ 107 
Measure is qualitative quantum; at first, as immediate [measurel, it is a 
quantum, with which a being-there or a quality is bound up. 
Addition. As the unity of quality and quantity, measure is thus also completed 
being. When we speak of being, it appears initially to be what is entirely abstract 
and lacking all determination; but being is essentially what determines itself, and it 
reaches its completed determinacy in measure. We can also consider measure as a 
definition of the Absolute, and it has been said accordingly that God is the measure 
of all things.35 That is also why this intuition forms the keynote of many ancient 
Hebrew psalms,36 where the glorification of God essentially comes down to saying 
that it is he who has appointed for everything its limit, for the sea and the dry land, 
the rivers and the mountains, and equally for the various kinds of plants and 
animals.-In the religious consciousness of the Greeks we find the divinity of 
measure represented, with special reference to the ethical order, by Nemesis. 
Nemesis involves the general notion that everything human-wealth, honour, 
power, and similarly joy, sorrow, etc.-has its definite measure, the transgression of 
which leads to undoing and ruin. 
As for the occurrence of measure in the world of ob-jects, we find first that in 
nature things exist whose essential content is measure. This is especially the case 
with the solar system, which we have to regard generally as the realm of free 
measure. As we advance further in the consideration of inorganic nature, measure 
retreats into the background, so to speak, because the qualitative and quantitative 
determinations that we have here prove to be largely indifferent to one another. For 
example, the qualitative character of a rock or a river is not bound up with a 
determinate magnitude. Still, a closer study shows that even ob-jects like these are 
not utterly without measure, since chemical investigation reveals that the water in a 
river, and the single constituents of a rock, are again qualities that are conditioned 
by quantitative ratios between the substances they contain. But then, measure 
emerges again in organiC nature, falling now more deciSively into the domain of 
immediate intuition. The various kinds of plants and animals have a certain mea­
sure, both as a whole and also in their single parts. We should notice here that the 
more imperfect organic formations, those that stand closer to inorganic nature, are 
distinguished in part from the higher organisms through the greater indeter­
minacy of their measure. Thus, we find among fossils, for example, some so-called 
ammonites, of which we are cognizant only through the microscope, and others 
which reach the size of a coach wheel. The same indeterminacy of measure is also 
shown by many plants which stand on a lower stage of organic development. This 
is the case with ferns, for example. 

C. MEASURE (§§ 107-111) 
171 
§ 108 
Insofar as in measure quality and quantity are only in immediate unity, 
their distinction shows itself in them in an equally immediate way. Under 
this aspect the specific quantum is in some cases mere quantum, and what 
is therea is capable of increase and decrease without the sublation of mea­
sure, which to that extent is a rule; but in other cases the alteration of the 
quantum is also an alteration of the quality. 
Addition. The identity of quality and quantity present in measure is only implicit at 
first, and not yet posited. This implies that each of the two determinations, whose 
unity is measure, also claims validity on its own account. In this way, on the one 
hand, quantitative determinations of what is there can be altered, without its 
quality being affected thereby, but, on the other, this indifferent increase and 
decrease also has a limit, the transgression of which alters the quality. Thus, for 
instance, the temperature of water is, up to a point, indifferent in relation to its 
liquid state; but there comes a point in the increasing or decreasing of the tempera­
ture of liquid water where this state of cohesion changes qualitatively, and the 
water is transformed into steam, on the one hand, and ice, on the other. When a 
quantitative alteration takes place it appears, to start with, to be something quite 
innocent; but something quite different lurks behind it, and this seemingly inno­
cent alteration of the quantitative is like a ruse with which to catch the qualitative. 
The antinomy of measure that is involved here was already depicted by the 
Greeks under many guises. They raised the question, for instance, [of] whether one 
grain of wheat can make a heap of wheat, or whether the plucking of one hair from 
the tail of a horse makes it a bald-tail.37 Regarding the nature of quantity as an 
indifferent and external determinacy of being, we are, at first, inclined to answer 
those questions in the negative. Nevertheless, we must soon concede that this 
indifferent increasing or decreaSing also has a limit, and that a point in the process 
is finally reached where, through the continued adding of just one grain of wheat at 
a time, a heap of wheat results, and through the continued plucking of just one hair 
at a time we have a bald-tail. It is the same with these examples as with the story of 
a farmer who, as his ass cheerfully strode along, increased its load one ounce at a 
time, until at last it sank down under the burden that had become unbearable. It 
would be very wrong to treat considerations of this sort as idle academic twaddle, 
for in fact we are dealing with thoughts that it is also very important to be familiar 
with in our practical and especially in our ethical life. With regard to the outlays 
that we make, for instance, there is initially a certain latitude within which a bit 
more or a bit less does not matter; but if we exceed, on one side or the other, the 
measure determined by the individual circumstances of the situation, then the 
qualitative nature of the measure comes into play (just as it does in the above 
example of the various temperatures of the water), and what could be considered 
good management of resources a moment ago now becomes avarice or waste. 
a. das Dasein 

172 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
The same applies in the political sphere as well-for, of course, it is the case that 
the constitution of a State must be regarded both as independent of, and also as 
dependent upon, the size of its territory, the number of its inhabitants, and other 
such quantitative determinations. For instance, if we consider a State with a terri­
tory of a thousand square miles, and a population of four million inhabitants, we 
would at first admit without hesitation that a few square miles of territory or a few 
thousand inhabitants more or less would not have an essential influence on its 
constitution. In contrast, however, we could not deny either that in the continual 
increase or decrease of the State a point is finally reached where, simply because of 
the quantitative change (quite apart from all other circumstances), the qualitative 
aspects of the constitution cannot remain unaltered. The constitution of a small 
Swiss canton will not do for a great empire, and the constitution of the Roman 
republic was equally unsuitable when it was transferred to the small "free cities" of 
the German empire. 
§ 109 
The measureless occurs initially when a measure, in virtue of its quantita­
tive nature, goes beyond its qualitative determinacy. But since the new 
quantitative ratio, which is measureless with regard to the first, is just as 
qualitative, the measureless is also a measure; both of these transitions, 
from quality to quantity and vice versa, can once more be represented as 
infinite progress-as the self-sublation and restoration of measure in the 
measureless. 
Addition. As we have seen, quantity is not merely capable of alteration, i.e., of 
increase and decrease; rather, it is, generally and as such, the process of going 
beyond itself. And in measure, quantity does indeed confirm this nature. But now, 
when the quantity that is present in measure exceeds a certain limit, the corre­
sponding quality is thereby sublated, too. What is negated in this way, however, is 
not quality in general, but only this determinate quality, whose place is imme­
diately taken again by another one. This process of measure, which proves to be 
alternately a mere alteration of quantity and an overturning of quantity into quality, 
can be visualised in the image of a knotted line.38 We find these knotted lines first 
in nature, in a variety of forms. We have already given the example of water's 
qualitatively various states of aggregation, conditioned by increase and decrease [of 
temperature] . The various stages of oxidation of metals are a similar case. The 
distinctions of musical notes can also be regarded as an example of the overturning 
of what is initially a merely quantitative into a qualitative alteration that takes place 
in the process of measure. 
§ 110 
What actually happens here is that the immediacy, which still belongs to 
measure as such, is sublated; quality and quantity themselves are initially 

C. MEASURE (§§ 107-111) 
173 
in measure as immediate, and measure is only their relational identity. But 
although measure sublates itself in the measureless, it shows itself equally 
to be only going together with itself in the measureless, which is its nega­
tion, but is itself a unity of quantity and quality. 
§ Ill 
Instead of the more abstract sides (of being and nothing, of something and 
an other, etc.) the Infinite, the affirmation as the negation of the negation, 
now has quality and quantity for its sides. These sides (0:) have passed over 
into one another: quality into quantity (§ 98) and quantity into quality (§ 
105), and they have thus exhibited themselves to be negations. (13) But in 
their unity (in measure) they are at first distinct, and each is only through 
the mediation of the other; and (,y) after the immediacy of this unity has 
proven to be self-sublating, this unity is now posited as what it is in-itself, 
as simple self-relation that contains within it being in general and its forms 
as sublated.-Being or immediacy which, through self-negation, is media­
tion with itself and relation to itself, and which is therefore equally media­
tion that sublates itself into relation to itself or into immediacy-this being 
or immediacy is Essence. 
Addition. The process of measure is not just the spurious infinity of the infinite 
progression in the shape of a perpetual overturning of quality into quantity and of 
quantity into quality; rather, it is, at the same time, the true Infinity which consists 
in the going together with oneself in one's other. Quality and quantity do initially 
confront one another in measure like something and other. But quality is indeed in­
itself quantity, and conversely, quantity is in-itself quality, too. Hence, in that the 
two determinations pass over into one another in the process of measure, each of 
them only becomes what it already is in-itself, and we now obtain the being that is 
negated in its determinations, in general terms the sublated being that is Essence. 
Essence was already implicit within measure, and its process consists simply in its 
positing itself as what it is in-itself. 
Ordinary consciousness interprets things as [simply] being, and considers them 
in terms of quality, quantity, and measure. But these immediate determinations 
then prove not to be fixed, but to pass into something else, and Essence is the 
result of their dialectic. In Essence no passing-over takes place any more; instead, 
there is only relation. In Being, the relational form is only [due to] our reflection; in 
Essence, by contrast, the relation belongs to it as its own determination. When 
something becomes other (in the sphere of Being) the something has thereby 
vanished. Not so in Essence: here we do not have a genuine other, but only 
diversity, relation between the One and its other. Thus, in Essence paSSing-over is 
at the same time not passing-over. For in the passing of what is diverse into 
another diversity, the first one does not vanish; instead, both remain within this 
relation. For instance, if we say "being" and "nothing," then being is by itself and 
nothing is by itself too. The situation is not at all the same with the "positive" and 

174 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
the "negative." Certainly, these contain the determination of being and nothing. 
But the positive makes no sense by itself; rather, it is strictly related to the negative. 
And the situation is the same with the negative. In the sphere of Being, relatedness 
is only implicit; in Essence, on the contrary, relatedness is posited. This then is in 
general what distinguishes the form of Being from that of Essence. In Being, 
everything is immediate; in Essence, by contrast, everything is relational. 

SECOND SUBDIVISION 
OF THE LOGIC 
THE DOCTRINE OF ESSENCE 
§ 112 
Essence is the Concept as posited Concept. In Essence the determinations 
are only relational, not yet as reflected strictly within themselves; that is 
why the Concept is not yet for-itself. Essence-as Being that mediates itself 
with itself through its own negativity-is relation to itself only by being 
relation to another; but this other is immediately, not as what is but 
as something-posited and mediated .-Being has not vanished; but, in the 
first place, essence as simple relation to itself is being; while on the other 
hand, being, according to its one-sided determination of being something­
immediate, is degraded to something merely negative, to a shine [or sem­
blance]."---As a result, essence is being as shining within itself. 
The Absolute is essence.-Inasmuch as being is also simple self­
relation, this definition is the same as the one that says it is being, 
but at the same time it is a higher definition, because essence is 
being that has gone into itself; i.e., its simple self-relation is this 
relation, posited as the negation of the negative, or as inward 
mediation of itself with itself.-But when the Absolute is deter­
mined as essence, the negativity is often taken only in the sense of 
an abstraction from all determinate predicates. In that case the 
negative activity, the abstracting, falls outside essence, and conse­
quently essence is taken only as a result, without this premise that 
belongs to it; it is the caput mortuum2 of abstraction. But because this 
negativity is not external to being, but is its own dialectic, its truth 
is essence, as being that has gone into itself or is self-contained; this 
reflection, its shining within itself, is what distinguishes it from 
immediate being, and it is the proper determination of essence 
itself. 
a. zu einem Scheine1 
175 

176 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Addition. When we speak of "essence", we distinguish it from being, i.e., from 
what is immediate. In comparison with essence, we regard being as a mere 
semblance. But this semblance is not simply "not"; it is not an utter nothing;' rather, 
it is being as sublated.-The standpoint of essence is in general the standpoint of 
reflection. The term "reflection" is primarily used of light, when, propagated rec­
tilinearly, it strikes a mirrored surface and is thrown back by it. So we have here 
something twofold: first, something immediate, something that is, and second, the 
same as mediated or posited. And this is just the case when we reflect on an ob-ject 
or "think it over" (as we also say very often). For here we are not concerned with 
the ob-ject in its immediate form, but want to know it as mediated. And our usual 
view of the task or purpose of philosophy is that it consists in the cognition of the 
essence of things. By this we understand no more than that things are not to be left 
in their immediate state, but are rather to be exhibited as mediated or grounded by 
something else. The immediate being of things is here represented as a sort of rind 
or curtain behind which the essence is concealed. 
Now, when we say further that all things have an essence, what we mean is that 
they are not truly what they immediately show themselves to be. A mere rushing 
about from one quality to another, and a mere advance from the qualitative to the 
quantitative and back again, is not the last word; on the contrary, there is some­
thing that abides in things, and this is, in the first instance, their essence. As for the 
further significance and use of the category of essence, we can recall first at this 
point how the term "Wesen" is employed to designate the past for the German 
auxiliary verb "sein" [to be]; for we designate the being that is past as "gewesen". 
This irregularity in linguistic usage rests upon a correct view of the relation of 
being and essence, because we can certainly consider essence to be being that has 
gone by, whilst still remarking that what is past is not for that reason abstractly 
negated, but only sublated and so at the same time conserved. If we say in Ger­
man, e.g., "Casar ist in Gallien gewesen" ["Caesar was in Gaul"], what is negated by 
that is just the immediacy of what is asserted about Caesar, but not his sojourn in 
Gaul altogether, for indeed it is just that which forms the content of this asser­
tion--only it is here represented as having been sublated. 
When a "Wesen" is spoken of in ordinary life, it frequently only means a com­
prehensive whole or an essential sum; we speak in this way, for instance, of a 
"Zeitungswesen" [the press], of the "Postwesen" [the postal service], or of the 
"5teuerwesen" [the taxation system], etc., which simply amounts to saying that the 
things that are part of these are not to be taken singly in their immediacy, but as a 
complex, and then further in their various relations as well. So this linguistic use 
involves just about the same content as essence has turned out to have for us. 
We speak also about finite essences,3 and we call man a finite essence. But, in 
speaking of essence, we have, strictly speaking, gone beyond finitude, so that to 
designate man as a finite essence is inaccurate. When we add that "es gibt"h [there 
is] a "highest essence;' and that God ought to be designated by that name, two 
things should be noted. First, the expression "geben" [to give] refers to something 
a. Dieser Schein ist nun abeT nicht gaT nicht, nicht ein Nichts 
b. Literally "it gives," from geben, "to give" 

SECOND SUBDIVISION OF THE LOGIC: (§§ 1 12-159) 
177 
finite, as when we say, for instance, that "Es gibt so-and-so many planets," or "Es 
gibt plants with this constitution, and others with that one." The things that are 
"given" in this way are such that others are "given" outside and beside them. But 
God, as the Infinite itself, is not something that is "given" whilst outside and beside 
him there are also other essences. Whatever else is "given" outside of God has no 
essentiality in its separateness from God; on the contrary, any such thing lacks 
internal stability and essence in its isolation, and must be considered as a mere 
semblance. 
And this implies a second point too: namely, that all talk of God merely as the 
"highest essence" must be called unsatisfactory. For the category of quantity that is 
applied here has its place only in the domain of the finite. For instance, when we 
say, "This is the highest mountain on earth," we have the notion that, apart from 
this highest mountain, there are also other mountains that are high. The situation 
is the same when we say that someone is the richest or the most learned man in his 
country. But God is not merely an essence and not even merely the highest essence 
either. He is the essence. In this connection also, we should notice at once that, 
although this interpretation of God forms an important and necessary stage in the 
development of the religious consciousness, it in no way exhausts the depth of the 
Christian representation of God. When we just regard God purely and simply as 
the essence and stop at that, then we know him only as the universal, irresistible 
Might, or, to put it another way, as the Lord. Well, of course, the fear of the Lord is 
the beginning of wisdom, but it is only the beginning of it. 
It was first in the Jewish and then later in the Mohammedan religions that God 
was interpreted as the Lord and essentially only as the Lord. The defect of these 
religions consists generally in their not giving the finite its due; whereas holding 
fast to the finite on its own account (be it something natural or something finite in 
the spiritual realm) is what is characteristic of the heathen (and thereby at the same 
time polytheistic) religions. 
Another position that has frequently been maintained is that there can be no 
cognition of God as the "highest essence." This is the general standpoint of the 
modem Enlightenment, which is content to say, "11 y a un etre supreme,"4 and lets 
the matter rest there. When people talk like this, and regard God only as the 
"highest essence" in the Beyond, then they have the world in view as something 
firm and positive in its immediacy. They are forgetting, then, that essence is pre­
cisely the sublation of everything immediate. As the abstract essence in the 
Beyond, outside of which all distinction and determinacy must fall, God is in fact a 
mere name, a mere caput mortuum of the abstractive understanding. The true 
cognition of God begins with our knowing that things in their immediate being 
have no truth. 
It frequently happens, not only in relation to God but in other contexts too, that 
the category of essence is employed in an abstract way, and that in the study of 
things their essence is fixed as something indifferent to the determinate content of 
their appearance, as something that subsists on its own account. Thus, we often say 
specifically that the main thing about people is their essence, and not what they do 
or how they behave. What is quite right in this claim is that what someone does 
must be considered not just in its immediacy, but only as mediated by his inward-

178 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
ness and as a manifestation of it. But it should not be overlooked either that 
essence, and inwardness as well, only prove themselves to be what they are by 
moving out into the domain of appearance; whereas, what underlies the appeal to 
an essence that is different from the content of what people do is often just the aim 
of making their mere subjectivity count, and of evading what holds in and for itself. 
§ 113 
In Essence, relation-to-self is the form of identity, of inward reflection. This 
form has here taken the place of the immediacy of being; both are the same 
abstractions of relation-to-self. 
The absence of thought in sense-knowledge, which takes every­
thing limited and finite for something that [simply] is," passes over 
into the stubbornness of the understanding, which grasps every­
thing finite as something-identical-with-itself, [and] not inwardly con­
tradicting itself. 
§ 114 
As it emerges from being, this identity appears at first to be burdened only 
with the determinations of being, and related to being as to something­
externa/. When being is taken separately from essence in this way, it is 
called the "inessential." But essence is being-within-self,b it is essential only 
insofar as it has the negative of itself, [i.e.,] the relation-to-another, or 
mediation, within itself. It has the inessential, therefore, as its own shine 
within itself. But there is a distinguishing contained in the shining or 
mediation, and what is distinct does itself acquire the form of identity, in 
its distinction from the identity from which it emerges, and in which it is 
not or lies [only] as semblance. Hence, what is distinct is itself in the mode 
of self-relating immediacy or of being. And for this reason the sphere of 
Essence becomes a still imperfect connection of immediacy and mediation. 
Everything is posited in it in such a way that it relates itself to itself, while 
at the same time [the movement] has already gone beyond it. [It is posited] 
as a being of reflection, a being within which an other shines and which 
shines within an other.-Hence, the sphere of Essence is also the sphere of 
posited contradiction, whereas, in the sphere of Being, contradiction is only 
implicit. 
a. ein Seiendes 
b. In-sich-sein 

A. ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE (§§ 115-130) 
179 
A 
Because the One Concept is wnat is substantial in everything, the 
same determinations occur in the development of Essence as in 
the development of being-but they occur in reflected form. Instead 
of being and nothing, the forms of the positive and negative present 
themselves; initially the positive corresponds, as identity, to the 
being that lacks antithesis, while the negative (shining within it­
self) develops as distinction. Then, becoming presents itself in the 
same way as the very ground of being-there, which, as reflected 
upon the ground, is existence, and so on.-This part of the Logic, 
which is the most difficult one, contains most notably the catego­
ries of metaphysics and of the sciences generally;-it contains 
them as products of the reflecting understanding, which both as­
sumes the distinctions as independent and at the same time posits 
their relationality as well. But it only ties the two assumptions 
together-and it links the two of them only in contiguity or succes­
sion, by means of an "also"; it does not bring these thoughts 
together; it does not unite them into the Concept. 
Essence as Ground of ExistenceS 
A. THE PURE DETERMINATIONS OF REFLECTION 
(a) IDENTITY 
§ 115 
Essence shines within itself or is pure reflection. In this way it is only 
relation to self (though not as immediate but as reflected relation): identity 
with itself. 
Formal identity or identity-of-the-understanding is this identity, 
insofar as one holds onto it firmly and abstracts from distinction. 
Or rather, abstraction is the positing of this formal identity, the 
transformation of something that is inwardly concrete into this 
form of simplicity-whether it be the case that a part of the man­
ifold that is present in the concrete is left out (by means of what is 
called analysis) and that only one of these [elements] is selected, or 

180 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
that, by leaving out their diversity, the manifold determinacies are 
drawn together into One. 
When identity is linked with the Absolute, as the subject of a 
proposition, then the proposition reads: "The Absolute is what is 
identical with itself." -This proposition is true enough, but it is 
quite unclear whether it is meant in its true sense. So it is at best 
incomplete in its expression, for it remains undecided whether it is 
the abstract identity-of-the-understanding that is meant-i.e., 
[identity 1 in antithesis to the other determinations of Essence-or 
rather the identity that is inwardly concrete. The latter (as will be 
seen later) is first the ground and then, in its higher truth, the 
Concept.-The very word "absolute" itself often has no other mean­
ing than that of "abstract"; thus, absolute space and absolute time do 
not mean anything more than abstract space and abstract time. 
Taken as essential determinations, the determinations of Essence 
become predicates of a presupposed subject, which, because they 
are essential, is everything. The propositions that arise in this way 
have been expressed as the universal laws of thought. Thus the prin­
ciple of identity reads: "Everything is identical with itself,6 A = PI.'; 
and negatively: "A cannot be both A and non-A at the same 
time." -Instead of being a true law of thinking, this principle is 
nothing but the law of the abstract understanding. The propositional 
form itself already contradicts it, since a proposition promises a 
distinction between subject and predicate as well as identity; and 
the identity-proposition does not furnish what its form demands. 
Specifically, however, it is sublated by the so-called laws of thought 
that follow it; for these make the contrary of this law into laws.­
If someone says that this proposition cannot be proven, but that 
every consciousness proceeds in accordance with it and, as experi­
ence shows agrees with it at once, as soon as it takes it in, then 
against this alleged experience of the Schools we have to set the 
universal experience that no consciousness thinks, has notions, 
or speaks, according to this law, and no existence of any kind 
at all exists in accordance with it. Speaking in accordance with 
this supposed law of truth (a planet is-a planet, magnetism is­
magnetism, the spirit is-a spirit) is rightly regarded as silly; that is 
indeed a universal experience. The Schoolroom, which is the only 
place where these laws are valid, along with its logic which pro­
pounds them in earnest, has long since lost all credit with sound 
common sense as well as with reason. 
Addition. Identity is in the first place the repetition of what we had before us earlier 
as being, but now as what has come to be through the sublation of immediate 

A. ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE (§§ 115-130) 
181 
determinacy; hence, it is being as ideality.-It is of great importance to reach an 
adequate understanding of the true significance of identity, and this means above 
all that it must not be interpreted merely as abstract identity, i.e., as identity that 
excludes distinction. This is the point that distinguishes all bad philosophy from 
what alone deserves the name of philosophy. In its truth, as the ideality of what 
immediately is, identity is a lofty determination both for our religious conscious­
ness and for the rest of our thinking and consciousness in general. It can be said 
that the true knowledge of God begins at the point where he is known as Identity, 
i.e., as absolute identity; and this implies, at the same time, that all the power and 
the glory of the world sinks into nothing before God and can subsist only as the 
shining [forth) of his power and his glory. 
Similarly, it is his identity as consciousness of himself that distinguishes man 
from nature in general, and particularly from animals, which do not achieve a 
grasp of themselves as "1," i.e, as their pure self-unity.-As for the significance of 
identity in relation to thinking, this is above all a matter of not confusing true 
identity, which contains being and its determinations sublated within itself, with 
abstract, merely formal identity. All the charges of one-sidedness, harshness, lack 
of content, etc., which are so often levelled at thinking (especially from the stand­
point of feeling and immediate intuition), have their basis in the perverse assump­
tion that the activity of thinking is only an abstract positing of identity, and it is 
formal logic itself that confirms this assumption, by setting up the supposedly 
highest law of thought that has been elucidated in the above paragraph. If thinking 
were no more than that abstract identity it would have to be declared the most 
otiose and boring business in the world. Certainly the Concept, and furthermore 
the Idea, are self-identical, but they are self-identical only insofar as they at the 
same time contain distinction within themselves. 
(13) DISTINCTION 
§ 116 
Essence is pure identity and inward shine only because it is negativity 
relating itself to itself, and hence by being self-repulsion from itself; thus it 
contains the determination of distinction essentially. 
At this point otherness is no longer qualitative, i.e., no longer deter­
minacy, or limit; but within the self-relating of essence, negation, 
being also relation, is at the same time distinction, positedness, 
mediatedness. 
Addition. The question, "How does identity arrive at distinction?" presupposes that 
identity, taken as mere (i.e., abstract) identity is something on its own account, and 
that distinction, too, is something else that is equally something on its own ac­
count. But this presupposition makes it impossible to answer the question raised, 
for when identity and distinction are regarded as diverse, then what we have in 

182 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
fact is only distinction; and for that reason the advance to distinction cannot be 
demonstrated, because what the advance is supposed to start from is not present at 
all for the one who is asking about the "how" of the advance. So when we look 
more closely, the question proves to be a completely unthinking one and whoever 
raises it should be asked first of all what he understands by "identity". It would 
then turn out that no thought underlies the word he uses and that identity is just 
an empty name for him. Moreover, as we have seen, identity is certainly something 
negative, though not just abstract, empty nothing; instead, it is the negation of 
being and of its determinations. But as this negation, identity is at the same time 
relation; indeed, it is negative relation to itself or a distinguishing of itself from 
itself. 
§ 1 17 
Distinction is (1) immediate distinction, diversity, in which each of the dis­
tinct [terms] is what it is on its own account and each is indifferent vis-a.-vis 
its relation to the other, so that the relation is an external one for it. 
Because of the indifference of the diverse [terms] with regard to their 
distinction, the distinction falls outside of them in a third, that makes the 
comparison. As identity of those that are related, this external distinction is 
equality, as their nonidentity it is inequality. 
The understanding lets these determinations themselves fall out­
side of each other in such a way that, although the comparison has 
one and the same substratum for the equality and the inequality, 
these are supposed to be diverse sides and aspects of it; but equality 
on its own is just the preceding [term], identity, and inequality on 
its own is distinction. 
Diversity has also been transformed into a principle: "Every­
thing is diverse," or "There are no two things that are perfectly 
equal to each other." Here everything is given the predicate op­
posed to the identity which was attributed to it in the first 
principle-and thus a law that contradicts the first one is pro­
claimed. All the same, inasmuch as diversity only belongs to exter­
nal comparison, something by itself is supposed to be only identical 
with itself; and in this way the second principle is supposed not to 
contradict the first. But in this case the diversity does not belong to 
the something or to everything, it does not constitute an essential 
determination of this subject; so, the second principle cannot be 
proclaimed at all.-But if, in accordance with the [second] princi­
ple, the something is itself diverse, then it is so in virtue of its own 
determinacy; but in this case it is no longer diversity as such that is 
meant, but determinate distinction.-This is the meaning of Leib­
niz's principle, too.? 

A. ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE (§§ 115-130) 
183 
Addition. When it sets itself to consider identity, the understanding is in fact al­
ready beyond it, and has distinction before it in the shape of mere diversity. In 
other words, if we follow the so-called law of identity, and say: "The sea is the sea," 
"The air is the air," "The moon is the moon," etc., we are regarding these ob-jects 
as being indifferent to one another; and hence it is not identity but distinction that 
we have before us. But, of course, we do not simply stop at the point of considering 
things as merely diverse; we compare them with one another instead, and in that 
way we obtain the determinations equality and inequality. 
The business of the finite sciences consists for the most part in the application of 
these determinations; and when we speak of a scientific treatment nowadays, we 
usually and principally understand by that the procedure of comparing the ob-jects 
which have been chosen for investigation. It is obvious that many very important 
results have been achieved by this procedure and in this connection we may recall 
especially the great achievements of modern times in the fields of comparative 
anatomy and comparative linguistics. But it must also be noted in this regard that 
those who think that this comparative procedure can be applied in all fields of 
knowledge with the same success are going too far; on the contrary, it must be 
particularly emphasised that the needs of science cannot ultimately be satisfied by 
mere comparison, and that results like those we have just recalled must be consid­
ered only as preliminary (though quite indispensable) steps toward genuinely com­
prehending cognition.-Besides, insofar as comparison aims at tracing back given 
distinctions to identity, mathematics must be regarded as the science in which this 
goal is most perfectly attained, and that is because distinctions of quantity are 
completely external distinctions. In geometry, for example, a triangle and a rec­
tangle, which are qualitatively diverse, are equated to one another with respect to 
their magnitude by abstracting from this qualitative distinction. We have already 
said earlier (§ 99 Addition) that neither the empirical sciences nor philosophy need 
to be envious of this advantage of mathematics; and this follows also from the 
remark made earlier about the mere identity that belongs to the understanding. 
We are told that on one occasion Leibniz propounded the principle of diversity 
[i.e., of the identity of indiscernibles] when he was at court; and the ladies and 
gentlemen who were strolling in the garden tried to find two leaves that could not 
be distinguished from one another, in order, by exhibiting them, to refute the 
philosopher's law of thought. This is doubtless a convenient way to busy oneself 
with metaphysics and one that is still popular today; but with regard to Leibniz's 
principle it must be noted that being distinct must not be conceived as external and 
indifferent diversity, but as inner distinction,' and that to be distinct pertains to 
things in themselves. 
§ 118 
Equality is only an identity of [terms] that are not the same, not identical 
with one another-and inequality is the relation between unequal [terms] . 
a. Unlerschied an sich 

184 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
So equality and inequality do not indifferently fall apart into diverse sides 
or aspects but each is a shining into the other. Hence diversity is distinc­
tion of reflection, or distinction that is in its own self, determinate distinction. 
Addition. Whereas what is merely diverse proves to be mutually indifferent, equal­
ity and inequality, on the contrary, are a pair of determinations that are strictly 
related to one another, and such that neither of them can be thought without the 
other. This advance from mere diversity to opposition can already be found in our 
ordinary consciousness, too, since we admit that comparing has meaning only on 
the assumption that there is a distinction, and conversely, likewise, that dis­
tinguishing has a meaning only on the assumption that there is some equality. So, 
too, when the problem is to indicate a distinction, we do not ascribe a great degree 
of acuity to someone who only distinguishes ob-jects from one another that are 
immediately and obviously distinct (e.g., a pen and a camel); just as we would say, 
on the other hand, that someone who can only compare things that are obviously 
alike-a beech with an oak, a temple with a church-has not advanced very far in 
the business of comparison. 
So, where there is distinction, we require identity and, where there is identity, 
distinction. It frequently happens in the domain of the empirical sciences, however, 
that one of the two determinations diverts attention from the other, and that 
scientific interest is directed toward the tracing back of given distinctions to iden­
tity in one instance, and, in a similarly one-sided way, toward the discovery of new 
distinctions in the other. This is especially t}1e case in the natural sciences. Natural 
scientists are primarily concerned with the discovery of new and ever newer sub­
stances, forces, genera, species, etc., or, in another direction, with the demonstra­
tion that bodies which had previously been taken to be simple are compound; 
modern physicists and chemists do indeed smile at the Ancients who were 
satisfied with four elements that were not even Simple. But then, on the other 
hand, mere identity is made the centre of attention once more, and so electricity 
and chemical affinity are not only considered to be the same, for example, but even 
the organic processes of digestion and assimilation are taken to be merely chemical 
processes. We have noticed (§ 103 Addition) that although recent philosophy has 
frequently been nicknamed "Philosophy of Identity", it is precisely philosophy, 
and above all speculative logic, which exhibits the nullity of the mere identity that 
belongs to understanding, the identity that abstracts from distinction. This philoso­
phy then also insists, to be sure, that we should not rest content with mere diver­
sity but become cognizant of the inner unity of everything there is. 
§ 119 
(2) Distinction in its own self is the essential [distinction], the positive and 
the negative: the positive is the identical relation to self in such a way that it 
is not the negative, while the negative is what is distinct on its own account 

A. ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE (§§ 115-130) 
185 
in such a way that it is not the positive. Since each of them is on its own 
account only in virtue of not being the other one, each shines within the 
other, and is only insofar as the other is. Hence, the distinction of essence 
is opposition through which what is distinct does not have an other in 
general, but its own other facing it; that is to say, each has its own deter­
mination only in its relation to the other: it is only inwardly reflected 
insofar as it is reflected into the other, and the other likewise; thus each is 
the other's own other. 
Distinction in itself gives us the principle: "Everything is some­
thing essentially distinct" -or (as it also has been expressed): "Of 
two opposed predicates, only one belongs to something," and 
"There is no third." -This principle of antithesisa contradicts the 
principle of identity most explicitly, since according to the latter 
something is supposed to be only relation to self, while according to 
the former it is supposed to be an opposite, or the relation to its other. 
It is the peculiar absence of thought in abstraction to put two such 
contradictory principles side by side, without even comparing 
them.-The principle of the excluded third is the principle of the 
determinate understanding, which tries to avoid the contradiction 
and by doing so commits it. A must be either + A or -A; thus the 
third [term], the A which is neither + nor - and which is posited 
also equally as + A and as -A, is already expressed. If + W means 6 
miles in the westerly direction, but 
-W 6 miles in the easterly 
direction, and + and - sublate each other, then 6 miles of road or 
of space remain what they were, with or without the antithesis. 
Even the mere plus and minus of number or of abstract direction 
have, if one pleases, zero for their third [term]; but one ought not 
to deny that the empty antithesis of the understanding between + 
and - also has its place, precisely in the context of such abstrac­
tions as number, direction, etc. 
In the doctrine of contradictory concepts, one concept is, for 
instance, called blue (for in a doctrine of this kind even something 
like the sense-representation of a colour is called a concept), the 
other not-blue, so that this other would not be an affirmative (like, 
for instance, yellow), but is just the abstractly negative that has to 
be held fast.-That the negative is also positive within itself is 
shown in the following paragraph [§ 120]; but this is already im­
plied in the determination that that which is opposed to an other is 
a. Satz der Gegensatzes 

186 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
its other.-The emptiness of the antithesis between so-called con­
tradictory concepts had its full presentation in the grandiose ex­
pression (as we may call it) of a universal law, that of all such 
opposed predicates one applies to each thing and the other not-so 
that spirit would be either white or not white, yellow or not yellow, 
and so on ad infinitum. 
Since it is forgotten that identity and opposition are themselves 
opposed, the principle of opposition is taken also for the principle 
of identity in the form of the principle of contradiction; and a 
concept to which neither (see above) or both of two mutually con­
tradictory characteristics apply, is declared to be logically false, 
like, for instance, a square circle.8 Now, although a polygonal circle 
or a rectilinear arc contradicts this principle just as much, geome­
ters do not hesitate to consider and to treat the circle as a polygon 
with rectilinear sides. But something like a circle (its mere deter­
minacy) is not yet a concept; in the concept of circle, centre and 
periphery are equally essential, both characteristics belong to it; 
and yet periphery and centre are opposed to and contradict each 
other. 
The notion of polarity, which is so generally current in physics, 
contains within itself a more correct determination of opposition; 
but if physics holds onto ordinary logic as far as its thoughts are 
concerned, it would easily get scared, if it were to develop polarity 
for itself, and would thus come to the thoughts that are implied 
in it. 
Addition 1 .  The positive is identity once more, but now in its higher truth, as 
identical relation to itself, and at the same time in such a way that it is not the 
negative. The negative on its own account is nothing but distinction itself. The 
identical as such is, to begin with, what lacks determination; the positive, in con­
trast, is what is identical with itself, but determined against an other, and the 
negative is distinction as such, determined as not being identity. This is the inward 
distinction of distinction itself. 
In the positive and the negative we think we have an absolute distinction. Both 
terms, however, are implicitly the same, and therefore we could call the positive 
"the negative" if we liked, and conversely we could call the negative "the positive" 
as well. Consequently, assets and debts are not two particular, independently sub­
sisting species of assets. What is something negative for the debtor is something 
positive for the creditor. The same applies to a road to the East: it is equally a road 
to the West. Thus, what is positive and what is negative are essentially conditioned 
by one another, and are [what they are] only in their relation to one another. There 
cannot be the north pole of a magnet without the south pole nor the south pole 
without the north pole. If we cut a magnet in two we do not have the north pole in 

A. ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE (§§ 115-130) 
187 
one piece and the south pole in the other. And in the same way, positive and 
negative electricity are not two diverse, independently subsisting fluids. 
Quite generally, what is distinct in an opposition confronts not only an other, but 
its other. Ordinary consciousness treats the distinct terms as indifferent to one 
another. Thus we say, "I am a human being, and I am surrounded by air, water, 
animals, and everything else." In this ordinary consciousness everything falls out­
side everything else. The purpose of philosophy is, in contrast, to banish indif­
ference and to become cognizant of the necessity of things, so that the other is seen 
to confront its other. And so, for instance, inorganic nature must be considered not 
merely as something other than organic nature, but as its necessary other. The two 
are in essential relation to one another, and each of them is [what it is], only insofar 
as it excludes the other from itself, and is related to it precisely by that exclusion. 
Or in the same way again, there is no nature without spirit, or spirit without 
nature. In any case, it is an important step in thinking, when we cease to say, 
"Well, something else is possible, too." When we say that, we are burdened with 
the contingent, whereas, as we remarked earlier, true thinking is the thinking of 
necessity. 
In the natural science of the recent past, opposition that was first perceived as 
polarity in magnetism has come to be recognised as running through the whole of 
nature, or as a universal law of nature. This must without doubt be regarded as an 
essential step forward in science, as long as we are careful from now on not to let 
mere diversity take its place again beside opposition, as if nothing had happened. 
Colours, for instance, are rightly treated as confronting one another in polar op­
position (as so-called complementary colours), on the one hand, and then, on the 
other hand, they are also regarded as the indifferent and merely quantitative dis­
tinction of red, yellow, green, etc. 
Addition 2. Instead of speaking in accordance with the law of excluded middle 
(which is a law of the abstract understanding), it would be better to say, "Every­
thing stands in opposition." There is in fact nothing, either in heaven or on earth, 
either in the spiritual or the natural world, that exhibits the abstract "either-or" as 
it is maintained by the understanding. Everything that is at all is concrete, and 
hence it is inwardly distinguished and self-opposed. The finitude of things consists 
in the fact that their immediate way of being does not correspond with what they 
are in-themselves. For instance, in inorganic nature, acid is at same time in-itself 
base, i.e., its being is totally and solely in its relatedness to its other. Hence also, 
however, acid is not something that persists quietly in the antithesis, but is rather 
what strives to posit itself as what it is in-itself. Generally speaking, it is contradic­
tion that moves the world, and it is ridiculous to say that contradiction cannot be 
thought. What is correct in this assertion is just that contradiction is not all there is 
to it, and that contradiction sublates itself by its own doing. Sublated contradiction, 
however, is not abstract identity, for that is itself only one side of the antithesis. The 
proximate result of opposition posited as contradiction is the ground, which con­
tains within itself both identity and distinction as sublated and reduced to merely 
ideal moments. 

188 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
020 
The positive is that diverse [term], which has to be on its own account and
at the same time not indifferent vis-a.-vis its relation to its other. The nega
tive, as negative relation to self, has to be equally independent. It has to b
on its own account but at the same time, as strictly negative, it has to have its
positive, this relation to self that belongs to it, only in the other. Both o
them, therefore, are the posited contradiction, both are in-themselves the
same. And both are the same for-themselves, too, since each is the sublating
of the other and of itself. As a result they go to the ground . "'--In othe
words, essential distinction, as distinction in and for itself, is immediately
only distinction of itself from itself; it therefore contains the identical; so
essential distinction itself belongs, together with identity, to the whole
distinction that is in and for itself.-As relating itself to itself, essentia
distinction is already expressed equally as what is identical with itself; and
what is opposed is precisely that which contains the One and its Other, both
itself and its opposite within itself. The being-within-self of essence, deter
mined in this way, is ground. 
(-y) GROUND 
021 
Ground is the unity of identity and distinction; the truth of what distinction
and identity have shown themselves to be, the inward reflection which is
just as much reflection-in to-another and vice versa. It is essence posited as
totality. 
The principle of ground reads, "Everything has its sufficien
ground,"9 i.e., the true essentiality of something is not the deter
mination of it as identical with itself or as diverse, as merely posi
tive or as merely negative, but the fact that it has its being in an
other, which (as the identical-with-itself that belongs to it)b is its
essence. The latter also is not abstract reflection into self, but reflec­
tion into another. Ground is the essence that is within itself, the
latter is essentially ground, and it is ground only insofar as it is the
ground of something, of an other. 
Addition. When we say that ground is the unity of identity and distinction, this
unity must not be understood as abstract identity, for then we would just have
another name for a thought that is once more just that identity of the understand-
a. gehen zu Grunde 
b. als dessen Identisches-mit-sich 

A. ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE (§§ 115-130) 
189 
ing which we have recognised to be untrue. So, in order to counter this misunder­
standing, we can also say that ground is not only the unity but equally the distinc­
tion of identity and distinction, too. Ground, which we encountered first as the 
sublation of contradiction, therefore makes its appearance as a new contradiction. 
But, as such, it is not what abides peacefully within itself, but is rather the expul­
sion of itself from itself. Ground is ground only insofar as it grounds; but what has 
come forth from the ground is the ground itself, and herein lies the formalism of 
ground. The ground and what is grounded are one and the same content; and the 
distinction between them is the mere distinction of form between simple relation 
to self and mediation or positedness. 
When we ask about the grounds of things, this is precisely the standpoint of 
reflection that we mentioned earlier (§ 112 Addition); we want to see the thing in 
question duplicated as it were: first in its immediacy and secondly in its ground, 
where it is no longer immediate. This is indeed the simple meaning of the so-called 
principle of sufficient reason or ground. This principle only asserts that things 
must essentially be regarded as mediated. Moreover, in setting up this law of 
thought, formal logic gives the other sciences a bad example, since it asks them not 
to take their content as valid in its immediacy; while, for its own part, it sets up this 
law of thought without deducing it and exhibiting its process of mediation. With 
the same right that the logician asserts when he maintains that our faculty of 
thinking happens to be so constituted that we must always ask for a ground, the 
doctor could answer that people are so organised that they cannot live under water 
when he is asked why a person who falls into the water drowns; and in the same 
way a jurist who is asked why a criminal is punished could answer that civil 
society is so constituted that crime cannot be allowed to go unpunished. 
But even if we prescind from the demand, addressed to logic, that it should 
furnish a grounding for the principle of sufficient reason or ground, still it must at 
least answer the question of what is to be understood by "ground". The usual 
explanation, that a ground is what has a consequence, appears at first sight to be 
more illuminating and accessible than the determination of this concept that was 
given above. But if we go on to ask what a consequence is, and we get the answer 
that a consequence is what has a ground, then it is clear that the accessibility of this 
explanation consists only in the fact that what in our case has been reached as the 
result of a preceding movement of thought is simply presupposed in that explana­
tion. It is precisely the business of the Logic, however, to exhibit the thoughts that 
are merely represented, and which as such are not comprehended nor demon­
strated, as stages of self-determining thinking, so that these thoughts come to be 
both comprehended and demonstrated. 
In ordinary life, and equally in the finite sciences, we very frequently employ 
this form of reflection with the aim of finding out, by its use, what the situation of 
the ob-jects under examination really is. And although there is nothing wrong with 
this way of looking at things, so long as it is only a matter of the immediate 
housekeeping needs of cognition, so to speak, still it should be noted at once that 
this method cannot provide definitive satisfaction, either in a theoretical or in a 
practical regard. This is because the ground still has no content that is determined 

190 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOG
in and for itself; and in consequence of that, when we consider something a
grounded, we obtain only the mere distinction of form between immediacy an
mediation. Thus, for instance, when we see an electrical phenomenon and ask fo
its ground, we receive the answer that the ground of this phenomenon is ele
tricity; but this is simply the same content that we had before us immediatel
translated into the form of something internal. 
Now, of course, the ground is also not just what is simply identical with itself; 
is also distinct, and for that reason various grounds can be offered for one and th
same content. So, in accordance with the concept of distinction, that diversity 
grounds now leads to opposition in the form of grounds for and against the sam
content.-Suppose, for example, that we consider an action, let us say, for argu
ment's sake, a theft. This is a content in which a number of aspects can be di
tinguished. Property has been violated by the theft; while the thief, who was i
need, has obtained the means for the satisfaction of his wants. It may be the cas
too, that the person from whom the theft was made did not make good use of h
property. Well, it is certainly correct that the violation of property which has take
place is the decisive point of view before which the others must give way; but th
decision is not entailed by the principle of thought according to which everythin
must have a ground. 
It is certainly the case that according to the usual version of this law of though
what is meant is not merely any ground but a sufficient one; and one might thin
therefore that, in the case of the action that has been mentioned as an example, th
points of view brought forward, other than violation of property, are grounds, t
be sure, although they are not sufficient grounds. But what has to be said abou
that is that when people speak of a sufficient ground, the predicate is either otios
or else it is one which transcends the category of ground as such. The predicat
"sufficient" is otiose and tautological if it is supposed to express only the capacit
to ground something, since a ground only is a ground to the extent that it po
sesses this capacity. If a soldier runs away from a battle in order to save his life, h
acts in a way that is contrary to his duty, of course; but it cannot be maintained th
the ground which has determined him to act in this way was insufficient, for if 
was he would have stayed at his post. 
However, it must also be said that, just as on the one hand, all grounds ar
sufficient, so, on the other hand, no ground is sufficient as such. This is because, a
we have already remarked, the ground does not yet have a content that is determ
nate in and for itself; and consequently it does not act of itself and bring forth. It 
the Concept that will soon show itself to be a content of this kind, one that 
determinate in and for itself, and hence acts on its own; and that is what Leibniz 
concerned with when he speaks of a "sufficient reason" or "ground" and insists o
considering things from this point of view. What Leibniz primarily had in min
here was the merely mechanical approach that many people are still so attached t
even now; and he rightly declared that it is inadequate. For instance, when th
organic process of circulation of the blood is traced back to the contraction of th
heart, this is a merely mechanical interpretation; and the theories of criminal law
that consider the purpose of punishment to be to render the criminal harmless, o

A. ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE (§§ 115-130) 
191 
to deter, or to lie in other such external grounds are similarly mechanical. It is very 
unjust to Leibniz to suppose that he contented himself with something so lame as 
the formal principle of reason or ground. The mode of consideration that he 
asserted as valid is precisely the reverse of the formalism that lets the matter rest 
with mere "grounds"-where what is at issue is a cognition that comprehends. In 
this regard, Leibniz contrasted causae efficientes and causae finales, and required that 
we should not stop at the former but press on to the latter. According to this 
distinction, light, heat, and moisture, for example, must certainly be considered as 
causae efficientes, but not as the causa finalis of the growth of plants-the causa 
finalis being nothing else but the concept of the plant itself. 
We may also remark at this point that to go no further than mere grounds, 
especially in the domain of law and ethics, is the general standpoint and principle 
of the Sophists. When people speak of "sophistry" they frequently understand by 
it just a mode of consideration which aims to distort what is correct and true, and 
quite generally to present things in a false light. But this tendency is not what is 
immediately involved in sophistry, the standpoint of which is primarily nothing but 
that of abstract argumentation. The Sophists came on the scene among the Greeks 
at a time when they were no longer satisfied with mere authority and tradition in 
the domain of religion and ethics. They felt the need at that time to become 
conscious of what was to be valid for them as a content mediated by thought. This 
demand was met by the Sophists because they taught people how to seek out the 
various points of view from which things can be considered; and these points of 
view are, in the first instance, simply nothing else but grounds. As we remarked 
earlier, however, since a ground does not yet have a content that is determined in 
and for itself, and grounds can be found for what is unethical and contrary to law 
no less than for what is ethical and lawful, the decision as to what grounds are to 
count as valid falls to the subject. The ground of the subject's decision becomes a 
matter of his individual disposition and aims. In this way the objective basis of 
what is valid in and for itself, and recognised by all, was undermined, and it is this 
negative side of sophistry that has deservedly given it the bad name referred to 
above. 
As is well known, Socrates fought the SophistslO on all fronts; but he did not do 
so just by setting authority and tradition against their abstract argumentation, but 
rather by exhibiting the untenability of mere grounds dialectically, and by vindicat­
ing against them the validity of what is just and good, the validity of the universal 
generally, or of the concept of willing. We prefer to go to work only in an abstractly 
argumentative way nowadays, not only in discussions about secular things, but 
also in sermons. Thus, for example, all possible grounds for gratitude to God are 
brought forward. Socrates, and Plato, too, would not have scrupled to declare all 
this to be sophistry, since sophistry is primarily a matter not of content, which may 
well be true, but of the form of [arguing about] grounds, an argumentation by 
which everything can be defended, but also everything can be attacked. In our 
time, rich as we are in reflection, and given to abstract argumentation, someone 
who does not know how to advance a good ground for everything, even for the 
worst and most perverse views, cannot have come far. Everything in the world that 

192 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
has been corrupted, has been corrupted on good grounds. When an appeal is made 
to "grounds" people are at first inclined to give way to them; but if they have had 
experience of this procedure, they will turn a deaf ear and not let themselves be 
imposed upon any further. 
§ 122 
At first, essence is shining and mediation within itself; but as totality of 
mediation, its unity with itself is now posited as the self-sublation of dis­
tinction, and so of mediation. This, therefore, is the restoration of imme­
diacy or of being, but of being inasmuch as it is mediated through the subla­
tion of mediation:-existence. 
Ground does not yet have any content that is determined in and for 
itself, nor is it purpose. So it is neither active nor productive; instead, 
an existence simply emerges from the ground. The determinate 
ground is therefore something formal; it is any determinacy at all, 
insofar as it is posited as related to itself (i.e., as affirmation) in its 
relationship to the immediate existence that is connected with it. 
Precisely because it is ground, it is also a good ground [or reason] : 
for "good", in its entirely abstract use, means no more than some­
thing affirmative, and every determinacy is good which can be 
expressed in any way at all as something admitted to be affirma­
tive. Hence, it is possible to find and to indicate a ground for 
everything; and a good ground (for instance, a good motive to act) 
may be effective or not, it may have a consequence or have none. It 
becomes a motive that produces something, for instance, by being 
taken up by someone's will, which is what first makes it active and 
a cause. 
B. EXISTENCE 
§ 123 
Existence is the immediate unity of inward reflection and reflection-into­
another. Therefore, it is the indeterminate multitude of existents as in­
wardly reflected, which are at the same time, and just as much, shining­
into-another, or relational; and they form a world of interdependence and of 
an infinite connectedness of grounds with what is grounded. The grounds 

A. ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE (§§ 115-130) 
193 
are themselves existences, and the existents are also in many ways 
grounds as well as grounded. 
Addition. The term "existence" (derived from existere) points to a state of emer­
gence,' and existence is being that has emerged from the ground and become 
reestablished through the sublation of mediation. As sublated being, essence has 
proved in the first place to be shining within itself, and the determinations of this 
shining are identity, distinction, and ground. Ground is the unity of identity and 
distinction, and as such it is at the same time the distinguishing of itself from itself. 
But what is distinct from the ground is not distinction anymore than the ground 
itself is abstract identity. The ground is self-sublating and what it sublates itself 
toward, the result of its negation, is existence. Existence, therefore, which is what 
has emerged from the ground, contains the latter within itself, and the ground 
does not remain behind existence; instead, it is precisely this process of self­
sublation and translation into existence. 
What we have here is therefore also to be found in the ordinary consciousness: 
when we consider the ground of something, this ground is not something ab­
stractly inward, but is instead itself an existent again. So, for instance, we consider 
the ground of a conflagration to be a lightning flash that set a building on fire, and, 
similarly, the ground of the constitution of a people is their customs and circum­
stances of life. This is the general shape in which the existing world is presented 
initially to reflection, namely, as an indeterminate multitude of existents which, 
being reflected simultaneously into themselves and into something else, are in the 
mutual relationship of ground and grounded with regard to each other. In this 
motley play of the world, taken as the sum total of all existents, a stable footing 
cannot be found anywhere at first, and everything appears at this stage to be 
merely relative, to be conditioned by something else, and similarly as conditioning 
something else. The reflective understanding makes it its business to discover and 
to pursue these all-sided relations; but this leaves the question of a final purpose 
unanswered, and, with the further development of the logical Idea, the reason that 
is in need of comprehension therefore strikes out beyond this standpoint of mere 
relativity. 
024 
But the reflection-into-another of what exists is not separate from its in­
ward reflection; the ground is the unity of these two, out of which exis­
tence has gone forth. Hence, what exists contains relationality and its own 
manifold connectedness with other existents in itself; and it is reflected 
within itself as ground. Thus what exists is thing. 
a. deutet auf ein Hervorgegangensein 

194 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
The thing-in-itself,n which has become so famous in the Kantian 
philosophy, shows itself here in its genesis, i.e., as the abstract 
reflection-into-itself that is clung to, as against reflection-in to­
another and against distinct determinations in general, as the 
empty basis of all of them. 
Addition. If we are to understand by "cognition" the apprehending of an ob-ject in 
its concrete determinacy, then the assertion that the "thing-in-itself" is beyond 
cognition must be admitted to be correct, since the thing-in-itself is nothing but the 
completely abstract and indeterminate thing in general. But, with the same right 
that we speak of the "thing-in-itself," we could also speak of "quality-in-itself," 
"quantity-in-itself," and similarly of all the other categories, and this would be 
understood to mean these categories in their abstract immediacy, i.e., apart from 
their development and inner determinacy. So we must consider the fixating of the 
thing as the only "in-itself" to be a whim of the understanding. But we also have 
the habit of applying the term "in-itself" to the content both of the natural and of 
the spiritual world. Hence we speak, for example, of electricity "in-itself" or a plant 
"in-itself," and similarly of man or the State "in-itself;" and by the "in-itself" of 
these ob-jects we understand what they rightly and properly are. 
The situation here is no different than it is in respect to the thing-in-itself 
generally; that situation is, more precisely, that if we halt at ob-jects as they are 
merely in-themselves, then we do not apprehend them in their truth, but in the 
one-sided form of mere abstraction. Thus, for instance, "man-in-himself" is the 
child, whose task is not to remain in this abstract and undeveloped [state of being] 
"in-itself," but to become for-himself what he is initially only in-himself, namely, a 
free and rational essence. Similarly, the State-in-itself is the still undeveloped, 
patriarchal State, in which the various political functions implied by the concept of 
the State have not yet become "constitutionalised" in a way that is adequate to its 
concept. In the same sense the germ, too, can be regarded as the plant-in-itself. We 
can see from these examples that all who suppose that what things are in­
themselves, or the thing-in-itself in general, is something that is inaccessible to our 
cognition are very much mistaken. Everything is initially "in-itself," but this is not 
the end of the matter, and just as the germ, which is the plant-in-itself, is simply 
the activity of self-development, so the thing generally also progresses beyond its 
mere in-itself (understood as abstract reflection-into-itself) to reveal itself to be also 
reflection-into-another, and as a result it has properties. 
C. THING 
§ 125 
The thing is the totality as the development of the determinations of 
ground and of existence posited all in One. According to one of its mo-

A. ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE (§§ 115-130) 
195 
ments, that of reflection-in to-another, it has in it the distinctions according 
to which it is a determinate and concrete thing. 
(ex) These determinations are diverse from each other; they have their 
inward reflection not in themselves, but in the thing. They are properties of 
the thing, and their relation to it is [its] having [them] . 
Having, which is a relation, replaces being. Something does, indeed, 
also "have" qualities in it, but this transference of having to what is 
is inaccurate, since determinacy as quality is immediately one with 
the something and since something ceases to be, when it loses its 
quality. The thing, however, is inward reflection, as the identity 
which is also distinct from the distinction, i.e., from its determina­
tions.-"Having" is used in many languages to indicate the past, 
and rightly, because the past is sublated being, and spirit is the 
inward reflection of the past. Only in this reflection does the past 
still have subsistence; though spirit also distinguishes this being 
that is sublated within it from itself. 
Addition. In the thing all the determinations of reflection recur as existent. Thus, 
the thing is identical with itself initially just as the thing-in-itself. But, as we have 
seen, there is no identity without distinction, and the properties which the thing 
has are its existent distinction in the form of diversity. Whereas previously the 
diverse terms proved themselves to be indifferent to one another, and their relation 
to one another was posited only through a comparison external to them, we now 
have, in the thing, a bond that connects the various properties with one another. 
Moreover, a property is not to be confused with a quality. We do certainly say also 
that something "has" qualities. But this way of speaking is unsuitable, insofar as 
"having" indicates an independence which does not yet belong to the something 
that is immediately identical with its quality. The something is what it is only 
through its quality; in contrast, although it is true that the thing likewise only exists 
insofar as it has properties, it is not bound up with this or that determinate prop­
erty and therefore it can also lose the property without ceasing to be what it is. 
§ l26 
(;) But in the ground, reflection-into-another is in itself immediately in­
ward reflection as well; consequently the properties are likewise self­
identical, [i.e., they are] independent and freed from their attachment to the 
thing. Being inwardly reflected they are the determinacies of the thing that 
are distinguished from each other; and therefore they are not themselves 
things (since things are concrete), but existences reflected into themselves 
as abstract deterrninacies: they are matters. 

196 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
The matters-for instance, magnetic, or electric matterl௅are not 
called "things" .-They are qualities in the proper sense of the 
term, they are one with their being (the determinacy that has 
reached immediacy), but they are one with a being that is reflected 
or is existence. 
Addition. The transformation of the properties that the thing "has" into indepen­
dent matters or stuffs "out of" which the thing "is made up" is certainly grounded 
in the concept of the thing, and therefore it is found in experience. But it is as 
much contrary to thought as it is to experience to conclude that, because certain 
properties of a thing, such as, for example, its colour, its smell, etc., can be pre­
sented as a particular colour-stuff or smell-stuff, therefore that is all there is to it, 
and that in order to get to the bottom of how things really are, nothing more needs 
to be done than to break them up into the stuffs out of which they are composed. 
This breaking up of things into independent stuffs has its proper place only in 
inorganic nature, and the chemist is within his rights when he breaks up cooking 
salt or gypsum, for instance, into their stuffs and then says that the former consists 
of hydrochloric acid and sodium, and the latter of sulphuric acid and calcium. And, 
in the same way, geology rightly considers granite to be composed of quartz, 
feldspar, and mica. These stuffs of which the thing consists are partly things 
themselves, too, which can, in their turn, be broken down again into more abstract 
stuffs (for example, sulphuric acid is made up of sulphur and oxygen). 
But although these stuffs or matters can in fact be presented as subsisting in 
their own right, it also happens quite often that other properties of things can 
similarly be considered as particular matters which are not, however, independent 
in this way. For instance, there is talk of caloric, electrical, and magnetic stuffs and 
matters; but these have to be regarded as mere fictions of the understanding. This 
is just how the abstract reflection of the understanding always proceeds, seizing 
arbitrarily upon single categories which are valid only as determinate stages in the 
development of the Idea; and then employing them-allegedly in the service of 
explanation, but in contradiction to unprejudiced intuition and experience-in 
such a way that every ob-ject investigated is traced back to them. Indeed, the view 
that things consist of independent stuffs is frequently applied in domains where it 
has no validity. 
Even within nature, this category shows itself to be inadequate in the sphere of 
organic life. An animal may, of course, be said to "consist of" bones, muscles, 
nerves, etc., but it is immediately evident that this is a state of affairs quite different 
from a piece of granite that "consists of" the stuffs that were mentioned. These 
stuffs behave in a way that is completely indifferent to their union, and they could 
subsist just as well without it, whereas the various parts and members of the 
organic body have their subsistence only in their union, and cease to exist as such if 
they are separated from one another. 

A. ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE (§§ 115-130) 
197 
§ 127 
Thus, a matter is the abstract or indeterminate reflection-in to-another. It is 
inward reflection that is at the same time determinate. Hence, it is thinghood 
that is there, or the substance of the thing.- In this way the thing has its 
inward reflection in the matters (the contrary of § 125); it does not subsist 
in itself, but consists of the mattersb and is only their superficial connected­
ness, i.e., an external combination of them. 
§ 128 
('Y) As the immediate unity of existence with itself, Matter is also indifferent 
with regard to determinacy; the many diverse matters therefore merge into 
the One matter (or existence in the reflective determination of identity). As 
against this One matter, these distinct determinacies and the external rela­
tion which they have to each other in the thing are the form-the reflective 
determination of distinction, but as existing and as totality. 
This One matter, without determination, is also the same as the 
thing-in-itself; but it is the thing-in-itself as inwardly quite ab­
stract, c and it is indeterminate matter as being in itself that is also 
for-another, and first of all for the form. 
Addition. The diverse matters of which the thing consists are in-themselves [or 
implicitly] the same as one another. In this way we obtain the one general matter 
with respect to which distinction is posited as something external, i.e., as mere form. 
The interpretation that things are all based upon one and the same matter, and are 
only externally diverse in respect of their form, occurs frequently in reflective 
consciousness. On this view, matter counts as something that is completely inde­
terminate in itself, though susceptible of all determinations, and at the same time 
as something utterly permanent and self-same in all change and all alteration. 
Now this indifference of matter with regard to determinate forms is certainly to 
be found in finite things; thus, e.g., it is indifferent to a block of marble whether it 
be given the form of this or that statue or even of a pillar. However, it should not be 
overlooked in this context that matter, such as a block of marble, is indifferent to 
form only in a relative way (in relation to the sculptor), but is never without form 
altogether. Hence, the mineralogist considers this only relatively formless marble as 
a determinate rock formation quite distinct from other, similarly determinate for­
mations, such as, for example, sandstone, porphyry, and the like. So it is only the 
abstractive understanding that fixates "matter" in isolation and as formless in itself; 
a. die daseiende Dingheit, das Bestehen des Dings 
b. besteht nicht an ihm selbst, sondern aus den Materien 
c. als insich ganz abstraktes 

198 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
whereas in fact the thought of matter always contains the principle of form within 
it, and hence no existent matter that is formless is ever met with in experience. 
But the interpretation of matter as present from the beginning and as formless in 
itself is, in any case, very old; we meet it already among the Greeks, initially in the 
mythical shape of Chaos, which was represented as the formless foundation of the 
existing world. One consequence of this representation is that God has to be 
considered, not the creator of the world, but the mere architect of it, the demiurge. 
The deeper view, in contrast, is that God created the world from nothing. What this 
expresses in general is that matter as such is not independent, on the one hand, 
and, on the other hand, that form does not accrue to matter from outside but, being 
[itself] totality, bears the principle of matter within itself. This free and infinite form 
will soon emerge for us as the Concept. 
§ l29 
The thing thus falls apart into matter and form, each of which is the totality 
of thinghood and is independent on its own account. But (qua existence) 
matter, which is supposed to be the positive, undetermined existence, 
involves reflection-into-another just as much as it does being-within-self; 
as unity of these determinations it is itself the totality of the form. But as 
totality of the determinations the form already contains inward reflection, 
or, as form that relates itself to itself, it has what ought to constitute the 
determination of the matter. Both are in-themselves the same. Once posited, 
this unity of theirs is quite generally the relation of matter and form, which 
are equally distinct. 
§ 130 
As this totality, the thing is the contradiction of being (according to its 
negative unity) the form-in which the matter is determined and degraded 
into properties (§ 125)-and of consisting at the same time of matters-which 
within the inward reflection of the thing are both independent and nega­
ted at the same time. Thus, in being the essential existence (as existence 
that sublates itself inwardly), the thing is [shining forth or] appearance." 
The negation, also posited in the thing as independence of the mat­
ters, occurs in physics as porosity.14 Each of the many matters 
(colour-stuff, odour-stuff, and other stuff, including, according to 
some, sound-stuff, and further, in any case, heat-stuff, electric mat­
ter, etc.) is also negated, and in this negation of it-in its pores-the 
many other independent matters are [found], which are equally 
a. Erscheinung13 

B. ApPEARANCE (§§ 131-141) 
199 
porous and which thus mutually let the others exist within them­
selves. The pores are nothing empirical; they are figments of the 
understanding, which represents the negation of the independent 
matters in this way, and covers up the further development of 
contradictions with that nebulous confusion in which all of them 
are independent and all of them equally negated in one another.­
When the faculties or activities are hypostatised in the same way 
in spirit, their living unity becomes equally the confusion of the 
influence" of the one upon the other. 
The pores do not have their verification in observation (for we 
are not talking about the organic pores, in wood, or in the skin, but 
about the ones in the so-called matters, such as colour-stuff, heat­
stuff, etc., or in metals, crystals, and the like); the same is true of 
matter itself, and a fortiori of any form separate from it (either the 
thing consisting of matters, or subsisting itself and only having 
properties). All of this is a product of the reflecting understanding, 
which, while observing and pretending to indicate what it ob­
serves, brings forth the contrary, a metaphysics instead, and one 
that is contradictory in all directions, though this fact remains 
hidden from it. 
B 
Appearance 
§ 131 
Essence must appear. Its inward shining is the sublating of itself into imme­
diacy, which as inward reflection is subsistence (matter) as well as form, 
reflection-into-another, subsistence sublating itself. Shining is the deter­
mination, in virtue of which essence is not being, but essence, and the 
developed shining is [shining-forth or] appearance. Essence therefore is 
not behind or beyond appearance, but since the essence is what exists, 
existence is appearance. 
Addition. Existence, posited in its contradiction, is appearance. The latter mllst not 
be confused with mere semblance. Semblance is the proximate truth of being or 
immediacy. The immediate is not what we suppose it to be, not something inde­
pendent and self-supporting, but only semblance, and as such it is comprehended 
in the simplicity of self-contained essence. b Essence is initially a totality of inward 
a. des Einwirkens 
b. zusammengefafit in die Einfachheit des in sich seienden Wesens 

200 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
shining, but it does not remain in this inwardness; instead, as ground, it emerges 
into existence; and existence, since it does not have its ground within itself but in 
an other, is quite simply appearance. When we speak of "appearance" we associate 
with it the representation of an indeterminate manifold of existing things, whose 
being is mediation pure and simple, so that they do not rest upon themselves, but 
are valid only as moments. 
At the same time, however, this implies that the essence does not remain behind 
or beyond the appearance; instead, it is, so to speak, the infinite goodness that 
releases its semblance into immediacy and grants it the joy of being-there. When 
posited in this way appearance does not stand on its own feet, and does not have 
its being within itself but within an other. Just as God, the essence, is goodness, by 
virtue of lending existence to the moments of his inward shining in order to create 
a world, so he proves himself at the same time to be the might that rules it, as well 
as the Righteousness that shows the content of this existing world to be mere 
appearance, whenever it wants to exist on its own account. 
Appearance, in any case, is a very important stage of the logical Idea, and it may 
be said that philosophy distinguishes itself from ordinary consciousness by regard­
ing what counts for the latter as having being and independence as mere ap­
pearance. But what matters here is to grasp the significance of appearance ade­
quately. For, when we say of something that it is "only" appearance, this can be 
misunderstood as meaning that (in comparison with this thing that only appears) 
what is, or is immediate, is something higher. In fact the situation is precisely the 
reverse: appearance is higher than mere being. Appearance is precisely the truth of 
being and a richer determination than the latter, because it contains the moments 
of inward reflexion and reflexion-into-another united within it, whereas being or 
immediacy is still what is one-sidedly without relation, and seems to rest upon 
itself alone. Of course, the "only" that we attach to appearance certainly does 
indicate a defect, and this consists in the fact that Appearance is still this inwardly 
broken [moment] that does not have any stability of its own. What is higher than 
mere appearance is, in the first place, actuality, which will be treated later, being 
the third stage of Essence. 
In the history of modern philosophy it is Kant who has the merit of having been 
the first to rehabilitate the distinction between the common and the philosophical 
consciousness that we have mentioned. Kant stopped halfway, however, inasmuch 
as he interpreted appearance in a merely subjective sense, and fixated the abstract 
essence outside it as the "thing-in-itself" that remains inaccessible to our cognition. 
It is the very nature of the world of immediate ob-jects to be only appearance, and 
since we do know that world as appearance, we thereby at the same time become 
cognizant of its essence. The essence does not remain behind or beyond ap­
pearance, but manifests itself as essence precisely by reducing the world to mere 
appearance. 
In any case, the naIve consciousness cannot be blamed, if in its desire for totality, 
it hesitates to acquiesce when subjective idealism asserts that we have to do strictly 
with mere appearances. But it easily happens that, in trying to save the objectivity 
of cognition, this naIve consciousness returns to abstract immediacy and, without 
more ado, holds fast to that, as what is true and actual. Fichte has treated the 

B. ApPEARANCE (§§ 131-141) 
201 
antithesis between subjective idealism and immediate consciousness in a short 
work bearing the title Report, Clear as Daylight, to the Wider Public about the Real 
Nature of Recent Philosophy; an Attempt to Force the Reader to Understand. IS Here we 
find a conversation in which the author attempts to demonstrate to the reader how 
the subjective idealist standpoint is justified. During the conversation the reader 
complains to the author that he, the reader, cannot succeed in putting himself in 
the idealist position; he is inconsolable about the fact that the things that surround 
him are supposed not to be real things but merely appearances. The reader is 
certainly not to be blamed for this distress, since he is required to regard himself as 
confined within an impenetrable circle of merely subjective representations; but 
then, quite apart from this merely subjective interpretation of appearance, it must 
be said that we all have cause to be glad that, in dealing with the things that 
surround us, we only have to do with appearances and not with firm and indepen­
dent existences, because in that case we would soon die of hunger, both bodily and 
mental. 
A. THE WORLD OF APPEARANCE 
§ 132 
What appears exists in such a way that its subsistence is immediately sub­
lated, and is only One moment of the form itself; the form contains subsis­
tence or matter within itself as one of its determinations. Thus, what ap­
pears has its ground in the form as its essence, or as its inward reflection 
vis-a.-vis its immediacy-but that only means that it has its ground in 
another determinacy of the form. This ground of what appears is just as 
much something-that-appears,a so that appearance proceeds to an infinite 
mediation of its subsistence by its form, hence by nonsubsistence as well. 
This infinite mediation is at the same time a unity of relation to self; and 
existence is developed into a totality and a world of appearance, or of 
reflected finitude. 
B. CONTENT AND FORM 
§ 133 
The mutual externality of the world of appearance is totality and it is 
entirely contained within its relation-ta-self. Hence, the relation of ap-
a. ein Erscheinendes 

202 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
pearance to itself is completely determinate, it has the form within itself, 
and, because it has it in this identity, [it has the form] as its essential 
subsistence. Hence too, the form is content; and in its developed deter­
minacy it is the law of appearance. The negative of appearance, that which 
is dependent and alterable, belongs to the form as not reflected within-itself: 
this is the indifferent, external form. 
Regarding the antithesis of form and content it is essential to re­
member that the content is not formless, but that it has the form 
within itself just as much as the form is something external to it. We 
have here the doubling of the form: on the one hand, as inwardly 
reflected, it is the content; on the other hand, as not reflected 
inwardly, it is the external existence, that is indifferent to the con­
tent. What is here present in-itself is the absolute relationship of 
content and form, i.e., the reciprocal overturning of one into the 
other, so that "content" is nothing but the overturning of form into 
content, and "form" nothing but overturning of content into form. 
This overturning is one of the most important determinations. But 
it is not posited until we reach absolute relationship. 
Addition. Form and content are a pair of determinations that are frequently em­
ployed by the reflective understanding, and, moreover, mainly in such a way that 
the content is considered as what is essential and independent, while the form, on 
the contrary, is inessential and dependent. Against this, however, it must be re­
marked that in fact both of them are equally essential, and that, whilst there is no 
more a formless content than there is a formless stuff, still the two of them (con­
tent, and stuff or matter) are distinguished from one another precisely because the 
matter, although it is not in itself without form, shows itself to be indifferent in its 
way of being with regard to form, while content as such is what it is only in virtue 
of the fact that it contains developed> form within itself. But we find the form, too, 
as an existence that is indifferent with respect to the content and external to it, and 
this is the case because appearance in general is still burdened with externality. 
If we consider a book, for instance, it certainly makes no difference, as far as its 
content is concerned, whether it be handwritten or printed, whether it be bound in 
paper or in leather. But this does not in any way imply that, apart from the external 
and indifferent form, the content of the book itself is formless. Certainly, there are 
books enough which may without injustice be said to be formless even with re­
spect to their content; but, as it bears upon content here, this formlessness is 
synonymous with deformity, b which should be understood not as the absence of 
form altogether, but as the lack of the right form. This right form is 50 far from 
being indifferent with respect to content, however, that, on the contrary, it is the 
a. ausgebildete 
b. Ul1fiirmlichkeit 

B. ApPEARANCE (§§ 131-141) 
203 
content itself. A work of art that lacks the right form cannot rightly be called a work 
of art, just for that reason. It is not a true work of art. It is a bad excuse for an artist 
as such to say that the content of his works is certainly good (or even excellent) but 
that they lack the right form. The only genuine works of art are precisely the ones 
whose content and form show themselves to be completely identical. We can say of 
the Iliad that its content is the Trojan War or, more precisely, the wrath of Achilles; 
in saying this we have said everything, but also only very little, for what makes the 
Iliad into the Iliad is the poetic form into which that content is moulded. Similarly, 
the content of Romeo and Juliet is the ruin of two lovers brought about by strife 
between their families; but by itself this is not yet Shakespeare's immortal tragedy. 
Moreover, as far as the relationship of content and form in the domain of science 
is concerned, we ought to recall here the distinction between philosophy and the 
other sciences. The finitude of the latter consists altogether in the fact that think­
ing, which is a merely formal activity in them, adopts its content as something 
given from outside, and the content is not known to be determined from within by 
the underlying thought, so that the form and content do not completely permeate 
one another. In philosophy, on the contrary, this separation falls by the wayside, 
and hence it must be called infinite cognition. But even philosophical thinking is 
very frequently regarded as a mere activity of the form; in regard to logic es­
pecially, which admittedly has to do only with thoughts as such, its lack of content 
is taken for granted. If we simply understand by content only what is palpable, 
what is perceptible by the senses, then it must indeed be conceded willingly that 
philosophy as such, and the Logic in particular, have no content, i.e., they have no 
content of this sensibly perceptible kind. But with regard to what is understood by 
content, even our ordinary consciousness and our general linguistic usage do not 
stop at what is perceptible by the senses at all, nor yet in general at what is merely 
there. When we speak of a book that lacks content everybody understands that this 
does not simply mean that the book has empty pages; it means a book whose 
content is as good as nil; and it will turn out, on closer consideration, that, in the 
last analysis, what an educated mind refers to primarily as "content" only means 
what is well thought out. But this means also that we must admit that thoughts are 
not to be considered as indifferent to their content, or as being in themselves 
empty forms, and that, just as in art, so too in all other domains, the truth and the 
solidity of the content rest essentially on the fact that this content shows itself to be 
identical with the form. 
§ 134 
Immediate existence, however, is a detenninacy of subsistence itself as well 
as of the form; hence, it is just as much external to the detenninacy of 
content as this externality, which the content has through the moment of 
its subsistence, is essential to the content. Posited in this way, appearance 
is relationship, in which one and the same, the content, is the developed 
fonn; i.e., both the externality and opposition of independent existences, 

204 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
and their identical relation, within which alone these distinct existences are 
what they are. 
C. RELATIONSHIP 
§ 135 
(Cl) The immediate relationship is that of the whole and the parts; the con­
tent is the whole and consists of its opposite, i.e., of the parts (of the form). 
The parts are diverse from each other and they are what is independent. 
But they are parts only in their identical relation to each other, or insofar 
as, taken together, they constitute the whole. But the ensemblea is the op­
posite and negation of the part. 
Addition. Essential relationship is the determinate, quite universal mode of appear­
ing. Everything that exists stands in a relationship, and this relationship is what is 
genuine in every existence. Consequently, what exists does not do so abstractly, on 
its own account, but only within an other; within this other, however, it is relation 
to self, and relationship is the unity of relation to self and relation to another. 
The relationship of the whole and its parts is untrue inasmuch as its concept and 
reality do not correspond to one another. It is the very concept of a whole to 
contain parts; but if the whole is posited as what it is according to its concept, then, 
when it is divided, it ceases at once to be a whole. There certainly are things that 
answer to this part-whole relationship, but, just for that reason, they are only 
inferior and untrue existences. In this connection we should recollect the general 
point that when we speak of something's being "untrue" in a philosophical discus­
sion, that should not to be understood to mean that the sort of thing spoken of 
does not exist; a bad State or a sick body may exist all the same, but they are 
"untrue" because their concept and their reality do not correspond to one another. 
The relationship of whole and parts, being relationship in its immediacy, is in 
any case one that easily recommends itself to the reflective understanding; hence 
the understanding is frequently content with it where deeper relationships are in 
fact involved. For instance, the members and organs of a living body should not be 
considered merely as parts of it, for they are what they are only in their unity and 
are not indifferent to that unity at all. The members and organs become mere 
"parts" only under the hands of the anatomist; but for that reason he is dealing 
with corpses rather than with living bodies. This is not to say that this kind of 
dissection should not happen at all, but only that the external and mechanical 
relationship of whole and parts does not suffice for the cognition of organic life in 
its truth. 
a. das Zusammen 

B. ApPEARANCE (§§ 131-141) 
205 
The same applies in a much higher degree when the part-whole relationship is 
applied to spirit and to the configurations of the spiritual world. Even in psychol­
ogy we do not speak expressly of "parts" of the soul or of the spirit; but still the 
treatment of this discipline from the point of view of the understanding also 
presupposes the representation of that finite relationship, because the various 
forms of spiritual activity are enumerated one after the other and are only de­
scribed in their isolation, as so-called particular powers and capacities. 
§ 1 36 
(13) What is one and the same in this relationship, [i.e.,] the relation to self 
that is present in it, is thus an immediately negative relation to self, namely 
as the mediation, by virtue of which one and the same is indifferent with 
regard to the distinction and is the negative relation to self-the relation 
which, as inward reflection, repels itself into distinction, and as reflection­
into-another, posits itself [as] existing, and conversely leads this reflection­
into-another back into relation to self and into indifference. [This is] force 
and its utterance. 
The relationship of the whole and the parts is the immediate (and 
therefore the thoughtless) relationship and overturning of self­
identity into diverSity. We pass from the whole to the parts and 
from the parts to the whole, forgetting in each the antithesis to the 
other, because we take each of them by itself-now the whole, and 
now the parts-as an independent existence. Or, since the parts 
are supposed to subsist in the whole and this [is supposed to 
consist] of the parts, it follows that, in one case, the whole is what 
subsists, in the other case, the parts, and each time the other [term] 
is correspondingly what is unessential. In its superficial form this is 
just what the mechanical relationship consists in: that the parts, as 
independent, stand over against each other and against the whole. 
The progress ad infinitum that is involved in the divisibility of 
matter can also employ this relationship; and when it does, it be­
comes the thoughtless alternation of the two sides. First a thing is 
taken as a whole, and then we pass on to the determination of its 
parts; then this determination is forgotten, and we treat what was 
previously a part as a whole; then the determination of the part 
comes back, and so on ad infinitum. But when it is taken as the 
negative that it [really] is, this infinity is the negative relation of the 
relationship to itself; it is force, the whole that is identical with 
itself, as being-within-self-and as sublating this being-within-self 

206 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
and uttering itself-and conversely the utterance which vanishes 
and returns into the force. 
In spite of this infinity, force is also finite; for the content, the one 
and the same of force and its utterance, is still only in-itself this 
identity; the two sides are not yet, each of them on its own ac­
count, the concrete identity of the relationship, i.e., the totality. 
Hence, they are diverse for each other and the relationship is a 
finite one. The force therefore needs solicitation from outside; it 
acts blindly, and, because of this defectiveness of the form, the 
content is restricted and contingent too. It is not yet truly identical 
with the form, not yet Concept and purpose, which is what is 
determinate in and for itself.-This distinction is most essential, 
but it is not easy to grasp; it has to determine itself more preCisely 
in the concept of purpose itself. If we disregard this distinction, we 
are led into the confusion of grasping God as force-a confusion 
from which Herder's GOd16 suffers quite conspicuously. 
It is often said that the nature of force itself is unknown and that 
we are cognizant only of its utterance. But, on the one hand, the 
whole determination of the content of the force is just the same as the 
content-determination of the utterance; and because of this the 
explanation of an appearance through a force is an empty tautol­
ogy. Thus, what is supposed to remain unknown is in fact nothing 
but the empty form of inward reflection, which is all that makes 
the force distinct from its utterance, and this form is likewise 
something that is quite well known. It adds nothing at all to the 
content and the law, of which we are supposed to be cognizant just 
from the appearance alone. We are also assured everywhere that 
this does not imply any assertion concerning the force [itself]; but 
in that case it is hard to see why the form of force was introduced 
into the sciences.-Yet, on the other hand, the nature of force is 
certainly something unknown, because both the necessity of the 
internal coherence of its content, and the necessity of the content 
insofar as it is restricted on its own account and hence has its 
determinacy through the mediation of an other that is outside it, 
are still lacking. 
Addition 1 .  In comparison with the preceding immediate relationship of whole and 
parts, the relationship of force and its utterance should be considered infinite, 
because in it the identity of the two sides that was present only implicitly in "whole 
and parts" is now posited. AlthougI{ikonsists implicitly of parts, the ܵhole does 
cease to be a whole when it is divided; a force, on the other hand, only proves itself 
to be a force by uttering itself. It returns to itself in its utterance, for the utterance is 

B. ApPEARANCE (§§ 131-141) 
207 
itself a force once more. But this relationship, too, is again a finite one, and its 
finitude consists generally in the fact that it is mediated; just as, conversely, the 
relationship of whole and parts has shown itself to be finite because of its imme­
diacy. The finitude of the mediated relationship of force and its utterance is shown, 
first, by the fact that any force is conditioned by something else and needs some­
thing other than itself in order to subsist. Thus we all know, for instance, that the 
principal vehicle of magnetic force is iron, whose remaining properties (colour, 
specific weight, relationship to acids, etc.) are independent of this relation to mag­
netism. The situation is the same with all the other forces, which show themselves 
always to be conditioned and mediated by something other than themselves. 
The finitude of force is shown further by the fact that it requires solicitation in 
order to utter itself. What solicits a force is again itself the utterance of a force 
(which in order to be uttered must similarly be solicited). In this way we get either 
an infinite progression once more or a reciprocity of soliciting and being solicited; 
but an absolute beginning of motion is still lacking here. Unlike purpose, force is 
not yet something that determines itself from within; the content is something 
determinately given, so that force, in uttering itself, is, as we say, blind in its 
working; and that is what is to be understood as the difference between the 
abstract utterance of force and all purposive activity. 
Addition 2 .  The oft-repeated assertion that there can be cognition only of the 
utterance of a force, and not of the force itself, must be rejected as unfounded, 
because a force consists precisely in its utterance, so that cognition of the totality of 
utterance grasped as law is cognition of the force itself. Nevertheless, it should not 
be overlooked here that the assertion that what forces are in-themselves is beyond 
cognition, involves a correct hunch about the finitude of this relationship. We first 
encounter the single utterances of a force as an indeterminate manifold, and in 
their isolation they are contingent. Then we reduce this manifold to its inner unity, 
which we designate as "force", and by becoming cognizant of the law that reigns 
in it we become aware that what seems to be contingent is something necessary. 
But the various forces themselves are again manifold and, being merely juxtaposed, 
they appear contingent. 
In empirical physics, therefore, we talk about the forces of gravity, of magnetism, 
of electricity, and so on; and similarly, in empirical psychology, we speak of the 
force of memory, the force of imagination, the force of will, and all manner of other 
forces of the soul. Hence, the need to become conscious of these various forces as a 
similarly unified whole recurs once more; and this need would not be satisfied by 
the simple reduction of the various forces to one primitive force that is common to 
them all. In fact, any such primitive force would be only an empty abstraction, as 
much lacking in content as the abstract thing-in-itself. Moreover, the relationship of 
force to its utterance is essentially a mediated one, and consequently, if we inter­
pret the force as original or as self-subsistent, this contradicts the very concept of 
force. 
This being the nature of force, we may well be content to let it be said that the 
existent world is an utterance of divine forces; but we should object to the treat-

208 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
ment of God himself as a mere force, because force is still a subordinate and finite 
determination. It was in this sense therefore that the church declared impious the 
undertaking of those who (at the time of the so-called reawakening of the sciences) 
set themselves to trace the singular phenomena of nature back to the same under­
lying force. For, if it were the forces of gravitation, of vegetation, etc., which occa­
sion the motion of the heavenly bodies, the growth of plants, etc., then nothing 
would remain for the divine governance of the world to do, and God would 
thereby be degraded into the idle spectator of this play of forces. Certainly, the 
natural scientists, and especially Newton,17 claimed quite expressly that, although 
they employed the reflective form of force for the explanation of natural phe­
nomena, their doing so was not meant to prejudice the honour of God as the 
creator and governor of the world. Nevertheless, this explanation by reference to 
forces has the consequence that the argumentative understanding proceeds to 
fixate the singular forces, each one on its own account, and cleaves to them in this 
finitude as something ultimate; so that, over and against this finitised world of 
independent forces and stuffs, nothing remains for the determination of God but 
the abstract infinity of a highest essence in a beyond that is unaccessible to our 
cognition. 
This is, indeed, the standpoint of materialism, and of the modern Enlighten­
ment, whose knowledge of God reduces to the fact that he is and disclaims all 
knowledge of what he is. So, in the polemic of which we are speaking, the church 
and the religious consciousness must be said to have been right, inasmuch as the 
finite forms of the understanding certainly do not suffice for the cognition either of 
nature or of the configurations of the spiritual world in their truth. All the same, 
we should not overlook the formal justification of the empirical sciences by the 
Enlightenment. This justification consists generally in reclaiming the content of this 
present world in all its determinacy for our thinking cognition-instead of letting 
the matter end simply with the abstract faith that God created and governs the 
world. When our religious consciousness, supported by the authority of the 
church, teaches us that it is God who created the world by his almighty will, and 
that it is he who guides the stars in their courses, and grants all creatures subsis­
tence and well-being, the question "why?" remains to be answered, and the an­
swering of this question is just what constitutes the common task of science, both 
empirical and philosophical. Insofar as the religious consciousness does not recog­
nise this task and the right contained it it, but appeals to the impossibility of 
inquiry into the divine decrees, it adopts the above standpoint of the Enlighten­
ment itself, and does not go beyond the mere understanding. But any such appeal 
must be regarded as the arbitrary assurance, not of Christian humility at all, but of 
courtly and fanatical self-debasement, since it contradicts the express command of 
the Christian religion that we should [re]cognise God in spirit and truth [John 
4:24]. 
§ l37 
As the whole which in its own self is negative relation to self, force is this: 
the repulsion of itself from itself and the utterance of itself.- But since this 
a. sich zu iiufiern 

B. ApPEARANCE (§§ 131-141) 
209 
reflection-in to-another, or the distinction of the parts, is to the same extent 
inward reflection, the utterance is the mediation, through which the force, 
which returns into itself, is as force. The utterance itself is the sublation of 
the diversity (of the two sides) that is present in this relationship, and the 
positing of the identity, which in-itself constitutes the content. Its truth is 
therefore the relationship whose two sides are distinct only as what is inner 
and what is outer. 
§ l38 
(oy) What is inner is the ground, inasmuch as the ground, as mere form, is 
one side of appearance and of the relationship, the empty form of inward 
reflection; over against it likewise stands existence, the form of the other 
side of the relationship, with the empty determination of reflection-into­
another, or what is outer. Its identity is fulfilled, it is the content, the unity 
of inward reflection and of reflection-into-another that is posited in the 
movement of the force; both are the same one totality, and this unity makes 
them into the content. 
§ l39 
Hence, what is outer is, first of all, the same content as what is inner. What is 
internal is also present externally, and vice versa; appearance does not 
show anything that is not within essence, and there is nothing in essence 
that is not manifested. 
§ 140 
Secondly, however, what is inner and what is outer are also opposed to each 
other as determinations of the form; and as abstractions of identity with 
self and of mere manifoldness or reality they are radically opposed. But 
since as moments of the One form they are essentially identical, what is 
first posited only in one abstraction is also immediately only in the other 
one. Hence, what is only something-internal, is also (by the same token) 
only something-external; and what is only something-external is also as yet 
only something-internal. 
The usual error of reflection is to take essence as what is merely 
inner. If it is taken only in this way, then this view of it is also a 
quite external one and that "essence" is the empty external 
abstraction. 

210 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Into the inwardnessa of Nature-says a poet­
No created spirit penetrates, 
Most fortunate, if it knows but the outer shell!" 
He should rather have said that, precisely when, for such a 
spirit, the essence of nature is determined as what is inner, then it 
only knows the outer shell.-Because in being in general, or even in 
mere sense-perception, the concept is still only what is inner, it is 
something outer [with regard] to being: both a being and a think­
ing that are subjective and without truth.-Both in nature and in 
spirit, too, Concept, purpose, and law, so far as they are still only 
inner dispositions, pure possibilities, are still only an external in­
organic nature, what is known by a third, an alien power, etc.­
The way a man is externally, i.e., in his actions (not of course just 
in his merely corporeal externality), that is how he is internally; 
and if he is only internally virtuous or moral, etc., i.e., only in his 
intentions, and dispositions, and his outward [behaviour]a is not 
identical with those, then the former is as hollow and empty as the 
latter. 
Addition. As the unity of the two preceding relationships, the relationship of in­
ward and outward is at the same time the sublation of mere relationality and of 
appearance altogether. But for as long as the understanding holds inward and 
outward fast in their separation from one another, they are a pair of empty forms, 
and the one is as null as the other. 
Both in the study of nature and in that of the spiritual world, it is of great 
importance to keep the special character of the relationship between inward and 
outward properly in view, and to guard against the error of thinking that only what 
is inward is essential, that it is the heart of the matter, c whilst, the outward side, on 
the contrary, is what is inessential and indifferent. We first meet this error when, as 
often happens, the distinction between nature and spirit is traced back to the 
abstract distinction between outward and inward. As for the interpretation of na­
ture that is involved here, it is certainly true that nature is what is external gener-
"See Goethe's "Indignant Outcry" in Zur Morphologie, vo!. 1 :3: 
For sixty years I hear repeated, 
What I curse-be it in secret-: 
Nature has no core nor crust, 
Here everything comes all at once. IS 
a. Ins Innere 
b. sein Aufieres 
c. worauf es eigentlich ankommt 

B. ApPEARANCE (§§ 131-141) 
211 
ally, not only for the spirit but also in-itself. But, this "generally" must not be taken 
in the sense of abstract externality, for there simply is no such thing, but rather in 
the sense that the Idea, which forms the common content of nature and spirit, is 
present in nature only in an external way, and yet, precisely for this reason, in a 
merely internal way too. And, however much the abstract understanding with its 
"either-or" may baulk at this interpretation of nature, still it is one that is also 
found in our other modes of consciousness, and in our religious consciousness 
most distinctly of all. Our religion says that nature, no less than the spiritual world, 
is a revelation of God, and the two are distinguished from one another by the fact 
that, whereas nature never gets to the pOint of being conscious of its divine es­
sence, it is the express task of finite spirit to achieve this. That is just why the spirit 
is initially finite. So those who regard the essence of nature as something merely 
inward and therefore inaccessible to us are adopting the standpoint of those An­
cients who considered God to be jealous, a position against which Plato and Aristo­
tle have already declared themselves.19 God imparts and reveals what he is, and he 
does it, first of all, through nature and in it. 
Furthermore, the defect or imperfection of an ob-ject consists generally in its 
being only something inward, and hence at the same time only something out­
ward, or (what is the same thing) in its being only something external, and hence 
at the same time only something internal. Thus a child, for instance, [considered] 
as human in a general sense, is of course a rational essence; but the child's reason 
as such is present at first only as something inward, i.e., as a disposition or voca­
tion, and this, which is merely internal, has for it equally the form of what is 
merely external, namely, the will of its parents, the learning of its teachers, and in 
general the rational world that surrounds it. The education and formation of the 
child consists therefore in the process by which it becomes for-itself also what it is 
initially only in-itself and hence for others (the adults). Reason, which is at first 
present in the child only as an inner possibility, is made actual by education, and 
conversely, the child becomes in like manner conscious that the ethics, religion, 
and science which it regarded initially as external authority are things that belong 
to its own and inner nature. 
In this connection, the situation is the same for the adult as it is for the child, to 
the extent that, in conflict with his vocation, he remains embroiled in the natural 
state of his knowing and willing; and similarly, for example, the punishment to 
which the criminal is subjected has for him the form of an external violence, but in 
fact it is only the manifestation of his own criminal will. 
And from this discussion we can also gather what our attitude should be when 
someone appeals to his quite different inner self, and his allegedly excellent inten­
tions and sentiments, in the face of his inadequate performances and even of his 
discreditable acts. There may, of course, be single instances where, through the 
adversity of external circumstances, well-meant intentions come to nothing and the 
execution of well-thought out plans is frustrated. But here, too, the essential unity 
of inward and outward generally holds good; and hence it must be said that a 
person is what he does, and the mendacious vanity that warms itself with the 
consciousness of inner excellence must be confronted with the saying of the Gos­
pels that "By their fruits ye shall cognise them" [Matt. 7:16,20]. Just as it holds 

212 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
good first in an ethical and a religious connection, so that great saying holds for 
scientific and artistic achievements, too. As far as artistic ability is concerned, a 
teacher of keen eye may perhaps, when he becomes aware of notable talents in a 
boy, express the opinion that a Raphael or a Mozart lies hidden in him; and the 
results will show how far that opinion was well founded. But it is cold comfort for a 
dauber or a poetaster to console himself with the view that his inner self is full of 
high ideals; and when he demands that he should be judged by his intentions 
rather than his achievements, his pretensions are rightly rejected as empty and 
unfounded. Conversely, it is also very often the case that in judging others, who 
have brought about something fair, square, and solid, we may employ the false 
distinction of inward and outward, in order to maintain that what they have done 
is only something external to them, and that their inner motives were completely 
different, because they acted to satisfy their vanity or some other discreditable 
passion. This is the envious disposition which, being itself unable to accomplish 
anything great, strives to drag greatness down to its own level and to belittle it. As 
against this, we may recall the fine saying of Goethe, that for the great superiorities 
of others there is no remedy but love.20 So if in order to depreciate the praiseworthy 
achievements of others there is talk of hypocrisy, we must notice, on the contrary, 
that although a man may certainly dissemble and hide a good deal in single 
instances, still he cannot hide his inner self altogether; it reveals itself infallibly in 
the decursus vitae [course of life], so that even in this connection it must be said that 
a man is nothing but the series of his acts. 
In our modern era, what we call "pragmatic historiography"21 has often sinned 
quite notably with regard to great historical characters through this false separation 
between inward and outward, dimming and distorting the unprejudiced apprehen­
sion of them. Instead of contenting themselves with simply narrating the great 
deeds that have been accomplished by heroes of world-historical stature, and rec­
ognising that their inner selves correspond to the content of these deeds, the 
pragmatic historians have considered it a right and duty to scent out allegedly 
secret motives behind what lies open to the light of day; and their opinion has been 
that historical inquiry is all the deeper the more it succeeds in remOVing the halo of 
the hero who has hitherto been celebrated and praised, and degrading him, with 
regard to his origin and his "real" significance, to the level of common mediocrity. 
In the interest of this kind of pragmatic historical inquiry, the study of psychology 
is often recommended, too, because it is supposed to yield information about the 
"real" motives by which people are generally determined to act. The psychology 
that is here appealed to, however, is nothing but that petty expertise about human 
nature" which takes as the ob-ject of its study, not what is universal and essential 
about human nature, but principally just what is peculiar and contingent such as 
isolated drives, passions, and so on. Besides, although this psychological-pragmatic 
approach to the motives that underlie great deeds would still leave the historian the 
choice between the substantial interests of the fatherland, of justice, of religious 
truth, etc., on the one hand, and the subjective and formal interests of vanity, 
ambition, avarice, etc., on the other, the latter are considered the "real" moving 
a. Menschenkennerei 

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
213 
forces, because otherwise the presupposed antithesis between what is inward (the 
disposition of the person acting) and what is outward (the content of the action) 
would not be borne out. But since inward and outward have in truth the same 
content, it must be expressly asserted, against all such school masterly cleverness, 
that if the historical heroes had been only concerned with subjective and formaJ22 
interests, they would not have accomplished what they did; and with reference to 
the unity of inward and outward, it must be recognised that the great men willed 
what they did and did what they willed. 
§ 141 
The empty abstractions, because of which the one identical content is still 
supposed to be in relationship, sub late themselves, through their immedi­
ate passing-over, into one another; the content is itself nothing but their 
identity (§ 138); they are the semblance of essence, posited as semblance. 
Through the utterance of force, what is inward is posited in existence; this 
positing is a mediation through empty abstractions; it vanishes within itself 
into the immediacy, in which what is inner and what is outer are identical in 
and for themselves and where their distinction is determined as mere 
positedness. This identity is actuality. 
C 
Actuality 
§ 142 
Actuality is the unity, become immediate, of essence and existence, or of 
what is inner and what is outer. The utterance of the actual is the actual 
itself, so that the actual remains still something-essential in this [utterance] 
and is only something-essential so far as it is in immediate external 
existence. 
Being and existence presented themselves earlier as forms of the 
immediate; being is quite generally unreflected immediacy and 
passing-over into another. Existence is immediate unity of being and 
reflection, and hence appearance; it comes from the ground and 
goes to the ground. The actual is the positedness of that unity, the 
relationship that has become identical with itself; hence, it is ex-

214 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
empted from passing-over, and its externality is its energy; in that 
externality it is inwardly reflected; its being-there is only the man­
ifestation of itself, not of an other. 
Addition. Actuality and thought-more precisely the Idea-are usually opposed to 
one another in a trivial way, and hence we often hear it said therefore that, al­
though there is certainly nothing to be said against the correctness and truth of a 
certain thought, still nothing like it is to be found or can actually be put into effect. 
Those who talk like this, however, only demonstrate that they have not adequately 
interpreted the nature either of thought or of actuality. For, on the one hand, in all 
talk of this kind, thought is assumed to be synonymous with subjective representa­
tion, planning, intention, and so on; and, on the other hand, actuality is assumed 
to be synonymous with external, sensible existence. 
These assumptions may be all very well in common life where people are not 
very precise about categories and their designation; and it may of course happen to 
be the case that the plan, or the so-called "idea", of a certain method of taxation, 
for example, is quite good and expedient in itself, but that nothing of the sort can 
be found in what is called (in the same ordinary usage) "actuality"-and that in the 
given circumstances it cannot be put into effect. All the same, when the abstract 
understanding takes control of these categories and exaggerates their distinction to 
the point of regarding them as a hard and fast antithesis, such that in this actual 
world we must knock ideas out of our heads, then it is necessary, in the name of 
science and sound reason, to reject such stuff deciSively. For, on the one hand, 
ideas are not just to be found in our heads, and the Idea is not at all something so 
impotent that whether it is realised or not depends upon our own sweet will; on 
the contrary, it is at once what is quite simply effective and actual as well. On the 
other hand, actuality is not so bad or so irrational as it is imagined to be by 
"practical men" who are devoid of thoughts or at odds with thinking and intellec­
tually derelict. As distinct from mere appearance, actuality, being initially the unity 
of inward and outward, is so far from confronting reason as something other than 
it, that it is, on the contrary, what is rational through and through; and what is not 
rational must, for that very reason, be considered not to be actual. This agrees, for 
that matter, with the usage of educated speech, in that, for example, we would 
object to recognising someone who does not know how to bring about something 
valid and rational as being "actually" a poet or a statesman. 
The ground of a widespread prejudice about the relationship between the phi­
losophies of Aristotle and Plato must also be looked for in the common interpreta­
tion of actuality that we are here discussing, and in the confusion of actuality with 
what is tangible and immediately perceptible. According to this prejudice, the 
difference between Plato and Aristotle is supposed to be that, whereas the former 
recognises the Idea and only the Idea as what is true, the latter, in contrast, rejects 
the Idea, and clings to what is actual; for that reason he should be considered the 
founder and leader of empiricism. On this head it must be remarked that actuality 
certainly does form the principle of Aristotle's philosophy, but his actuality is that 
of the Idea itself, and not the ordinary actuality of what is immediately present. 

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
215 
More precisely, therefore, Aristotle's polemic against Plato consists in his designa­
tion of the Platonic Idea as mere dynamis, and in urging, on the contrary, that the 
Idea, which is recognised by both of them equally to be what is alone true, should 
be regarded essentially as energeia, i.e., as the inwardness that is totally to the fore; 
so that it is the unity of inward and outward. In other words, the Idea should be 
regarded as Actuality in the emphatic sense that we have given to it here. 23 
§ 143 
As this concreteness, actuality contains those determinations [i.e., essence 
and existence, what is inner and what is outer] and their distinction; and it 
is therefore their development, too, so that they are at the same time 
determined in it as semblance, or as merely posited (§ 141). (1) As identity 
in general it is, first, possibility-the inward reflection that is posited as the 
abstract and unessential essentiality, in contrast to the concrete unity of the 
actual. Possibility is what is essential to reality, but in such a way that it is at 
the same time only possibility. 
a. heraus 
It was probably the determination of possibility that allowed Kant 
to regard it-together with actuality and necessity-as modalities, 
"since these determinations do not in the least enlarge the concept 
as object, but only express its relationship to the faculty of cogni­
tion."24 Possibility is indeed the empty abstraction of inward 
reflection-what was earlier called the inner, except that now it is 
determined as sublated, merely posited, external inwardness;b and 
so it is certainly now also posited as a mere modality, as an inade­
quate abstraction, or taken more concretely, as belonging only to 
subjective thinking. Actuality and necessity, on the contrary, are 
truly anything but a mere mode or manner< for something else; they 
are rather just the opposite, [for] they are posited as the concrete 
that is not only posited, but inwardly complete d.-Since possibility 
is at first the mere form of self-identity, in contrast to the concrete 
as what is actual, the rule for it is only that something shall not 
inwardly contradict itself; consequently everything is possible, for 
this form of identity can be given to every content through abstrac­
tion. But everything is just as much impossible too; for in every con­
tent, since it is something-concrete, its determinacy can be grasped 
b. das 
. 
iiufierliche lnnre 
c. Art und Weise 

216 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
as a determinate opposition and hence as a contradiction.­
For this reason there is nothing emptier than the talk about possi­
bilities and impossibilities of this kind. And in particular, there 
should be no talk in philosophy of proving that something is possi­
ble, or that something else is possible, too; and that something, as 
people also say, is "thinkable." And the warning not to use this 
category which has already been shown up as untrue even on its 
own account applies just as immediately to the historian. But the 
subtlety of the empty understanding takes the greatest pleasure in 
this pointless invention of possibilities, and right many of them at 
that. 
Addition. The notion of possibility appears initially to be the richer and more 
comprehensive determination, and actuality, in contrast, as the poorer and more 
restricted one. So we say, "Everything is possible, but not everything that is possi­
ble is on that account actual too." But, in fact, i.e., in thought, actuality is what is 
more comprehensive, because, being the concrete thought, it contains possibility 
within itself as an abstract moment. We find this accepted in our ordinary con­
sciousness, too: for when we speak of the possible, as distinct from the actual, we 
call it "merely" possible. 
It is usually said that possibility consists generally in thinkability. But thinking is 
here understood to mean just the apprehending of a content in the form of abstract 
identity. Now, since any content can be brought into this form, providing only that 
it is separated from the relations in which it stands, even the most absurd and 
nonsensical suppositions can be considered possible. It is possible that the moon 
will fall on the earth this evening, for the moon is a body separate from the earth 
and therefore can fall downward just as easily as a stone that has been flung into 
the air; it is possible that the Sultan may become Pope, for he is a human being, 
and as such he can become a convert to Christianity, and then a priest, and so on. 
Now in all this talk of possibilities it is especially the principlea of "grounding" that 
is applied in the way discussed earlier: according to this principle, anything for 
which a ground (or reason) can be specified is possible. The more uneducated a 
person is, the less he knows about the determinate relations in which the ob-jects 
that he is considering stand and the more inclined he tends to be to indulge in all 
manner of empty possibilities; we see this, for example, with so-called pub politi­
cians in the political domain. 
Moreover, it happens not infrequently in practical matters that evil will and 
inertia hide behind the category of possibility, in order to avoid definite obligations 
in that way; what we said earlier about the use of the principle of "grounding" 
holds good here, too. Rational, practical people do not let themselves be impressed 
by what is possible, precisely because it is only possible; instead they hold onto 
what is actual-and, of course, it is not just what is immediately there that should 
a. Denkgesetz 

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
217 
be understood as actual. For that matter, there is no shortage of all manner of 
proverbs in common life in which the justly low estimation of abstract possibility is 
expressed. For instance, we say that " A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush." 
And, furthermore, just as everything can be considered possible, so we can say 
with equal right that everything can be considered impossible, since any content 
(which, as such, is always something-concrete) contains not only diverse but also 
opposite determinations. Thus, for example, nothing is more impossible than the 
fact that I exist, for "I" is at once simple self-relation as well as, unconditionally, 
relation to another. The same situation holds for every other content in the natural 
and spiritual world. We can say that matter is impossible, because it is the unity of 
repulSion and attraction. The same holds for life, for law, for freedom, and, above 
all, for God himself as the true, i.e., triune God; indeed the Trinity is a concept that 
has been rejected by the abstract Enlightenment of the understanding in accor­
dance with its principle, because it is allegedly an expression that cannot be 
thought without contradiction. In any case it is the empty understanding that 
roams around in these empty forms, and the business of philosophy with regard to 
them consists simply in exhibiting their nullity and lack of content. Whether this or 
that is possible or impossible depends on the content, Le., on the totality of the 
moments of actuality, an actuality which, in the unfolding of its moments, proves 
to be Necessity. 
§ 144 
(2) But, in its distinction from possibility as inward reflection the actual is 
itself just the externally concrete, i.e., the immediate that is inessential. Or 
immediately, insofar as it is to begin with (§ 142) the simple unity of wQat' 
is inner and what is outer, a unity which is itself immediate, the actual is 
[actual] as something-outer that is inessential. Thus, it is at the same time 
(§ 140) what is only internal, the abstraction of inward reflection; hence it is 
itself determined as something only possible. When it is given this value of 
a mere possibility, the actual is something-contingent, and conversely, possi­
bility is mere chance itself. 
§ l45 
Possibility and contingency are the moments of actuality, what is inner and 
what is outer, posited as mere forms that together constitute the externality 
of the actual. They have their inward reflection in the actual that is deter­
minate within-itself, i.e., in the content, as their essential ground of deter­
mination. Hence, the finitude of the contingent and the possible consists 
more precisely in the distinctness of the form-determination from the con­
tent, and for that reason whether something is contingent and possible depends 
on the content. 

218 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Addition. Being just the inwardness of actuality, possibility is, precisely for that 
reason, merely external actuality or contingency as well. The contingent is generally 
what has the ground of its being not within itself but elsewhere. This is the shape 
in which actuality first presents itself to consciousness, and which is frequently 
confused with actuality itself. But the contingent is only the actual in the one-sided 
form of reflection-in to-another or the actual considered as what is merely possible. 
We consider the contingent, therefore, as what either can be or can also not be, as 
what can be thus or otherwise too, i.e., as that whose being or not being, being 
thus or otherwise, is grounded not within itself but in another. It is, on the one 
hand, the general task of cognition to overcome the contingent, whilst, on the other 
hand, in the domain of the practical, the point is not to remain at the stage of the 
contingency of willing or of [simple] freedom of choice." All the same, it has often 
happened, particularly in modem times, that contingency has been improperly 
elevated, and a value that it does not have has been ascribed to it, both in reference 
to nature and to the spiritual world as well. To begin with nature, it is very often 
admired chiefly on account of the richness and the multiplicity of its configurations 
alone. But, apart from the unfolding of the Idea that is present in it, that wealth 
(taken as it stands) offers nothing of higher rational interest; and the great multi­
plicity of inorganic and organic configurations affords only the intuition of a con­
tingency that loses itself in indeterminateness. In any case, the motley play of 
single varieties of animals and plants, the ever-changing figures and groupings of 
clouds and so on, all conditioned by external circumstances, should not be rated 
higher than the equally contingent brain waves of a spirit that indulges itself in its 
own arbitrariness; and the admiration devoted to these phenomena is a very ab­
stract mode of behaviour, from which we ought to advance to a closer insight into 
the inner harmony and lawfulness of nature. 
In the next place, it is particularly important to make an adequate evaluation of 
contingency in respect of the will. When people speak of freedom of the will, they 
frequently understand by this simply freedom of choice, i.e., will in the form of 
contingency. Now, freedom of choice, as the capacity to determine oneself in this 
way or that, is certainly an essential moment of the will, which by its very concept 
is free. But it is not freedom itself at all; on the contrary, it is still only freedom in 
the formal sense. b The will that is genuinely free, and contains freedom of choice 
sublated within itself, is conscious of its content as something steadfast in and for 
itself; and at the same time it knows the content to be utterly its own. In contrast, 
the will that does not go beyond the level of freedom of choice, even when it 
decides in favour of what is, as regards its content, true and right, remains infected 
with the conceit that, had it so pleased, it could also have decided in favour of 
something else. For the rest, when we look at it more closely, freedom of choice 
proves to be a contradiction, because the form and content are here still opposed to 
one another. The content of freedom of choice is something given, and known to 
be grounded, not within the will itself, but in external circumstances. For this 
a. Wil/kiir 
b. die formel/e Freiheit 

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
219 
reason, freedom in relation to such content consists only in the form of choosing; 
and this formal freedom must be regarded as a freedom that is only supposed to be 
such" because it will be found, in the final analysis, that the same external sort of 
circumstances in which the content given to the will is grounded must also be 
invoked to explain the fact that the will decides in favour of just this and not that. 
Although it follows from discussion so far that contingency is only a one-sided 
moment of actuality, and must therefore not be confused with it, still as a form of 
the Idea as a whole it does deserve its due in the world of ob-jects. This holds first 
for nature, on the surface of which contingency has free rein, so to speak. This free 
play should be recognised as such, without the pretension (sometimes erroneously 
ascribed to philosophy) of finding something in it that could only be so and not 
otherwise. Similarly, as we have already noted in respect to the will, the contingent 
also asserts itself in the world of spirit, since will contains the contingent within 
itself in the shape of freedom of choice, though only as a sublated moment. In 
regard to the spirit and its activity, we also have to be careful that we are not misled 
by the well-meant striving of rational cognition into trying to show that phe­
nomena that have the character of contingency are necessary, or, as people tend to 
say, into "constructing them a priori."25 For example, although language is the body 
of thinking, as it were, still chance indisputably plays a decisive role in it, and the 
same is true with regard to the configurations of law, art, etc. It is quite correct to 
say that the task of science and, more precisely, of philosophy, consists generally in 
coming to know the necessity that is hidden under the semblance of contingency; 
but this must not be understood to mean that contingency pertains only to our 
subjective views and that it must therefore be set aside totally if we wish to attain 
the truth. Scientific endeavours which one-sidedly push in this direction will not 
escape the justified reproach of being an empty game and a strained pedantry. 
§ 146 
More precisely, this externality of actuality implies that contingency (as 
immediate actuality) is essentially what is identical with itself only as 
positedness; but this positedness is equally sublated, it is an externality that 
is there. Thus it is something-presupposed, whose immediate way of being is 
at the same time a possibility, and is destinedb to be sublated-i.e., to be 
the possibility of an other: the condition. 
Addition. Being actuality in its immediacy, the contingent is at the same time the 
possibility of an other. But it is no longer the merely abstract possibility that we 
began with; instead it is the possibility that is; and as such it is condition. When we 
speak of the condition for this or that matter, this has a double implication: namely, 
a. eine blofl gemeinte Freiheit 
b. die Bestimmung hat 

220 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
first, something-there, an existent, or in general something immediate; and se­
condly, the destination of this immediate being is to be sublated and to serve for 
the realisation of another one. 
Now, immediate actuality as such is quite generally not what it ought to be; on 
the contrary, it is a finite actuality, inwardly fractured, and its destination is to be 
used up. But then the other side of actuality is its essentiality. Initially this is what 
is inward, which, being mere possibility, is similarly destined to be sublated. As 
sublated possibility it is the emergence of a new actuality, for which the first 
immediate actuality was the presupposition. This is the alternation that the concept 
of Condition contains within itself. When we consider the conditions of a matter, 
they appear to be something quite without bias. a But, in fact, any such immediate 
actuality contains within it the germ of something else altogether. Initially, this 
other is just something pOSSible; but this form then sublates and translates itself 
into actuality. The new actuality that emerges in this way is the specific inwardness 
of the immediate actuality, which the new actuality uses up. So what comes to be is 
quite another shape of things, and yet it is not another one either: for the first 
actuality is now simply posited in accordance with its essence. The conditions that 
sacrifice themselves, go under and are used up, only come together with them­
selves in the other actuality.-This is just what the process of actuality is like. 
Actuality is not just something that is immediately; but, as the essential being, it is 
the sublation of its own immediacy, and in this way it mediates itself with itself. 
047 
(3) When it is developed in this way, this externality is a circle of the 
determinations of possibility and immediate actuality; the reciprocal media­
tion of these determinations is real possibility in general. As this circle, 
moreover, it is the totality, i.e., the content, the matter [i.e., thing in question]b 
that is determined in and for itself; and, according to the distinction of the 
determinations within this unity, it is likewise the concrete totality of the 
form for-itself, the immediate self-translation of the inner into the outer 
and of the outer into the inner. This self-movement of the form is activity, 
activationc of the matter [itself], as the real ground, which sublates itself 
into actuality, and the activation of the contingent actuality, i.e., of the 
conditions: their inward reflection and their self-sublation into another 
actuality, the actuality of the matter. When all conditions are present, the 
matter must become actual, and the matter is itself one of the conditions; 
for, as what is inner, it is at first itself only something-presupposed. Devel-
a. etwas ganz Unbefangenes 
b die Sache26 
c. Betiitigung 

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
221 
aped actuality as the coincident- alternation of what is inner and what is 
outer, or the alternation of their opposed movements which are united into 
One movement, is necessity. 
It is true that necessity has been rightly defined as the unity of 
possibility and actuality. But when it is expressed only in this way, 
this determination is superficial, and therefore unintelligible. The 
concept of necessity is very difficult, precisely because it is the 
Concept itself, but its moments are still actualities, which have to 
be grasped at the same time only as forms, or as inwardly broken 
and in passage. b For this reason, the exposition of the moments 
that constitute necessity must be given in more detail in the follow­
ing two paragraphs. 
Addition. When it is said of something that it is necessary, what we ask in the first 
place is: "Why?" . So, what is necessary should prove to be something posited, 
something mediated. If we stop at simple mediation, however, we do not yet have 
what is understood by necessity. What is merely mediated is what it is not through 
itself but through an other, and therefore it is also merely something-contingent. In 
contrast, we require of what is necessary that it be what it is through itself, and so, 
although it may be mediated, it must at the same time also contain mediation 
sublated within itself. We say of what is necessary, therefore, that it is, and hence 
that it counts for us as a simple relation to self, within which its being conditioned 
by an other falls away. 
It is usually said about neceSSity that it is "blind," and this is quite right, in­
asmuch as purpose is still not present explicitly as such in the process of necessity. 
The process of necessity begins with the existence of dispersed circumstances that 
seem to have no concern with one another and no inward coherence. These cir­
cumstances are an immediate actuality that collapses inwardly; and from this nega­
tion a new actuality emerges. We have here a content that has a dual character 
within it in respect to its form: first, as the content of the matter that is at issue,' 
and secondly, as the content of the dispersed circumstances that appear to be 
something positive, and initially assert themselves as such. Because of its inward 
nullity, this content is inverted into its negative, and so becomes the content of the 
matter. As conditions, the immediate circumstances go under, but at the same time 
they are also preserved as the content of the matter. We say then that something 
quite different has emerged from these circumstances and conditions, and hence 
the necessity that constitutes this process is called "blind." By contrast, if we 
consider purposive activity, then the content is a purpose of which we knew 
beforehand, so that this activity is not blind but sighted. 
a. in Eins fallende 
b. iibergehende 
c. als lnhalt der Sache 

222 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
When we say that the world is governed by Providence, this implies that, being 
predetermined in and for itself, purpose is what is at work generally, so that what 
is to come corresponds to what was previously known and willed. In any case, the 
interpretation of the world as determined by necessity, and the faith in a divine 
Providence, do not have to be considered reciprocally exclusive at all. What under­
lies the divine Providence27 at the level of thought will soon prove to be the Concept. 
The Concept is the truth of necessity and contains the latter sublated within itself, 
just as, conversely, necessity is implicitly the Concept. Necessity is blind only inso­
far as it is not comprehended, and hence there is nothing more absurd than the 
reproach of blind fatalism that is levelled against the Philosophy of History because 
it regards as its proper task the cognition of the necessity of what has happened. In 
this perspective, the Philosophy of History takes on the significance of a theodicy; 
and those who think to honour divine Providence by excluding necessity from it by 
this abstraction actually degrade Providence to the level of blind, irrational ar­
bitrariness. The naive religious consciousness speaks of God's eternal and immuta­
ble decrees, and in that there lies the express recognition that necessity belongs to 
the essence of God. As distinct from God, man with his particular opining and 
willing carries on according to his mood and caprice, and so it happens to him that 
when he acts, what comes forth is something quite different from what he in­
tended and willed; on the contrary, God knows what he wills, he is not determined 
in his eternal willing by inward or outward chance, and what he wills he also 
irresistibly brings about. 
In relation to our disposition and behaviour generally, the standpoint of neces­
sity is in any case of great importance. When we consider what happens as neces­
sary, we seem at first sight to be in a completely unfree situation. As we all know, 
the Ancients viewed necessity as destiny, whereas the modern standpoint, on the 
contrary, is that of consolation. The general meaning of this "consolation" is that 
when we give up our purposes and interests, we do it in the expectation of receiv­
ing some compensation for them. Destiny, in contrast, is without consolation. But 
when we consider the matter more carefully, we find that the disposition of the 
Ancients with regard to destiny does not bring us face to face with unfreedom at 
all, but rather with freedom.28 This is because unfreedom is grounded upon firmly 
cleaving to the antithesis, in such a way that we consider that what is and does 
happen stands in contradiction with what ought to be and to happen. The disposi­
tion of the Ancients, on the contrary, was to say: It is so, because it is, and it ought 
to be just the way it is. So there is no antithesis here, and hence no unfreedom, no 
pain, and no suffering. 
Of course, as we remarked before, this attitude to destiny is without any consola­
tion; but a disposition of this kind was never in need of consolation either, just 
because subjectivity had here not yet attained its infinite significance. This is the 
standpoint that must be kept in view, as what is decisive, when we compare the 
ancient frame of mind with our modern Christian disposition. Suppose that we 
first understand by subjectivity just the finite immediate subjectivity with the con­
tingent and arbitrary content of its private inclinations and interests, or, in short, 
what we call a person, as distinct from the matter' in the ҆mphatic sense of the 
a Sache 

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
223 
word (in the sense in which we usually say-and rightly so-that it is the "matter" 
that matters," not the person). When we do that, we cannot but admire the serene 
submission of the Ancients to destiny, or fail to recognise this disposition as one 
that is higher and worthier than the modern one, which stubbornly pursues its 
subjective purposes, and, when it sees itself forced to renounce their attainment 
after all, can only console itself with the prospect of receiving compensation in 
another shape. But in addition, subjectivity is not really just that first subjectivity 
which, as opposed to the matter, is bad and finite; no, in its truth, subjectivity is 
immanent in the matter, and, being therefore infinite Subjectivity, it is the truth of 
the matter itself. When we interpret it in this way, the standpoint of consolation 
acquires quite another and higher significance, and it is in this sense that the 
Christian religion should be regarded as the religion of consolation and indeed of 
absolute consolation. As we all know, Christianity contains the doctrine that God 
wills that all men should be saved [1 Tim. 2:4], and that means that subjectivity has 
an infinite value. More precisely then, the consoling power of the Christian re­
ligion consists in the fact that God himself is known as absolute Subjectivity, and 
this Subjectivity contains the moment of particularity within itself. Hence, our 
particularity, too, is recognised to be something that is not just to be abstractly 
negated; it must at the same time be preserved. 
Or again the gods of the Ancients were likewise regarded as personal, of course; 
but the personality of Zeus, or of Apollo and of the others, is not an actual person­
ality but only an imaginary one. Or, to put it in another way, these gods are merely 
personifications; they do not know themselves as such; they are only known about 
instead. We also find this defect and this impotence of the ancient gods in the 
religious consciousness of the Ancients, in that they regarded the gods themselves, 
and not only human beings, as subject to destiny (to the pepromenon or heimarmene) 
-a destiny that had to be represented as unrevealed necessity, and hence as what 
is thoroughly impersonal, without self, and blind. The Christian God, in contrast, 
is not merely known, but utterly self-knowing, and not a merely imaginary person­
ality, but rather the absolutely actual one. 
For the rest, although we must refer to the Philosophy of Religion for a more 
developed explanation of the points touched upon here, we can add one more 
comment on how important it is that everyone should interpret whatever happens 
to him in the spirit of the old proverb that says, "Everyone is the smith who forges 
his own fortune." What this means, in general, is that man has the enjoyment only 
of himself. b The opposite view is the one where we shift the blame for what befalls 
us onto other people, onto unfavourable circumstances, and the like. But that is just 
the standpoint of unfreedom once more, and the source of discontent as well. By 
contrast, when we recognise that whatever happens to us is only an evolution of 
Our own selves, and that we carry only the burden of our own debts, we behave as 
free men, and whatever may befall us, we keep the firm faith that nothing unjust 
can happen to us. People who live in discord with themselves and their lot get 
involved in much that is wrong and awry, precisely because of the false opinion 
a. daft e5 auf die Sache ankommt 
b. Hierin liegt, daft der Mensch uberhaupt nur sich selbst zu genieften bekommt 

224 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
that injustice has been done to them by others. Now, certainly, there is much that is 
contingent in what happens to us. But this contingency is grounded in the natural 
dimension of man. And, since we also have the consciousness of our freedom, the 
harmony of our souls and our peace of mind will not be destroyed by the misfor­
tunes that befall us. Thus, it is our own view of necessity that determines our 
human contentment and discontent, and thereby our very destiny. 
§ 148 
Among the three moments, condition, matter [i.e., thing in question], and 
activity: 
(a) The condition is (Cl) what is presupposed; as only posited it is only in 
relation to the matter; but as pre[supposed] it is by itself: it is a contingent, 
external circumstance that exists without reference to the matter. What is 
presupposed here is (in this contingency, but at the same time with refer­
ence to the thing in question, which is the totality) a complete circle of 
conditions. (13) The conditions are passive; they are used as material for the 
matter and in that way they enter into the content of the matter; they are 
also in conformity with this content and already contain its entire determina­
tion within themselves. 
(b) The matter [itself] is equally (Cl) something-presupposed: as posited it is 
still only something-inner and possible, and as pre[supposed] it is a content 
that is independent on its own account; (13) through the employment of the 
conditions it acquires its external existence, the realisation of its content 
determinations, which correspond on their side to the conditions, so that it 
also establishes itself as [the] thing in question on the basis of these condi­
tions and emerges from them. 
(c) The activity is (Cl) likewise existent on its own account, independently 
(a man, a character); and at the same time it has its possibility only in the 
conditions and in the matter [itself]; (13) it is the movement of translating the 
conditions into the matter, and the latter into the former as the side of 
existence; more precisely [it is the movement] to make the matter [itself] go 
forth from the conditions, in which it is implicitly present, and to give 
existence to the matter by sublating the existence that the conditions have. 
Insofar as these three moments have the shape of independent existence vis­
a-vis one another, this process is external necessity.-This necessity has a 
restricted content as its matter. For the matter [itself] is this whole in simple 
determinacy; but since the whole is external to itself in its form, it is also 
inwardly and in its content external to itself, and this externality belonging 
to the matter is the restriction of its content. 
§ 149 
Hence, necessity is in-itself the One essence that is identical with itself but full 
of content, which shines within itself in such a way that its distinctions have 

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
225 
the form of independent actualities; and as absolute form this identical [es­
sence] is at the same time the activity of the sublating [of immediacy] into 
mediatedness and of mediation into immediacy.-What is necessary is so 
through an other that has fallen apart into the mediating ground (the matter 
and the activity), and an immediate actuality, something-contingent which is 
at the same time [its] condition. As what is through an other, the necessary 
is not in and for itself, but is something that is merely posited. But this 
mediation is just as immediately the sublating of itself; the ground and the 
contingent condition is translated into immediacy,29 whereby that posited­
ness is sublated into actuality, and the matter has gone together with itself. In 
this return into itself the necessary simply is, as [an] unconditioned 
actuality.-The necessary is so, [because it is] mediated by a circle of circum­
stances: it is so, because the circumstances are so; and at the same time" it is 
so without mediation-it is so, because it is. 
A. RELATIONSHIP OF SUBSTANTIALITY 
§ 150 
Inwardly the necessary is absolute relationship; i.e., it is the developed process 
(see the preceding paragraphs), in which relationship sublates itself equally 
into absolute identity. 
In its immediate form it is the relationship of substantiality and 
accidentality. The absolute identity of this relationship with itself is 
substance as such. As necessity substance is the negativity of this 
form of inwardness,b and therefore it posits itself as actuality. But it 
is equally the negativity of this external [side], for through this 
negativity the actual, as immediate, is only something-accidental, 
which in virtue of this [very status of] mere possibility passes into 
another actuality; and this passing-over is substantial identity as 
activity-of-form (§§ 148, 149). 
§ 151 
Substance, therefore, is the totality of the accidents; it reveals itself in them 
as their absolute negativity, i.e., as the absolute might and at the same time 
as the richness of all content. The content, however, is nothing but this 
manifestation itself, since the determinacy that is inwardly reflected into 
a. in Einem 
b. lnnerlichkeit 

226 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
content is itself only a moment of the form, which passes over into the 
might of the substance. Substantiality is the absolute activity-of-form and 
the might of necessity, and every content is just a moment that belongs to 
this process alone-the absolute overturning of form and content into one 
another. 
Addition. In the history of philosophy, we meet with substance as the principle of 
Spinoza's philosophy. About the significance and value of this philosophy, which 
has been as much praised as decried, there has been from the first much misunder­
standing, and much argument pro and con. The charge that is raised as a rule 
against Spinoza's system is principally that of atheism, and then, on top of that, 
there is the charge of pantheism. The reason in both cases is that in Spinoza's 
system God is apprehended as substance and only as substance. What we should 
think about these charges follows directly from the position that substance oc­
cupies in the system of the logical Idea. Substance is an essential stage in the 
process of development of the Idea, but it is not the Idea itself; it is not the absolute 
Idea, but only the Idea in the still restricted form of necessity. Now, God is certainly 
necessity or, as we can also say, he is the absolute matter,· but at the same time he is 
the absolute Person, too. This is the point that Spinoza never reached and it must 
be admitted that in this respect his philosophy fell short of the true concept of God 
which forms the content of the Christian religiOUS consciousness. Spinoza was by 
descent a Jew, and on the whole it is the Oriental intuition, according to which 
everything finite appears as something merely transient and ephemeral, that has 
found in his philosophy its expression at the level of thought. It is true, of course, 
that this Oriental intuition of the unity of substance forms the foundation of all 
genuine further development. but we cannot stop at that; what it still lacks is the 
Occidental principle of individuality, which first emerged in its philosophical shape 
in the monadology of Leibniz, at the same time as Spinozism itself. 30 
If we review the charge of atheism levelled at the philosophy of Spinoza from 
the point of view that we have reached, we must reject it as ungrounded, because 
not only is God not denied in this philosophy, but, on the contrary, he is recog­
nised as what alone truly is. Nor can it be maintained that, although Spinoza 
certainly speaks of God as the uniquely true, still this God of his is not the true one, 
and is therefore as good as no God at all. For in that case, if they remained at a 
subordinate stage of the Idea in their philosophising, we would have to charge all 
the other philosophers with atheism as well; and we should have to charge not 
only the Jews and the Mohammedans, because they know of God only as the Lord, 
but all the many Christians, too, who regard God only as the unknowable, the 
supreme and otherworldly Essence. When we look at it more closely, the charge of 
atheism levelled against the philosophy of Spinoza reduces to the point that his 
philosophy does not give the principle of difference (or finitude) its due; and this 
means that this system should be called, not atheism, but "acosmism" instead. For 
there is not, properly speaking, any world at all in it (in the sense of something that 
positively is). 
a. die absolute Sache 

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
227 
What we ought to hold about the charge of pantheism follows from this too. If we 
accept a view that is widely held, and understand pantheism to be the doctrine that 
considers finite things as such, and the complex of them, to be God, then we shall 
be forced to acquit Spinoza's philosophy of the charge of pantheism, because no 
truth at all is ascribed to finite things or to the world as a whole in that philosophy. 
Nevertheless, this philosophy is certainly pantheistic, precisely because of its 
acosmism. Thus, the defect that we have recognised with respect to its content does 
at the same time prove to be a defect with respect to its form, in the first place 
because Spinoza places Substance at the head of his system and defines it as the 
unity of thinking and extension, without demonstrating how he arrives at this 
distinction and how he succeeds in tracing it back to the unity of Substance. The 
further treatment of the content then takes place according to the so-called mathe­
matical method, which involves the initial setting-up of definitions and axioms, 
from which a series of theorems follow in sequence, the proof of which consists 
simply in deriving them in the manner of the understanding, from those unproven 
presuppositions. Spinoza's philosophy is usually praised for the strict consistency 
of its method, even by those who completely reject its content and its results. But 
this unconditional 'recognition of the form is, in fact, just as unjustified as the 
unconditional rejection of the content. On the side of content, the defect of Spin­
oza's philosophy consists precisely in the fact that the form is not known to be 
immanent to that content, and for that reason it supervenes upon it only as an 
external, subjective form. Substance, as it is apprehended immediately by Spinoza 
without preceding dialectical mediation-being the universal might of negation-is 
only the dark, shapeless abyss, so to speak, in which all determinate content is 
swallowed up as radically null and void, and which produces nothing out of itself 
that has a positive subsistence of its own. 
§ 152 
In the first form of necessity substance is [simply] substance. Then, as 
absolute might, substance is the might that relates itself to itself as a merely 
inner possibility, and hence determines itself to accidentality. According to 
this moment [of might], from which the externality that is thereby posited 
is distinguished, Substance is relationship in the most proper sense: the 
relationship of causality. 
B. RELATIONSHIP OF CAUSALITY 
§ 153 
Substance is cause, because-in contrast to its passing-over into 
aCcidentality-it is inwardly reflected; and in this way, it is the originating 

228 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Thing.- But it is cause also because it equally sublates the inward reflection 
(or its mere possibility); i.e., because it posits itself as the negative of itself, 
and in that way produces an effect: an actuality which is therefore only a 
posited one, although at the same time it is a necessary one in virtue of the 
causal process. b 
As the originating Thing the cause has the determination of abso­
lute independence and of a subsistence that preserves itself against 
the effect; but in the necessity, the identity of which constitutes 
that originality itself, it has merely passed over into the effect. 
Inasmuch as we can speak again of a determinate content, there is 
no content in the effect that is not in the cause. That identity is the 
absolute content itself; but it is equally the form-determination as 
well: the originality of the cause is sublated in the effect, where it 
makes itself into a positedness. But this does not mean that the 
cause has vanished, so that only the effect would be actual. For 
this positedness is just as immediately sublated; it is rather the 
inward self-reflection of the cause, or its originality: it is only in the 
effect that the cause is actual, and is [truly] cause. In and for itself 
therefore the cause is causa sui.-Holding firmly to the one-sided 
representation of the mediation, Jacobi took this absolute truth of 
the cause, the causa sui (which is the same as the effectus sui), to be 
a mere formalism (Letters on Spinoza, 2d ed., 416).31 He also de­
clared that God must not be determined as ground, but essentially 
as cause; that this does not establish the point he was concerned 
about, however, would have become evident through a more thor­
ough meditation on the nature of "cause." Even in the finite cause 
and in its representation this identity with regard to the content is 
present; the rain, which is the cause, and the wetness, which is the 
effect, are one and the same existing water. With regard to the 
form the cause (rain) is lost in the effect (wetness); but by the same 
token the determination of the effect [as "effect"] is lost, too, for 
the effect is nothing without the cause; and there remains only the 
undifferentiated wetness. 
In the usual sense of the causal relationship the cause is finite, 
inasmuch as its content is finite (just as it is in the finite substance) 
and inasmuch as the cause and the effect are represented as two 
diverse independent existences-but that is only what they are 
when we abstract from the causal relationship in considering 
a. die ursprungliche Sache 
b. Prozess des Wirkens 

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
229 
them. In the realm of the finite, we do not get beyond the distinc­
tion of the form-determinations within their relation; hence, it is 
the turn of the cause to be also determined as something-posited or 
as an effect; this effect then has yet an other cause; and in this way 
the progress ad infinitum, from effects to causes, arises once more. 
A descending progress arises in the same way, since it follows from 
the identity of the effect with the cause that the effect is itself 
determined as a cause and at the same time as an other cause, 
which has again other effects, and so on forever. 
Addition. Just as the understanding tends to baulk at substantiality, so, on the 
contrary, it is quite comfortable with causality, i.e., the relationship of cause and 
effect. When it is a case of interpreting some content as necessary, the reflective 
understanding makes a special point of tracing it back to the relationship of 
causality. This relationship certainly has the character of necessity, but it is itself 
only one side of the process of necessity. This process is just as much the sublation 
of the mediation that is contained in causality, and the demonstration that it [i.e., 
necessity] is simple self-relation. If we stop short at causality as such we do not 
have causality in its truth, but only a finite causality instead; and the finitude of this 
relationship then consists in holding fast to cause and effect in their distinction. 
Cause and effect, however, are not only distinct, but are just as much identical too, 
and this is even registered in our ordinary consciousness, when we say that the 
cause is a cause only because it has an effect, and the effect is an effect only 
because it has a cause. Thus, cause and effect have, both of them, one and the same 
content, and the distinction between them is primarily just that between positing 
and being posited; but then this difference of form sublates itself again, too, since the 
cause is not only the cause of an other, but is also the cause of itself, and the effect 
is not only the effect of an other, but also the effect of itself. So, the finitude of 
things consists in the fact that, although cause and effect are conceptually identical, 
the two forms occur separated in just this way: that although the cause is indeed an 
effect too and the effect is also a cause, nevertheless, the cause is not an effect in 
the same relation in which it is cause, and the effect is not a cause in the same 
relation in which it is an effect. This then gives us once again an infinite pro­
gression in the shape of an endless series of causes, which exhibits itself at the 
same time as an endless series of effects. 
054 
The effect is diverse from the cause; as such the effect is positedness. But 
this positedness is likewise inward reflection and immediacy; and insofar 
as we hold onto the diversity of the effect from the cause, the effective 
action of the cause, its positing, is at the same time a presupposing. Hence, 
there is an other substance present, upon which the cause happens to work. 
As immediate, this [other] substance is not a negativity relating itself to 

230 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
itself; it is not active, but passive. Yet as substance it is active, too; it sublates 
the presupposed immediacy and the effect that is posited in it: it reacts, 
i.e., it sublates the activity of the first substance; but the first substance is 
likewise this sublation of its immediacy or of the effect posited in it, so that 
it sublates the activity of the second, too, and reacts. As a result causality 
has passed over into the relationship of reciprocal action. 
Although causality is not yet posited in its genuine determination, 
the progress, as an infinite progress from causes to effects, is truly 
sublated as progress in reciprocal action, because the rectilinear 
progression from causes to effects and from effects to causes is 
curved and bent back upon itself. As in every other case, this curv­
ing of the infinite progress into a relationship that is self-enclosed 
is the simple reflection that in all those unthinking repetitions 
there is only one and the same relation: namely, this cause and that 
other one, and their relation to each other. Reciprocal action, how­
ever, being the development of this relation, is itself the alternation 
of the distinguishing, not now of causes, but of the moments: in 
each of which on its own (again in accordance with the identity that 
the cause is cause in the effect, and vice versa, i.e., in accordance 
with this inseparability) the other moment, too, is posited equally. 
C. RECIPROCAL ACTION 
§ 155 
The determinations that are maintained firmly as distinct in reciprocal 
action are (0:) in-themselves the same; each side is the cause, original, active, 
passive, etc., just as much as the other one. Similarly, the presupposing of 
an other and the working upon it, the immediate originality and the 
positedness through the exchange, are one and the same. In virtue of its 
immediacy, the cause that is taken as the first one is passive, positedness and 
effect. The distinction between the causes that are said to be two is there­
fore empty, and there is in-itself only One cause present, which both sub­
lates itself as substance in its effect and equally gives itself independence 
only in this effective action. a 
a. in diesem Wirken 

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
231 
056 
(;) But this unity is also for-itself, since the whole exchange is the cause's 
own positing, and since only this positing of it is its being. The nullity of the 
distinctions is not only in-itself or [due to] our reflection (see the preceding 
paragraph). On the contrary, the reciprocal action is itself also the 
sublating-again of each of the posited determinations and its conversion 
into the opposite one; and hence it is the positing of the nullity (which is 
[at first] in-itself) of the moments. In the originality there is posited an 
effect, i.e., the originality is sublated; the action of a cause becomes reac­
tion, and so on. 
Addition. Reciprocal action is the relationship of causality posited in its complete 
development, and hence it is to this relationship that reflection tends to have 
recourse when the consideration of things from the standpoint of causality proves 
to be unsatisfactory because of the infinite progression discussed above. In the case 
of historical studies, for instance, the question discussed first is whether the charac­
ter and the customs of a people are the cause of its constitution and laws, or 
whether, conversely, they are the effect of the constitution. Then the discussion 
moves on to the interpreting of both terms, character and customs on the one 
hand, and constitution and laws on the other, from the standpoint of reciprocal 
action, so that the cause is also the effect, in the same relation in which it is cause, 
and the effect is at the same time the cause, in the same relation in which it is 
effect. Or again, the same thing happens in the study of nature, and especially in 
that of the living organism, where single organs and functions likewise turn out to 
stand to one another in the relationship of reciprocal action. 
Of course, reciprocal action certainly is the proximate truth of the relationship of 
cause and effect, and it stands on the threshold of the Concept, so to speak; but, 
just for this reason, we must not be satisfied to employ this relationship, when 
what is at issue is conceptually comprehensive cognition. If we stop at considering 
a given content just from the point of view of reciprocal action, we are in fact 
proceeding quite unconceptually; we are then dealing just with a dry fact, and the 
requirement of mediation, which is what is at issue when we start to use the 
relationship of causality, still remains unsatisfied. Looked at more closely, the use 
of the relationship of reciprocal action is unsatisfactory because, instead of being 
able to count as an equivalent of the Concept, this relationship itself still requires to 
be comprehended. And comprehension comes when its two sides are not left as 
something immediately given, but (as we have shown in the two preceding para­
graphs) when they are recognised as the moments of a third, a higher [whole], 
which is, in fact, precisely the Concept. To consider the customs of the Spartans, for 
example, as the effect of their constitution, and then, conversely, to regard the 
constitution as the effect of their customs, may be correct so far as it goes. But this 
interpretation does not give us any ultimate satisfaction, because neither the consti­
tution nor the customs of this people are in fact comprehended by this approach. 

232 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Comprehension comes about only when both of them, and similarly all of the 
other particular aspects that the life and the history of the Spartans display, are 
recognised as grounded in their concept. 
057 
('Y) Hence, this pure exchange with itself is unveiled or posited necessity. The 
bond of necessity as such is the identity that is still inner and hidden; for it 
is the identity of those [terms] which count as actual, although their inde­
pendence should precisely be the necessity. Hence, the course of substance 
through causality and reciprocal action is just the positing [of the fact] that 
independence is the infinite negative relation to self-negative indeed [be­
cause] distinction and mediation become in it the originality of actualities 
that are independent vis-a-vis each other-infinite relation to itself because 
the independence of these [terms] is just nothing but their identity. 
058 
This truth of necessity is thereby freedom, and the truth of substance is the 
Concept, i.e., the independence, that is the repulsion of itself from itself 
into distinct independent [terms], [but] which, as this repulsion, is identi­
cal with itself, and which is this movement of exchange with itself alone 
that remains at home with itself. 
Addition. Necessity is usually called hard, and indeed rightly so, to the extent that 
we do not go beyond it as such, i.e., beyond it in its immediate shape. We have here 
a state of things, or in general a content, that subsists on its own account; and 
necessity implies, in the first place, that this content is overcome by another which 
brings it to the ground. That is what is hard and sorrowful about immediate or 
abstract necessity. The identity of the two things which appear as bound to one 
another in necessity, and which, for that reason, lose their independence, is at first 
only an inner identity that is not yet present to those who are subject to necessity. 
And from this point of view, freedom, too, is, initially, just the abstract freedom 
that can only be saved by renouncing what we immediately have and are. 
But again, as we have seen already, the process of necessity is the overcoming of 
what is present at first as rigid externality, so that its inwardness is revealed. What 
this process shows is that the terms that appear initially to be bound together are 
not in fact alien to one another; instead, they are only moments of one whole, each 
of which, being related to the other, is at home with itself, and goes together with 
itself. This is the transfiguration of necessity into freedom, and "freedom" now is 
not just the freedom of abstract negation, but concrete and positive freedom in­
stead. From this we can also gather how absurd it is to regard freedom and neces-

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
233 
sity as mutually exclusive. To be sure, necessity as such is not yet freedom; but 
freedom presupposes necessity and contains it sublated within itself. The ethical 
person is conscious of the content of his action as something necessary, something 
that is valid in and for itself; and this consciousness is so far from diminishing his 
freedom, that, on the contrary, it is only through this consciousness that his ab­
stract freedom becomes a freedom that is actual and rich in content, as distinct 
from freedom of choice, a a freedom that still lacks content and is merely possible. A 
criminal who is punished may regard the punishment meted out to him as a 
restriction of his freedom; in fact, however, the punishment is not an alien violence 
to which he is subject, but is only the manifestation of his own deed; and it is when 
he recognises this that he behaves as a free person. Generally speaking, the highest 
independence of man is to know himself as totally determined by the absolute 
Idea; this is the consciousness and attitude that Spinoza calls amor intellectualis Dei 
[the intellectual love of God].32 
059 
The Concept, therefore, is the truth of being and essence, since the shining of 
reflection within itself is, at the same time, independent immediacy, and 
this being of [a] diverse actuality is immediately just a shining within itself. 
In that the Concept has proven itself to be the truth of being and 
essence, which are both returned into it as their ground, it has also, 
conversely, developed itself out of being as out of its ground. The first 
side of the progression can be considered as a deepening of being 
into itself, whose inwardnessb has been unveiled through this pro­
gression; while the second side can be considered as a going forth 
of the more perfect from the imperfect. Where this development has 
been considered only from the latter side, philosophy has been 
criticised for it. The more determinate import, which the superfi­
cial thoughts about imperfect and more perfect have here, is the 
distinction of being, as immediate unity with itself, from the concept, 
as free mediation with itself. Since being has shown itself to be a 
moment of the Concept, the latter has thereby proven itself to be 
the truth of being; as its inward reflection and as the sublating of 
mediation, the Concept is the presupposing of the immediate-a 
presupposing which is identical with the return-into-self: the iden­
tity that constitutes freedom and the concept. Hence, if the moment 
a. Willkiir 
h. [nnere 

234 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
is called the imperfect, then the Concept, as what is perfect, is 
more precisely its own self-development from the imperfect, for it 
is essentially this sublating of its presupposition. But at the same 
time it is the Concept alone which, by positing itself, makes the 
presupposition. This has been shown to be the case in causality in 
general and more precisely in reciprocal action. 
Thus, the Concept is determined in relation to being and essence 
as essence that has returned to being as simple immediacy. Through 
this return the shining of essence has actuality, while its actuality 
is at the same time a free shining within itself. In this way the 
Concept has being as its simple self-relation or as the immediacy 
of its unity, within itself; being is a determination that is so poor 
that it is the very least that can be exhibited in the Concept. 
The passage from necessity to freedom, or from the actual into 
the Concept, is the hardest one, since independent actuality has to 
be thought of as having its substantiality only in its passing into, 
and its identity with, the independent actuality that is other than 
itself; thus the Concept is also the hardest, because it is itself pre­
cisely this identity. Actual substance as such, however (the cause, 
which in its being-far-itself will not allow anything to penetrate 
into it), is already subjected to the necessity, or to the destiny, of 
passing-over into positedness, and it is this subjection that is really 
the hardest. The thinking of necessity, on the contrary, is rather the 
dissolution of this hardness; because it is its· gOing-together with 
itself in the other-the liberation, which is not the flight of abstrac­
tion, and not the having of itself in that other actuality (with which 
the actual is bound together through the might of necessity) as 
something-other, but the having of its very own being and positing 
in it. As existing for-itself, this liberation is called "I," as developed 
into its totality, it is free spirit, as feeling, it is love, as enjoyment, 
beatitude.-The great intuition of Spinoza's substance is the libera­
tion from finite being-far-itself, but only implicitly; however, it is 
the Concept itself that is for-itself the might of necessity as well as 
actual freedom. 
Addition. When the Concept is called the truth of being and of essence (as it is 
here), we must be prepared for the question of why we did not start with it. A 
sufficient reply is that, when what is in question is cognition in the mode of 
thinking, we cannot begin with the truth, because truth, when it forms the begin­
ning, rests on bald assurance, whereas the truth that is thought has to prove itself 
a. Seiner 

C. ACTUALITY (§§ 142-159) 
235 
to be truth at the bar of thinking. If the Concept were posted at the head of the 
Logic, and defined as the unity of being and essence (which would be quite correct 
from the point of view of its content), then the question would arise about what is 
meant by "being" and by "essence", and how the two of them come to be brought 
together into the unity of the Concept. This would mean that we were beginning 
with the Concept in name only and not in actual fact. We would then really begin 
with "being," just as we did here; and the only difference would be that the 
determinations of being, and likewise those of essence too, would have to be taken 
up directly from representation, whereas we have here considered being and es­
sence in their own dialectical development and have recognised how they sublate 
themselves into the unity of the Concept. 

THIRD SUBDIVISION 
OF THE LOGIC 
THE DOCTRINE OF 
THE CONCEPT 
§ 160 
As the substantial might which is for itself the Concept is what is free; and 
since! each of its moments is the whole that it is, and is posited as insepar­
able unity with it, the Concept is totality; thus, in its identity with itself it is 
what is in and for itself determinate. 
Addition. The general standpoint of the Concept is indeed that of Absolute Ideal­
ism, and philosophy is conceptually comprehensive cognition, insofar as every­
thing which in other forms of consciousness counts as something that is-­
and because it is immediate, as independent-is known within the Concept simply 
as an ideal moment. In the logic of the understanding we are accustomed to regard 
the Concept as a mere form of thinking, and, more precisely, as a general represen­
tation; and it is this subordinate interpretation of the Concept that is referred to by 
the assertion, so often repeated on behalf of feeling and the heart, that "concepts" 
as such are something dead, empty, and abstract. The situation is in fact quite the 
reverse: properly speaking, the Concept is the principle of all life, and hence, at the 
same time, it is what is utterly concrete. 
That this is so has emerged as the result of the entire logical movement up to 
this pOint; so we do not have to start proving it here. The antithesis between form 
and content, which is given special validity when the Concept is supposed to be 
what is only formal, now lies behind us, together with all the other antitheses that 
reflection keeps fixed. They have been overcome dialectically, i.e., through them­
selves; and it is precisely the Concept that contains all the earlier determinations of 
thinking sublated within itself. Certainly the Concept must be considered as a 
form, but it is a form that is infinite and creative, one that both encloses the 
plenitude of all content within itself, and at the same time releases it from itself. For 
all that, the Concept can indeed be called abstract, too, if we understand by "con-
236 

THIRD SUBDIVISION OF THE LOGIC CONCEPT (§§ 160-244) 
237 
crete" only what is sensibly concrete, and in general what is immediately percept­
ible; for the Concept as such will not let us grasp it with our hands,2 and, in 
general, when the Concept is in question, hearing and seeing are things of the 
past. All the same, as we have said already, the Concept is also what is utterly 
concrete, precisely because it contains Being and Essence, and hence all the riches 
of both these spheres, within itself in ideal unity. 
As we said earlier, the various stages of the logical Idea can be considered as a 
series of definitions of the Absolute. Consequently, the definition that results at 
this point is that "the Absolute is the Concept." For this to be true, we must 
certainly apprehend the Concept in another and higher sense than that which 
"concept" has in the logic of the understanding, where it is regarded merely as a 
form of our subjective thinking, without any content of its own. In this connection, 
and because the Concept has a meaning in the speculative Logic that is so different 
from the one that we usually associate with this term, we might raise just the 
following question: "Why is something that is so completely different nevertheless 
called 'concept'?" For the result is that an occasion for misunderstanding and 
confusion is created. The answer to this question must be that, however great the 
distance between the concept of formal logic and the speculative Concept may be, a 
more careful consideration will still show that the deeper significance of the Con­
cept is in no way so alien to general linguistic usage as it might seem to be at first 
sight. We do speak of the "deduction" of a content from its concept, for instance, of 
the deduction of legal determinations pertaining to property from the concept of 
property; and conversely, we speak of tracing a content of this kind back to its 
concept. This involves the recognition that the Concept is not merely a form which 
is without any content of its own; for, on the one hand, nothing could be deduced 
from such a form, and, on the other, tracing a given content back to the empty form 
of the concept would only rob the content of its determinacy, instead of securing 
the cognition of it. 
§ 161 
The progression of the Concept is no longer either passing-over or shining 
into another, but development; for the [moments] that are distinguished are 
immediately posited at the same time as identical with one another and 
with the whole, and [each] determinacy is as a free being of the whole 
Concept. 
Addition. In the sphere of Being the dialectical process is passing-over into another, 
whilst in the sphere of Essence it is shining into another. In contrast, the movement 
of the Concept is development, through which only that is posited which is already 
implicitly present. What corresponds to the stage of the Concept in nature is 
organic life. For example, a plant develops from its germ: the germ already contains 
the whole plant within itself, but in an ideal way, so that we must not envisage its 

238 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
development as if the various parts of the plant-root, stem, leaves, etc.-were 
already present in the germ realiter, though only in a very minute form. This is the 
so-called Chinese box hypothesis,3 the defect of which is that what is present 
initially only in an ideal way is regarded as already existent. What is correct in this 
hypothesis, however, is just that the Concept remains at home with itself in the 
course of its process, and that the process does not posit anything new as regards 
content, but only brings forth an alteration of form. This "nature" of the Concept, 
which shows itself in its process to be a development of itself, is what people have 
in view when they speak of the ideas that are innate in man, or when they say, as 
Plato himself did, that all learning is merely reminiscence; but, all the same, "remi­
niscence" should not be understood to mean that whatever constitutes the content 
of a mind that is educated by instruction was already present in that mind pre­
viously in its determinate unfolding. 
The movement of the Concept must be considered, so to speak, only as a play; 
the other which is posited by its movement is, in fact, not an other. In the doctrine 
of the Christian religion this is expressed by the assertion that God not only 
created a world that confronts him as an other, but also that he has from all 
eternity begotten a Son in whom he, as Spirit, is at home with himself. 
§ 162 
The doctrine of the Concept subdivides into: (1) the doctrine of the subjec­
tive or formal Concept, (2) that of objectivity or of the Concept as deter­
mined to immediacy, (3) that of the Idea, or of the Subject-Object, the unity 
of the Concept and of objectivity, the absolute Truth. 
Ordinary logic embraces only the matters that we here encounter as 
one part of the third part of the whole, together with the so-called 
laws of thinking that we encountered above; and in applied logic 
there is some discussion of cognition, in combination with psycho­
logical, metaphysical, and other empirical material, because those 
forms of thinking turned out to be no longer sufficient by them­
selves; but as a result this science has lost its firm orientation. ௃ 
And those forms, which do at least belong to the proper domain of 
the Logic, are taken only as determinations of conscious thinking, 
or more exactly of conscious thinking only at the level of the un­
derstanding, not at the level of reason. 
The preceding logical determinations, the determinations of 
being 
and 
essence, 
are (of course) 
not 
mere 
thought­
determinations; in the dialectical moment of their passing-over, 
and in their return into themselves and in their totality, they prove 
themselves to be concepts. But they are (cf. §§ 84 and 112) only 
determinate concepts, concepts in-themselves--or to say the same 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163--193) 
239 
A 
thing another way, concepts for us. For the other (into which each 
determination passes over, or within which it shines and therefore 
is as something-relational) is not determined as something­
particular, nor is its third moment determined as something-singular 
or as subject: the identity of the determination in its opposite, [i.e.,] 
its freedom, is not posited, because it is not universality.-What is 
usually understood by "concepts" are determinations of the under­
standing, or even just general notions; hence such "concepts" are 
always finite determinations (cf. § 62). 
The Logic of the Concept is usually understood as a merely 
formal science, in the sense that what counts for it is the mere form 
of concept, judgment, and syllogism, but not at all whether some­
thing is true; truth is supposed to depend exclusively on the con­
tent. If the logical forms of the Concept were really dead, inactive, 
and indifferent receptacles of representations or thoughts, then, as 
far as truth is concerned, our information about them would be a 
completely superfluous and dispensable description.- In fact, how­
ever, being forms of the Concept they are, on the contrary, the 
living spirit of what is actual; and what is true of the actual is only 
true in virtue of these forms, through them and in them. Yet the truth 
of these forms on their very own account has never been consid­
ered and investigated until now, any more than the necessary 
connection between them has. 
The Subjective Concept 
A. THE CONCEPT AS SUCH 
§ 163 
The Concept as such contains the moment of universality, as free equality 
with itself in its determinacy; it contains the moment of particularity, or of 
the determinacy in which the Universal remains serenely equal to itself; 
and it contains the moment of singularity, as the inward reflection of the 
determinacies of universality and particularity. This singular negative 
unity with itself is what is in and for itself determined, and at the same time 
identical with itself or universal. 
a. Historie 

240 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
The singular is the same as the actual, except that it has issued 
from the Concept, and hence is posited as something-universal, or 
as negative identity with itself. Since the actual is still only in-itself 
or immediately the unity of essence and existence, it is potentially 
effective; but the singularity of the Concept is strictly what is 
effective-and of course it no longer works like a cause, with the 
semblance of producing something else: rather [it is 1 what pro­
duces itself. -Singularity, however, is not to be taken in the sense 
of merely immediate singularity-as when we speak of single 
things, or human beings, etc.; this determinacy of Singularity is 
found only where we have the Judgment. Every moment of the 
Concept is itself the whole Concept (§ 160); but singularity, the 
subject, is the Concept posited as totality. 
Addition 1 .  When people speak of the Concept. they ordinarily have only abstract 
universality in mind, and consequently the Concept is usually also defined as a 
general notion. We speak in this way of the "concept" of colour, or of a plant, or of 
an animal, and so on; and these concepts are supposed to arise by omitting the 
particularities through which the various colours, plants, animals, etc., are dis­
tinguished from one another, and holding fast to what they have in common. This 
is the way in which the understanding apprehends the Concept, and the feeling 
that such concepts are hollow and empty, that they are mere schemata and 
shadows, is justified. What is universal about the Concept is indeed not just some­
thing common against which the particular stands on its own; instead the universal 
is what particularises (specifies) itself, remaining at home with itself in its other, in 
uncIouded clarity. 
It is of the greatest importance, both for cognition and for our practical be­
haviour, too, that we should not confuse what is merely communal with what is 
truly universal. All the reproaches that are habitually levelled against thinking in 
general, and, more specifically, against philosophical thinking, from the standpoint 
of feeling, and the oft-repeated assertion that it is dangerous to pursue thought to 
what are alleged to be too great lengths have their ground in this confusion. And in 
any case it must be said that in its true and comprehensive significance the univer­
sal is a thought that took milIenia to enter into men's consciousness; and it only 
achieved its full recognition through Christianity. The Greeks, although otherwise 
so highly cultivated, did not know God, or even man, in their true universality. The 
Greek gods were only the particular powers of the spirit; and the universal god, the 
god of all nations, was, for the Athenians, still the hidden god. Consequently, for 
the Greeks there was an absolute gulf between themselves and the barbarians, and 
they did not yet recognise man as such in his infinite worth and his infinite 
justification. The question of why slavery has disappeared in modern Europe has 
indeed been raised; and this or that circumstance has been offered as the explana­
tion of this phenomenon. But the genuine reason why there are no longer any 
slaves in Christian Europe is to be sought in nothing but the principle of Chris­
tianity itself. The Christian religion is the religion of absolute freedom, and only for 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163--193) 
241 
Christians does man count as such, man in his infinity and universality. What the 
slave lacks is the recognition of his personality; but the principle of personality is 
Universality. The master considers the slave not as a person, but as a thinga devoid 
of self; and the slave himself does not count as an "I", for his master is his "I" 
instead. 5 
The distinction that we have made above between what is merely held in com­
mon and the genuine universal is strikingly expressed in Rousseau's well-known 
Contrat social, when he says that the laws of a State must emerge from the general 
will (the volonte gem!rale), but that they do not at all need on that account to be the 
will of all (volonte de toUS).6 With regard to the theory of the State, Rousseau would 
have achieved something sounder if he had kept this distinction in mind all the 
time. The general will is the Concept of willing, and the laws are the particular 
de terminations of willing as grounded in this Concept. 
Addition 2. We must add a remark about the explanation of the origin and forma­
tion of concepts that is usually given in the logic of the understanding. It is not we 
who "form" concepts, and in general the Concept should not be considered as 
something that has come to be at all. Certainly the Concept is not just Being or 
what is immediate; because, of course, it involves mediation too. But mediation lies 
in the Concept itself, and the Concept is what is mediated by and with itself. It is a 
mistake to assume that, first of all, there are ob-jects which form the content of our 
representations, and then our subjective activity comes in afterwards to form con­
cepts of them, through the operation of abstracting that we spoke of earlier, and by 
summarising what the ob-jects have in common. Instead, the Concept is what truly 
comes first, and things are what they are through the activity of the Concept that 
dwells in them and reveals itself in them. This comes up in our religious conscious­
ness when we say that God created the world out of nothing or, in other words, 
that all finite things have emerged from the fullness of God's thoughts and from his 
divine decrees. This involves the recognition that thought, and, more precisely, the 
Concept, is the infinite form, or the free, creative activity that does not need a 
material at hand outside it in order to realise itself. 
064 
The Concept is what is altogether concrete, because negative unity with 
itself as being-determined-in-and-for-itself (which is what singularity is) 
constitutes its own relation to self, or universality. From this point of view, 
the moments of the Concept cannot be separated; the determinations of 
reflection are supposed to be grasped and to be valid each on its own, 
separately from the one opposed to it; but since in the Concept their 
identity is posited, each of its moments can only be grasped immediately on 
the basis of and together with the others. b 
a. Sache 
b. aus und mit den andern 

242 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Taken abstractly, universality, particularity, and singularity are the 
same as identity, distinction, and ground. But the universal is what 
is identical with itself explicitly in the sense that it contains the 
particular and the singular at the same time. Furthermore, the 
particular is what is distinct or the determinacy, but in the sense 
that it is inwardly universal and is [actual] as something-singular. 
Similarly, the singular means that it is subject, the foundation that 
contains the genus and species within itself and is itself substan­
tial. This is the posited unseparatedness of the moments in their 
distinction (§ 160}-the clarity of the Concept, in which each of the 
distinctions does not constitute a breach, or blurring, but is trans­
parent precisely as such. 
There is no greater commonplace than that the Concept is some­
thing abstract. This is correct in two ways: inasmuch as the element 
of the Concept is just thinking, and not the sensible in its empirical 
concreteness; and inasmuch as the Concept is not yet the Idea. 
From this point of view the subjective Concept is still formal, but 
this in no way means that it has to have or to receive any content 
other than itself.-As the absolute form itself, it is every deter­
minacy, but in the way that it is in its truth. Although it is abstract, 
therefore, it is also what is concrete, and indeed it is what is al­
together concrete, subject as such. What is absolutely concrete is 
the spirit (see § 159 Remark): the Concept, insofar as it exists as 
Concept, distinguishing itself from its own objectivity (which re­
mains its own, however, in spite of the distingUishing). Everything 
else that is concrete, however rich it may be, is not so intimately 
identical with itself, and hence not so concrete in itself; and least of 
all what is commonly understood by "concrete", [i.e.,] a manifold 
that is externally held together.-What are also called concepts, 
and indeed determinate concepts, for instance, man, house, ani­
mal, etc., are simple determinations and abstract representations; 
these are abstractions that take only the moment of universality 
from the Concept, leaving out particularity and singularity, so that 
they are not developed in themselves and therefore they abstract 
precisely from the Concept. 
065 
It is only the moment of singularity that posits the moments of the Concept 
as distinctions, inasmuch as singularity is the negative inward reflection of 
the Concept. Hence, it is initially its free distinguishing, as the first negation. 
Hereby the determinacy of the Concept is posited, but as particularity; i.e., 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163--193) 
243 
the distinct [moments] have at first only the determinacy of the moments 
of the Concept over and against each other, and then secondly their iden­
tity (that the one moment is the other) is posited likewise. This posited 
particularity of the Concept is the judgment. 
The usual classification of concepts as clear, distinct, and adequate7 
does not apply to the Concept; but so far as it refers to representa­
tions it belongs rather to psychology, in that what is meant by a 
"clear" concept is an abstract, simply determined representation, 
and by a "distinct" concept a similar one, but in such a way that 
one characteristic in it, i.e., some determinacy, is emphasised as a 
sign for subjective cognition. There is nothing more characteristic 
of the superficiality and degradation of logic than the favorite cate­
gory of the "characteristic" itself. The adequate concept comes 
closer to the Concept, and even to the Idea, but it still expresses 
only the formal aspect of the correspondence of a concept or a 
representation with its object, i.e., with an external thing.-The so­
called "subordinate" and "coordinate" concepts are founded on 
the conceptless distinction of the universal and the particular, and 
on their relational connection" in an external reflection. Moreover, 
an enumeration of the types of contrary and contradictory, affirma­
tive and negative concepts,8 etc., is nothing but a haphazard recital 
of determinacies of thought which for their own part belong to the 
sphere of Being or to that of Essence, where they have already 
been considered; they have nothing to do with the determinacy of 
the Concept as such.-Only the genuine distinctions of the Con­
cept, the universal, the particular, and the singular, constitute types 
of the Concept; and even then only so far as they are kept apart by 
an external reflection.-The immanent distinguishing and deter­
mining of the Concept is given in the judgment, for to judge is to 
determine the Concept. 
B. THE JUDGMENT 
§ 166 
The judgment is the Concept in its particularity, as the distinguishing rela­
tion of its moments, which are posited as being-for-themselves and at the 
same time as identical with themselves, and not with each other. 
a. Verhiiltnis-Beziehung 

244 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
When considering the judgment, one usually thinks first of the 
independence of the extremes (the subject and the predicate): that 
the first is a thing or determination [that stands] on its own, and 
that the predicate likewise is a universal determination outside 
that subject (for instance, in my head), which is then brought 
together with the subject by me, and is thus "judged." But since the 
copula "is" attributes the predicate to the subject, that external, 
subjective subsumption is again sublated, and the judgment is taken 
as a determination of the ob-ject itself.-The etymological meaning 
of " Urteil" in our language is more profound and expresses the 
unity of the Concept as what comes first, and its distinction as the 
original division, which is what the judgment truly is. 
The abstract judgment is the proposition: "The singular is the 
universal." These are the determinations which subject and predi­
cate primitively have vis-a-vis each other, where the moments of 
the Concept are taken in their immediate determinacy or first ab­
straction. (The propositions: "The particular is the universal," and: 
"The singular is the particular," belong to the further determination 
of the judgment. ) It must be considered a quite amazing lack of 
observation that we do not find any mention in the logic books of 
the fact that a proposition of this kind is expressed in every 
judgment: "The singular is the universal," or, more determinately: 
"The subject is the p redicate" (e.g., "God is absolute spirit"). It is 
true that the determinations of singularity and universality, or sub­
ject and predicate, are also distinct, but the absolutely universal 
fact remains, nonetheless, that every judgment expresses them as 
identical. 
The copula "is" flows from the nature of the Concept: to be 
identical with itself in its uttering;- as moments of the Concept, the 
singular and the universal are the sort of determinacies that cannot 
be isolated. The preceding determinacies of reflection have among 
their relationships also the relation to each other, but their connec­
tion is only one of "having," not of "being"; it is not identity posited 
as such or universality. Hence, only the judgment is the genuine 
particularity of the Concept, for it is the determinacy or dis­
tinguishing of the Concept which continues to be universality all 
the same. 
Addition. The judgment is usually considered to be a combination of concepts, and 
indeed of concepts of diverse sorts. What is right in this interpretation is that the 
a 
Entiiuflerung 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163-193) 
245 
Concept certainly forms the presupposition of the judgment, and that in the judg­
ment it presents itself in the form of distinction. On the contrary, it is false to speak 
of concepts of diverse sorts, for the Concept as such, although concrete, is still 
essentially one, and the moments contained within it must not be considered to be 
diverse sorts of concepts; similarly, it is false to speak of a "combination" of the 
sides of judgment, because, when we speak of a combination, we think of the 
terms combined as occurring also in their own right outside the combination. 
This external interpretation shows up in an even more definite way, when the 
judgment is said to come about through the "ascription" of a predicate to a subject. 
In this view, the subject counts as what subsists "out there" on its own account, 
while the predicate is what is found in our heads. But the copula "is" already 
contradicts this view. When we say, "This rose is red;' or "This picture is 
beautiful," what the assertion expresses is that it is not just we who, from outside, 
dress the rose in red, or the picture in beauty, but, rather, that these are the ob­
jects' own characteristics. A further defect of the usual interpretation of the judg­
ment in formal logic is the fact that in this perspective the judgment always appears 
to be something merely contingent, and the advance from the Concept to the 
judgment is not demonstrated. 
But the Concept as such does not abide within itself, without development (as 
the understanding would have it); on the contrary, being the infinite form, the 
Concept is totally active. It is the punctum saliens9 of all vitality, so to speak, and for 
that reason it distinguishes itself from itself. This sundering of the Concept into the 
distinction of its moments that is posited by its own activity is the judgment, the 
significance of which must accordingly be conceived of as the particularisation of 
the Concept. Indeed the Concept is in-itself already the particular, but the particu­
lar is not yet posited in the Concept as such; it is still in transparent unity with the 
universal there. So, as we have already noted (§ 160 Addition), the germ of a plant, 
for instance, already contains the particular: root, branches, leaves, etc., but the 
particular is here present only in-itself, and is posited only when the germ opens 
up; this unclosing should be regarded as the judgment of the plant. Consequently, 
the same example can also serve to make it obvious that neither the Concept nor 
the judgment is found only in our heads and that they are not merely formed by 
us. The Concept dwells within the things themselves, it is that through which they 
are what they are, and to comprehend an ob-ject means therefore to become 
conscious of its concept. If we advance from this to the judging of the ob-ject, the 
judgment is not our subjective doing, by which this or that predicate is ascribed to 
the ob-ject; on the contrary, we are considering the ob-ject in the determinacy that 
is posited by its concept. 
§ 167 
The judgment is usually taken in a subjective sense, as an operation and a 
form, which occurs only in thinking that is conscious of itself. But this 
distinction is not yet present in the logical [realm]; [here] the judgment is 

246 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
to be taken as entirely universal: every thing is a judgment . -That is, every 
thing is a singular which is inwardly a universality or inner nature, in other 
words, a universal that is made singular; universality and singularity dis­
tinguish themselves [from each other] within it, but at the same time they 
are identical. 
The supposedly merely subjective sense of the judgment (as if it 
were I who "ascribe" a predicate to a subject) is contradicted by 
the expression of the judgment, which is, on the contrary, objec­
tive: "The rose is red," "Gold is a metal," etc. It is not I who first 
ascribe something to these [subjects] .-Judgments are distinct 
from propositions; propositions contain a determination of the sub­
jects which does not stand in a relationship of universality to 
them-a state, a singular action, and the like. "Caesar was born in 
Rome in this or that year, waged war in Gaul for 10 years, crossed 
the Rubicon," etc.-these are propositions, not judgments. More­
over, it is quite vacuous to say that propositions such as, for in­
stance, "I slept well last night," or even "Present arms!" can be put 
in the form of a judgment. A proposition like: "A carriage is pass­
ing by," would be a judgment, and a subjective one at that, only if 
there could be doubt whether what is passing by is a carriage, or 
whether the ob-ject is moving, and not, on the contrary, the stand­
point from which we observe it; for then the concern would be to 
find the [right] determination for [my] not yet appropriately deter­
mined representation. 
§ l68 
The standpoint of the judgment is finitude, and from this point of view the 
finitude of things consists in their being a judgment; [i.e.,] their thereness 
and their universal nature (their body and their soul) are indeed united 
(otherwise the things would be nothing), but these moments are already 
diverse as well as separable in principle. 
§ l69 
In the abstract judgment: "The singular is the universal," the subject, as 
what relates itself to itself negatively, is what is immediately concrete; the 
predicate, on the contrary, is what is abstract or undetermined-it is the 
universal. But since they are connected by "is", the predicate, too, must 
contain within its universality the determinacy of the subject; hence this 
determinacy is particularity, and this particularity is the posited identity of 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163-193) 
247 
the subject and the predicate; but as what is therefore indifferent vis-a-vis 
this distinction of form it [the determinacy of the subject] is the content. 
The subject only has its explicit determinacy and content in the 
predicate;JO and hence, taken on its own, it is a mere representa­
tion or an empty name. In the judgment: "God is the most real, 
etc." or: "The Absolute is identical with itself, etc." -God, or the 
Absolute, is a mere name: what the subject is is expressed only in 
the predicate. What else it may be, as something concrete, does not 
concern this judgment (cf. § 31). 
Addition. It is quite trivial to say, "The subject is what something is said about, and 
the predicate is what is said about it"; from this we learn nothing more precise 
about the distinction between subject and predicate. At the level of its thought, the 
subject is first of all the singular, and the predicate is the universal. What happens 
in the further development of the judgment is that the subject does not remain just 
the immediate singular, nor does the predicate continue to be just the abstract 
universal; next subject and predicate also acquire the significance of the particular 
and the universal (in the case of the subject), and of the particular and the singular 
(in the case of the predicate). This exchange of significance between the two sides 
of the judgment is what takes place under the designations "subject" and 
"predicate" . 
§ 170 
With regard to the more precise determinacy of the subject and the predi­
cate, the first, as negative relation to itself (§§ 163, 106 Remark), is the solid 
ground in which the predicate has its subsistence and is ideal (it inheres in 
the subject); and since the subject is altogether and immediately concrete, 
the determinate content of the predicate is only one of the many 
determinacies of the subject, and the latter [is] richer and wider than the 
predicate. 
Conversely, the predicate, as what is universal, subsists on its own ac­
count, and it is indifferent as to whether this subject is or is not; it reaches 
beyond the subject, subsumes it under itself, and is for its part wider than 
the subject. It is only the determinate content of the predicate (§ 169) that 
constitutes the identity of the two. 
§ 171 
In the judgment, subject, predicate, and the determinate content or [their] 
identity are posited at first precisely in their relation as diverse, or as falling 

248 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
outside each other. But in-themselves (i.e., according to the Concept) they 
are identical, since the concrete totality of the subject consists, not in being 
some undeterminate manifold, but in the fact that only it is singularity, 
[i.e.,] it is the particular and the universal within an identity, and precisely 
this unity is the predicate (§ 170).-ln the copula, moreover, the identity of 
the subject and the predicate is posited, to be sure, but it is posited at first 
only as an abstract is. According to this identity, the subject also has to be 
posited in the determination of the predicate, and therefore the predicate, 
too, receives the determination of the subject, and the copula fulfills itself. 
This is the further determination of the judgment by the fulfilled copula 
[which leads] to the syllogism. But in respect of the judgment there is first 
the further determination of the judgment itself, the determination of the 
initially abstract, sensible universality to allness, genus, and species and to the 
developed universality of the Concept. 
It is only the cognition of the further determination of the judg­
ment that gives coherence as well as sense to what are usually pre­
sented as the species of judgment. Apart from looking quite con­
tingent, the usual enumeration is superficial, and even confused 
and disorderly, in its indication of the distinctions. How positive, 
categorical, and assertoric judgments are distingUished is some­
times just a matter of pure conjecture and sometimes it remains 
undetermined. The various judgments have to be looked upon as 
following necessarily from one another and as a further determina­
tion of the Concept, for the judgment itself is nothing but the deter­
minate Concept. 
In their relation to the two preceding spheres of Being and of 
Essence, the determinate concepts are, as judgments, reproductions 
of these spheres, but they are posited in the simple relation of the 
Concept. 
Addition. The various types of judgment are to be interpreted not just as an empiri­
cal multiplicity, but as a totality determined by thinking; and one of Kant's great 
achievements was to have been the first to draw our attention to this. Kant's 
classification of judgmentsll according to the schema of his table of categories into 
the judgments of quality, quantity, relation, and modality, cannot be regarded as 
adequate, partly because of the merely formal application of the schema, and partly 
because of its content. But all the same, what underlies this classification is the 
genuine intuition that the various types of judgment are determined by the univer­
sal forms of the logical Idea itself. Thus we obtain, first of all, three main types of 
judgment, which correspond to the stages of Being, Essence, and Concept. In 
accord with the character of Essence, as the stage of difference, the second of these 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163-193) 
249 
main types is again inwardly divided in two. The inner ground of this system of the 
judgment must be sought in the fact that, since the Concept is the ideal unity of 
being and essence, the unfolding of it that comes about in the judgment must also, 
first of all, reproduce these two stages in a conceptual transformation, while the 
Concept itself shows itself to be what determines the genuine judgment. 
The various types of judgment must not be regarded as standing beside one 
another, each having the same value; instead, they must be seen as forming a 
sequence of stages, and the distinction between them rests on the logical signifi­
cance of the predicate. We can indeed find this already in our ordinary conscious­
ness, in that we unhesitatingly ascribe only a very inadequate power of judgment 
to someone who habitually frames only such judgments as "This wall is green," 
"This oven is hot," and so on; in contrast, we say that someone genuinely under­
stands how to judge only when his judgments deal with whether a certain work of 
art is beautiful, whether an action is good, and so on. In the case of judgments of 
the first kind, the content is only an abstract quality, the presence of which can be 
adequately decided by immediate perception; whereas, to say of a work of art that 
it is beautiful, or of an action that it is good, the ob-jects in question must be 
compared with what they ought to be, i.e., with their concept. 
(a.) THE QUALITATIVE JUDGMENT 
§ I  72 
The immediate judgment is the judgment of thereness; the subject [is] 
posited in a universality (as its predicate) which is an immediate (and 
hence sensible) quality. 
(1) The positive judgment: the singular is 
something-particular. But the singular is not something-particular; more 
precisely, such a singular quality does not correspond to the concrete na­
ture of the subject: (2) the negative judgment. 
It is one of the most fundamental logical prejudices that qualitative 
judgments such as: "The rose is red," or: "is not red," can contain 
truth. 12 Correct they may be, but only in the restricted confines of 
perception, finite representation, and thinking; this depends on 
the content which is just as finite, and untrue on its own account. 
But the truth rests only on the form, i.e., on the posited Concept 
and the reality that corresponds to it; truth of this kind is not 
present in the qualitative judgment, however. 
Addition. In ordinary life correctness and truth are very often considered to be 
synonymous, and hence we often speak of the truth of a content when it is a matter 
of mere correctness. In general, correctness is only a matter of the formal agree­
ment of our representation with its content, whatever kind this content may other-

250 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
wise be. Truth, on the contrary, consists in the agreement of the ob-ject with itself, 
i.e., with its concept. It may certainly be correct that someone is ill, or has stolen 
something; but a content like this is not "true," for an ill body is not in agreement 
with the concept of life, and similarly theft is an action that does not correspond to 
the concept of human action. From these examples it may be gathered that, no 
matter how correct it may be, an immediate judgment, in which an abstract quality 
is asserted of something immediately singular, simply cannot contain any truth; for 
subject and predicate do not stand to one another here in the relationship of reality 
and concept. 
Furthermore, the untruth of the immediate judgment consists in the fact that its 
form and its content do not correspond to one another. When we say: "This rose is 
red," the copula "is" implies that subject and predicate agree with one another. But, 
of course, the rose, being something concrete, is not merely red; on the contrary, it 
also has a scent, a definite form, and all manner of other features, which are not 
contained within the predicate "red". On the other hand, this predicate, being 
something abstractly universal, does not belong merely to this subject. For there 
are other flowers, too, and other ob-jects altogether that are also red. In an immedi­
ate judgment subject and predicate do not coincide with one another, but touch at 
just one point so to speak. With the judgment of the Concept the situation is 
different. When we say, "This action is good," we are asserting a judgment of the 
Concept. We can notice here at once that the subject and predicate do not now have 
the loose and external relationship that occurs in the immediate judgment. In the 
latter the predicate consists in some abstract quality or other, which may or may 
not belong to the subject; in the judgment of the Concept, on the contrary, the 
predicate is, as it were, the soul of the subject, by which the latter, as the body of 
this soul, is determined through and through. 
§ l73 
Since this negation is the first one and the relation of the subject to the 
predicate still remains in it; and the predicate is therefore something rela­
tively universal of which only the determinacy is negated. ("The rose is not 
red" implies that it does have some colour--obviously some other colour, 
which when identified would be just another positive judgment.) But the 
singular is also not a universal. Hence (3) the judgment falls apart into 
itself as (aa) the empty identity-relation: the singular is the singular-the 
judgment of identity; and into itself as (bb) presenting the total incommen­
surability> of the subject and the predicate, the so-called infinite judgment. 
Examples of the latter are: "The spirit is not an elephant," "A lion 
is not a table," etc.-propositions that are correct, but pointless, 
exactly like the identical propositions: "A lion is a lion," "The spirit 
is spirit." Propositions like these are indeed the truth of the imme-
a. Unangemessenheit 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163--193) 
251 
diate, so-called qualitative judgment, but [they are] not really judg­
ments at all; they can only occur in a subjective thinking that is 
able to hold onto an untrue abstraction as well.-Objectively con­
sidered, they express the nature of what [finitely] is or of sensible 
things, namely, that they are a falling-apart into an empty identity 
and a fulfilled relation, which is, all the same, the qualitative other­
ness of the related [terms], their complete incommensurability. 
Addition. The negatively infinite judgment, in which there is no longer any relation 
between subject and predicate at all, tends to be cited in formal logic only as a 
meaningless curiosity. But, in fact, this infinite judgment must not be considered 
merely as a contingent form of subjective thinking; on the contrary, it shows itself 
to be the proximate dialectical result of the preceding immediate judgments (the 
positive and the simply negative), whose finitude and untruth come to light ex­
plicitly in it. A crime can be considered as an objective example of the negative­
infinite judgment. Someone who commits a crime-for argument's sake a theft­
does not merely deny the particular right of someone else to this particular thing" 
(as in a suit about civil rights); instead, he denies the rights of that person com­
pletely, and therefore he is not merely obliged to return the thing that he stole, but 
is punished as well, because he has violated right as such, i.e., right in general. 
The civil law suit, in contrast, is an example of the simple negative judgment, 
because it deals with cases where only this particular right is negated, and right in 
general therefore remains recognised. So the situation is the same as in the case of 
the negative judgment, "This flower is not red," where what is denied to the flower 
is merely this particular colour, but not colour in general, for the flower can still be 
blue, yellow, etc. In the same way, death is a negative-infinite judgment, too, 
whereas, in contrast, illness is a singular negative judgment. In illness, it is merely 
this or that particular life-function that is checked or denied, whereas in death-as 
we normally say-body and soul separate, in other words, they fall apart 
completely. 
(ل) THE JUDGMENf OF REFLECTION 
§ 174 
Posited in the judgment, the singular as singular (inwardly reflected) has a 
predicate, against which the subject, as relating itself to itself, remains at 
the same time an other.-In existence the subject is no longer immediately 
qualitative, but in relationship and connectedness with an other (with an ex­
ternal world). Hence, universality has acquired the significance of this 
relativity. (For instance, useful, dangerous; weight, acidity; and [at a higher 
level] drive, and so on.) 
a. Sache 

252 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
Addition. The judgment of reflection is basically distinguished from the qualitative
judgment by virtue of its predicate's being no longer an immediate, abstract qualit
but something through which the subject proves itself to be related to something
else. If we say, "This rose is red," for example, we are considering the subject in its
immediate singularity, without relation to anything else; while, on the other hand
if we frame the judgment, "This plant is curative," we are considering the subject
(the plant) as standing in a relation to something else (the illness to be cured by the
plant) in virtue of its predicate, curativeness. The situation is the same with the
judgments, "This body is elastic," or "This instrument is useful," or "This punish
ment is deterrent," and so on. The predicates of these judgments are all of them
determinations of reflection, by which the immediate singularity of the subject is
of course, transcended, but where the concept of the subject is still not specified.­
This is the manner of judgment that we predominantly practice in our ordinary
argumentation. The more concrete the ob-ject, the more points of view it offers to
reflection; but reflection never exhausts the ob-ject's own nature, i.e., its concept.I3
§ l75 
(1) The subject, the singular as singular (in the "singular" judgment), is
something-universal. (2) In this relation it is elevated above its "sin­
gularity." This extension is an external one; [it is] subjective reflection,
[resulting] to begin with, [in] an indeterminate particularity (in the particu­
lar judgment, which is immediately negative as well as positive; the singu­
lar is inwardly divided, it relates itself to itself on the one hand, and to
something else on the other). (3) Some are the universal, and hence par­
ticularity is extended to universality; universality determined by the sin­
gularity of the subject is allness (communality, the ordinary universality of
reflection) . 
Addition. When it is determined in the singular judgment14 as a universal, the
subject thereby goes beyond itself as this merely single instance. a To say, "This
plant is curative," implies that it is not merely this single plant that is curative, but
that some or many plants are, and this gives us the particularb judgment ("Some
plants are curative," "Some men are inventive," etc.). By virtue of this "par­
ticularity'" the immediately Single instance loses its independence and becomes
interconnected with something else. As this man, a man is no longer merely this
single man; he now stands beside other men instead, and is one of the crowd. But,
precisely for this reason, he also belongs to his universal and consequently he is
elevated. The particular! judgment is just as much positive as negative. If only
some bodies are elastic, then the rest are not elastic. 
a. dieses blofi Einzelme 
b. partikular 
c. Partikularitiit 
d. partikuliir 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163--193) 
253 
This in its turn implies the advance to the third form of the judgment of reflec­
tion, i.e., the judgment of allness ("All men are mortal," "All metals are conductors 
of electricity" ). Allness is the first form of universality upon which reflection nor­
mally happens to hit. The singular instances form the foundation here, and it is 
through our subjective action that they are collected together and determined as 
"all". The universal appears here only as an external bond that embraces all the 
singular instances which subsist on their own account and are indifferent to one 
another. But, in fact, the universal is the ground and soil, the root and substance of 
the single instance. For instance, if we consider Caius, Titus, Sempronius, together 
with all the other inhabitants of a city or a country, the fact that they are all men is 
not something that they simply have in common; on the contrary, it is what is 
universal in them, it is their kind, and none of them would be what he is at all 
without this kind. 
The situation is quite different in the case of the superficial, merely so-called 
"universality", whose status is in fact merely that it pertains to all the single 
instances in question, and is what they have in common. It has been noticed that 
one thing that men have in common, as distinct from animals, is that they are 
furnished with earlobes. 15 But it is obvious that if perhaps someone or other were 
not to have earlobes, this would not affect the rest of his being, his character, his 
capacities, etc., whereas it would not make sense to assume that Caius might 
perhaps be brave, learned, etc., and yet not be a man. The single human is what he 
is in particular, only insofar as he is, first of all, human as such, and within the 
universal; and this universal is not just something over and above other abstract 
qualities or mere determinatins of reflection, but it is rather what permeates all the 
particulars and embraces them within itself. 
§ 176 
Because the subject is equally determined as something-universal, its iden­
tity with the predicate and consequently the determination of the judg­
ment itself, too, is posited as indifferent. This unity of the content-as a 
universality which is identical with the negative inward reflection of the 
subject-makes the judgmental relation into a necessary one. 
Addition. The advance from the aline ss-type of the judgment of reflexion to the 
judgment of necessity can already be found in our ordinary consciousness when 
we say that what pertains to all pertains to the kind and is therefore necessary. 
When we say "all plants," "all men," etc., this is the same as if we had said "the 
plant as such, " "man as such," etc. 
(-y) THE JUDGMENT OF NECESSITY 
§ 177 
The judgment of necessity, as that of the identity of the content in its 
distinction (1) contains in its predicate first the substance or nature of the 

254 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
subject, the concrete universal-the genus; and secondly (since this univer
sal also contains within itself the determinacy as negative) the predicate
contains the excluding essential determinacy-the species; [this is] the cate
gorical judgment. (2) In accordance with their substantiality both side
acquire the shape of independent actuality; their identity is only an inne
one, so that the actuality of the one is at the same time not its own, but i
the being of the other; [this is] the hypothetical judgment. (3) Since, in thi
uttering- of the Concept, the inner identity is at the same time posited, the
universal is the genus which [even] in its excluding singularity is identica
with itself. The judgment that has this universal as both of its sides-firs
as such, and then as the circle of its self-excluding particularisation (o
which the either-or as well as both-and is the genus)-is the disjunctiv
judgment. Thus universality, having been posited first as genus and now
also as the rangeb of its [various] species, is hereby determined and posited
as totality. 
Addition. The categorical judgment ("Gold is a metal," "The rose is a plant") is th
immediate judgment of necessity, and corresponds to the relationship of substan
tiality in the sphere of Essence. Everything is a categorical judgment; i.e., thing
have their substantial nature, which forms their firm and unchangeable foundation
It is only when we consider things from the point of view of their kind, and a
necessarily determined by it, that the judgment begins to be a genuine one. T
regard judgments such as "Gold is expensive" and "Gold is a metal" as being on
the same level has to be called a defect in logical training. Gold's being expensive i
a matter of its external relation to our inclinations and wants, to the cost of obtain
ing it, and so on; and gold remains what it is even if that external relation change
or disappears. Being a metal, in contrast, constitutes the substantial nature of gold
without which whatever else there may be in it, or whatever else may be asserted
about it, could not subsist. The situation is the same when we say, "Caius is a man"
by means of this we assert here that whatever else he may be has value and signifi
cance only insofar as it corresponds to his substantial nature, that of being a man
But, of course, even the categorical judgment is still defective in that it does no
give the moment of particularity its due. Thus, for instance, gold is certainly 
metal; but so are silver, copper, iron, and the rest; and their simply being metals i
indifferent with regard to the particular kinds [of metal] to which they belong. Thi
is where the advance from the categorical to the hypothetical judgment comes in
The hypothetical judgment can be expressed through the formula, "If A is, then B
is." The advance here is the same as the earlier one from the relationship o
substantiality to the relationship of causality. In the hypothetical judgment th
determinacy of the content shows itself to be mediated, to be dependent upon
another, and this, then, is precisely the relationship of cause and effect. The signifi
cance of the hypothetical is generally that the universal is posited through it in it
a. Entiiuflerung 
b. Umkreis 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163-193) 
255 
particularity, and this gives us the disjunctive judgment as the third form of the 
judgment of necessity. "A is either B or C or D"; "A work of poetry is either epic or 
lyric or dramatic"; "A colour is either red, yellow, or blue,"16 etc. Both sides of the 
disjunctive judgment are identical; the genus is the totality of its species, and the 
totality of the species is the genus. This unity of the universal and the particular is 
the Concept, and it is the Concept that forms the content of the judgment 
henceforth. 
(8) THE JUDGMENT OF THE CONCEPT 
§ 178 
The judgment of the Concept has the Concept, the totality in simple form, as 
its content, the universal with its complete determinacy. The subject is first 
(1) something-singular which has as its predicate the reflection of the par­
ticular that is thereupon its universal: the agreement or disagreement of 
these two determinations. This is the assertoric judgment about what is 
good, true, correct, etc. 
This is the fIrst type of judging that is called "judging" in ordinary 
life as well: whether an object, an act, etc., is good or bad, true, beau­
tiful, etc. We never attribute the "power of judgment" to anyone 
because he knows how to make positive or negative judgments such 
as: "This rose is red" or "This painting is red, green, dusty," etc. 
Because of the principle of immediate knowledge and faith, the 
assertoric judgment has been made the sole and essential form of 
doctrine even in philosophy. Yet in society it is regarded as im­
proper when it pretends that it ought to have validity just as it 
stands. In the so-called philosophical works that uphold the princi­
ple of immediate knowledge and faith one can read hundreds and 
hundreds of assurances about reason, knowing, thinking, etc.; and 
since external authority does not count for much any more, they 
seek to gain acceptance for themselves through endless repetitions 
of one and the same [statement]. 
§ 179 
In its initially immediate subject the assertoric judgment does not contain 
the relation of the particular and the universal that is expressed in the 
predicate. Consequently this judgment is only a subjective specification­
and the opposite assertion confronts it with the same right or rather the 
same lack of right. Hence it is (2) straightaway just a problematic judgment. 
a. Partikularitiit 

256 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
But (3) when the objective specificationa is posited in the subject or when its
particularity is posited-as the special way that its thereness is
constituted-then the subject expresses the relation of this way of being
constituted to its determination, i.e., to its genus. Thus it expresses what
constitutes the content of the predicate (see preceding paragraph). Here
we have the apodeictic judgment (e.g., "This-the immediate singularity­
house-the genus-being constituted thus and so-particularity-is good or
bad").-All things are a genus (which is their determination and purpose)
in a single actuality with a particular constitution; and their finitude con­
sists in the fact that what is their particular [way of being] may (or again
may not) conform to the universal. 
§ I80 
In this way the subject and the predicate themselves are each of them the
whole judgment. Initially the immediate constitution of the subject shows
itself as the mediating ground between the singularity of what is actual and
its universality, as the ground of the judgment. What has been posited in
fact is the unity of the subject and the predicate as the Concept itself. The
Concept is the fulfillment of the empty "is" of the copula; and since (as
subject and predicate) its moments are at the same time distinct, the Con­
cept is posited as their unity, as the relation mediating between them.
[This is] the Syllogism. 
C. THE SYLLOGISM 
§ I  81 
The syllogism is the unity of the Concept and the judgment; it is the
Concept as the simple identity into which the form-distinctions of the
judgment have returned, and it is judgment, insofar as it is posited at the
same time in reality, i. e., in the distinction of its determinations. The syl­
logism is what is rational, and it is everything that is rational. 
It is, of course, quite usual for the syllogism to be given out as the
form of what is rational-but [only] as a subjective form and without
any connection being demonstrated between this form and any
a, Partikularitiit 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163-193) 
257 
other rational content, for instance, a rational principle, a rational 
action or idea, etc. There is, in general, much talk of "reason" and 
it is frequently appealed to; but its determinacy, what it is, is not 
stated-and the last thing anyone thinks of in that context is syl­
logistic reasoning. Formal syllogising is indeed "rational" in a way 
that is so devoid of reason that it has nothing to do with the 
rationality of its basic import. But since any such import can only 
be rational in virtue of the determinacy that makes thinking into 
reason, it can only be rational in virtue of that form, which is the 
syllogism.-And this last is nothing but the posited, (and at first 
formally) real Concept, "-just as the above paragraph expresses it. 
Hence the syllogism is the essential ground of everything true; and 
the definition of the Absolute from now on is that it is the syllogism. 
Expressed as a proposition this determination becomes: "Every­
thing is a syllogism." Everything is a concept, and the way that the 
concept is there is the distinction of its moments, in such a way 
that its universal nature gives itself external reality through par­
ticularity, and in this way, i.e., as negative inward reflection, the 
concept makes itself into the singular.-Or, conversely: the actual 
is a singular that raises itself by means of particularity to univer­
sality and makes itself identical with itself.-The actual is One, but 
it is equally the stepping asunder of the moments of the Concept; 
and the syllogism is the cycle of the mediation of its moments, the 
cycle through which it posits itself as One. 
Addition. Like the Concept and the judgment, the syllogism also is usually consid­
ered only as a form of our subjective thinking, and it is said therefore that the 
syllogism is the grounding of the judgment. Now, it is certainly the case that the 
judgment refers us to the syllogism, but it is not merely our subjective doing that 
brings this advance about; on the contrary, it is the judgment itself that posits itself 
as syllogism and returns in it to the unity of Concept. More precisely, it is the 
apodeictic judgment which forms the passage to the syllogism. In the apodeictic 
udgment we have something singular that relates to its universal, i.e., to its con­
cept, in virtue of its constitution. Here the particular appears as the mediating 
middleb between the singular and the universal; and this is the basic form of the 
syllogism, whose further development, interpreted in a formal way, consists in the 
fact that the singular and the universal also occupy this position of being the 
middle. It is this process that forms the passage from subjectivity to objectivity. 
a. reale Begriff 
b. die vermittelnde Mitte 

258 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGI
§ 182 
In the immediate syllogism, the determinations of the Concept-being ab
stract-stand in a merely external" relationship to each other; hence the tw
extremes are singularity and universality, but in the same way the Concep
(as the middle term which con-eludes these two) is only abstract par
ticularity. As a result the extremes are posited as subsisting on their ow
account, just as indifferent toward each other as toward their middle term
This syllogism, therefore, is the rational that lacks the Concept, it is th
formal syllogism of the understanding.-Here the subject is con-eluded wit
an other determinacy; or [from the other side] by means of this mediatio
the universal subsumes a subject that is external to it. What happens in th
rational syllogism, on the contrary, is that by means of the mediation th
subject con-eludes itself with itself. Only then is it [truly] subject; or th
subject is all by itself the syllogism of reason. 
In the following examination, the syllogism of the understandin
is expressed in its subjective mode, according to its ordinary cur
rent meaning. 17 This mode belongs to it when we say that we mak
these syllogisms. And, in fact, the syllogism of the understandin
is only a subjective syllogising; but this has also the objective mean
ing that this syllogism expresses only the finitude of things, albe
in the determinate mode that the form has achieved at this poin
In finite things their subjectivity-as a thinghood that is separabl
from their properties, [i.e.,] from their particularity-is equall
separable from their universality, not only insofar as this univer
sality is the mere quality of the thing and its external connected
ness with other things, but also insofar as it is its genus an
concept. 
Addition. In conformity with the above mentioned interpretation of the syllogism
as the form of what is rational, reason itself has been defined as the faculty o
syllogising, while the understanding, in contrast, has been defined as the faculty o
forming concepts. Quite apart from the underlying superficial representation of th
spirit as a mere ensemble of forces or faculties subSisting side by side, there is th
to be said about the association of the understanding with the concept and o
reason with the syllogism: that we ought not to regard the Concept as a mer
determination of the understanding any more than we ought to regard the syllog
ism as rational without qualification. For, on the one hand, what is usually dea
with in formal logic as the doctrine of the syllogism is nothing but the simpl
syllogism of the understanding. It does not deserve the honour of counting as th
a. iiussere 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163-193) 
259 
form of the rational, of counting indeed as what is rational purely and simply. Nor 
yet, on the other hand, is the Concept as such just a mere form of the understand­
ing. On the contrary, it is only the abstractive understanding that depreciates the 
Concept in this way. 
So, although people do habitually distinguish between mere concepts of the 
understanding and concepts of reason, this distinction should not be understood to 
mean that there are two kinds of concepts; instead, it is our choice, whether we stay 
with the merely negative and abstract form of the Concept or whether we interpret 
it, in accordance with its true nature, as what is also positive and concrete. For 
instance, the "concept" of freedom as framed by the mere understanding regards 
freedom as the abstract antithesis of necessity, whereas the true and rational con­
cept of freedom contains necessity sublated within itself. Similarly, the definition of 
God set up by what is called Deism is just the understanding's concept of God, 
whereas the Christian religion, which knows God as the Trinity, contains reason's 
concept of God.18 
(a) THE QUALITATIVE SYLLOGISM 
§ 183 
As was indicated in the preceding paragraph, the first syllogism is the 
syllogism of thereness or qualitative syllogism, (1) S-P-U: that a subject as 
something-singular is con-cluded with a universal determinacy through a 
quality. 
Only the forms through which subject and predicate constitute a 
syllogism are considered here-not the fact that the subject (the 
minor term) has other determinations besides that of singularity, 
just as the other extreme (the major term, i.e., the predicate of the 
conclusion) is determined in other ways and is not just something­
universal. 
Addition. The syllogism of thereness is merely a syllogism of the understanding, 
because singularity, particularity, and universality confront one another quite ab­
stractly in it. So this syllogism is the last extreme of the process in which the 
Concept becomes external to itself. a Here we have something immediately singular 
as subject; then some particular aspect or property of this subject is emphasised, 
and by way of this property the singular proves to be a universal. An example 
would be, "This rose is red, red is a colour, therefore this rose is something 
coloured." It is mainly the syllogism in this shape that is usually dealt with in 
ordinary logic. 
In former times the syllogism was regarded as the absolute rule of all cognition, 
and a scientific assertion was only held to be justified when it had been demonstra-
a. das hiichste Auflersichkommen des Begriffs 

260 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
bly mediated by a syllogism. Nowadays, we meet the various forms of the syllog­
ism almost exclusively in the logic manuals, and acquaintance with them counts 
only as an empty piece of book learning, which is of absolutely no further use, 
neither in practical life nor in science. The first comment to be made about this is 
that, although it would be superfluous and pedantic to enter into the whole detail 
of formalistic syllogising on every occasion, still, the various forms of the syllogism 
reassert themselves continually in our cognition. For instance, when someone 
hears the creaking of a cart in the street as he wakes on a winter's morning and is 
led by that to the conclusion that it must have frozen quite hard, he is performing 
here the operation of syllogising, and we repeat this operation every day in the 
most varied and complicated ways. So, at least it should not be less interesting to 
become expressly conscious of this activity that we perform daily as humans that 
think, than it is generally acknowledged to be to become acquainted not only with 
the functions of our organic life, such as that of digestion, or of the formation of 
the blood, or of respiration, and so on, but also with the processes and formations 
of the nature that is all around us. But it must be conceded, without hesitation, that 
drawing correct conclusions no more depends on a previous study of logic than 
adequate digestion, respiration, etc., requires a preliminary study of anatomy and 
physiology. 
Aristotle was the first to observe and describe the various forms, and the so­
called figures, of the syllogism in their subjective significance; indeed, he did this 
with such sureness and accuracy that, in essentials, there has been no need to add 
anything further. But, although this achievement does great honour to Aristotle, he 
himself made no use of the forms of the syllogism of the understanding in his 
properly philosophical inquiries, nor even of finite thinking in general. (See the 
Remark to § 187.» 
§ 184 
This syllogism is (a) entirely contingent with regard to its determinations, 
since, as an abstract particularity, the middle term is any determinacy of the 
subject whatever. For-being something-immediate, and hence empirically 
concrete-the subject has several of these determinacies. So it can be con­
cluded with a variety of other universalities as well. In the same way, since 
even a single particularity can again have diverse determinacies within it, 
the subject can be related to distinct universals through one and the same 
middle term. 
It is more the case that formalistic syllogising has gone out of 
fashion, than that people have become aware of its incorrectness 
and have tried to justify not using it on that account. This para-
a. Not § 189 (our correction) 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163-193) 
261 
graph and the one following show that syllogising of this kind is 
quite pointless for the truth. 
Under the aspect that is dealt with in the present paragraph, all 
sorts of things can, as people say, be proven by means of this kind 
of syllogisms. We only have to choose the middle term from which 
the passage can be made to the determination that we want. But 
with another middle term something else can be proven-even its 
opposite.-The more concrete an ob-ject is, the more sides there 
are that belong to it, and can serve as middle terms. Which of them 
is more essential than the others must again depend on a syllogis­
ing of this kind, which holds onto the single determinacy and can 
easily find a side and an aspect in this determinacy according to 
which it can be made important and necessarily valid. 
Addition. Although we hardly ever think of the syllogism of the understanding in 
the daily business of life, still it does continually play its role there. For instance, it 
is the job of advocates in a civil lawsuit to make the legal titles that are favourable to 
their clients into the ones that count. But, in its logical aspect, a legal title is nothing 
but medius terminus [a middle term]. The same thing happens in diplomatic nego­
tiations, too, for example, when various powers lay claim to one and the same piece 
of land. In this case, the right of inheritance, the geographic lie of the land, the 
descent and language of its inhabitants, or any other ground, can be brought up as 
a medius terminus. 
§ l85 
(௄) This syllogism is equally contingent because of the form of the relation 
that it involves. According to the concept of the syllogism, the true is the 
relation of distinct [terms]1 through a middle term which is their unity. But 
the relations of the extremes to the middle term (the so-called premises, 
major and minor) are immediate relations instead. 
This contradiction of the syllogism expresses itself once more 
through an infinite progress-as the requirement that the premises 
be likewise demonstrated by a syllogism. But since the new syllo­
gism has two equally immediate premises, this requirement-which 
constantly duplicates itself, of course-is repeated ad infinitum. 
086 
What has been noted at this point (because of its empirical importance) as 
a defect of the syllogism to which absolute correctness is ascribed in this 

262 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
form, must sub late itself of its own accord as the determination of the
syllogism proceeds. Here, within the sphere of the Concept, as well as in
the Judgment, the opposite determinacy is not merely present in-itself, but it
is posited; and in this way the further determination of the syllogism, too, 
requires only that we take up what is posited each time by the syllogism
itself. Through the immediate syllogism S-P-U the singular is mediated
with the universal; and it is posited in this conclusion as something-universal.
Thus the singular, as a subject that is itself something-universal, is now the
unity of the two extremes and is what mediates. This gives the second figure
of the syllogism: (2) U-S-P. This figure expresses the truth of the first­
that, since the mediation has taken place in singularity, it is something
contingent. 
§ 187 
The second figure con-eludes the universal with the particular. (Since the 
universal steps across from the preceding conclusion, it now occupies the
place of the immediate subject.) The universal is, therefore, posited as
something-particular, hence as what mediates between the extremes,
whose places are now occupied by the other [terms]. [This is] the third
figure of the syllogism: (3) P-U-S. 
Aristotle rightly admits only three figures of the syllogism; the
fourth is a superfluous and even absurd addition made by the
Modems. In the usual accounts of these so-called figures19 they are
juxtaposed, without any thought of showing their necessity and
still less of showing their significance and their value. It is no
wonder, therefore, that these figures later have come to be treated
as an empty formalism. But they do have a very fundamental
meaning, which rests on the necessity that, as a determination of
the Concept, each moment becomes itself the whole and the mediat­
ing ground . -Studying how the propositions have to be deter­
mined-whether they can be universal, etc., or negative-in order
to produce a correct syllogism in the various figures: this is a 
merely mechanical inquiry, which has quite justly fallen into obliv­
ion, because it is inwardly meaningless and its mechanism lacks
the Concept.-To appeal to Aristotle, in defence of the importance
of such inquiries and of the syllogism of the understanding in
general, is quite out of the question. Aristotle did, indeed, describe
them just as he did countless other forms of spirit and of nature; 
and he investigated and indicated their determinacy. But in his
metaphysical concepts, just as in the concepts of the natural and the

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163-193) 
263 
spiritual, he was so far from seeking to make the form of the 
syllogism of the understanding the basis and the criterion, that 
one might say that not a single one of the metaphysical concepts 
could have arisen or stood its ground, if it had had to be subjected 
to the laws of the understanding. Even if, in his own way, Aristotle 
contributes much that is essentially a product of description and of 
the understanding, the speculative concept is always what is domi­
nant with him; and he does not allow the syllogistic reasoning of 
the understanding, which he had been the first to expose so defi­
nitely, to encroach upon the speculative sphere. 20 
Addition. The objective sense of the figures of the syllogism is generally that every­
thing rational shows itself to be a threefold syllogism, and it does that in such a 
way that each of its members occupies the position both of an extreme and of the 
mediating middle. This is the case especially with the three "members" of philo­
sophical science, i.e., the logical Idea, Nature, and Spirit. Here, it is first Nature that 
stands in the middle as the member that con-eludes the others. As the immediate 
totality, Nature unfolds itself in the two extremes of logical Idea and Spirit. Spirit, 
however, is Spirit by being mediated through Nature. In the second place, Spirit 
which we know as what is individual and actuating is the middle, and Nature and 
the logical Idea are the extremes. It is Spirit that knows the logical Idea in Nature, 
and elevates it to its essence. Equally, in the third place, the logical Idea itself is the 
middle; it is the absolute substance of Spirit and of Nature, that which is universal 
and all-pervading. These are the members of the absolute syllogism. 
§ 188 
Since each moment has passed through the place of the middle term and 
of the extremes, their determinate distinction from each other has sublated 
itself; and in this form where its moments are not distinguished,- the 
syllogism has at first the external identity-of-the-understanding, or equality, 
as its relation-this is the quantitative or mathematical syllogism. If two 
things are equal to a third, they are equal to one another. 
Addition. As we all know, the quantitative that is referred to here occurs in mathe­
matics as an axiom, whose content, like that of the other axioms, is normally said to 
be insusceptible of proof, though it does not require any proof either, being imme­
diately self-evident. But, in fact, these mathematical axioms are nothing but logical 
propositions which, insofar as they express particular and definite thoughts, must 
a. in dieser Form der Unterschiedslosigkeit seiner Momente 

264 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
be deduced from universal and self-determining thinking; and this deduction must
be considered their proof. This proof is here given for the quantitative syllogism
which is set up in mathematics as an axiom, but which shows itself to be the direct
result of the qualitative or immediate syllogism. 
Incidentally, the quantitative syllogism is the syllogism that lacks form al­
together, since the distinction between the terms, determined by the Concept, is
sublated within it. External circumstances determine here which propositions are
to be the premises, and hence, in using this syllogism, we presuppose what is
already established and proven elsewhere. 
§ l89 
With regard to the form a double result has now been established: (1)
Since each of the moments has assumed the determination and the place
of the middle term, and hence of the whole in general, it has in-itself lost
the one-sidedness of its abstraction (§§ 182, 184); (2) the mediation (§ 185)
has been completed, but again only in-itself, i.e., only as a circle of media­
tions that reciprocally presuppose each other. In the first figure, S-P-U, the 
two premises, S-P and P-U, are still unmediated; the former is mediated in
the third, the latter in the second figure. But for the mediation of their
premises each of these two figures presupposes again both of the other
figures. 
Consequently, the mediating unity of the Concept has to be
posited as the developed unity of singularity and universality and
no longer just as abstract particularity. Indeed, it has to be posited
first of all as [the] reflected unity of these determinations; [i.e., as] 
the singularity that is at the same time determined as universality. 
This kind of middle term gives us the syllogism of reflection. 
(13) THE SYLLOGISM OF REFLECTION 
§ 190 
Since, to begin with (1) the middle term is thus not just an abstract, particu­
lar determinacy of the subject, but at the same time all singular concrete
subjects, to which that determinacy belongs (though only as one deter­
minacy among others), we have the syllogism of allness. But now the major
premise itself-which has the particular determinacy, the middle term, as 
Allness for its subject-really presupposes the conclusion, of which it is
supposed to be the presupposition. Hence (2) the major premise is based 
on an induction, of which the middle term are all the singular [instances] as 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163-193) 
265 
such, a, b, c, d, etc. But since immediate, empirical singularity is diverse 
from universality and therefore unable to provide completeness, the induc­
tion is (3) based on analogy, the middle term of which is something­
singular, but in the sense of its essential universality, of its genus or essen­
tial determinacy.-The first syllogism refers to the second for its mediation 
and the second to the third; but once the forms of the external relation of 
singularity and universality have been run through in the figures of the 
syllogism of reflection, the third syllogism also requires a universality that 
is inwardly determinate, i. e., singularity as genus. 
The defect of the basic form of the syllogism of the understanding, 
that was indicated in § 184, is corrected by the syllogism of Allness; 
but only in such a way that a new defect arises, namely, that the 
major premise itself presupposes what was supposed to be the 
conclusion, so that the conclusion is [again] an immediate 
proposition.-"All men are mortal, therefore Caius is mortal," -"All 
metals conduct electricity, therefore copper, for instance, does the 
same." In the affirmation of these majors, which are supposed to 
express the immediate singular [instances] as "all cases" and which 
ought to be essentially empirical propositions-what is involved is 
that the propositions about the singular [case of] Caius, about the 
singular [case of] copper, have previously been ascertained to be 
correct.-Everyone is struck, not just by the pedantry, but by the 
empty· formalism of syllogisms like: "All men are mortal, but 
Caius is . . . etc." 
Addition. The syllogism of Allness refers us to the syllogism of induction, in which 
the single instances form the con-cluding middle. If we say, "All metals are conduc­
tors of electricity," this is an empirical proposition, which results from the testing 
of every single metal. In this way we obtain the syllogism of induction, which has 
the following shape: 
P - 5 - U  
5 
5 
"Gold is a metal, silver is a metal, and so are copper, lead, etc." This is the major 
premise. Then comes the minor premise: "All these bodies are conductors of 
electricity," and from this results the conclusion: "All metals are conductors of 
electricity." 50 the linkage is effected here by singularity in the form of Allness. 
a. nichtssagende 

266 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
Now this syllogism likewise sends us on again to another syllogism. As its 
middle term it has the complete set of single instances; and this presupposes that 
observation and experience are complete in a certain domain. But because what is 
in question here are single instances, there is an infinite progression once more 
(5,5,5, .
. . ). The single instances can never be exhausted in an induction. If we 
say, "All metals, all plants, etc.," this just means, "All the metals, all the plants that
we have so far encountered." Consequently, any induction is imperfect. To be sure, 
we have made this and that observation, lots and lots of them, but not all cases, not 
all individuals, have been observed. It is this defect of induction that leads us to 
analogy. In the syllogism of analogy it is concluded that because things of a certain 
kind have a certain property, therefore other things of the same kind have the same 
property, too. It is an example of a syllogism of analogy when we say: "We have 
found that all the planets observed so far obey such and such a law of motion, and 
that therefore any newly discovered planet will probably move according to the
same law." 
Analogy is rightly held in high esteem in the empirical sciences, and very impor­
tant results have been arrived at by this path. It is the instinct of reason which 
surmises that this or that empirically discovered determination is grounded in an 
ob-ject's inner nature or kind, and which proceeds on that basis.21 Analogy, it may 
be added, can be more or less superficial or well grounded. For instance, if some­
one says, "Caius, who is a man, is a scholar; Titus is a man, too, so he will probably 
be a scholar also." This is a very bad analogy in any case, because, of course, a 
man's being a scholar is certainly not grounded just in his being human. Superficial 
analogies of this kind do, however, occur very often. For example, it is often said 
that "The earth is a heavenly body and has inhabitants; the moon is also a heavenly 
body; therefore it will probably be inhabited too." This analogy is in no way better
than the one given above. That the earth has inhabitants does not rest merely on 
the fact that it is a heavenly body; on the contrary, some further conditions are
necessary, especially that of being surrounded with an atmosphere, the related
presence of water, and so on; and it is precisely these conditions which, as far as 
we know, the moon lacks. What has been called Philosophy of Nature in modem
times consists for the most part in a futile play with empty and external analogies, 
which are supposed, all the same, to count as profound results. That is why the 
philosophical study of nature has fallen into deserved discredit. 22 
("'I) THE SYLLOGISM OF NECESSITY 
§ 191 
According to its merely abstract determinations, this syllogism has the
universal as its middle term-just as the syllogism of reflection has sin­
gularity [as its middle]; the latter according to the second figure, the former
according to the third. [But in the syllogism of necessity the middle term
is] the universal posited as essentially determinate within itself. The medi-

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163-193) 
267 
ating determination is initially (1) the particular in the sense of the determi­
nate genus or species; this is the case in the categorical syllogism. [Then, it is) 
(2) the singular in the sense of immediate being, so that it is both mediat­
ing and mediated-in the hypothetical syllogism. (3) The mediating univer­
sal is also posited as the totality of its particularisations and as a singular 
particular [or as) exeluding singularity-in the disjunctive syllogism. So 
that there is one and the same universal in all these determinations, but it 
is in the forms of distinction. 
§ 192 
The syllogism has been taken according to the distinctions which it con­
tains, and the universal result of its course is that the self-sublation of 
these distinctions and of the self-externality of the Concept is produced in 
it. And indeed, (1) each of the moments has proven itself to be the totality 
of the moments, hence the whole syllogism: in this way, they are in­
themselves identical. (2) The negation of their distinctions, and the media­
tion of them, constitutes the being-for-itself [of the Concept); so that it is 
one and the same universal that is in these forms and hence is posited also 
as their identity. In this ideality of the moments, syllogistic reasoning 
acquires the determination of essentially containing the negation of the 
determinacies through which it proceeds-and hence that of being a medi­
ation through the sublation of mediation, and a con-eluding of the subject, 
not with [an) other, but with [a) sublated other, [i.e.,) with itself. 
Addition. It is customary in traditional logic to conclude the first part, the so-called 
doctrine of elements, with a treatment of the doctrine of the syllogism. What 
follows then, as the second part, is the so-called doctrine of method, in which it is 
supposed to be shown how a whole body of scientific cognition can be brought 
into existence by applying the forms of thinking treated in the doctrine of elements 
to the objects that are present.23 Where these objects come from and how it stands 
with the thought of objectivity are questions about which the logic of the under­
standing gives no information. In that logic thinking is taken to be a merely subjec­
tive and formal activity, and the objective world that confronts thinking counts as 
something fixed and present in its own right. But this dualism is not the true state 
of affairs, and to take up the determinations of subjectivity and objectivity without 
further ado, and without examining their origins, is a mindless procedure. Both 
subjectivity and objectivity are thoughts in any case; and indeed they are determi­
nate thoughts, which have to prove themselves to be grounded in the thinking that 
is universal and self-determining. 
This has been done here, first with regard to subjectivity. We have come to the 
cognition of subjectivity, or the subjective Concept, which contains the Concept as 
such, the judgment, and the syllogism within it, as the dialectical result of the first 

268 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
two principal stages of the logical Idea, namely, being and" essence. It is quite 
correct to say of the Concept that it is subjective and only subjective, because it is 
certainly subjectivity itself. And both the judgment and the syllogism are as subjec­
tive as the Concept as such. These, together with the so-called laws of thought (the 
laws of identity, of distinction, and of sufficient reason), form the content of the so­
called doctrine of elements in traditional logic. But now, this subjectivity, with the 
determinations which have been cited here (the Concept, the judgment and the 
syllogism), is not to be regarded as an empty framework that can only be filled up 
from outside, by objects that are present on their own account; on the contrary, it is 
subjectivity itself which, being dialectical, breaks through its own barrier, and 
opens itself up into objectivity by means of syllogism. 
§ 193 
This realisation of the Concept, in which the universal is this One totality 
returned into itself, whose distinctions are equally this totality, and which 
through the sublation of the mediation has determined itself as immediate 
unity, is the object. 
This passage from the subject, from the Concept in general and 
more precisely from the syllogism, to the object, may seem at first 
sight to be very strange (especially if One thinks only of the syllog­
ism of the understanding and considers syllogistic reasoning as 
done by consciousness). But all the same, it is not part of our 
COncern to make this passage plausible to representation. We can 
only look back to see whether our usual notion of what is called an 
"object" corresponds more or less with what constitutes the deter­
mination of the object here. Now we do not usually understand by 
an "object" merely something that is abstractly, or an existing 
thing, or something-actual in general, but something-independent, 
that is concrete and complete within itself; this completeness is the 
totality of the Concept. The fact that the object is also ob-ject, and is 
something-externalb to an other will be established later-insofar as 
it sets itself up in its antithesis to what is subjective. But at this 
point, the object, as that into which the Concept has passed over 
from its mediation, is initially just immediate unaffected object­
just as the Concept is likewise only determined as what is subjec­
tive in the antithesis that comes later. 
Moreover, the object is quite generally the One whole that is 
inwardly still undetermined; it is the objective world in general, 
God, the absolute object. But equally the object has distinction in 
a. Reading und (instead of oder) 
b. Ausseres 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163-193) 
269 
it; as objective world it falls apart inwardly into [an] undetermined 
manifoldness-and each of these isolated [bits] is also an object, or 
something-there that is inwardly concrete, 
complete, 
and 
independent. 
We have compared objectivity with being, existence, and actu­
ality; in the same way the passage to existence and actuality (for 
being is the first, totally abstract immediacy) has to be compared 
with the passage to objectivity. The ground from which existence 
emerges, the relationship of reflection that sublates itself into actu­
ality, are nothing but the still imperfectly posited Concept; i.e., they 
are only abstract sides of it. The ground is just the unity of the 
Concept at the level of essence; the relationship is just the relation 
of real sides that are supposed to be only inwardly reflected-the 
Concept is the unity of the two, and the object is a unity which is 
not just one appropriate to essence, but one that is inwardly uni­
versal: it does not merely contain real distinctions, but contains 
them as totalities within itself. 
It is clear, moreover, that what is at issue in all these transitions 
is more than just showing the inseparability of the Concept (or of 
thinking) from being. It has often been noted that being is nothing 
more than the simple relation to itself, and that this poor deter­
mination is indubitably contained in the Concept (or in thinking). 
The sense of these transitions is not to take up determinations 
simply as contained [in the Concept] (in the way this happens in 
the ontological argument for God's being-there, by means of the 
proposition that being is one of the realities). [The task here] is 
rather to take the Concept, the way it initially ought to be deter­
mined on its own account as Concept (with which this remote 
abstraction of being or even of objectivity has still nothing to do); 
and then, in its determinacy as determinacy of the Concept alone, 
to see whether, and [indeed] that this determinacy passes over into 
a form that is diverse from determinacy as it belongs to the Con­
cept and appears in it. 
If the object, as the product of this passage, is put in relation 
with the Concept (which as far as its proper form is concerned has 
vanished in this transition), then the result may be correctly 
expressed by saying that the Concept (or even, if one prefers, 
subjectivity) and the object are in-themselves the same. But it is 
equally correct to say that they are diverse. Precisely because each 
statement is as correct as the other, each of them is as incorrect as 
the other; expressions of this kind are incapable of presenting the 
genuine relationship. The "sameness in-themselves" that was 

270 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
mentioned above is something-abstract and even more one-sided 
than the Concept itself-whose one-sidedness sublates itself, 
generally speaking, in the fact that the Concept sublates itself into 
the object, the opposite one-sidedness. That "sameness in­
themselves" also must therefore determine itself to be for itself 
through the negation of itself. As is always the case, the speculative 
identity is not the trivial one, that Concept and objectivity are in­
themselves identical; this is a remark that has been repeated often 
enough, yet it cannot be repeated often enough, if the intention is 
to put an end to the stale and totally malicious misunderstandings 
about this identity. But, of course, there is no hope of achieving 
this at the level of the understanding. 
Besides, if one takes this unity quite generally, without remem­
bering the one-sided form of its being-in-itself, then as everyone 
knows, it is this unity that is presupposed in the ontological proof 
that there is a God; it is presupposed precisely as what is the most 
perfect. It is true that Anselm (to whom the most remarkable 
thought of this proof occurs for the first time) simply discusses to 
begin with whether a content is in our thinking only. His words are 
briefly these: "Certe id, quo majus cogitari nequit, non potest esse 
in intellectu solo. Si enim vel in solo intellectu est, potest cogitari 
esse et in re: quod maius est. Si ergo id, quo maius cogitari non 
potest, est in solo intellectu: id ipsum, quo maius cogitari non 
potest, est, quo maius cogitari potest. Sed certe hoc esse non pot­
est." [Assuredly, that than which nothing greater can be thought 
cannot be in the intellect alone. For suppose it is in the intellect 
alone-then it can be thought to be in reality as well: and that is 
greater. Therefore, if that than which nothing greater can be 
thought is in the intellect alone, then precisely that than which 
nothing greater can be thought is that than which a greater can be 
thought. But obviously this is impossible.]24 According to the de­
terminations which we have now reached, finite things are such 
that their objectivity is not in agreement with the thoughts of 
them; Le., not in agreement with their universal determination, 
their genus, and their purpose. Descartes and Spinoza and others 
have expressed this unity in a more objective way, but the princi­
ple of immediate certainty or of faith takes it more in the subjective 
way of Anselm; i.e., that in our consciousness the determination of 
God's being is inseparably bound up with our representation of 
him. And if the principle of this faith also takes the representa­
tions of external finite things in the inseparability of the conscious­
ness of them and of their being (because they are bound up with 

A. THE SUBJECTIVE CONCEPT (§§ 163--193) 
271 
the determination of existence in our intuition), that too is quite 
correct. But it would be mindless' in the extreme, if this were 
supposed to mean that in our consciousness existence is bound up 
with the representation of finite things in the same way as it is 
with the representation of God. To suppose that would be to forget 
that finite things are alterable and perishable, i.e., that existence is 
bound up with them only in a transitory manner, that this bond is 
not eternal but can be severed. Hence Anselm put aside the sort of 
linkage that occurs in finite things, and declared rightly that the 
perfect [being]b is that which is not merely in a subjective way, but 
in an objective way as well. Every attempt to look down upon the 
so-called ontological proof and upon Anselm's determination of 
what is perfect is futile, since this determination is implicit in every 
unprejudiced human mind, just as it finds its way back in every 
philosophy, even against its wit and will (as in the case of the 
principle of immediate faith). 
The defect in Anselm's argumentation, however, which is also 
shared by Descartes and Spinoza, as well as by the principle of 
immediate knowing, is that this unity, which is proclaimed as 
what is most perfect (or subjectively as the true knowing), is pre­
supposed; i.e., it is assumed as in-itself only. Consequently this 
unity is abstract; and the diversity of the two determinations is at 
once brought up against it, as happened to Anselm long ago. In 
other words, it is the representation and existence of the finite that 
is actually brought up against the infinite; for, as was remarked 
above, the finite is the sort of objectivity which is at the same time 
not adequate to its purpose, to its essence and concept, but diverse 
from it; or it is the sort of representation, the sort of subjective 
something, that does not involve existence. This objection and an­
tithesis is only removed by showing that the finite is something­
untrue, or that these determinations are on their own account one­
sided and null, and that their identity is therefore one into which 
they pass over by themselves and in which they are reconciled. 
a. Gedankenlosigkeil 
b. das Vollkommene 

B 
The Object 
§ 194 
Because of its indifference vis-a.-vis the distinction that has sublated itself 
in it, the object is immediate being, and it is an inward totality.- At the 
same time it is equally indifferent vis-a.-vis its own immediate unity, since 
that identity [i.e., totality] is the identity of its moments that is only in-itself. 
It is a falling apart into distinct [moments], each of which is itself the 
totality. Hence, the object is the absolute contradiction of the complete 
independence of the [distinct moments] that are manifold and of their 
equally complete dependency. 
The definition: "The Absolute is the object," is contained in its most 
determinate form in the Monad of Leibniz,25 which is supposed to 
be an object, but one which in-itself represents-and which is 
indeed-the totality of the representation of the world; in the sim­
ple unity of this Monad all distinction is [present] only as 
something-ideal, or as dependent. Nothing enters into the Monad 
from outside, it is within itself the whole Concept. and only dis­
tinct from it in virtue of the greater or lesser development of the 
Concept [in it] . This simple totality also falls apart into the absolute 
plurality of distinctions, in such a way that the distinctions are 
independent monads. But in the Monad of monads and in the 
preestablished harmony of their inner development these sub­
stances are also again reduced to nonindependence and ideality. 
Thus the philosophy of Leibniz is the completely developed contra­
diction. 
Addition 1. When the Absolute (God) is interpreted as the object and we do not go 
beyond that, we have the general standpoint of superstition and servile fear. It is 
Fichte especially who has rightly emphasised this in our modern period.26 Cer­
tainly God is the object, indeed he is the object pure and simple, as against which 
our particular (subjective) opinions and volitions have neither truth nor validity. 
But precisely as the absolute object, God does not confront subjectivity as a dark 
and hostile power; instead, he contains it within himself as an essential moment. In 
the doctrine of the Christian religion this is expressed by saying that God wills that 
all men shall be saved and come to blessedness. Men are saved and attain blessed-
a ist in sich Totalitat 
272 

B. THE OBJECT (§§ 194-212) 
273 
ness by becoming conscious of their unity with God. Then God ceases to be a mere 
object to them; and ipso facto he ceases to be an ob-ject of fear and terror, as God 
was especially in the religious consciousness of the Romans. Then later, in the 
Christian religion, God becomes known as love, precisely because he revealed 
himself to man in his Son, who is one with him; he revealed himself as this single 
man, and redeemed mankind by doing that. What this also means is that the 
antithesis of objectivity and subjectivity is overcome implicitly; and it is our busi­
ness· to participate in this redemption by laying aside our immediate subjectivity 
(putting off the old Adam) and becoming conscious of God as our true and essen­
tial Self. 
Now, just as religion and religious worship consist in the overcoming of the 
antithesis between subjectivity and objectivity, so too the task of science, and more 
precisely of philosophy, is nothing but the overcoming of this antithesis through 
thinking. In cognition, what has to be done is all a matter of stripping away the 
alien character of the objective world that confronts us. As we habitually say, it is a 
matter of "finding ourselves in the world," and what that amounts to is the tracing 
of what is objective back to the Concept. which is our innermost Self. The explana­
tion we have given shows how absurd it is to consider subjectivity and objectivity 
as a fixed and abstract antithesis. Both moments are thoroughly dialectical. The 
Concept, which is initially only subjective, proceeds to objectify itself by virtue of 
its own activity and without the help of an external material or stuff. And likewise 
the object is not rigid and without process; instead, its process consists in its 
proving itself to be that which is at the same time subjective, and this forms the 
advance to the Idea. Anyone who is not familiar with the determinations of subjec­
tivity and objectivity, and who wants to hold fast to them in abstraction from one 
another, will find that these abstract determinations slip through his fingers before 
he knows it, and that he says precisely the opposite of what he wanted to say. 
Addition 2 .  Objectivity contains the three forms of mechanism, chemism, and teleol­
ogy. The mechanically determined object is the immediate, undifferentiatedb object. 
This object certainly contains distinction, but its diverse [parts] behave indif­
ferentlyc to each other, and their linkage is only external to them. In chemism, by 
contrast, the object proves to be essentially differentiated,d so that the objects are 
what they are only through their relation to one another, and their difference 
constitutes their quality. The third form of objectivity, the relationship of teleology, is 
the unity of mechanism and chemism. Like the mechanical object, purpose is once 
more a self-enclosed totality, but it is enriched by the principle of difference which 
came forth in chemism, so that it relates itself to the object that confronts it. It is the 
realisation of purpose, therefore, that forms the passage to the Idea. 
a. Sache 
b. indifferente 
c. gleichgiiltig 
d. different 
e. Differenz 

274 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
A. MECHANISM 
§ 195 
(1) In its immediacy, the object is only the Concept in-itself; initially it has 
the Concept outside it, and every determinacy is [present] as one that is 
posited externally. Hence, as a unity of distinct [terms], it is something­
composite; it is an aggregate, and its operation upon another remains an 
external relation. This is formal mechanism.-In this relation and depend­
ence the objects remain equally independent; they offer resistance, and are 
external to each other. 
Just as pressure and impact are mechanical relationships, so we 
have mechanical knowledge, too: we know things by rote, in­
asmuch as the words remain without meaning for us and are 
external to sense, representation, and thought; the words are in 
like manner external to themselves: they form a meaningless se­
quence. Action, piety, etc., are mechanical in the same way, in­
asmuch as what a man does is determined for him by ritual pre­
scriptions, or by a director of conscience, etc., and his own spirit 
and will are not in his actions, so that even within himself they 
remain external. 27 
Addition. As the initial form of objectivity, mechanism is also the first category that 
presents itself to reflection when it considers the world of ob-jects, and it is the 
very one at which reflection most often halts. But this is a superficial, intellectually 
impoverished point of view, inadequate in regard to nature and still more so in 
regard to spirit. In nature only the wholly abstract relationships of a matter which 
is still not opened up within itself28 are subject to mechanism; in contrast, not even 
the phenomena and processes of the physical domain in the narrower sense of the 
word (such as the phenomena of light, heat, magnetism, and electricity, for in­
stance) can be explained in a merely mechanical way (i.e., through pressure, colli­
sion, displacement of parts and the like). The transference and application of this 
category into the domain of organic nature is even more unsatisfactory, since the 
task there is to comprehend what is specific about that domain, in particular, the 
nutrition and growth of plants or even animal sensation. So we must in any case 
regard it as a very crucial defect of the modern inquiry into nature-indeed as the 
main defect-that it holds so stubbornly to the categories of mere mechanism even 
where quite different and higher categories are really involved. In doing this, it 
contradicts what offers itself to unprejudiced intuition, and bars the way to an 
adequate cognition of nature. 
In the study of the formations of the world of spirit, too--which comes next­
the mechanical view has frequently been adopted in a quite unwarranted manner. 

B. THE OBJECT (§§ 194-212) 
275 
This is the case, for example, when it is said that man "consists" of body and soul. 
In this view, body and soul are held to subsist each on its own account and to be 
connected together only in an external way. It is the same, too, when the soul is 
treated as a mere complex of forces and faculties that subsist independently, one 
beside the other. 
But, although, on the one hand, the mechanical point of view must be rejected 
quite decisively when it pretends to take the place of conceptually comprehensive 
cognition altogether, and to establish mechanism as the absolute category, still, on 
the other hand, we must also vindicate for mechanism the right and the signifi­
cance of a universal logical category; and therefore we must not restrict it simply to 
that domain of nature from which it derives its name. So there is no reason for us 
to object when attention is drawn to mechanical actions outside of the domain of 
mechanics proper, especially in physics and physiology (e.g., actions like those of 
weight, the lever, and the like). But it must not be overlooked here that in these 
domains the laws of mechanism are no longer the decisive ones, but enter only in a 
subservient position, so to speak. 
Another remark that directly follows is that wherever in nature the higher func­
tions suffer some kind of disturbance or check in their normal functioning (and 
especially the functions of the organism), the otherwise subordinated mechanism 
immediately advances to a dominating role. For example, someone who suffers 
from weakness of the stomach feels "pressure" there after having eaten a small 
quantity of certain foods, whilst others, whose digestive organs are healthy, remain 
free of this feeling, even though they have eaten the same amount. It is the same 
with regard to a general feeling of "heaviness" in the limbs in the case of bodily 
indisposition. 
Even in the domain of the spiritual world, mechanism has its place, though again 
it is only a subordinate one. It is quite right to speak of "mechanical" memory, and 
of all manner of "mechanical" activities, such as reading, writing, and playing 
music, for example. As for memory specifically, we may note, in this connection, 
that a mechanical mode of behaviour belongs even to its essence; this is a circum­
stance that is not infrequently overlooked by modem pedagogy in a mistaken zeal 
for the freedom of intelligence-something that has caused great harm to the 
education of youth. Nevertheless, anyone who has recourse to mechanics in order 
to explain the nature of memory and wants to apply its laws without further ado to 
the soul will thereby show himself to be a bad psychologist. The mechanical aspect 
of memory simply consists in the fact that certain signs, tones, etc., are here 
apprehended in their merely external combination and are then reproduced in this 
combination, without there being any need to draw attention expressly to their 
significance and inner association. To be cognizant of this aspect of mechanical 
memory requires no further study of mechanics, and the study of mechanics can­
not advance psychology as such. 
§ 196 
The object only has the dependence according to which it suffers violence, 
inasmuch as it is independent (see the preceding paragraph); and as 

276 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
posited Concept-in-itself neither of these determinations sublates itself in 
its other, but the Object con-eludes itself with itself through its own 
negation-or its dependence-and only in this·way is it independent. This 
[independence of the object] (in distinction from the externality which it 
negates in its independence) is negative unity with itself, centrality, 
subjectivity-in which the object is itself directed at and related to what is 
external [to it]. The latter is centered on itself in the same way, and therein 
it is only related to the other centre likewise; it also has its centrality in the 
other. [This is] (2) differentiated mechanism (fall, desire, urge to socialise, 
etc.). 
§ 197 
The development of this relationship forms the syllogism in which the 
immanent negativity, as the central singularity of an object (i.e., the abstract 
centre), relates itself to objects that are not independent (as to the other 
extreme) through a middle term (the relative centre) which unites the 
centrality and the dependence of the objects within itself. [This gives us] 
(3) absolute mechanism. 
§ 198 
The syllogism we have now reached (S-P-U) is a triad of syllogisms. Qua 
dependence, the spurious singularity of the dependent objects among which 
formal mechanism is at home, is just as much external universality. These 
objects, therefore, are also the middle term between the absolute and the 
relative centre (the form of the syllogism U-S-P); for it is through this 
dependence that the absolute and relative centres are sundered into ex­
tremes, as well as related to each other. Similarly, absolute centrality is what 
mediates between the relative centre and the independent objects (the form 
of the syllogism P-U-S). It is the substantial universal-the gravity that 
remains identical-which (as pure negativity), ineludes singularity within 
itself equally; and, of course, it mediates just as essentially in its sundering 
action (according to its immanent singularity) as it does in its identical 
cohesion and undisturbed being-within-self (according to its universality). 
In the practical sphere, for instance, the State is a system of three 
syllogisms just like the solar system. (1) The singular (the person) 
con-eludes himself through his particularity (the physical and spir­
itual needs, which when further developed on their own account 
give rise to civil society) with the universal (society, right, law, 
government). (2) The will or the activity of the individuals is the 
mediating [term] that gives satisfaction to their needs in the con-

B. THE OBJECT (§§ 194-212) 
277 
text of society,- right, etc., and provides fulfillment and actualisa­
tion to society, right, etc. (3) But it is the universal (State, govern­
ment, right) that is the substantial middle term within which the 
individuals and their satisfaction have and preserve their full real­
ity, mediation, and subsistence. Precisely because the mediation 
con-eludes each of these determinations with the other extreme, 
each of them con-eludes itself with itself in this way or produces 
itself; and this production is its self-preservation.-It is only 
through the nature of this con-eluding, or through this triad of 
syllogisms with the same terms, that a whole is truly understood 
in its organisation. 
099 
The immediacy of the existence that the objects have in absolute mecha­
nism is in-itself negated by the fact that their independence is mediated 
through their relations to each other, i.e., through their dependence. Hence 
the object has to be posited as differentiated in its existence vis-a.-vis its own 
other. 
B. CHEMISM 
§ 200 
The differentiated object has an immanent determinacy which constitutes its 
nature and in which it has existence. But as the posited totality of the 
Concept, it is the contradiction between this, its own totality, and the deter­
minacy of its existence: hence, it is the striving to sublate this contradiction 
and to make its way of being equal to the Concept. 
Addition. Chemism is a category of objectivity which as a rule is not particularly 
emphasised. Instead, it is lumped together with mechanism, and then they are 
contrasted with the relationship of purposiveness under the common name of me­
chanical relationship. The reason for this must be sought in the fact that mechanism 
and chemism do indeed have in common the fact that they are only implicitly the 
existent Concept, whereas purpose must be considered the Concept as it exists /or­
itself. But mechanism and chemism are also very definitely distinct from one an­
other; specifically, this is because in the mode of mechanism the object is, initially, 
only indifferent relation to itself, whereas the chemical object proves to be strictly 
a. an der Gesellschaft 

278 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
related to what is other. It is true, of course, that even in the course of development 
of mechanism, some relations to what is other emerge already; but the relation of 
mechanical objects to one another is, to start with, only an external one, a relation 
in which the objects that are related to one another retain the semblance of inde­
pendence. So, for example, in nature, the various heavenly bodies that form our 
solar system move in relationship to one another, and thereby show themselves to 
be related to one another. But as the unity of space and time, motion is only the 
quite external and abstract relation, and it seems therefore as if the heavenly 
bodies, being thus externally related to one another, would be what they are, and 
remain so, even without this relation to one another that they have. 
The situation is different with chemism, however. Objects that are chemically 
differentiated are explicitly what they are only in virtue of their difference. Hence, 
they are the absolute drive to integrate themselves through and into one another. 
§ 201 
Hence, the chemical process has as its product the neutral [state] between 
its tensed extremes (which are in-themselves this neutral [state]). Through 
the difference of the objects-their particularising-the Concept, as the 
concrete universal, con-eludes itself with the singularity, i.e., with the 
product, and thus only with itself. And the other syllogisms are again 
contained in this process too; as activity, the singularity is again the medi­
ating [term], just like the concrete universal, the essence of the tensed 
extremes, which comes to be there in the product. 
§ 202 
As the reflective relationship of objectivity, chemism still has as its presup­
position, not just the differentiated nature of the objects, but also their 
immediate independence. The process is the going back and forth, from one 
form to the other, while these forms still remain external to each other.-In 
the neutral product, the determinate properties which the extremes had 
vis-a.-vis each other are sublated. It is in conformity with the Concept, to be 
sure, but the inspiriting principlea of differentiation does not exist in it, 
because it has sunk back into immediacy. Hence, the neutral product is 
something-separable. But both the judging [or dividing] principleb which 
sunders the neutral into the differentiated extremes and gives the un-
a. das begeistende Prinzip 
b. das urteilende Prinzip 

B. THE OBJECT (§§ 194-212) 
279 
differentiated object generally its difference and inspirationa vis-a-vis an 
other-and the process as a separation with tension, fall outside that first 
process. 
Addition. The chemical process is still a finite, conditioned one. The Concept as 
such is still just the inward aspect of this process, and it does not yet come into 
existence here in its being-for-itself. In the neutral product the process is extinct, 
and what stimulated it falls outside of it. 
§ 203 
But the externality, which lets these two processes (the reduction of what 
is differentiated to the neutral and the differentiating of the undifferenti­
ated or neutral) appear as independent vis-a-vis each other, also shows 
their finitude when they pass over into products in which they are sub­
lated. And conversely, the process presents the presupposed immediacy of 
the differentiated objects as null and void.-Through this negation of the 
exteriority and immediacy in which the Concept qua object was immersed, 
it is set free and posited for-itself against that externality and immediacy. It 
is posited as purpose. 
Addition. The passage from chemism to the teleological relationship is contained in 
the fact that the two forms of the chemical process sublate one another reciprocally. 
What results from this is that the Concept, which in chemism and in mechanism 
was still only present in-itself, becomes free, and the Concept that now exists for 
itself is purpose. 
C. TELEOLOGY 
§ 204 
Purpose is the Concept that has entered into free existence, and is-for-itself, 
by means of the negation of immediate objectivity. It is determined as 
subjective, because this negation is initially abstract, and so at first it merely 
stands opposed to objectivity. But this determinacy of its subjectivity is 
one-sided vis-a-vis the totality of the Concept; and this one-sidedness holds 
a. Begeistung 

280 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
for the purpose itself, since all determinacy has posited itself in it as sub­
lated. So, for the purpose too, the presupposed object is only an ideal 
reality, one that is null and void in-itself. As this contradiction between its 
identity with itself and the negation and antithesis that is posited in it, the 
purpose itself is the sublation, the activity which negates the antithesis in 
such a way that the purpose posits it as identical with itself. This is the 
realising of the purpose, in which the purpose has sublated the distinction 
between the two, i.e., subjectivity and objectivity, since it makes itself into 
the other of its subjectivity and objectifies itself. It has con-eluded itself 
with itself alone and has preserved itself. 
On the one hand, the concept of purpose is called redundant; but, 
on the other hand, it is quite rightly called a concept-of-reason-and 
it has been set up in contrast to the abstract universal of the under­
standing which relates itself to the particular only by subsuming 
this particular which it does not have in itself.-Moreover, the 
distinction of the purpose as final cause from the merely efficient 
cause (i.e., from what is usually called "cause") is of the highest 
importance. The cause belongs to the necessity that is not yet 
unveiled and blind; hence, it appears to pass over into its other and 
thus to lose its originality in its positedness. Only in-itself (or for 
us) does the cause return into itself-being cause only in the effect. 
The purpose, on the contrary, is posited as containing within itself 
the determinacy (or what still appears there, in the context of 
causality, as otherness, i.e., the effect). In this way the purpose 
does not pass over, but preserves itself, in its operation; i.e., it 
brings only itself about and is at the end what it was in the begin­
ning, or in its originality: what is truly original comes to be only 
through this self-preservation.-The purpose requires a specula­
tive interpretation, as the Concept which itself (in its own unity 
and in the ideality of its determinations) contains the judgment or 
negation, i.e., the antithesis of the subjective and objective-and 
which is just as much their sublation. 
In dealing with the purpose, we must not think at once (or 
merely) of the form in which it occurs in consciousness as a deter­
mination that is present in representation. With his concept of in­
ternal purposiveness, Kant has resuscitated the Idea in general and 
espeCially the Idea of life. The determination of life by Aristotle29 
already contains this internal purposiveness; hence, it stands in­
finitely far above the concept of modern teleology which had only 
finite, or external, purposiveness in view. 

B. THE OBJECT (§§ 194-212) 
281 
Need and drive are the readiest examples of purpose. They are 
the felt contradiction, as it occurs within the living subject itself; 
and they lead into the activity of negating this negation (which is 
what mere subjectivity still is). Satisfaction establishes peace be­
tween the subject and the object, since what is objective, what 
stands on the other side in the contradiction while it is still present 
(i.e., in the need), is sublated with respect to its one-sidedness by 
being united with the subjective.-Those who talk so much about 
the stability and invincibility of the finite (whether subjective or 
objective) can find an example of the contrary in every drive. Drive 
is, so to speak, the certainty that the subjective is only one-sided 
and that it has no more truth than the objective. Drive, moreover, 
is the carrying out of the certainty that belongs to it; it accomplishes 
the sublation of this antithesis ([between 1 the subjective that is and 
remains only something-subjective, and the objective that is and 
remains only something-objective) and of this finitude that be­
longs to each of them. 
Concerning the activity of the purpose, it may be worth noting 
that in the syllogism (which this activity is and which con-eludes 
the purpose with itself by means of its realisation) the negation of 
the terms is essentially present: this is the negation of the immedi­
ate subjectivity present in the purpose as such that was just men­
tioned, as well as the negation of the immediate objectivity (of the 
means and of the presupposed objects). It is the same negation 
that is put into practice in the elevation of the spirit to God, above 
the contingent things of the world as well as above our own sub­
jectivity. As has been mentioned in the Introduction and in § 192, 
this is the moment which is overlooked and left out in the form 
that is given to this elevation in the so-called proofs that there is a 
God-i.e., in the form of the syllogisms of the understanding. 
§ 205 
In its immediacy, the teleological relation is initially external purpo­
siveness, and the Concept confronts the object as something-presupposed. 
As a result the purpose is finite, partly in respect to its content, and partly 
because it has an external condition in a pre-givena object which is the 
material for its realisation; in these respects its self-determination is merely 
a. vorzufindend 

282 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
formal. More precisely, its immediacy implies that the particularity (which 
as a determination of form is the subjectivity of the purpose) appears as 
inwardly reflected and that the content appears as distinct from the totality 
of the form, i.e., from the subjectivity in-itself, or from the Concept. This 
diversity is what constitutes the finitude of the purpose within itself. Be­
cause of it the content of the purpose is just as much restricted, contingent, 
and given as the object is particular and given in advance. 
Addition. When people speak of "purpose" they usually have only external pur­
posiveness in mind. From this point of view things are held not to bear their 
determination within themselves, but to count merely as means, which are used 
and used up in the realisation of a purpose that lies outside them. This is the 
general viewpoint of utility, which once played a great role, even in the sciences, 
but soon fell into deserved discredit, and was [re]cognised as a viewpoint that does 
not suffice for a genuine insight into the nature of things. Certainly finite things as 
such must be given their due by being regarded as not ultimate and as pointing 
beyond themselves. But this negativity of finite things is their own dialectic, and if 
we are to [re]cognise this, we must involve ourselves first of all in their positive 
content. However, since in the teleological approach we also have to deal with the 
well-intentioned concern to demonstrate the wisdom of God, as it specifically 
announces itself in nature, it must be remarked that, in all this searching out of the 
purposes for which things serve as means, we do not get beyond the finite, and we 
can very easily end up in lame reflections; for example, when it is not only the vine 
that is considered under the aspect of the well-known utility that it has for men, 
but the cork tree, too, is considered in its relation to the stoppers cut from its bark 
in order to seal wine bottles. Whole books used to be written in this spirit, and it is 
easy to see that neither the true interest of religion nor that of science can be 
advanced in this way. External purposiveness stands immediately before the Idea, 
but what stands on the threshold like that is often precisely what is most 
unsatisfactory. 
§ 206 
The teleological relation is the syllogism in which the subjective purpose 
con-eludes itself with the objectivity external to it, through a middle term 
which is the unity of these two. This unity is both the purposive activity 
and the objectivity posited immediately as subservient to the purpose; [in 
other words] it is the means. 
Addition. The development of purpose into the Idea proceeds through three stages: 
first, subjective purpose, secondly, purpose in the process of accomplishing itself, 
and thirdly, the accomplished purpose.-In the first place, we have the subjective 
purpose, and this, being the Concept which is for-itself, is itself a totality of concep-

B. THE OBJECT (§§ 194--212) 
283 
tual moments. First among these moments is the universality that is identical with 
itself, as it were the neutral first water, 3D in which everything is contained, but not 
yet separated out. The second moment then is the particularisation of this univer­
sal, through which it acquires a definite content. And when this definite content is 
posited by the agency of the universal, the latter returns to itself through this 
content and con-eludes3! itself with itself. 
Accordingly, too, when we set ourselves a purpose, we say [in German) that we 
"beschlieBen"32 something, and we consider ourselves therefore initially as "open," 
so to speak, and as "accessible" to this or that determination. But we say equally 
that we have "entschlossen" on something, expressing in this way that the subject 
steps out from his inwardness that is merely on its own and starts to deal with the 
objectivity that confronts him. This results in the advance from the merely subjec­
tive purpose to the purposive activity that is turned outwards. 
§ 207 
(1) The subjective purpose is the syllogism in which the universal Concept 
con-eludes itself with singularity through particularity, in such a way that, 
as self-determination, singularity judges"---Le., it not only particularises the 
still indeterminate universal and makes it into a determinate content, but it 
also posits the antithesis of subjectivity and objectivity. At the same time, 
singularity is, in itself, the return into itself. For it determines that the 
subjectivity of the Concept, presupposed as confronting the objectivity, is 
something-deficient, in comparison with the totality that is con-eluded 
within itself; and it thereby turns itself outwards at once. 
§ 208 
(2) In the subjective purpose this outward-directed activity is the singularity 
that is identical with the particularity in which, together with the content, 
external objectivity is included as well. This activity relates itself in the first 
place immediately to the object, and makes itself master of it as a means. 
The Concept is this immediate might, because it is the negativity that is 
identical with itself, in which the entire being of the object is determined 
only as an ideal being.-The whole middle term is now this inner might of 
the Concept, as the activity with which the object is immediately united as 
a means, and to which it is subservient. 
a. urteilt 
In finite purposiveness the middle term is broken apart into these 
two moments that are external to each other: the activity and the 

284 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
object that serves as a means. The relation of the purpose as power 
to this object, and the latter's subservience to it, is immediate (it is 
the first premise of the syllogism) inasmuch as the object is posited 
as in-itself null within the Concept as the ideality that is for-itself. 
[But] because the purpose con-eludes itself with the objectivity 
through this relation-the activity in which it is contained and 
which it continues to dominate-this [immediate] relation or first 
premise becomes itself the middle which is inwardly the syllogism at 
the same time. 
Addition. The execution of the purpose is the mediated way of realising it, but 
immediate realisation is also equally necessary. The purpose seizes upon the object 
in immediate fashion, because it is the power over the object: particularity is 
contained within it, and within this particularity objectivity is contained as well.­
The living being has a body; the soul takes hold of the body and, in doing so, it has 
objectified itself immediately. The human soul has much to do in making its cor­
poreal nature into a means. Man must first take possession of his body, as it were, 
in order for it to be the instrument of his soul. 
§ 209 
(3) Even in conjunction with its means the purposive activity is still di­
rected outwards, because the purpose is also not identical with the object; 
consequently it, too, must still be mediated with the object. In this second 
premise the means, as object, is immediately related with the other extreme 
of the syllogism, the objectivity as presupposed, the material. This relation 
is the sphere of mechanism and chemism which now serve the purpose­
which is the truth and free Concept of them both. The fact that the subjec­
tive purpose, as the power over these processes (in which the objective gets 
used up through mutual friction and sublates itself), keeps itself outside of 
them and preserves itself in them is the cunning of reason." 
Addition. Reason is as cunning as it is mighty. Its cunning generally consists in the 
mediating activity which, while it lets objects act upon one another according to 
their own nature, and wear each other out, executes only its purpose without itself 
mingling in the process. In this sense we can say that, with regard to the world and 
its process, divine Providence behaves with absolute cunning. God lets men, who 
have their particular passions and interests, do as they please, and what results is 
the accomplishment of his intentions, which are something other than those whom 
he employs were directly concerned about. 
a. die List der Vernunft 

B. THE OBJECT (§§ 194-212) 
285 
§ 210 
Thus the realised purpose is the posited unity of the subjective and the 
objective. But this unity is essentially determined in such a way that the 
subjective and the objective are only neutralised and sublated in their one­
sidedness, while the objective is subordinated to and brought into confor­
mity with the purpose, which is the free Concept and hence the might over 
it. The purpose preserves itself against and within the objective, since it is 
not only the one-sided subjective [moment], the particular, but also the 
concrete universal, the identity (of both the subjective and the objective) 
that is in-itself. As simply reflected inwardly this universal is the content, 
which remains the same through all three terms of the syllogism, and 
throughout their movement. 
§ 211 
But in finite purposiveness even the accomplished purpose is still some­
thing inwardly broken, just as much as the middle term and the initial 
purpose were. Only a form that is externally posited in the pre-givena 
material is established thereby; and because of the restricted content of the 
purpose, this form is likewise a contingent determination. Hence, the pur­
pose that is attained is merely an object, which is once more a means or a 
material for other purposes, and so on ad infinitum. 
§ 212 
But in the realising of the purpose what happens in-itself is that the one­
sided subjectivity is sublated, along with the semblance of an objective 
independence standing over against it. In taking hold of the means, the 
Concept posits itself as the essence of the object. In-itself the independence 
of the object has already evaporated in the mechanical and chemical pro­
cesses; and as they take place under the dominion of the purpose, even the 
semblance of this independence-the negative as against the Concept­
sublates itself. But since the accomplished purpose is determined only as 
means and material, this object is already posited at once as something 
that is in-itself null and merely ideal. And thereby the opposition of content 
and form has vanished as well. For, because the purpose con-eludes itself 
with itself by sublating the form-determinations, the form is posited as 
identical with itself, and hence as content-so that the Concept, as the 
activity of the form, has only itself for content. Through this whole process, 
therefore, what was previously the Concept of the purpose is now posited: 
a. vorgefunden 

286 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
the unity in-itself of the subjective and the objective is now posited as 
being-far-itself. [This is] the Idea. 
Addition. The finitude of purpose consists in the fact that, in its realisation, the 
material used as means is only externally subsumed under it and adapted to it. But 
in fact the object is implicitly the Concept, and when the Concept, as purpose, is 
realised in the object, this purpose is only the manifestation of the object's own 
inwardness. So objectivity is, as it were, only a wrapping under which the Concept 
lies hidden. In the sphere of the finite we can neither experience nor see that the 
purpose is genuinely attained. The accomplishing of the infinite purpose consists 
therefore only in sublating the illusion that it has not yet been accomplished. The 
good, the absolute good, fulfills itself eternally in the world, and the result is that it 
is already fulfilled in and for itself, and does not need to wait upon us for this to 
happen. This is the illusion in which we live, and at the same time it is this illusion 
alone that is the activating element- upon which our interest in the world rests. It is 
within its own process that the Idea produces that illusion for itself; it posits an 
other confronting itself, and its action consists in sublating that illusion. Only from 
this error does the truth come forth, and herein lies our reconciliation with error 
and with finitude. Otherness or error, as sublated. is itself a necessary moment of 
the truth, which can only be in that it makes itself into its own result. 
C 
The Idea 
§ 213 
The Idea is what is true in and for itself, the absolute unity of Concept and 
objectivity. Its ideal content is nothing but the Concept in its determina­
tions; its real content is only the presentation that the Concept gives itself 
in the form of external thereness; and since this figure is included in the 
ideality of the Concept, or in its might, the Concept preserves itself in it. 
The definition of the Absolute as the Idea is now itself absolute. All 
definitions given previously return into this one.-The Idea is the 
Truth; for truth means that objectivity corresponds with the 
Concept-not that external things correspond with my representa­
tions (representations of this kind are just correct representations 
held by me as this [individual]). In the Idea we are not dealing with 
this or that-be it representations, or external things. And-yet 
again, everything that is actual is the Idea inasmuch as it is 
a das Betiitigende 

C. THE IDEA (§§ 213-244) 
287 
something-true, and it has its truth only through the Idea and in 
virtue of it. The singular being is some side or other of the Idea; 
that is why other actualities were needed for it-actualities which 
likewise appear to subsist distinctly on their own account. It is only 
in all of them together and in their relation that the Concept is 
realised. By itself the singular does not correspond to its concept; 
this restrictedness of its way of being constitutes its finitude and its 
fall. 
The Idea itself is not to be taken as an idea of something or other, 
any more than the Concept is to be taken merely as determinate 
concept. The Absolute is the universal and One Idea, which par­
ticularises itself in the act of judging into the system of determinate 
ideas-whose whole being consists, nonetheless, in their returning 
into the One Idea, i.e., into their truth. It is because of this judg­
ment that the Idea is at first just the One and universal substance, 
but its developed, authentic actuality is to be as subject and so as 
spirit. 
Inasmuch as the Idea does not have an existence as its starting 
point and support, it is often mistaken for something belonging 
only to formal logic. We must leave this view to the standpoints for 
which the existing thing, and all the further determinations that 
have not yet penetrated to the Idea, still count as so-called realities 
and genuine actualities.-Equally mistaken is the notion according 
to which the Idea is only what is abstract. That the Idea is abstract 
is true enough in the sense that everything untrue is consumed in 
it; but in its own right the Idea is essentially concrete, because it is 
the free Concept that determines itself and in so doing makes itself 
real.' It would only be what is formally abstract, if the Concept, 
which is its principle, were taken to be the abstract unity, and not 
how it really is, i.e., as the negative return into itself and as subjec­
tivity. 
Addition. Truth is understood first to mean that I know how something is. But this 
is truth only in relation to consciousness; it is formal truth, mere correctness. In 
contrast with this, truth in the deeper sense means that objectivity is identical with 
the Concept. It is this deeper sense of truth which is at issue when we speak, for 
instance, of a "true" State or a "true" work of art. These ob-jects are "true" when 
they are what they ought to be, i.e., when their reality corresponds to their concept. 
Interpreted in this way, the "untrue" is the same as what is sometimes also called 
the "bad". A bad man is one who is "untrue", i.e., one who does not behave in 
accord with his concept or his destination. But without any identity at all between 
a. sich selbst und hiemit zur RealWit bestimmende Begriff 

288 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Concept and reality nothing can subsist. Even what is bad and untrue can only be 
because its reality conforms to some extent with its Concept. Precisely for this 
reason, what is thoroughly bad or contrary to its concept disintegrates inwardly. It 
is by virtue of the Concept alone that things in the world have their own 
standing-<>r, to use the language of religious representation, things are what they 
are only because of the divine and hence creative thought that dwells within them. 
When we speak of the Idea, it must not be taken to mean something far away 
and beyond. Instead, the Idea is what is perfectly present, and it is likewise to be 
found in any consciousness too, however confused and impaired it may be.-We 
imagine the world as a great whole which has been created by God-in such a way 
that God has manifested himself to us in it. In like manner, we regard the world as 
governed by divine Providence, and this implies that the world, in its mutual 
externality, is eternally led back to the unity from which it came forth, and is 
preserved in accordance with that unity. 
The concern of philosophy has always been simply with the thinking cognition 
of the Idea, and everything that deserves the name of philosophy has always had at 
its foundation the consciousness of an absolute unity of what is valid for the 
understanding only in its separateness.-It is not just now that we can for the first 
time ask for a proof that the Idea is the truth; the whole preceding exposition and 
development of thinking contains this proof. The Idea is the result of this journey. 
But this result is not to be understood as if it were only mediated, i.e., mediated by 
something other than itself. Rather, the Idea is its own result, and, as such, it is 
immediate just as much as it is mediated. The stages of Being and of Essence, 
previously considered, and similarly those of the Concept, and of objectivity, while 
distinct from one another, are not something fixed and resting upon themselves; 
instead, they have proved to be dialectical, and their truth is only that they are 
moments of the Idea. 
§ 214 
The Idea can be grasped as reason (this is the proper philosophical mean­
ing of "reason" ); and further as the Subject-Object, as the unity of the ideal 
and the real, of the finite and the infinite, of the soul and the body,- as the 
possibility that has its actuality in itself, as that whose nature can be compre­
hended only as existing, and so forth. [It can be grasped in all these ways] 
because all the relationships of the understanding are contained in the 
Idea, but in their infinite self-return and self-identity. 
a Leib 
It is an easy task for the understanding to show that everything 
asserted about the Idea is self-contradictory . But the proof can be 
sent home to the understanding; or rather, that has already been 
brought about in the Idea: this is the work of reason, which is not 

C. THE IDEA (§§ 213-244) 
289 
at all as easy as that of the understanding.-The understanding 
shows that the Idea contradicts itself, because the subjective, for 
instance, is merely subjective and the objective is really opposed to 
it; and being is something quite other than the concept, so that it 
cannot be plucked out of it;33 likewise, the finite is merely finite 
and the exact opposite of the infinite, so that it is not identical with 
it-and so on, through all determinations, one after the other. But 
the Logic demonstrates the opposite instead, namely, that the sub­
jective that is supposed to be merely subjective, the finite that is 
supposed to be merely finite, and the infinite that is supposed to 
be merely infinite, and so on, do not have any truth; they contra­
dict themselves and pass over into their opposites.-As a result, 
the passing-over and the unity, in which the extremes are [present] 
as sublated-i.e., as a shining or as moments-reveals itself as 
their truth. 
The understanding that applies itself to the Idea is a misunder­
standing in two ways. In the first place, it still takes the extremes of 
the Idea (express them any way you like, as long as they are in their 
unity) in the sense and determination that they have when they 
are not in their concrete unity, but are only abstractions outside of 
it. It equally fails to recognise the relation, even when it has already 
been expressly posited. For instance, it overlooks the very nature 
of the copula in the judgment, which says that the singular, or the 
subject, is not just singular but universal as well .-Secondly, the 
understanding takes its own reflection, that the self-identical Idea 
contains the negative of itself (the contradiction), to be an external 
reflection which does not fall within the Idea itself. But, in fact, this 
is not a wisdom that belongs just to the understanding; rather, it is 
the Idea itself which is the dialectic which eternally divides and 
distinguishes what is self-identical from what is differentiated, the 
subjective from the objective, the finite from the infinite, the soul 
from the body. Only in this way is the Idea eternal creation, eternal 
vitality, and eternal Spirit. While the Idea itself is this passing-over 
or rather self-translation into the abstract understanding, it is also 
eternally reason; it is the dialectic that makes this product of the 
understanding, this diversity, understand its own finite nature 
once more, makes it see that the independence of its productions is 
a false semblance, and leads it all back to unity. Since this double 
movement is not temporal, and not in any way separate and dis­
tinct (for then it would again belong to the abstract understand­
ing), it is the eternal intuiting of itself in the other: the Concept 
that has carried itself out in its objectivity, or the object that is inner 
purposiveness, essential subjectivity. 

290 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
The various ways of interpreting the Idea-as the unity of the
ideal and the real, of the finite and the infinite, of identity and
difference, and so forth-are all more Or less formal, because they
designate some level or other of the determinate Concept. Only the
Concept itself is free, and what is truly universal; in the Idea, there­
fore, its determinacy is at the same time only itself: an objectivity in
which the Concept, as the universal, sets itself forth, and in which
it has only the determinacy that is its own, [i.e.,] the total deter­
minacy. The Idea is the infinite judgment, of which the sides are
each the independent totality, while (precisely because it completes
itself in this way) each of them has also passed over into the other.
None of the concepts that are determined otherwise is this totality
that is completed in both of its sides-both as the Concept itself
and as objectivity. 
§ 215 
The Idea is essentially process, because its identity is only the absolute and 
free identity of the Concept, because this identity is the absolute negativity 
and hence dialectical. The Idea is the course in which the Concept (as the 
universality that is singularity) determines itself both to objectivity and to 
the antithesis against it, and in which this externality, which the Concept 
has with regard to its substance, leads itself back again, through its imma­
nent dialectic, into subjectivity. 
Since the Idea is (a) process, the expression of the Absolute as "the 
unity of the finite and the infinite, of thinking and being, etc." is 
false (as we have often said); for "unity" expresses an abstract, 
quietly persisting identity. And because the Idea is (b) subjectivity, 
that expression is equally false for another reason: "unity" there 
expresses the In-itself, the substantial [side] of the genuine unity. 
Thus, the infinite only appears to be neutralised with the finite, just 
as the subjective is neutralised with the objective, and thinking 
with being. But in the negative unity of the Idea, the infinite over­
grasps the finite, thinking overgrasps being, subjectivity over­
grasps objectivity. The unity of the Idea is subjectivity, or thinking, 
or infinity, and therefore it has to be essentially distinguished from 
the Idea as substance, just as this overgrasping subjectivity, thinking, 
or infinity has to be distinguished from the one-sided subjectivity, 
thinking, or infinity, to which it reduces itself in judging and 
determining. 

C. THE IDEA (§§ 213-244) 
291 
Addition. As a process, the Idea runs through three stages in its development. The 
first form of the Idea is life, i.e., the Idea in the form of immediacy. The second 
form is that of mediation or difference, and this is the Idea as cognition, which 
appears in the dual shape of the theoretical and the practical Idea. The result of the 
process of cognition is the reestablishing of unity enriched by distinction; and this 
gives the third form of the (herewith) absolute Idea. This last stage of the logical 
process proves at the same time to be what is genuinely first and what is only 
through itself. 
A. LIFE 
§ 216 
The immediate Idea is life. The Concept is realised as soul, in a body. The 
soul is the immediate self-relating universality of the body's externality; it is 
equally the particularising of the body, so that the body expresses no dis­
tinctions in itself other than the determinations of the Concept; and finally 
it is singularity as infinite negativity: the dialectic of the body's scattereda 
objectivity, which is led back into subjectivity from the semblance of inde­
pendent subsistence. [This happens] in such a way that all of the body's 
members are reciprocally both means and purposes for each other from 
moment to moment, and that life, while it is the initial particularising of 
the members, becomes its own result as the negative unity that is for-itself, 
and in the dialectic of corporeity it con-eludes itself only with itself.-Thus, 
life is essentially living being,b and in its immediacy it is This Singular living 
being. In this sphere, the determination of finitude is that, because of the 
immediacy of the Idea, soul and body are separable; this constitutes the 
mortality of what is alive. But it is only insofar as it is dead that these two 
sides of the Idea are diverse components. 
Addition. The single members of the body are what they are only through their 
unity and in relation to it. So, for instance, a hand that has been hewn from the 
body is a hand in name only, but not in actual fact, as Aristotle has already 
remarked.34-From the standpoint of the understanding life is usually considered 
to be a mystery, and in general as incomprehensible. But here the understanding 
only confesses its finitude and nullity. In fact, life is so far from being incomprehen­
sible that on the contrary, we have the Concept itself before us in it, and, more 
precisely, the Idea that exists as the Concept, the immediate Idea. But this expresses 
a. auseinanderseiende 
b. Lebendiges 

292 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
at once the defect of Life, too. The defect consists in the fact that the Concept and 
reality still do not genuinely correspond with one another. The concept of life is the 
soul, and this concept has the body for its reality. The soul is, as it were, diffused 
into its bodily nature, and so it is still only sentient, not yet free being-for-itself. 
Hence, the process of life consists in the overcoming of the immediacy in which life 
is still entangled; and this process itself, which is once more a threefold one, results 
in the Idea in the form of judgment, i.e., the Idea as cognition. 
§ 217 
The living being is the syllogism whose very moments are inwardly sys­
tems and syllogisms (§§ 198, 201, 107). But they are active syllogisms, or 
processes; and within the subjective unity of the living being they are only 
One process. Thus, the living being is the process of its own con-eluding 
with itself, which runs through three processes. 
§ 218 
(1) The first of them is the process of the living being inside itself. In this 
process it sunders itself and makes its corporeity into its object, or its 
inorganic nature. As what is relatively external, this inorganic nature enters 
on its own part into the distinction and antithesis of its moments, each of 
which abandons itself to the others, assimilates the others to itself, and 
maintains itself by self-production. But this activity of the members is just 
the One [activity] of the subject into which its productions return-so that 
in all this only the subject is produced; i.e., it simply reproduces itself. 
Addition. The process of the living being inside itself has in nature the threefold 
form of sensibility, irritability, and reproduction.35 As sensibility, the living being is 
immediately simple relation to itself, the soul, which is everywhere present in its 
body, so that the mutual externality of the bodily parts has no truth for it. As 
irritability, the living being appears sundered within itself, and, as reproduction, it 
is constantly reestablishing itself out of the inner distinction of its members and 
organs. It is only as this constantly renewed inner process that the living being is. 
§ 219 
(2) But the judgment of the Concept goes on, in its freedom, to release the 
objective out of itself as an independent totality; and, as immediate 
singularity, the negative relation of the living being to itself makes the 
presupposition of an inorganic nature that confronts it. Since this negative 

C. THE IDEA (§§ 213--244) 
293 
of itself is nonetheless a conceptual moment of the living being itself, it is 
in the living being-which is at the same time a concrete universal-as a 
want. The dialectic, through which the object (as in-itself null) sublates 
itself, is the activity of the living being that is certain of itself; in and 
through this process against an inorganic nature, it maintains itself, develops 
itself, and objectifies itself. 
Addition. The living being confronts an inorganic nature to which it relates as the 
power over it, and which it assimilates. The result of this process is not, as in the 
case of the chemical process, a neutral product in which the independence of the 
two sides that confronted one another is sublated; instead, the living being proves 
itself to be what overgrasps its other, which cannot resist its power. Inorganic 
nature, which is subdued by the living being, suffers this subjection because it is 
in-itself the same as what life is for-itself. So in the other the living being only 
comes together with itself. When the soul has fled from the body, the elementary 
powers of objectivity come into play. These powers are, so to speak, continually 
ready to pounce, to begin their process in the organic body, and life is a constant 
struggle against them. 
§ 220 
(3) The living individual, which behaves itself inwardly as subject and 
concept in its first process, assimilates its external objectivity to itself in the 
second process; and in this way it posits real determinacy within itself, so 
that it is now genus in-itself, or substantial universality. The particularising 
of this universality is the relation of the subject to another subject of the 
same genus, and the judgment is the relationship of the species to these 
individuals which are determined vis-a.-vis one another in this opposi­
tional way-the difference of the sexes. 
§ 221 
The process of the genus36 brings it to its being-for-itself. Since life is still the 
immediate Idea, the product of this process falls apart into two sides: on 
the one hand, the living individual generally, which was to begin with 
presupposed as immediate, now emerges as something-mediated and gen­
erated; but on the other hand, the living singularity, which on account of its 
initial immediacy stands in a negative relationship to universality, goes un­
der in this universality as what has power [over it] .  
Addition. The living being dies because it is the contradiction of being in-itself the 
universal, the genus, and yet existing immediately only as a Singular being. In 

294 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
death the genus proves itself to be the power over the immediately singular 
being.-For the animal, the process of the genus is the highest point of its living 
career. But the animal does not succeed in being for-itself in its species; instead, it 
succumbs to the power of the latter. The immediate living being mediates itself 
with itself in the process of the genus; and in this way it elevates itself above its 
immediacy, but always just to sink back into it again. So, to start with, life simply 
runs its course into the spurious infinity of the infinite progress. But what, accord­
ing to the Concept, is brought about through the process of Life is the sublation 
and overcoming of the immediacy in which as life the Idea is still entangled. 
§ 222 
As a result, however, the Idea of life has freed itself not just from some one 
or other (particular) immediate This, but from this initial immediacy in 
general. Thereby the Idea of life comes to itself, or to its truth; and there­
fore it enters into existence for its own self as free genus. The death of the 
merely immediate singular organisma is the emergence of spirit. 
B. COGNITION 
§ 223 
The Idea exists freely for-itself, inasmuch as it has universality as the ele­
ment of its existence, or inasmuch as objectivity itself is as the Concept; 
[i.e.,] inasmuch as the Idea has itself as its ob-ject. Its subjectivity, which 
has [now] become determined as universality, is pure distinguishing inside 
itself: an intuiting that holds itself within this identical universality. But, as 
determinate distinguishing, the Idea is further the judgment of repelling 
itself as a totality from itself, and, to be precise, of presupposing itself first of 
all as external universe. There are here two judgments, which, although 
identical in-themselves, are not yet posited as identical. 
§ 224 
The relation between these two Ideas, which are identical in-themselves or 
as Life, is therefore a relative one. This is what constitutes the determina­
tion of finitude in this sphere. We have here the relationship of reflection, 
because the distinguishing of the Idea within itself is just the first 
a. Lebendigkeit 

C. THE IDEA (§§ 213-244) 
295 
judgment; because the presupposing is not yet a positing; [and because], for 
that very reason, the objective Idea is for the subjective Idea the immediate 
world that is found to be already there, or the Idea as life is [here] in the 
appearance of singular existence. [At the same time and all in one]­
inasmuch as this judgment is pure distinguishing within the Idea itself (see 
the preceding paragraph [§ 223])-the Idea is for-itself both itself and its 
other. In this way the Idea is the certainty of the implicita identity of this 
objective world with it.-Reason comes to the world with absolute faith in 
its ability to posit this identity and to elevate its certainty into truth, and 
with the drive to posit the antithesis [between itself and the world], which 
is in-itself null and void for it as null and void. 
§ 225 
In general terms this process is cognition. In this process the antithesis, the 
one-sidedness of subjectivity together with the one-sidedness of objec­
tivity, is implicitly sublated within One activity. But initially this sublating 
happens only in-itself; hence, the process as such is itself immediately 
affected by the finitude of this sphere, and it falls apart into the doubled 
movement of this drive, posited as two diverse movements. [To start with, 
there is the movement] to sublate the one-sidedness of the subjectivity of 
the Idea by means of the assumption of the world that [simply] iSh into 
oneself, into subjective representing and thinking; and to fill the abstract 
certainty of oneself with this objectivity (which thus counts as genuine) as 
its content. And, conversely, [there is the movement] to sublate the one­
sidedness of the objective world, which therefore counts, on the contrary, 
only as a semblance, a collection of contingencies and of shapes which are 
in-themselves null and void-[the movement] to determine this world 
through the inwardness of the subjective, which here counts as what is 
truly objective, and to in-form it with this subjectivity. C The first movement 
is the drive of knowing toward truth, or cognition as such-the theoretical 
activity of the Idea-the second is the drive of the good toward its own 
accomplishment-willing, the practical activity of the Idea. 
(ex) COGNITION 
§ 226 
The universal finitude of cognition (the finitude that lies in the first judg­
ment, in the presupposition of the antithesis [§ 224] against which its very 
a. an sich seiende 
b. der seienden Welt 
c. und ihr dieses einzubilden 

296 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
own agency is the built-in contradiction) determines itself more precisely, 
in its own Idea, by giving the moments of this Idea the form of diversity 
from each other; and, since these moments are nevertheless complete, they 
come to stand in the relationship of reflection to each other, not in that of 
the Concept. Hence the assimilation of the material as something-given 
appears as its being taken up into conceptual determinations which at the 
same time remain external to it, and which likewise present themselves in 
diversity from one another. This is reason acting as understanding. By the 
same token, therefore, the truth that is reached by this cognition is only the 
finite [truth]; the infinite truth of the Concept is fixed as a goal that is only 
in-itself, or as a beyond for this cognition. But in its external agency this 
cognition stands under the guidance of the Concept, and the determina­
tions of the Concept constitute the inner thread of its progression. 
Addition. The finitude of cognition lies in the presupposition of a world that is 
found to be there already, and the cognitive subject appears here as a tabula rasa.37 
People have ascribed this representation to Aristotle, although there is no one 
further removed from this external interpretation of cognition than Aristotle him­
self.38 Finite cognition does not yet know itself as the activity of the Concept, which 
it is only in-itself but not for-itself. Its behaviour appears to itself as passive, but it is 
in fact active. 
§ 227 
Since finite cognition presupposes the distinct as something found already 
in being and standing over and against it-the manifold facts of external 
nature or of consciousness-it has (1) formal identity or the abstraction of 
universality as the form of its activity. This activity consists therefore in 
dissolving the concrete that is given, isolating its distinctions and bestow­
ing the form of abstract universality upon them; in other words, it consists 
in leaving the concrete as ground and making a concrete universal-the 
genus, or force and law-stand out through abstraction from the par­
ticularities that seem to be inessential. This is the analytical method.39 
Addition. We usually speak of the "analytic" and "synthetic" methods as if it were 
merely a matter of our own choice whether we follow the one or the other. But this 
is not at all the case; on the contrary, which of the two above-mentioned methods 
resulting from the Concept of finite cognition is to be applied depends on the form 
of the ob-jects themselves that cognition aims at. At first, cognition is analytic; the 
object assumes for it the shape of something isolated, and the activity of analytical 
cognition is directed toward tracing the singular that lies before it back to a univer-

C. THE IDEA (§§ 213-244) 
297 
sal. Here, thinking has the significance only of abstraction or of formal identity. 
This is the standpoint of Locke and of all empiricists.4O Many say that cognition 
cannot go any further than this at all: to break up the given concrete ob-jects into 
their abstract elements and then contemplate these in their state of isolation from 
one another. It is apparent at once, however, that this stands things on their heads, 
and that any cognition that wants to take things as they are falls into contradiction 
with itself when it takes this road. For example, a chemist puts a piece of meat into 
his retort, tortures it in many ways, and then says that he has found that it consists 
of nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen, etc. But these abstract materials are no longer meat. 
And we have the same situation when the empirical psychologist breaks an action 
up into the various aspects which it presents to observation, and then holds fast to 
them in their separation from one another. The ob-ject that is treated analytically is 
regarded like an onion, so to speak, from which people strip one skin after another. 
§ 228 
But this universality is (2) also a determinate one; and here the activity 
progresses through the moments of the Concept, which in finite cognition 
is not the Concept in its infinity, [but] the determinate concept of the under­
standing. The taking up of the ob-ject into the forms of this determinate 
concept is the synthetic method. 
Addition. The movement of the synthetic method is the reverse of the movement in 
the analytic method. Whilst the latter starts from the singular and advances to the 
universal, the former, on the contrary, starts with the universal (as a definition), and 
advances, through particularisation (in division), to the singular (in the theorem). 
Thus, the synthetic method proves to be the development of the moments of the 
Concept in the ob-ject. 
§ 229 
(aa) The ob-ject brought first into the form of the determinate Concept in 
general by cognition-so that its genus and its universal determinacy are 
thereby posited-is the definition. Its material and justification are pro­
vided by the analytical method (§ 227). The determinacy, however, is only 
supposed to be a characteristic; Le., it is for the purpose of a cognition 
which is only subjective and external with regard to the ob-ject. 
Addition. Definition itself contains the three moments of the Concept: the univer­
sal, as the proximate genus (genus proximum), the particular, as the determinacy of 

298 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
the species41 (qualitas specifica), and the singular, as the defined ob-ject itself.-With 
regard to definition there arises, first, the question of where it comes from; and the 
general answer to this question is that definitions arise upon the analytic path. But 
then, too, this at once occasions controversy about the correctness of the definition 
that is set up, for it is now a question about what perceptions we started from and 
what points of view we had in mind at that stage. The richer the ob-ject that is to be 
defined, i.e." the more varied the aspects that it presents for consideration, the 
more varied do the definitions that are set up tend to be as well. Hence we have, 
for example, a whole mass of definitions of life, or of the State, and so on. Geome­
try, on the contrary, has it easy in the making of definitions, because its ob-ject, 
space, is so abstract. 
Moreover, there is no necessity at all in the content of the ob-jects defined. We 
are supposed to admit that there is space, that there are plants, animals, and so on; 
and it is not the business of geometry, or botany, etc., to exhibit the necessity of the 
ob-jects in question. And for this same reason the synthetiC method is just as 
unsuitable for philosophy as the analytic one, since philosophy must above all 
justify itself with regard to the necessity of its ob-jects. All the same, there have 
been many attempts to employ the synthetic method in philosophy, too. Spinoza, 
especially, begins with definitions, and says, for example, that Substance is the 
causa sui. The most speculative content is laid down in his definitions, but in the 
form of assurances. The same holds for Schelling as well. 42 
§ 230 
(bb) The specification of the second moment of the Concept, the deter­
minacy of the universal as particularisation, is its division according to some 
external aspect or other. 
Addition. The requirement is that divisions should be complete; and for this there 
must be a principle or ground of division, which is so constituted that the division 
based on it embraces the entire content of the domain that is designated in general 
terms by the definition. More preCisely, the principle of division must be taken 
from the nature of the very ob-ject that is to be subdivided, so that the division is 
made naturally and is not merely artificial, i.e., arbitrary. Hence, for example, the 
division of mammals in zoology is mainly based upon the teeth and the claws, and 
this makes sense, because the mammals distinguish themselves from one another 
through these parts of their bodies, and the universal type of the various classes 
can be traced back to them. 43 
Any division is to be considered genuine when it is determined by the Concept. 
So genuine division is, first of all, tripartite; and then, because particularity pres­
ents itself as doubled, the division moves on to fourfoldness as well. In the sphere 
of spirit trichotomy predominates, and it is one of Kant's merits to have drawn 
attention to this. 44 

C. THE IDEA (§§ 213-244) 
299 
§ 231 
(cc) In its concrete singularity-where the determinacy (which in the defini­
tion is simple) is taken as a relationship-the ob-ject is a synthetic relation 
of distinct determinations: a theorem. Since there are diverse determina­
tions, their identity is a mediated one. The bringing forward of the materials 
that constitute the middle terms is the construction; and the mediation 
itself, from which the necessity of that relation for cognition flows, is the 
demonstration. a 
a. Beweis 
b. Beweis 
The way the distinction between the synthetic and the analytical 
methods is usually specified makes the use of one or the other 
appear on the whole to be optional. If the concrete [case] which is 
presented as a result, according to the synthetic method, is presup­
posed, then the abstract determinations, which constitute the pre­
suppositions and the material for the demonstration,b can be ana­
lysed out of it as its consequences. The algebraical definitions of 
curved lines become theorems in the procedure of geometry. And 
the Pythagorean theorem, too, if it is taken as a definition of the 
right-angled triangle, would yield, by way of analysis, the proposi­
tions which have already been demonstrated in order to prove it in 
geometry. The optional character of the choice rests upon the fact 
that both methods equally start from something that is externally 
presupposed. According to the nature of the Concept the analytical 
procedure comes first, since its first task is to elevate the given, 
empirically concrete material into the form of universal abstrac­
tions; only after that can the abstractions be set up as the starting 
definitions in the synthetic method. 
Although these methods are essential, and are brilliantly suc­
cessful in their own field, they cannot be used for philosophical 
cognition. This is obvious because they have presuppositions and 
because cognition functions in them as understanding, and ad­
vances toward formal identity. In Spinoza, who made notable use 
of the geometrical method-and for speculative concepts at that­
the formalism of this method makes itself conspicuous at once. 
The philosophy of Wolff, which carried this method to the height 
of pedantry,45 is also a metaphysics of the understanding with 
regard to its content.-The misuse of this method and its formal­
ism, in philosophy and in the sciences, has been replaced in more 
recent years by the misuse of what is called "construction". The 

300 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
notion that mathematics constructs its concepts became current 
through the influence of Kant;46 [but] this only means that mathe­
matics does not deal with concepts at all, but with abstract deter­
minations of sensible intuitions. As a result, the specification of 
sensible determinations (taken up from perception in a way that 
bypasses the Concept), along with the further formalism of a clas­
sification of philosophical and scientific ob-jects, tabulated accord­
ing to a presupposed schema, but for the rest in a completely 
arbitrary manner-all this has been called a "construction of con­
cepts". Admittedly there lies at the bottom of all this an obscure 
notion of the Idea, of the unity of the Concept and objectivity, as well 
as of the concreteness of the Idea. But this game of construction as 
it is called falls far short of presenting the unity, which only the 
Concept as such is; and by the same token what is sensibly concrete 
in intuition is not a concrete [content] of reason and the Idea. 
Since geometry is concerned after all with the sensible (though 
abstract) intuition of space, it has no difficulty in fixing simple 
determinations of the understanding in this space; that is why 
geometry alone employs the synthetic method of finite cognition 
in its perfection. It is important to note, however, that geometry 
does, in its normal course, finally strike upon incommensurabilities 
and irrationals; at this point, it is driven beyond the principle of the 
understanding if it wants to go further in its determining. As so 
often happens elsewhere, so here, too, we find that terminology is 
stood on its head: what is called "rational" belongs to the under­
standing, while what is called "irrational" is rather the beginning 
and a first trace of rationality. When other sciences reach the limit 
of their advance according to the understanding (which happens 
to them necessarily and quite often, since they are not confined to 
the simplicity of space or of number), they easily find a way out. 
They break off their consistent advance and take up what they 
need (often the opposite of what preceded) from without, from 
representation, opinion, perception, or from any other source. 
Since this finite cognition is not conscious of the nature of its 
method or of the relationship of this method with the content, it 
cannot [re]cognise that it is being led on by the necessity of the 
determinations of the Concept in its progression through definitions, 
divisions, etc.; nor can it [re]cognise the point where it reaches its 
limit, and once it has transgressed this limit, it is unaware that it 
finds itself in a field where the determinations of the understand­
ing (which it still continues to use in a rough and ready way) are 
no longer valid. 

C. THE IDEA (§§ 213-244) 
301 
§ 232 
The necessity, which finite cognition produces in its demonstration,a is to 
begin with an external one, directed only at subjective insight. But in 
necessity as such, finite cognition itself has abandoned its presupposition 
and starting point, the simple finding and givenness of its content. Neces­
sity as such is implicitly the Concept that relates itself to itself. In this way 
the subjective Idea has (in-itself) arrived at what is determinate in and for 
itself, not-given, and hence immanent in the subject; and it passes over into 
the Idea of willing. 
Addition. The necessity that cognition achieves through proof is the contrary of 
that which forms its starting point. In the latter, cognition had a given and con­
tingent content; but at the conclusion of its movement, it knows that its content is 
necessary, and this necessity is mediated by subjective activity. Similarly, subjec­
tivity was at first wholly abstract, a mere tabula rasa,47 whereas from now on it 
proves to be determining. But in this lies the passage from the Idea of cognition to 
the Idea of willing. This passage consists, more precisely, in the fact that the 
universal in its truth must be interpreted as subjectivity, as the Concept that is self­
moving and active, and that posits determinations. 
(;) WILLING 
§ 233 
As what is in and for itself determinate and as a content that is equal to 
itself and simple, the subjective Idea is the good. Its drive to realise itself 
has the converse relationship to that of the Idea of the true and aims rather 
to determine the world that it finds already there according to its own 
purpose.-On the one hand, this willing has the certainty that the presup­
posed object is null and void-but, at the same time on the other hand, 
being finite, it takes the purpose of the good to be a merely subjective Idea 
and it presupposes the independence of the object. 
§ 234 
The finitude of this activity, therefore, is the contradiction that the purpose of 
the good is being achieved and equally is not being achieved in the self­
contradicting determinations of the objective world; that it is posited 
equally as an inessential purpose and an essential one, as an actual pur­
pose and at the same time as a merely possible one. This contradiction 
a. Beweis 

302 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
presents itself as the infinite progress in the actualisation of the good, which 
is fixed in this progress as a mere ought.48 Formally the vanishing of this 
contradiction consists in the fact that the activity sublates the subjectivity 
of the purpose and hence the objectivity, the antithesis that makes both 
finite; it does not just sublate the finitude of this subjectivity but subjec­
tivity in general: another similar subjectivity, i.e., the re-production" of the 
antithesis, is not distinguished from the one that was supposed to be an 
earlier one. This return into itself is at the same time the recollectionb of the 
content into itself-a content which is the good and the identity in-itself of 
both sides. It is the recollection of the presupposition of the theoretical 
attitude (§ 224) that the object is what is substantial and true in it. 
Addition. Whereas the task of intelligence is simply to take the world as it is, the 
will, in contrast, is concerned to make the world finally into what it ought to be. The 
will holds that what is immediate, what is given, is not a fixed being, but only a 
semblance, something that is in-itself null and void. We encounter here the contra­
dictions which, at the standpont of morality, drive us from pillar to pOSt.49 
This is, in general, the standpoint of Kant with regard to human action,< and also 
that of Fichte. The good ought to be realised; we have to work at this, to bring it 
forth, and the will is simply the good that is self-activating. But then if the world 
were as it ought to be, the result would be that the activity of willing would 
disappear. Therefore the will itself also requires that its purpose shall not be real­
ised. This correctly expresses the finitude of willing. But we must not stop at this 
finitude, of course, and it is through the process of willing itself that this finitude is 
sublated, together with the contradiction that it contains. The reconciliation con­
sists in the will's returning-in its result-to the presupposition of cognition; hence 
the reconciliation consists in the unity of the theoretical and practical Idea. The will 
knows the purpose as what is its own, and intelligence interprets the world as the 
Concept in its actuality. This is the genuine position of rational cognition. 
What is null and vanishing constitutes only the surface of the world, not its 
genuine essence. This essence is the Concept that is in and for itself, and so the 
world is itself the Idea. Unsatisfied striving vanishes when we [re]cognise that the 
final purpose of the world is just as much accomplished as it is eternally accom­
plishing itself. This is, in general, the outlook of the mature person, whereas youth 
believes that the world is in an utterly sorry state, and that something quite dif­
ferent must be made of it. The religious consciousness, on the contrary, regards the 
world as governed by divine Providence and hence as corresponding to what it 
ought to be. This agreement between is and ought is not rigid and unmoving, 
however, since the final purpose of the world, the good, only is, because it con­
stantly brings itself about; and there is still this distinction between the spiritual 
a. ein neues Erzeugen 
b. Erinnerung 
c. in praktischer Beziehung 

C. THE IDEA (§§ 213-244) 
303 
and the natural worlds: that, whilst the latter continues simply to return into itself, 
there is certainly a progression taking place in the former as well. 
§ 235 
As a result the truth of the good is posited-as the unity of the theoretical 
and the practical Idea: [the truth] that the good has been reached in and 
for itself-that the objective world is in this way in and for itself the Idea 
positing itself eternally as purpose and at the same time bringing forth its 
actuality through [its] activity.-This life, which has returned to itself from 
the difference and finitude of cognition, and which has become identical 
with the Concept through the activity of the Concept, is the speculative or 
absolute Idea. 
C. THE ABSOLUTE IDEA 
§ 236 
As unity of the subjective and the objective Idea, the Idea is the Concept of 
the Idea, for which the Idea as such is the ob-ject, and for which the object 
is itself-an object in which all determinations have come together. This 
unity, therefore, is the absolute truth and all truth, it is the Idea that thinks 
itself, and at this stage, moreover, it is [present] as thinking, i.e., as logical 
Idea. 
Addition. The absolute Idea is first of all the unity of the theoretical and the 
practical Idea, and hence equally the unity of the Idea of life with the Idea of 
cognition. In cognition we had the Idea in the shape of difference; the process of 
cognition has shown itself to us as the overcoming of this difference, and the 
reestablishing of that unity which, as such and in its immediacy, is initially the Idea 
of life. The defect of life consists in the fact that it is still only the Idea in-itself; 
cognition, on the contrary, is the Idea only as it is for-itself, in the same one-sided 
way. The unity and the truth of these two is the Idea that is in and for itself, and 
hence absolute.-Up to this point the Idea in its development through its various 
stages has been our ob-ject; but from now on, the Idea is its own ob-ject. This is the 
noesis noeseos, which was already called the highest form of the Idea by Aristotle.50 
§ 237 
Since there is no passing-over within the absolute Idea, no presupposing, 
and no determinacy at all that would not be fluid and transparent, this 
Idea is for-itself the pure form of the Concept, which intuits its content as 

304 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
itself. It is its own content, inasmuch as it is the ideal distinguishing of itself 
from itself, and [because] one of the distinct [terms] is its identity with 
itself; but in this identity the totality of the form (as the system of the 
determinations of the content) is contained. This content is the system of 
the logical. All that remains here as form for the Idea is the method of this 
content-the determinate knowing of the currency of its moments. 
Addition. When the expression "absolute Idea" is used, people may think that it is 
only here that we meet with what is right, that here everything must give itself up. 
It is certainly possible to sing the hollow praises of the absolute Idea, far and wide; 
in the meantime, its true content is nothing but the entire system, the development 
of which we have been considering so far. So it can also be said that the absolute 
Idea is the universal, but this universal is not merely the abstract form that con­
fronts the particular content as something-other; on the contrary, it is the absolute 
form into which all determinations, the whole fullness of the content posited by it, 
have returned. In this perspective, the absolute Idea is to be compared with the old 
man who utters the same religious statements as the child, but for whom they 
carry the significance of his whole life. Even if the child understands the religious 
content, it still counts for him only as something outside of which lie the whole of 
life and the whole world. 
And the situation is the same with human life in general and with the events 
that make up its content. All labour is directed only at this or that goal; and when it 
is attained, we are amazed to find just what we willed and nothing more. What is 
of interest is the whole movement. When we are carrying on with our lives, the 
end in view may appear very restricted, but it is the whole decursus vitae [course of 
life] that is embraced together in it. In the same way and for the same reason, the 
content of the absolute Idea is the whole display- that has passed before us up to 
this point. The last step is the insight that it is the whole unfolding that constitutes 
its content and its interest. 
Moreover, this is the philosophical perspective: that everything which, taken by 
itself, appears to be restricted gets its value by belonging to the whole, and being a 
moment of the Idea. This is how we have had the content, and what we now have 
is the knowledge that the content is the living development of the Idea, and this 
simple looking back is contained in the form. Each of the stages considered so far is 
an image of the Absolute, but initially in a restricted way, and hence it drives itself 
on to the whole, whose unfolding is what we have called method. 
§ 238 
The moments of the speculative methodS! are (Cl) the beginning, which is 
being or the immediate; it is all by itself, on the simple ground that it is the 
a. Ausbreitung 

C. THE IDEA (§§ 213--244) 
305 
beginning. But from [the standpoint of] the speculative Idea it is its self­
determinating which, as the absolute negativity or movement of the Con­
cept, judges and posits itself as the negative of itself. In this way being, 
which appears as abstract affirmation for the beginning as such, is on the 
contrary negation, positedness, mediatedness in general, and presupposed­
ness. But as the negation of the Concept (which is strictly identical with 
itself even in its otherness and is the certainty of itself), it [i.e., being] is the 
Concept that is not yet posited as Concept; i.e., it is the Concept in-itself.­
As the Concept that is still indeterminate, i.e., determined only in-itself or 
immediately, this being is therefore just as much the universal. 
The beginning, in the sense of immediate being, is taken from 
[sense-] intuition and perception: this is the beginning of the ana­
lytical method of finite cognition. And in the sense of universality, 
being is the beginning of the synthetic method of finite cognition. 
But since the logical is immediately both something-universal and 
equally something that [simply] is, or since it is both something 
that the Concept presupposes to itself and is equally the Concept 
itself in its immediacy, its beginning is equally both a synthetic and 
an analytical beginning. 
Addition. The philosophical method is both analytic and synthetic, but not in the 
sense of a mere juxtaposing or a mere alternation of both these methods of finite 
cognition; instead, the philosophical method contains them sublated within itself, 
and therefore it behaves, in every one of its movements, analytically and synthet­
ically at the same time. Philosophical thinking proceeds analytically in that it sim­
ply takes up its ob-ject, the Idea, and lets it go its own way, while it simply watches 
the movement and development of it, so to speak. To this extent philosophising is 
wholly passive. But philosophical thinking is equally synthetic as well, and it 
proves to be the activity of the Concept itself. But this requires the effort to beware 
of our own inventions and particular opinions which are forever wanting to push 
themselves forward. 
§ 239 
(13) The progression is the posited judgment of the Idea. As the Concept in­
itself, the immediate universal is the dialectic of spontaneously' reducing 
its own immediacy and universality to a moment. Thus, the negative of the 
beginning, or what was first, is now posited in its determinacy; it is for one;b 
it is the relation of distinct [terms], or the moment of reflection. 
a. an ihm selbst 
b. fur eines" 

306 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
This progression is equally both analytical-because through the 
immanent dialectic only what is contained in the immediate Con­
cept is posited-and synthetic, because this distinction had not yet 
been posited in the immediate Concept. 
Addition. In the progression of the Idea the beginning proves itself to be what it 
already is in-itself, namely, what is posited and mediated and not what simply and 
immediately is.- It is only for that consciousness which is itself immediate that 
nature comes first or immediately, while spirit is mediated by it. For, in fact, nature 
is posited by spirit, and it is spirit itself that makes nature into its presupposition. 
§ 240 
Within Being the abstract form of the progression is an other and passing­
over into an other; within Essence [it is] shining within what is opposed; in 
the Concept it is the distinctness of the singular from the universality which 
continues itself as such into what is distinct from it, and is [present] as 
identity with the latter. 
§ 241 
In the second sphere the Concept (which at first is in-itself) has come to 
shine, and as a result it is already in-itself the Idea.-The development of 
this sphere becomes a return into the first, just as the development of the 
first is a passage into the second. It is only through this double movement 
that distinction gets its due, since each of the two that are distinct consum­
mates itself, considered in itself, into the totality and works out its unity 
with the other. Only this self-sublating of the one-sidedness of both [sides] 
in themselves prevents the unity from becoming one-sided. 
§ 242 
The second sphere develops the relation of the distinct [terms] into what it 
is initially; i.e., into the contradiction in these [terms] themselves-in the 
infinite progress. This contradiction resolves itself ('y) into the end where 
what is different is posited as what it is in the Concept. This is the negative 
of what is first, and, in its identity with that, it is the negativity of its own 
self; hence [it is] the unity within which both of these first [terms] are as 
a. nicht als das Seiende und Unmittelbare 

C. THE IDEA (§§ 213--244) 
307 
ideal and as moments; [they are there] as sublated, i.e., as preserved at the 
same time. Con-eluding itself with itself in this way from its being-in-itself 
by means of its difference and through the sublation of this difference, the 
Concept is the realised Concept; i.e., it is the Concept that contains the 
positedness of its determinations within its being-far-itself. It is the Idea for 
which, being what is absolutely first (in the method), this end is at the 
same time only the vanishing of the semblance that the beginning is 
something-immediate, and the Idea is a result. This is the cognition that 
the Idea is the One Totality. 
§ 243 
In this way, the method is not an external form, but the soul and the 
Concept of the content. It is distinct from the Concept only inasmuch as 
the moments of the Concept, each in itself, in its determinacy, reach the 
point where they appear as the totality of the Concept. Since this deter­
minacy, or the content, leads itself back, along with the form, to the Idea, 
the latter presents itself as a systematic totality, which is only One Idea. Its 
particular moments are in-themselves this same [Idea]; and equally, 
through the dialectic of the Concept, they produce the simple being-for­
itself of the Idea.-As a result the Science [of Logic] coneludes by grasping 
the Concept of itself as the Concept of the pure Idea for which the Idea is. 
§ 244 
Considered according to this unity that it has with itself, the Idea that is for 
itself is intuiting and the intuiting Idea is Nature. But as intuiting, the Idea 
is posited in the one-sided determination of immediacy or negation, 
through external reflection. The absolute freedom of the Idea, however, is 
that it does not merely pass over into life, nor that it lets life shine within 
itself as finite cognition, but that, in the absolute truth of itself, it resolves to 
release out of itself into freedom the moment of its particularity or of the 
initial determining and otherness, [i.e.,] the immediate Idea as its reflexion,a 
or itself as Nature. 
Addition. We have now returned to the Concept of the Idea with which we began. 
At the same time this return to the beginning is an advance. What we began with 
was being, abstract being, while now we have the Idea as being; and this Idea that is, 
is Nature. 
a. Widerschein 

THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
NOTES 
Preface to the First Edition 
L The philosophical Manier that "presupposes a schema" is the same "formalist" degenera­
tion of the "Identity Philosophy" that is attacked in the Preface to the Phenomenology (Miller, 
§§ 14-16, 50-53). It is clear from his correspondence that in the Phenomenology Hegel's target 
was various friends and followers of SchelIing rather than Schelling himself. See further, H. S. 
Harris, "The Cows in the Night." 
2. Although the main attack is directed at "Schelling's school" it seems clear that Schelling 
himself is included here. It was others (such as H. Steffens, J. Garres, and J. J. Wagner) whom 
Hegel accused in the Phenomenology of making schematic parallels, and focusing upon cu­
rious accidents, in their philosophy of nature. But he was already remarking, during that 
period, that (through his continual thought-experiments) 5chelling had "conducted his philo­
sophical education in public." The "adventures of thought" here surely refer to that, just as 
the Verriicktheit refers to the case of the student invented by Jean Paul (in his novel Titan), 
who had to be confined to an asylum in consequence of his total absorption in the study of 
the Identity Philosophy. 
3. From his critical essays of the early Jena years we know that Hegel must (minimally) have 
had G. E. Schulze and W. T. Krug in mind here. There were many others who belonged to the 
"other side" in those years, but these two fit the stereotypes of "clever scepticism" and 
"modest criticism" perfectly. It is probably Schulze (in his mammoth Kritik) who is the 
"schoolmaster giving lessons to the centuries." (Compare Di Giovanni and Harris, 293--362). 
4. In showing this preference for the Romantics over the Common Sense school, Hegel 
echoes the Preface to the Phenomenology, written ten years earlier. "Revelling" reminds us of 
the claim that "Truth is the Bacchanalian revel"; and "the sunrise of the rejuvenated spirit" is 
in the Preface also (see Miller, §§ 47 and 11). 
5. The comparatively friendly remarks about "immediate knowing" refer to Jacobi; and in 
1827 Jacobi's position was used as the transition from the critical empiricism of most followers 
of Kant to properly speculative philosophy. But Hegel's attitude toward Schleiermacher's 
theology of immediate experience became increasingly polemical during the Berlin years. 
Preface to the Second Edition 
L For the many theorists of the "facts of consciousness" in the generation of German 
philosophers after Kant, see first the essay of George Di Giovanni in Between Kant and Hege/. 
A fuller account of the philosophical scene will be found in Beiser's The Fate of Reason. But 
both authors are concerned with a time twenty or thirty years earlier than this Preface. 
2. The great prophet of "immediate knowledge" was Jacobi. See §§ 61-78. (But Jacobi had 
been dead for more than ten years. The voice of immediate knowledge in Hegel's Berlin was 
Schleiermacher. ) 
308 

NOTES 
309 
3. This is a revised version of a remark of Mephistopheles: "From the Evil One they are free, 
but the evil ones remain" (Faust, pt. 1, "Witches Kitchen"). 
4. Faktum. See note 21 to the Glossary. 
5. durch Nachdenken. Here, as well as in some other places, this is Hegel's word for the 
procedure of Descartes. 50 we have used an appropriately Cartesian word for it. 
6. It is true that Tholuck characterises the monotheistic mysticism of the Sufis as "pantheis­
tic." But he does not call the monist philosophers pantheists; and Hegel's polytheistic panthe­
ism arises entirely from his own sophistical reading of Tholuck's argument. 
7. This famous remark comes from the reports of Jacobi in his Letters on the Teaching of 
Spinoza (1785). See Werke, 4:i, 68. Hegel's citation is from memory. What Lessing said, accord­
ing to Jacobi, was, "People always talk about Spinoza still, as if he were a dead dog." 
8. J. J. Brucker, Historia critica philosophiae, vo!. 6, 1767. Compare Hegel's criticisms in the 
Lectures on the History of Philosophy, trans. Haldane and Simson, 1:43, 112; compare also 
1:51-55 with his remarks about the history of philosophy here. 
9. Homer, Iliad 1.401, 2.813, 14.290, 20.74. In 1827 Hegel actually wrote "certain stars." He 
repeated this error in his review of Goschel in 1829, but by 1830 he had discovered that he 
was mistaken. 
10. Compare Haldane and Simson, 3:197-99, or better still, Vorlesungen, Band 9:82. This latter 
volume provides us with the course of 1825-26; for the translation see the Index of Refer­
ences. The expression qualirt cannot actually be found in Boehme (who uses qualificirt). But 
Hegel is thinking of the importance of Qual in Boehme's speculation. 
11. The "Fata Morgana" was properly a mirage in the Straits of Messina. The tradition of the 
English Normans was that King Arthur's sister, the enchantress Morgan le Fay, lived in 
Calabria (Brewer). For this and the other passages to which Hegel directly refers, Nicolin and 
Poggeler have provided the relevant citations from Tholuck's essay in their notes. 
12. The English newspaper report about the Unitarians was in the Morning Chronicle, 6 June 
1825. See Gesammelte Werke [G. w. ], 19:491-92 (note to 14, 33-35). 
13. Berlin, 1824; the emphasis is Hegel's. 
14. Actually Tholuck cites Anselm in only two places, of which this is one. See Hegel, G. w. , 
19:492-93 (note to 15, 33-36). 
15. Hegel found in his edition of Boehme (Hamburg, 1715) the information (given in the 
"Life" by A. von Frankenburg) that Boehme's friend Balthasar Waiter had conferred this title 
upon him. 
16. Compare Haldane and Simson, 3:192-93, 198-99, 208, 214; or, better still, Vorlesungen, 
Band 9:80, 87 (Brown and Stewart, 3:119-20, 130-31). 
17. Nicolin and POggeler cite the appreciative remarks of Franz von Baader about Hegel in 
the first of his six volumes of Fermenta Cognitionis; in the passage with which Hegel takes 
issue here (from the separate polemic of 1824) von Baader refers specifically to § 193 of the 
1817 Encyclopaedia. The doctrine that he criticises will be most easily found by Anglophone 
readers in Philosophy of Nature (Petry or Miller), § 248, note. Baader replied to the aggressive 
defence offered by Hegel in the present note in a short essay titled "Hegel on My Doctrine in 
the Preface to the Second Edition of the Encyclopaedia." See his Siimtliche Werke, series I, 
10:306-309; for the essay of 1824 see Siimtliche Werke, series I, 2. The Fermenta Cognitionis will 
also be found in the first two volumes. 
18. Verum norma sui et falsi is a dictum of Spinoza's. See the Ethics, 2, 43, scholium. He uses 
the precise expression that Hegel cites here in Epistle 76 (to Albert Burgh). See Opera, ed. 
Gebhardt, 4:320. 

310 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Foreword to the Third Edition 
1. In the 1829 Jahrbuch fur wissenschaftliche Kritik Hegel promised a comprehensive review 
of five polemics against his philosophy. Actually he reviewed only the first two of them. See 
Berliner Schriften, 330-402. 
2. The reference is to a controversy at Halle between von Hengstenberg's Evangelischen 
Kirchenzeitung and the rationalists in the theology faculty. See Hegel's Letters, no. 659 to 
GoscheI. 13 December 1830 (Butler and Seiler, 543-4). 
3. This is a mistake. Apart from putting one soul in Hell while the body was still alive on 
earth, Dante has St. Peter himself proclaim the damnation of two Popes before they are dead. 
(But none of his victims was alive to read what he wrote.) 
4. The text (and probably Hegel's manuscript) was faulty. There is no article, a singular 
subject, and a plural verb. Lasson's correction "human individuals posit themselves" is the 
simplest. Nicolin and Poggeler insert the definite article and singularise the verb-which 
gives the statement a more "philosophical" form. The sense is unchanged, and it is quite 
clear. 
5. Hegel had planned to review Justinus Kerner's book about the medium of Prevorst (Stutt­
gart, 1829). But in the Yearbook of his school for 1830 a review by Liider appeared instead. Her 
visions were regarded as evidence for the spiritual world beyond this one. 
6. The polemic that Hegel is discussing was between scriptural fundamentalists and the­
ologians inspired by the Enlightenment. Hegel thinks both parties are equally mistaken, and 
that the interpretation of Scripture given by both sides is equally devoid of any speculative 
(i.e., philosophical) content. 
7. The echo is from Rom. 3:4; but quite probably the quotation itself comes from a hymn. 
See further note 12 to § 11 below. 
8. Aristotle, Metaphysics 12.7. 1072b24. 
Introduction (§§ 1-18) 
1. (§ 2 R) Schleiermacher is the probable target of this attack. Compare Hegel's Preface for 
H. W. F. Hinrichs' Religion in Its Inner Relationships to Science (Berlin, 1822). A translation by 
A. V. Miller will be found in F. G Weiss (1974). 
2. (§ 3) Hegel seems to distinguish three levels: (1) the content in feeling, etc., permeated by 
(nonreflective) thinking (see § 2 R), (2) the content in feeling mixed with reflective thought; 
and (3) the content in pure thought. 
3. (§ 6 R) This is the page reference for the first edition of 1821. The references for modern 
editions are Hoffmeister (1955), 14; Theorie Werkausgabe [T W-A.} (Suhrkamp), 7:24; Knox, 10. 
4. (§ 6 R) See especially Science of Logic, bk. 2, pt. 3, chap. 2 (Lasson, 2:169-84; Miller, 541-
53). 

NOTES 
311 
5. (§ 7 R) The work of Grotius was actually titled On the Law of War and Peace (Paris, 1625). 
Newton, of course, called his book The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (London, 
1687). 
6. (§ 7 note") Thomas Thomson (1773-1852) was a distinguished professor of chemistry (see 
Partington, History of Chemistry, 4:716-21). His Annals of Philosophy appeared from 1813 to 
1826. The Art of Preserving the Hair was published anonymously (London, 1825). Hegel's 
knowledge of it came from his reading of the Morning Chronicle. The note that he made at the 
time has been published by M. J. Petry-see Hegel-Studien 11 (1976):34; or G. w., 19:497-98 
(note to 34, 17-19). 
7. (§ 7 note" ) Wallace-relying on the Times-gives the dates of the debate and the 
Shipowner's dinner as 3 February and 12 February 1825. From that source he also revises the 
quotation ascribed to Canning: "the just and wise maxims of sound, not spurious philoso­
phy." But Hegel's source was actually the Morning Chronicle; and he noted the date of the 
debate correctly in his excerpt (see Petry, Hegel-Studien 11 (1976):29-30; the relevant data can 
also be found in G w., 19:497-98). For the Shipowner's Society dinner excerpt see Petry, 31-32. 
Canning's words, as reported by the Chronicle, were: "But a period has lately commenced 
when Ministers have had it in their power to apply to the state of the country the just maxims 
of profound philosophy . . . . " Hegel's excerpt was word perfect, so we have translated his 
citation back to English in accord with his original. Hegel referred both to Thomson's Annals 
and to this excerpt in the Introduction to his course on the History of Philosophy (see Haldane 
and Simson, 1:57-58). 
8. (§ 8 R) This maxim was everywhere used (correctly) as a summary of the Aristotelian 
position. (See especially De Anima 2.8.432a.) But Leibniz made the appropriate response to 
the tabula rasa interpretation of this tag: Nisi intellect us ipse ("Nothing in the intellect that was 
not previously in the sensϨxcept the intellect itself!"). Jacobi drew attention to this com­
ment in the Preface to his Collected Works (Werke, 2:16). For the passage in Leibniz himself 
see New Essays, 2:1, 2. 
9. (§ 10 R) This became a commonplace of critical empiricism beginning with Locke's Preface 
for the Essay. But in Kant himself the most familiar echoes of it are in the Critique of Pure 
Reason [CPR] B, 7-9, 22-27; and the opening paragraphs of the Prolegomena. 
10. (§ 10 R) Wallace refers us to the Facetiae ascribed to Hierodes for this and other deeds of 
the guileless Scholasticus. For details, see G. W., 19:499 (note to 37, 1-2). 
11. (§ 10 R) This criticism of K. L. Reinhold is an old hobbyhorse of Hegel's. See especially the 
Difference Essay (1801), trans. Harris and Cerf, 174-92. For a balanced account of Reinhold's 
work see Di Giovanni, "The Facts of Consciousness," in Between Kant and Hegel, eds. Di 
Giovanni and Harris. 
12. (§ 11) Underlined because it is an intentional echo of Rom. 3:4. The conflict there is 
between "unbelief" and the "faith in God"-see note 5 to the 1830 foreword, above. (Hegel 
also used the phrase in his own translation of Aristotle, De Anima 3.4.429a19.) 
13. (§ 11 R) Hegel probably means us to remember Phaedo 89c-90e. But Nicolin and Piggeler 
refer also to Laches 188cǞ and Republic 411d. 
14. (§ 12 R) It is Schelling's own early philosophy of the Absolute Identity that is here 
compared with the necessarily "formal" beginning of Greek speculation. Compare Haldane 
and Simson, 3:529-45, especially 534, 540, and 542-45. 
15. (§ 13) As Wallace has already pointed out, it would be difficult to map the history of 
philosophy (or even Hegel's account of it) directly onto the Logic. But the clue given here to 
what Hegel is doing should never be forgotten (compare the Remark to § 12). 

312 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
16. (§ 13 R) Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel all of them habitually wrote as the mouthpieces of 
"Philosophy" simply. But, as Wallace pointed out, Reinhold and J. S. Beck had claimed to do 
this also. The attempt to stand above any "battle of the schools" begins with Kant. 
17. (§ 16 R) The use of the tenn "anthropology" in Kant and the post-Kantian schools was 
quite different from ours. In Hegel's philosophy of subjective spirit, "anthropology" is the first 
division; it is followed by "phenomenology" and "psychology." Wallace defines "anthropol­
ogy" neatly as "a study of those aspects of psychology which are most closely allied with 
physiological conditions." The "facts of consciousness" provided the foundation for Reinhold 
and other philosophers who adopted the method of Hume and his Scottish opponents. See 
the essay of Di Giovanni referred to in note 11. 
18. (§ 16 R) Wallace thought, plausibly enough, that in this section of his Remark Hegel was 
referring to the scientific work of Goethe. But his own lectures on the philosophy of world 
history are the appropriate paradigm in the sphere of Spirit. 
19. (§ 17) Wallace points out correctly that the doctrine of "spiritual circularity" is found in 
Proclus and in Christian neo-Platonism (especially Erigena). But the reader should note that 
Hegel is not here talking about a "procession from" and "return to" God. The neo-Platonic 
conception of a "procession" of the finite from the Absolute was revived by Schelling. From 
1804-05 onward Hegel steadily rejects it as a mistaken view. See, for instance, Phenomenology 
(Miller, § 162). 
The Science of Logic: Preliminary Conception 
(§§ 19-83) 
1. (§ 19 AI) Wallace thought that it was Fichte who had preached the new dawn-he cites 
the Wissenschaftslehre of 1794. But that "glorious dawn" is long past now. It seems clear that 
the three Additions to this paragraph come from courses given at different times, and that 
this first one is the earliest. In that case, Hegel's polemic here is directed at the "demagogues" 
of the student youth movement in 1818-20. Among them, the most notable logician was J. F. 
Fries. He lost his professorship at Heidelberg in November 1819. (A good brief account of the 
political crisis in the German universities during these years can be found in A. T. B. 
Peperzak, Philosophy and Politics, 15-31. )  
2. ( §  19 AI) Hegel may be playing here on "setzen": "Die Alteren setzen nun allerdings ihre 
Hoffnung auf die Jugend, denn sie soll die Welt und die Wissenschaften fortsetzen." 
3. (§ 19 AI) Hegel's "auf der Sandbank dieser Zeitlichkeit" comes from the Eschenberg 
translation of Shakespeare's Macbeth (act I, sc. 7: "But here, upon this bank and shoal of timel 
We'd jump the life to come"). He evoked the same echo in his Philosophy of Religion 
manuscript of 1820; and it was Waiter Jaeschke who spotted the reference-see Vorlesungen, 
Band 3:4, line 52 (and the note on p. 375). 
4. (I 19 A3) Anaxagoras was banished from Athens (probably not long before the Pelopon­
nesian War began, but the date is a subject of controversy); Socrates was put to death after the 
war (399 B.C.). Protagoras was prosecuted at Athens during the war. In all cases "impiety" 
was the main ground for the prosecution. 

NOTES 
313 
5. (§ 20 R) See Critique of Pure Reason [CPR] B, 131: "The 'I think' must be able to accompany 
all of my representations." As Wallace rightly commented, Hegel's reference is rather loose. It 
was Fichte's interpretation of the formal "I think" that was crucial for the development of 
German idealism. 
6. (§ 20 R) The doctrine of the thinking self as "the Category" is expounded in the first 
pages of chap. 5 of the Phenomenology. 
7. (1 20 A) On the history of logic after Aristotle, Hegel has more to say in his Introduction 
to the Science of Logic (Lasson, 1:32-34; Miller, 51-53). 
8. (I 21 A) Hegel is probably referring to experiences such as learning to distinguish colours 
(and to say, for example, "This rose is red"). He is not talking about the learning of grammar, 
the parsing of sentences, etc. 
9. (§ 22 A) In 594 B.C. (approximately) Solon gave Athens a constitution (which the city 
accepted). Hegel's knowledge of his work was based on the "lives" of Solon in Plutarch and 
Diogenes Laertius. 
10. (§ 23 R) The target of Hegel's irony is probably Schleiermacher. (But it was Fichte who 
made this a watchword, and he influenced many of Hegel's contemporaries.) 
1 1 .  (§ 23 R) See Metaphysics A.2.982a2ff; and compare Haldane and Simson, 2:135-36. 
12. (§ 24 AI) Apparently Schelling only used the phrase "petrified intelligence" in a poem 
printed in the Zeitschrift fur spekulative Physik, 1800. See Werke, 4:546. (Wallace found the 
reference-as well as some others like it-and he quotes the poem.) 
13. (§ 24 A2) See Introduction, p. xxvii. 
14. (§ 24 A2) In der Mitte . . .  seine Pole zusammenschliept "con-eludes its poles in the middle 
term." The "impotence" consists precisely in the shift to a spatial sense of "middle". 
15. (I 24 A2) Compare Phenomenology Preface (Miller, § 58). 
16. (§24 A2) Compare the lecture of 1804 quoted in the Introduction above, and Science of 
Logic (Lasson, 1 :9-12; Miller, 31-33). 
17. (§ 24 A3) From the "Scepticism" essay of 1802 we can learn that the supreme master of 
"high Scepticism" was Plato in the Parmenides. Also that the misapplication of sceptical 
method to the "forms of reason" began in the school of Sextus. See the translation in Di 
Giovanni and Harris, 322, 325-30, 334-39. For a fuller account of the significance of the 
sceptical tradition (both ancient and modern) for Hegel, see M. N. Forster, Hegel and Scepti­
cism. 
18. (§ 24 A3) Hegel's discussion here should be compared with the interpretations offered 
in his Philosophy of Religion lectures; see Hodgson, 3:104-108, 207-11, and 300-304. (The 
"Erkenntnis of Good and Evil" is logically significant because simple Evil is aufgehoben in it. 
This would not be the case in the mere "acquaintance" of simple Kenntni͐r elementary 
Wissen.) 
19. (§ 25 R) What follows is the authoritative statement of the relation between the Phe­
nomenology and the new introductory discussion (U 26-78) that was first written for the 1827 
edition of the Encyclopaedia. Compare and contrast the references in the Science of Logic. The 
description of the development as "behind the back of consciousness" is an echo of Phe­
nomenology (Miller, § 87). 
20. (§ 28 A) For the origin of these "questions" (and the consequent identity of the "older 
metaphysiCS") see note 25 below. 
21 . (§ 28 A) The source of Hegel's knowledge of this "Oriental" doctrine is probably Philo, via 
August Neander. See Jaeschke's note in Vorlesungen, 5:353, note to 202, 742-45. 

314 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
22. (§ 29 R) See note 21 . 
23. (§ 31 R) Compare the doctrine of the "speculative proposition" in the Preface to the 
Phenomenology (Miller, §§ 58-62) . 
24. (§ 32 A) This use of "dogmatism" is typical in Sextus Empiricus; but Hegel means to refer 
both to the "Pyrrhonists" and to the "Academics." See further note 17 above. 
25. (§ 33) The four branches of metaphysics discussed in §§ 33-36-0ntology, cosmology, 
psychology, rational theology-come from the School-Metaphysics that Wolff bequeathed to a 
host of followers. Thus, the first 5tellung of thought-which Hegel calls simply "Metaphysics" 
in his Table of Contents-is really that of Wolff and his school. 
26. (§ 34 A) Where Hegel found this term, which he ascribes to the Scholastics, is not clear. 
But it comes either from a history of philosophy or from his reading of von Baader, Boehme, 
and German mysticism. In his Philosophy of Religion lectures Hegel used it once only (1827, 
Band 5:196, line 586; Hodgson, 3:271); and Jaeschke has no note on it. 
27. (§ 36 R) The origins of the "eminent sense" are probably in neo-Platonism. It was an 
axiom of scholastic metaphysics that the "cause" must "contain" the effect. But a spiritual or 
intellectual "cause" (such as God, or the human mind) can only contain its physical effects in 
an eminent sense. Thus God as its Creator "contains" the world eminently. The generally 
accepted definition of causal eminence can be found in St. Thomas (5. T. 1 :4, 2); but see also 
Descartes' Meditation III for one of the most celebrated appeals to it. The "eminence" of 
God's attributes generally (not only his causal power, but his wisdom and goodness, etc.) was 
the principal topic of the "negative theology." The standard authority for that is Pseudo­
Dionysius On the Divine Names. But Hegel encountered the doctrine of God's "eminent" 
perfections in the Theodicy of Leibniz; and it is altogether more likely that he has Spinoza's 
attack upon it (Epistle VI) in his mind, rather than anything he may have learned during his 
theological education. 
The doctrine was part of the Wolffian School-Metaphysics. Hence, apart from the Spinoza 
letter, the following references are pertinent: Wolff, Theologia Naturalis, pt. 1, §§ 1096, 1098, 
1099, 1066, 1068; and pt. 2, chap. 2, §§ 158-59 (quoted in G. w., 19:502 [note to 55, 23]). Also 
Leibniz, Theodicy, § 4, 192; Monadology, § 41; Principles of Nature and Grace, § 9. (See Hodgson, 
3:75.) 
28. (§ 36 A) allerrealste Wesen. The German would normally and naturally be rendered "Su­
premely Real Being", since Wesen corresponds to both "being" and "essence" in English, but 
the majority opinion favoured "essence" in order to translate Wesen consistently. See the 
Introduction, p. xviii. 
29. (§ 36 A) The first "abstract" refers to the fixed separation between the determinations of 
the understanding; the second time "abstract" indicates the absence of all negation and hence 
of all determination. A useful survey of the different uses of abstrakt in Hegel's Logic is 
provided by Philip Grier in ed., Di Giovanni, Essays on Hege/'s Logic; for the methodical 
acquisition of "concreteness," see J. Glenn Gray (1971). 
30. (§ 37) Clearly-in view of his comments about Hume in § 39-Hegel means to embrace 
the whole movement of thought from Bacon and Locke onward. He can still call it the 
"second" 5tellung of thought, because (as he explains in the lecture commentary on § 38) the 
"metaphysical" 5tellung embraces the earlier tradition of mediaeval Scholasticism. But he is 
mainly concerned with the German followers of "Scottish Common Sense," and with "Hu­
mean" sceptics like G. E. Schulze. 
31 . (§ 38 A) Faust, pt. 1, lines 1940-41, 1938-39 (trans. David Luke, Oxford University Press, 
1987). A more literal translation would read: 

NOTES 
Chemistry calls it "The handling of Nature" 
It fools itself and it knows not how. 
It has the parts right in its hand, 
But it lacks, alas, just the spiritual bond. 
315 
32. (§ 39 R) This is the first of four references to Hume (see §§ 47, 50, 53 for the others). In all 
of them Hegel takes Hume as the paradigm of the "naive empiricism" that trusts experience 
and rejects "metaphysics." He understands very well that Hume is a "mitigated" Sceptic, not 
a "Pyrrhonian"; and he thinks the worse of him for it. But he also recognises the crucial role 
of Hume in the "awakening" of Kant. In § 53 he mentions the ancient Sceptics and Hume 
(both together) as cultural relativists about ethical principles. It seems likely that Hegel read 
the first Inquiry and the "Natural History of Religion", as well as some parts of the History of 
England. He may have read more, but he depends heavily on Schulze and on manuals of the 
history of philosophy. Compare further Haldane and Simson, 3:369-75, and Vorlesungen, 
9:146-48. 
33. (§ 39 R) The Critical Journal is reproduced as a whole in G. W ,  Band 4. There is an English 
translation of the "Scepticism" essay in Di Giovanni and Harris. 
34. (§ 40) See especially the Introduction to the CPR. 
35. (§ 41) See especially CPR B, 2; Prolegomena, §§ 18-19. 
36. (§ 41 A2) Das Gedachte. It is clear from Hegel's immediate effort to specify this "more 
closely" that he does not mean what anyone just happens to "think," but the reiult of a 
process of logical thinking, i.e., any "thought" that is valid for all, because it embodies a 
"category" that everyone must use. 
37. (§ 42) Kant, of course, calls it the "transcendental unity of apperception" -see CPR B, 
132ff (§ 16). For a better account of Hegel's interpretation of it see Faith and Knowledge, trans. 
Cerf and Harris, 69-75. 
38. (§ 42) Kant's theory is in the "Transcendental Aesthetic" of the CPR. 
39. (I 42) Kant's "table" and "deduction" of twelve categories is in the "Transcendental 
Analytic" of the CPR. 
40. (§ 42 R) "Fichte's contribution" was principally in the Wissenschaftslehre of 1794 and the 
two Introductions of 1797. In one of the Aphorisms from his Wastebook (probably late 18041 
early 1805) Hegel defined it thus: "Only after the history of consciousness does one know what 
one has in these abstractions, through the Concept: Fichte's contribution" (Hegel-Studien 4 
[1967]:13; Independent Journal of Philosophy 3 [1979]:4). 
We can see from this that the Phenomenology itself was Hegel's "deduction of the catego­
ries" in accordance with Fichte's own project for a theory of rational consciousness. But we can 
see here that the Logic itself is the "metaphysical deduction" that Kant only pretended to 
supply. 
41. (§ 42 A2) See CPR B, 352-53, 383, 593, 671, 893-94. 
42. (§ 43) The reference here is to Kant's famous dictum: "Thoughts without content are 
empty, intuitions without concepts are blind" (CPR B, 75). Hegel's own 10gtc depends on the 
fact that "pure thoughts" have a "content" of their own. But it is true for him, as much as for 
Kant, that nothing is a "pure thought" unless it has actual application in "experience." (See 
also Kant, CPR B, 102, 122-23; and Prolegomena, §§ 18-19.) 
43. (§ 43 A note" ) Hegel refers to the Philosophy of Nature and the Philosophy of Spirit as 
the Realphilosophie. 

316 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
44. (§ 44 R) Kant's initial statement about the "thing-in-itself' (in the Preface to the Second 
Edition of the CPR) is as follows: 
That space and time are only forms of sensible intuition, and so only conditions of 
the existence of things as appearances; that, moreover, we have no concepts of 
understanding, and consequently no elements for the knowledge of things, save 
insofar as intuition can be given corresponding to these concepts; and that we can 
therefore have no knowledge of any object as thing-in-itself, but only insofar as it is 
an object of sensible intuition, that is, an appearance-all this is proved in the 
analytical part of the Critique. Thus it does indeed follow that all possible specula­
tive knowledge of reason is limited to mere objects of experience. But our further 
contention must also be duly borne in mind. namely, that though we cannot know 
these objects as things-in-themselves, we must yet be in position at least to think 
them as things-in-themselves; otherwise we should be landed in the absurd conclu­
sion that there can be appearance without anything that appears (CPR B, xxvi-vii; 
compare further B, 294ff, 313, 343). 
When we do think this unknowable--and hence absolutely problematic-"thing" in a per­
fectly determinate way, we reach "the ideal of All of Reality (omnitudo realitatis)" as a "singu­
lar being": 
If, therefore, reason employs in the complete determination of things a transcen­
dental substrate that contains, as it were, the whole store of material from which all 
possible predicates of things must be taken, this substrate cannot be anything else 
than the idea of an All of Reality (omnitudo realitatis). AIl true negations are nothing 
but limitations--a title which would be inapplicable, were they not thus based upon 
the unlimited. that is, upon the All. 
But the concept of what thus possesses all reality is just the concept of a thing-in­
itself as completely determined; and since in all possible [pairs of] contradictory 
predicates one predicate, namely, that which belongs to being absolutely, is to be 
found in its determination, the concept of an ens realissimum is the concept of a 
singular being. It is therefore a transcendental ideal which serves as basis for the 
complete determination that necessarily belongs to all that exists (B, 603-604). 
Compare further the note to § 124 R. 
45. (§ 44 R) This was the alchemist's term for the "dead" precipitate that remained when all 
the "living spirit" had been extracted or given off. 
46. (§ 44 R) See CPR B, 346-49. 
47. (§ 45 A) As Wallace rightly pointed out, the distinction is older than Kant. But Kant's 
usage is the definitive starting point for Hegel's theory (see especially CPR B, 35!Hi6) The 
"goodness of God" in creating finite things is Kant's "faculty of rules" by which the categories 
are applied to the manifold of sense to produce unities of intuition and concept. In the 
speculative view this unself-conscious interpretation of the world is the spontaneous activity 
of the productive imagination. Kant's "reason" is the "faculty of principles" which aims to 
grasp the Infinite, but falls into "dialectic." Hegel's speculative reason comprehends the 
dialectic of the finite concepts of understanding, and grasps itself as the "true Infinite." 
48. (§ 47) In this paragraph Hegel gives a summary of what Kant calls the "paralogisms" of 
Pure Reason. For Kant's own arguments in full see CPR, Transcendental Dialectic, bk. 2, chap. 
1 (B, 399ff). 

NOTES 
317 
49. (§ 48) Kant's treatment of four antinomies arising from the rational concept of the "world" 
is in the Transcendental Dialectic, bk. 2, chap. 2 (CPR B, 432ff). For the whole account of 
Kant's view, but especially for the antinomies, Hegel's discussion in the History of Philosophy 
should be consulted; see T. W-A., 14:333-86; Haldane and Simson, 3:427-78. (See also the 
course of 1825 in Vorlesungen, 9:150-56.) 
50. (§ 48 R) Compare CPR B, 433, 448, 452. 
51. (§ 48 R) Hegel is here referring mainly to Remark 2 in bk. 1, pt. 2, chap. 1, of vo!. 1 as 
published in 1812 (see G W, 11:113-20), 147-50. But the revised version of vo!. 1 was pub­
lished only a short time after the third edition of the Encyclopaedia. So Lasson, 1:182-93 
(Miller, 190-99) contains the fullest account of Hegel's views at this time. See also pt. 2, chap. 
2, sec. C. Remark 2 (Lasson, 231-36; Miller, 234-38). 
52. (§ 48 A) Kant's antinomies are constructed of "theses" and "antitheses" balanced on the 
model of ancient scepticism; and he uses the Greek terms for the two sides. Hegel's use of 
Gegensatz derives from this mode!. Both Gegensatz and Entgegensetzung occur frequently in 
Fichte's writings, but Hegel chose to use the former to express the logical principle of antin­
omy; see note 17 to the Glossary. A Hegelian concept evolves logically into a Gegensatz (our 
"antithesis")-i.e., a contradictory unity. We should notice that Hegel does not use the triad of 
"thesis/antithesis/synthesis" (which Fichte took over from Kant); and the reason for this goes 
deeper than his preference for native German terms. The move to the language of the people 
expresses the liberation of properly speculative "reason" from the "reflective" methods of the 
critical "understanding." 
53. (§ 49) Kant treats God as "the Ideal of Pure Reason." See the Transcendental Dialectic, bk. 
2, chap. 3 (CPR B, 595ft especially 604). 
54. (§ 50) In the School-Metaphysics of Wolff various traditional proofs of God's existence 
were standardised and categorised. The fact that Dasein Gottes is the ordinary German usage 
is logically significant for Hege!. So in the translation we always render it literally rather than 
colloquially (cf. note 83). Kant discusses the "proofs" one by one; and the easiest way to find 
out what they were is to examine his refutations. For the "cosmological proof" see the 
Transcendental Dialectic, bk. 2, chap. 3, sec. 5; and for the "physico-theological proof" see the 
following sec. 6, CPR B, 631-58. (This last is more familiar as the "Argument from Design.") 
55. (§ 50) See note 29 above. 
56. (§ 50 R) Both here and at the beginning of the paragraph Hegel echoes remarks that he 
made in his review of Hinrichs. Compare Miller's translation of this review (see Index). 
Hegel's target there-and probably here also-was Schleiermacher. But see also Iacobi's 1816 
Preface for his David Hume (Werke, 2:56) . 
57. (§ 50 R) See especially Ethics, 2, 7, scholium. Whether Hegel's statement is "inaccurate" 
(as Wallace claimed) is a moot point, because it is not clear that "infinite attributes" (in pt. 1, 
def. 6, and prop. 1) means "infinitely many." But since Hegel characterises the statement of 
Spinoza's position here as ganz ungeschickte it is not clear that his "correction" of it is meant to 
be perfectly adequate by itself. It is lacobi's interpretation of Spinoza that he is concerned to 
combat. (See especially the Briefe iiber Spinoza, Beilage 7, Werke, 4:2, 125-62; and for the 
explicit accusation of atheism, ibid., 216-but that was "notorious" long before Iacobi took up 
the cudgels-Hume learned it from Bayle.) 
58. (§ 50 R) This curious "critical defence" of Spinoza was first offered by Solomon Maimon. 
See G. W, 19:505 (note to 67, 14-15) for the relevant references. 
59. (§ 50 R) Hegel's ihre refers to die Vorstellung, which is here equated with Spinoza's imag­
inatio. A study of Spinoza's use of imaginatio and ratio is very helpful for the understanding of 

318 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
what Hegel means by vorstellen and denken (when they are opposed-for in the Cartesian 
sense in which it is used here, denken includes vorstellen and all other modes of reflective self­
consciousness) . 
60. (§ 51) See Kant's Transcendental Dialectic, bk. 2, chap. 3, sec. 4. (The famous example of 
the "hundred dollars" will be found in CPR B, 627.) 
61 . (§ 51 R) Hegel put these three words in quotes (as well as italics). Probably he was 
thinking of the definition that he cites from Spinoza below [§ 76, note]: the causa sui . . .  non 
potest concipi nisi existens. We can see here that Hegel means to defend Spinoza's ontological 
argument against Kant. Thus Spinoza's rationalism is not comprehended under the "meta­
physics" of the "First Stellung of Thought." Almost certainly Leibniz is not comprehended 
there either, even though Wolff's position derived from him. 
62. (§ 52) Compare CPR, Introduction, sec. 7 (B, 24-26). 
63. (§ 53) Compare Kant's Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals, Akad 4:413, 448 (Beck, 72-
73, 103). 
64. (§ 53) See note 31 above. This induction excludes the possibility of universal, "objective" 
rational imperatives. (For Hume's argument see especially Enquiry Concerning the Principles of 
Morals, sec. 3.) 
65. (§ 54 R) Compare the first sentence of sec. 1 of Kant's Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der 
Sit/en: "Nothing in the world-indeed nothing even beyond the world--<an possibly be 
conceived which could be called good without qualification except a good will" (Beck, 55). 
66. (§ 54 A) Hegel discussed this "Eudaemonism" at some length in the introductory pages of 
Faith and Knowledge (see Cerf and Harris, 5&-66). Both the followers of Wolff and the "popular 
philosophers" of common sense can be counted as "Eudaemonists." So can the French 
Enlightenment-see Phenomenology (Miller, §§ 560-61, 581). For Kant, the most important 
opponent of this type was probably Moses Mendelssohn. 
67. (§ 55) This paragraph (and the next two) are concerned with the Critique of Judgment [Cn. 
For the "intuitive understanding" see especially § 77. The "Idea" (mentioned at the beginning 
of the Remark here) is discussed there. Kant's discussion of "inner purposiveness" is in § 66. 
The two parts of the Critique ("Aesthetic Judgment" and "Teleological Judgment") deal with 
the "products of art" and the "products of organic nature" respectively. 
68. (§ 55 R) All of Schiller's aesthetic essays were inspired by the Critique of Aesthetic Judg­
ment. But Hegel is probably thinking especially of the letters On the Aesthetic Education of 
Man. There is a magnificent critical edition of this, text and translation by E. Wilkinson 
and L. Willoughby (Oxford, 1967), and a good translation by R. Snell (London, Routledge, 
1954). See especially Letters no. 5 and no. 6. 
69. (§ 55 R) This appeal can be found in Jacobi, in Fichte, and in Schelling. But see especially 
Jacobi's Spinoza book, Werke, 4:i, 212-13. 
70. (§ 55 R) For the relation of the Idea to the "Ideal" in Kant, see not only Cf, § 17, but CPR 
B, 596-98, 838-39. (For the "final purpose of the world" see Cf, § 84.) 
71 . (§ 56) Kant's theory of "genius" is in Cf, §§ 46-50; and the Critique begins with the theory 
of "judgments of taste" (U 1-22). 
72. (§ 57) This is the main topic of the Critique of Teleological Judgment (§§ 61-84). See also the 
Introduction to the Critique as a whole (xxvii-xxxviii; Pluhar, 18-26). 
73. (§ 58) Compare Cf, § 75. 
74. (§ 60 note* ) Hegel gives the reference for the first edition (1790). The quotation comes 
from § 88 (Akad 5:454-55; Pluhar, 345). It is interesting (and significant) that after giving only 

NOTES 
319 
paragraph (§ 54) to the Critique of Practical Reason, Hegel sums up Kant's ethical philosophy 
mainly in terms of the Critique of Teleological Judgment (§ 58--60). 
75. (§ 60) For the "postulate of immortality" see especially Critique of Practical Reason, Akad 
5:3-4, 121-24, 142-46 (Beck, 118-19, 225-27, 244-47). The "perpetually posited contradiction" 
is explored at length in the "Moral World-View" (Phenomenology [Miller, §§ 559ξ31]). 
76. (§ 60 R note") Gottfried Hermann, Handbuch der Metrik, Leipzig, 1790. 
77. (1 60 R) It is apparent from the argument of this Remark that the "empiricism" of §§ 37-39 
is "naive empiricism." This is Locke's "new way of ideas"; and it reaches its perfect form in 
Hume. This "naive empiricism" is essentially anti-metaphysical; Kant's "critical" achievement 
was to do justice to the traditional metaphysics (of Wolff and his many followers) within the 
limits of finite experience, as those limits were clearly projected by Locke and distinctly 
defined by Hume. That tradition needs the Critical Philosophy because it cannot do justice to 
the a priori role played by thought in the interpretation of experience. But the empiricists also 
have the option of solving this problem by setting themselves against the traditional meta­
physics in another way. They can have a metaphysics of their own based on the assumed 
absolute primacy of external perception. In this way "naive empiricism" gets degraded into 
materialism and natural determinism. The problem of the spontaneity and freedom of thinking 
here vanishes by fiat. This was the path followed by many French disciples of Locke (for 
instance, Condillac, D'Holbach, and LaMettrie). It is they who represent metaphysizieriender 
Empirismus. ("Naive empiricism" and "the Critical Philosophy" are historic moments in the 
Hegelian solution for the antinomy of necessity and freedom. "Materialism" is a simple 
deviation and a side issue.) 
78. (§ 60 R) This is clearly not the authority of some external actuality (such as the Bible or the 
church). It is the νuthority of the inner sense. Hegel's argument here depends upon Jacobi's 
extension of the Humean theory of "belief" to embrace faith in God. (That extension of Hume 
was actually initiated by Hamann; but it is Jacobi who appears as the exemplary Gestalt of 
"immediate knowing" here.) "Metaphysical" empiricism is "consistent" in the sense that it is 
monistic. It allows only one form of true belief and makes the concept of "matter" into its 
"ultimate, highest content." 
79. (§ 60 R note b) Hegel uses Vorurteil, generally rendered "prejudice". But this is a highly 
pejorative term. In the present context it is quite dear that Hegel is positive about this 
Vorurteil. We translate it by "assumption" . 
so. (§ 60 AI) nur eine historische Beschreibung. It seems possible that this characterisation of 
Kant's method is a deliberate assimilation of it to the "historical, plain method" of Locke 
(Essay, Intro., § 2, ed. Yolton, 1:5). Hegel owned a 1721 edition of Locke's Essay in English. But 
the most direct and probable source of Hegel's usage is Kant himself; see especially CPR B, 
864. (This gives a very ironical twist to Hegel's comment here.) 
81. (§ 60 A2) In Fichte's theory the Ding-an-sich is "thinkable" only negatively, not positively 
as in Kant. The Fichtean AnstofJ is a critical heritage of enlightened Materialism, rather than of 
Deism, as in Kant. Thus, what Fichte says about it is: 
the principle of life and consciousness, the ground of its possibility is admittedly 
contained in the self; but this gives rise to no genuine self, no empirical existence in 
time; and any other kind, for us, is absolutely unthinkable. If such a genuine life is 
to be possible, we need for the purpose another and special sort of shock (AnstofJ) 
to the self on the part of a not-self. 
According to the Science of Knowledge, then, the ultimate ground of all reality 
for the self is an original interaction between the self and some other thing outside 
it, of which nothing more can be said, save that it must be utterly opposed to the 

320 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
self. In the course of this interaction, nothing is brought into the self, nothing alien 
is imported; everything that develops therein, even out to infinity, develops solely 
from itself, in accordance with its own laws; the self is merely set in motion by this 
opponent, in order that it may act; without such an external prime mover it would 
never have acted, and since its existence consists solely in acting, it would never 
have existed either. But this mover has no other attribute than that of being a 
mover, an opposing force, and is in fact only felt to be such. 
Thus, in respect of its existence the self is dependent; but in the determinations of 
this existence it is absolutely independent. In virtue of its absolute being, it contains 
a law of these determinations, valid to infinity, and an intermediary power of 
determining its empirical existence according to this law. The point at which we 
find ourselves, when we first set this intermediary power of freedom in play, is not 
dependent on us; considered in its full extension, the series that from this point on 
we shall traverse to all eternity, is wholly dependent on ourselves. 
The Science of Knowledge is therefore realistic. It shows that the consciousness of 
finite creatures is utterly inexplicable, save on the presumption of a force existing 
independently of them, and wholly opposed to them, on which they are dependent 
in respect of their empirical existence. Nor does it assert anything beyond this 
opposing force, which the finite being feels, merely, but does not apprehend. All 
possible determinations of this force, or not-self, which may emerge to infinity in 
our consciousness, the Science of Knowledge undertakes to derive from the deter­
minant power of the self, and must indeed really be able to derive them, as surely 
as it is a Science of Knowledge. . . . 
This fact, that the finite spirit must necessarily posit something absolute outside 
itself (a thing-in-itself), and yet must recognise, from the other side, that the latter 
exists only for it (as a necesary noumenon), is that circle which it is able to extend 
into infinity, but can never escape. A system that pays no attention at all to this 
circle is a dogmatic idealism; for it is indeed the aforesaid circle which alone 
confines us and makes us finite beings; a system which fancies itself to have 
escaped therefrom is a transcendent realist dogmatism (Werke, 1:279-81; Science of 
Knowledge, trans. P. Heath, 245-47). 
82. The main representative of this "third Stellung" was F. H. Jacobi. There is a notable 
contrast between the treatment of Jacobi's view here and the much harsher treatment ac­
corded to him in Faith and Knowledge (Cerf and Harris, 97-152). There is now a good discus­
sion of this section by Kenneth Westphal (1 ļ 
83. (§ 62 R note a) Since "existence" has to be used for translating Existenz, we cannot speak 
about the "proofs of the existence of God." Existenz is a much more developed logical 
category than Dasein. But neither category allows for an adequate comprehension of "God". 
See also note 10 to the Glossary. 
84. (§ 62 R) The probable target of this polemic was the Logic of J. F. Fries (see G. w., 19:508 
[note to 77, 1-8]). 
85. (§ 62 R) See Werke, 4:2, 127. (A translation by Di Giovanni is in preparation.) 
86. (§ 62 R) This mode of reference to the natural sciences, though not quite concordant with 
our convention, is supported by titles like that of Newton's Principia ("Mathematical Principles 
of Natural Philosophy"). Hegel means to designate the inorganic sciences in which "mecha­
nism" reigns supreme, and for which the Kantian understanding is "constitutive." (Hegel's 
model of "exact science" was Lagrange. But Jacobi refers to Copernicus, Kepler, Newton, and 
Laplace; see the 1814 Preface, Werke, 2:55-56.) 

NOTES 
321 
87. (§ 62 R) Hegel's use of immanent here differs from that later adopted by his followers. 
Since the "true Infinite" comprehends the finite within itself as a necessary moment of its 
being, almost all Hegelians came to speak of it as "immanent" in finite experience. As the 
paradigm of Lalande shows, what Hegel means here is that the Infinite cannot be 
thoughtfully discovered in the finite (as the force of gravity can, for example). The speculative 
thinker must first transcend the finite; then what is discovered in the "overgrasping return" is 
the infinitude of what was previously called finite. Thus, it would be more natural for Hegel 
himself to express his speculative view by speaking of the "immanence of the finite in the 
Infinite" (rather than vice versa). 
88. (§ 62 R) Hegel got this story from Jacobi (Werke, 2:55); or possibly straight from Fries 
(Populare Vorlesungen, 1813) who was Jambi's source. Wallace comments: "What Lalande has 
actually written in the preface to his work on astronomy is that the science as he understands 
it has no relation to natural theology-in other words, that he is not writing a Bridgewater 
treatise." But it seems probable that the remark was made in lectures, and spread by word of 
mouth. 
89. (§ 63) That "Reason is what humanity consists in," Jacobi repeats continually. Wallace 
quotes aptly from Werke, 2:343: "Reason is the true and proper life of our nature." That our 
reason is a Wissen von Gott is more than Jacobi usually allows. Our awareness of God is not 
"knowledge" for him but only a "presage" (Ahndung). But there is not much doubt that Hegel 
still has the 1814 Preface to David Hume in mind. See especially Werke, 2:7-11, 55-68. Hegel 
himself agreed with Jacobi's emphatic contrast between immediate Wissen and actual 
Wissenschaft. He diff,;:red from Jacobi in holding that Wissenschaft is possible. 
90. (§ 63 R) This famous claim (which brought many polemical attacks upon Jacobi) was made 
in the Letters on Spinoza (1785): "Through faith we know that we have a body, and that other 
bodies, and other thinking beings are present outside us" (Werke, 4:1, 211). 
91 . (§ 63 R) Here Hegel reduces Jacobi's "Faith" to the "Truth of Enlightenment." Compare 
Phenomenology (Miller, §§ 574-81). Uacobi comments on the relation of his philosophical faith 
to Christian faith, both in the Spinoza book, and in David Hume. See Werke, 4:212-13 and 
2:144.) 
92. (§ 64 R) H. G. Hotho, De Philosophia Cartesiana (Berlin, 1826). From Hegel's discussion of 
the Cogito here, it is evident that the rationalism of Descartes is not comprehended under the 
"Metaphysics" of the first Stellung. The great rationalists are all part of the tradition of 
speculative philosophy proper. 
93. (§ 64 R) An examination of passages cited from Hotho's dissertation, De Philosophia 
Cartesiana, shows that their relevance is as follows: 
"Replies to the Second Objections:" The fuller context of Hegel's direct quotation is: 
But when we are aware that we are thinking things, this is a certain primary concept, 
that is not concluded from any syllogism; and when someone says "[ am thinking, 
therefore I am, or I exist," he does not deduce existence from thought by means of a 
syllogism, but recognises it as something self-evident by a simple intuition of the 
mind. This is clear from the fact that if he were deducing it by means of a syllogism, 
he would have to have had previous knowledge of the major premise, "Everything 
that thinks is, or exists"; yet in fact he learns it from experiencing in his own case 
that it is impossible that he should think without existing. It is in the nature of our 
mind to construct general propositions on the basis of our knowledge of particular 
ones. (Descartes, Philosophical Writings, trans. J. Cottingham, 3:100. Hegel's own 
quotation is italicised.) 

322 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
The Discourse on Method, pt. 4, contains Descartes' argument for the certain existence of the 
self and of God in its briefest (and perhaps its most perspicuous) compass. But Descartes 
does not talk about the argument, or allude to its nonsyllogistic character (see the translation 
by D. A. Cress, 16-1S). A possible reason for Hegel's reference to it here is suggested in note 
94. 
"Ep. I. 11S" refers to Clerselier's edition of the Lettres de M. Descartes in three volumes 
(Paris, 1657). See Letter 440 in Oeuvres, eds. Adam and Tannery, 4:442ff. The most pertinent 
passage (trans. A. Kenny in Philosophical Letters of Descartes, 197) is: 
I will also add that one should not require the first principle to be such that all other 
propositions can be reduced to it and proved by it. It is enough if it is useful for the 
discovery of many, and if there is no other proposition on which it depends, and 
none which is easier to discover. It may be that there is no principle at all to which 
alone all things can be reduced They do indeed reduce other propositions to the 
principle that the same thing cannot both be and not be at the same time, but their 
procedure is superfluous and useless. On the other hand it is very useful indeed to 
convince oneself first of the existence of God, and then of the existence of all 
creatures, through the consideration of one's own existence (to Clerselier, June 
1646). 
94. (§ 64 R) This is where the reference to Discourse on Method, pt. 4, is probably relevant. 
Compare this sentence of Descartes: "And noticing that this truth-I think therefore I am-was 
so certain that the most extravagant suppositions of the sceptics were unable to shake it, I 
judged that I could accept it without scruple as the first principle of the philosophy I was 
seeking" (eds. Adam and Tannery, 6:32; Cress, 19). 
95. (§ 67) In his own Lectures on the History of Philosophy Hegel refers to Phaedrus 246-51 for 
this (Haldane and Simson, 2:36-41). See note 97 for some other relevant references. 
96. (I 67 R) See Jacobi, Werke, 3:210 ("On a saying of Lichtenberg's"). 
97. (I 67 A) Plato's doctrine of "Reminiscence" is typically presented in the dialogues through 
the myth of the soul's existence in the realm of the Ideas before birth (see, for instance, Meno 
SI, Phaedo 75). The Cambridge Platonists formulated Plato's theory as the view that certain 
fundamental concepts are "innate" in the mind; and in this form the theory was pilloried by 
Locke (in the first book of his Essay). But by the time the Essay was published the theory was 
universally familiar in the shape that it assumes in the work of Descartes. It is the Cartesian 
version that is defended by Leibniz (against Locke) in the Nouveaux Essais. The "Scottish 
philosophers" whom Hegel refers to here are Thomas Reid, James Oswald, and James Beattie. 
Reid developed a "common-sensical" version of the theory of "innate ideas." Hegel's knowl­
edge of the Scottish School may derive partially from translations, although in his Lectures he 
relies upon compendia of the history of philosophy (see Haldane and Simson, 3:375-7S; and 
Vorlesungen, 9:144-46). 
9S. (I 71 R) The most obvious texts here are De Natura Deorum 1.43; 2.12. But the principle of 
consensus is of more general application, and older. Cicero gives Epicurean doctrine in Book 1: 
"For what nation or what tribe of men is there that does not have some preconception of the 
Gods without any teaching? This Epicurus calls prolepsis, that is information of a sort precon­
ceived in the mind" (De Natura Deorum 1.43); and Stoic doctrine in bk. 2: "By everyone of 
every nation the main issue is agreed; for in all it is innate, and as it were engraved in the 
mind that there are Gods." But Cicero's speakers were only "rationalising" Aristotle's "What 
seems so to everyone, that we say is" (Ethics, 5.1173al). 
99. (§ 71 note" ) The only poets who maintained monotheism were Xenophanes and Par­
menides. No one treated them as "atheists"-though Xenophanes was certainly a severe critic 

NOTES 
323 
of the "Gods of the City." Clearly it is the philosophers who are in Hegel's mind (and the 
poets only come in because it was Aristophanes who portrayed Socrates proclaiming that the 
"Clouds" had taken the place of Zeus). Both Protagoras (who was an agnostic) and Anaxagoras 
(who was a monotheist) were accused of "impiety" before Socrates was brought to trial. (This 
"Greek" argument seems to be Hegel's own. The preceding discussion of idolaters-and the 
argument of § 72-may well owe something to Hume's Natural History of Religion.) 
100. (§ 71 note*) Sir John Ross, A Voyage of Discovery Etc. (London, 1819). Hegel excerpted 
128-29; see Berliner Schriften, ed. Hoffmeister, 710; or G. w. ,  19:511, note to 86, 30-32. Sir W. E. 
Parry, Journal of a Voyage (London, 1821). It cannot be proved decisively that Hegel read Parry. 
He was a lieutenant on the Ross expedition, and Hegel may have known of him through that. 
101. (§ 71 note* ) See Histories 2:33. Hegel found the English report of Roman atheism in the 
Morning Chronicle, 16 March 1825. See Petry in Hegel-Studien 11 (1976):32-33 (or Berliner 
Schriften, 731; or G. w., 19:512 [note to 86, 33-35]). But the "bigots" Hegel seems to have 
added by himself. 
102. (§ 76 R) In the latest translation the section reads as follows: 
9. What is meant by "thought" 
By the term "thought", I understand everything which we are aware of as happen­
ing within us, insofar as we have awareness of it. Hence, thinking is to be identified 
here not merely with understanding, willing, and imagining, but also with sensory 
awareness. For if I say, "I am seeing, or I am walking, therefore I exist," and take 
this as applying to vision or walking as bodily activities, then the conclusion is not 
absolutely certain. This is because, as often happens during sleep, it is possible for 
me to think I am seeing or walking, though my eyes are closed and I am not 
moving about; such thoughts might even be possible if I had no body at all. But if I 
take "seeing" or "walking" to apply to the actual sense or awareness of seeing or 
walking, then the conclusion is quite certain, since it relates to the mind, which 
alone has the sensation or thought that it is seeing or walking (Descartes, Philosoph­
ical Writings, 1:195). 
103. (§ 76 R note* ) Hegel refers here to Principia 1:17. (Our translations are from Descartes, 
Philosophical Writings, vol. 1.) 
104. (§ 76 R note* ) Proposition 11 of pt. 1 of the Ethics reads: "God, or the substances abiding 
in infinite attributes, of which each one expresses eternal and infinite essence, necessarily 
exists." 
105. (§ 77 note* ) The reference is to the first sentence of the first speech by the interlocutor 
(Boso) in Cur Deus Homo 1:1. 
106. (§ 78 note a) Here "prejudices" is too pejorative. See also note 78 to § 60. 
107. (§ 80 A) In the poem Natur und Kunst: "Wer Grosses will, muB sich zusammenraffen;/ In 
der Beschrankung zeigt sich erst der Meister,l Und das Gesetz nur kann uns Freiheit geben" 
(Werke, Berlin edition, Aufbau Verlag, 1973, 2:121). (The same moral is preached often in 
Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship.) 
108. (§ 80 A) This contrasts sharply with Hegel's usual characterisation of the Understanding 
as the death-dealing power-for which the locus classicus is probably the Preface to the 
Phenomenology (Miller, § 32). Hegel's dialectical conception of the understanding, as itself a 
unity of opposite values, of fixation and separation, is not generally understood. Often, 
indeed, it is not even remembered. But its importance for Hegel is shown by the way he recurs 
to this positive evaluation of Understanding in his commentary on § 81. 

324 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
109. (§ 81 R) At this point it is worth recalling the sentence that Wallace cited from Fichte: 
"Yet it is not we who analyse: But knowledge analyses itself, and can do so, because in all its 
being it is a for-self' ("Darstellung der Wissenschaftslehre;' 1801, first printed 1845, Werke, 
2:37). 
110. (t 81 AI) Hegel is probably relying on Diogenes Laertius, 3:56, here. But he knew, and 
himself relied upon, the other tradition according to which Aristotle called Zeno the inventor 
of dialectic (Diogenes Laertius, 9:25). (Compare the remarks about the Parmenides below.) 
111. (§ 81 AI) Hegel's memory slipped here (and his first editors failed to correct the error). It 
is of course the slave-boy in the Meno who is brought to this admission. 
112. (t 81 AI) Compare Hegel's comments in the "Scepticism Essay" (1801, Di Giovanni and 
Harris, 323-24, 328-29) and in the History of Philosophy (Haldane and Simson, 1:261-62, 264). 
113. (t 81 A2) Hegel's contrast between the "ancient" and the "modem" scepticism goes back 
to the "Scepticism Essay" of 1801, which can be read in Di Giovanni and Harris, 313-62, with 
the essays of Harris (on the ancient) and Di Giovanni (on the modem scepticism). It will be 
seen that Hegel here gives a somewhat higher evaluation of Sextus and Cicero (who are the 
sources of "ancient scepticism" for his students) than he gave them (in comparison with their 
"sources") in the essay itself. (For a very good account of Hegel's interpretation and use of the 
whole sceptical tradition see M. N. Forster, Hegel and Scepticism.) 
The Doctrine of Being (§§ 84-111) 
1. (§ 84 note a) See note 38 to the Glossary and note 16 to the Introduction. 
2. (§ 85 note b) See the Introduction, pp. xxiii-xxiv. 
3. (§ 85) Wallace gives an outline history of the term (Logic, 3d ed., 318). Hegel adopted it in 
concert with Schelling, but his logical usage is fixed by Spinoza who defines God as ens 
absolute infinitum. The "Absolute" is that which is not bounded by (not related to or dependent 
upon) anything else. What is distinctive about Hegel's usage is that, in order to be without any 
extemally bounding "relations," that which is "absolute" must logically contain (or "compre­
hend") all finite relations and necessities. It cannot simply be "other" than they are-for that 
itself would be a "relation" to them. 
4. (§ 86 R) Letters on Spinoza (2d ed., 61; repeated in Beylage, 7:398; Werke, 4:1, 87, and 4:2, 
127). "I = I" is Fichte's first principle; and the "Absolute Indifference or Identity" is the 
principle of Schelling's school; the intuition of what is "absolutely certain" is the beginning of 
the Cartesian philosophy. Hegel's "beginning" takes us back to Parmenides of Elea; but as he 
emphasises at once it is directly confirmed by the School-Metaphysics (the "first Stellung") 
which is all that remains of Christian Scholasticism. Wallace refers us to a manual of 
Baumgarten's Metaphysics here; but Hegel probably expected his students to think of Kant's 
great assault on Mendelssohn's version of the Ontological Argument (Transcendental Dialectic, 
bk. 2, chap. 3, sec. 2--4, CPR B, 599-630). The definition of God as the Inbegriff aller Realitiiten 
comes immediately from CPR B, 605-10. (These "recollections" are obvious. But Hegel did 
expect the legal sense of Erinnerung to be remembered. Cf. Introduction, p. xxxiv.) 
5. (§ 86 A2) The closest equivalent in Parmenides' poem seems to be in fragment 6: "For 'it 
is' can be, but 'it is not' cannot." But Wallace is probably right in appealing to fragment 2 
(though he misreads it and cites only half enough). There, the Goddess tells Parmenides that 
"the only ways that exist for thinking are on one side that it is and cannot not be, which is the 

NOTES 
325 
way of persuasion that attends upon Truth; and on the other side, that it is not, and it is 
necessary that it should not be, but that I tell thee is quite without persuasion. For thou 
could'st not know that which is not nor utter it. For thinking and being are the same" (Diels 
and Kranz, Fragmente der Vorsokratiker [D. K. ], 28B, 2, 3, 6. Our reading follows that of Kirk 
and Raven-though not word for word--except in the last sentence [fragment 3] which we 
read as Hegel would have done). 
6. (§ 86 A2) This was the "starting point" of ScheUmg's Philosophy of Identity. "Ich = Ich" is 
the starting point of Fichte's idealism; and although many thinkers spoke of "beginning from 
God," the exemplar in Hegel's mind is 5pinoza. 
7. (§ 87) In the Science of Logic Hegel warns: "Nothing is usually opposed to something; but 
something is already something-that-is-determinate rein bestimmtes Seiendes] which is distinct 
from another something; therefore the nothing that is opposed to the something is also the 
nothing of something or other, a determinate nothing. Here, however, nothing is to be taken 
in its indeterminate simplicity" (Lasson, 1:67-<i8; Miller, 83). 
8. (§ 87 R) It hardly needs to be pointed out that Hegel's information about Buddhism was 
very inadequate. What is significant is that by offering it as the paradigm of the absoluteness 
of the Nothing-and ignoring the effort of Gorgias to travel the Eleatic path of "it is not" with 
which he was quite familiar-Hegel shows us that his Logic is more than a developmental 
theory of Western thought. He has told us that the moments of the Idea do appear in a 
temporal sequence in our history. But he now takes the very first available opportunity to 
break that sequence himself, though it should also be recorded that he probably did not 
regard Gorgias as a "speculative" philosopher. 
9. (§ 87 R) "Freedom" as the highest form of negativity is the very principle of self­
articulation, and as such it is absolute affirmation. 
10. (§ 88 R) WaIlace very sensibly refers us here to the comment of Aristotle: 
The first of those who studied science were misled in their search for truth and the 
nature of things by their inexperience, which as it were thrust them into another 
path. 50 they say that none of the things that are either comes to be or passes out of 
existence, because what comes to be must do so either from what is or from what is 
not, both of which are impossible. For what is cannot come to be (because it is 
already), and from what is not nothing could have come to be (because something 
must be present as a substratum). 50 too they exaggerated the consequence of this, 
and went so far as to deny even the existence of a plurality of things, maintaining 
that only Being itself is (Physics 1.8.191a26ff). 
For Hegel, the dialectic and the speculative sublation of the exclusive alternatives was the 
logical road out of this impasse. He offers us a logical theory of development. We should notice 
that this section (S)-against "pantheism"-was added only in 1830. It reflects the growing 
strength of the pious opposition to "speculative" theology; compare further the Foreword to 
the 1830 edition. 
11. (§ 88 A) It is of little interest to raise the question of the mere "being" of God, precisely 
because God is infinitely concrete. We/ches refers to Sein, but what follows explicates God's 
genuine being, not his merely abstract being. Only the question about the latter is of little 
interest. 
12. (§ 88 A) This is the most astonishing historical misstatement in Hegel's work. He repeats it 
in the History of Philosophy lectures, so it is definitely not a mistake of transcription. (For his 
account of Heracleitus see Haldane and 5imson, 1:278-98; compare Vorlesungen, 7:69-81 .) The 
fact that his first editors let it stand seems to show that they knew it to be a considered 

326 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
opinion of Hegel's, and not a simple failure of memory. For the source of the quotation was 
ready to hand. In the very first book of the Metaphysics (A.4.985b4-1O) Aristotle reports that 
the Atomists 
Leucippus and his associate Democritus say that the full and the empty are the 
elements, calling the one being and the other nonbeing-the full and solid being 
being, the empty nonbeing (whence they say being no more is than nonbeing, 
because the solid no more is than the empty); and they make these the material 
causes of things. 
Something must have convinced Hegel that he was entitled to project the saying back into 
the book of Heracleitus. He was, of course, convinced that Heracleitus thought and wrote 
after Parmenides; and the way that Plato reports the views of Heracleitus may have seemed to 
support his view that Heracleitus was the real origin of what Diels more plausibly ascribes to 
the shadowy Leucippus (D.K. , 67, A6). There was some excuse for dating Heracleitus accord­
ing to a genetic hypothesis about his thought, because all the reports of his "life" are of 
doubtful worth. But this daylight robbery perpetrated against Leucippus is a striking example 
of a wishful use of his own logic on Hegel's part. 
13. (§ 88 A) "das Werden . . .  hat . . . sich in sich weiter zu vertiefen und zu erfiillen." With 
"vertiefen" here cf. § 84. 
14. (§ 89 R) Hegel depends mainly on Aristotle's account in Physics 6.9. See further I W-A, 
18:295-319; Haldane and Simson, 1:261-78; compare Vorlesungen, 7:62ږ9. It is clear from the 
way that Hegel's account of Zeno opens there that he has the Eleatics in mind here when he 
speaks of "the Ancients." What he says here is paraphrased directly from his lecture manu­
script. It was Parmenides and Zeno who maintained "that the One is." 
15. (§ 91 A) This tag, which Hegel loves, is a misquotation. The nearest equivalent in Spinoza's 
surviving texts is in Epistle 50, "Figure is nothing else but determination, and determination 
is negation [et determinatio negatio est]." 
16. (§ 91 A note c) "dies Recht." Dies could also be read as das, which is how Bourgeois (525) 
and Verra (273) read it. 
17. (§ 92) See note 28 to the Glossary. 
18. (§ 92 A) Etwas Anderes is naturally rendered in English as "something else", rather than 
"something other". Whenever it occurs we have to remember its essential relatedness to 
"other." 
19. (§ 92 A) Hegel's students apparently copied this down as a direct quotation. Actually it is 
only a paraphrase of Timaeus 35a-b. 
20. (§ 94) This "spurious infinity" is typically found in the natural philosophy of Galileo and 
Newton (with reference to space, time, causal chains, etc. ); and the logical paradigm of it is 
the series of natural numbers. But the way it is deployed in the practical philosophy of Kant 
and Fichte is a more important ground of Hegel's antipathy. It is the "postulate of immor­
tality" required for an "infinite progress in morality" that represents for him the absolute 
triumph of the " ought." This antipathy is the reason why he virtually ignores the Critique of 
Practical Reason in his own systematic outline of Kant (§§ 5ڕ0 above). Compare the last 
sentences in his lecture commentary on this paragraph. 
21 . (§ 95) As Hegel's explanation in the following Remark shows, this is logically identical 
with the "Absolute." Compare note 3. 
22. (§ 95 R) This is because every "genuine" philosophy interprets all finite data in the context 
of a "genuinely infinite" Concept. In that sense every systematic philosophy--every philoso­
phy that operates constructively with Kant's "Ideas of Reason"-is an "Idealism" in the same 

NOTES 
327 
sense as Hegel's philosophy; and Hegel's philosophy is not "Idealism" in Berkeley's sense at 
all. As Hegel says in the Science of Logic: "The antithesis of idealistic and realistic philosophy 
is therefore without significance" (Lasson, 1:145; Miller, 155). See also Notes to the Glossary. 
23. (§ 96 A) This "interpretation" was the work of Schelling. It can be found in his earliest 
essays on the Philosophy of Nature. Wallace refers us to the Einleitung of 1799 (Werke, 3:272). 
But the doctrine can be readily found in the available translations. See for instance Ideas for a 
Philosophy of Nature (1797, 1803), trans. E. E. Harris and P. Heath, 27; or Bruno (1801), trans. 
M. Vater, 158-59. The doctrine stems from Spinoza's thesis that "the order of ideas is the same 
as the order of things." 
24. (§ 98) Hegel relies especially on Cicero. See De Divinatione 2. 17, 40, and De Natura Deorum 
1 .8. 
25. (§ 98) The reference is to the second chapter, "The Metaphysical Foundations of Dy­
namics" (Akad 4:498-517; Ellington, 40-94). What Hegel means by "muddy confusion" here is 
explained fully in the Science of Logic (1812), G. W ,  11:102-107. For the second edition of 1830 
see Lasson, 1:170-76; Miller, 178-84. 
26. (§ 98 AI) In the famous General Scholium at the end of Principia, Newton himself held to 
a "corpuscularian" theory of matter. "Corpuscles" differed from "atoms" in that they could be 
divided. This is the logically degenerate form of "atomism" which Hegel discusses in the 
Remark to § 98. 
27. (§ 98 AI) A. G. Kiistner (1719-1800) was a professor of mathematics and physics at 
G6ttingen (and a literary essayist of considerable repute). His "warning" is probably to be 
found somewhere in Angfangsgriinde der hiiheren Mechanik. 
28. (§ 102 R) As a moment of number, Anzahl is "annumeration"; but as a number that is one 
of the factors of multiplication (or of squaring), it is "the annumerator". 
29. (§ 103 A) This was the name that Schelling gave to his speculative idealism in 1801 (see 
especially Bruno). Hegel here acknowledges implicitly that his mature idealism is still a 
"philosophy of Identity." But he distingUishes the speculative "identity" of Nature and Spirit 
(or the Real and the Ideal) from the formal logical "law of identity." The philosophical 
champions of this formal "identity" were Reinhold and Bardili. 
30. (§ 104 R) Actually the reporter is Simplicius in his commentary on the Physics; see D. K., 
29, B1 . 
31 . (§ 104 A2) For Spinoza's distinction between the infinite of Reason and that of imagination 
see especially Ethics, 1, prop. 8, scholium; Ethics, 2, prop. 44; and Epistle 12 ( =  29 in the 
Paulus edition that Hegel himself used). For Hegel's own understanding of Spinoza on this 
pOint, see Faith and Knowledge (Cerf and Harris, 105-13) .  
32. (§ 104 A2) From the poem "Uber die Ewigkeit" published as "incomplete" i n  Versuch 
schweizerischer Gedichte, Bern, 1732. Hegel cites it in exactly the same form in the Science of 
Logic (Lasson, 1:227; Miller, 230); so perhaps Wallace's conjecture that the missing fourth 
line-with other variants-was added later (and published in the second edition, 1777) is 
correct. But one suspects that Hegel learned the poem as a boy, and never looked at the book 
after that. (Kant's reference to the poem as "eery" is in CPR B, 641 .) 
33. (§ 104 A3) Hegel depends upon Aristotle, Metaphysics A.5.985b23ff. The "story everyone 
knows" about the musical intervals is in Iamblichus, Life of Pythagoras, §§ 115ff. It is told in 
detail in T W-A., 18:258-59; Haldane and Simson, 1:226-28. Hegel's treatment of the 
Pythagorean School in his lectures is exceptionally copious. 
34. (§ 106 A) Qualitii/ here must be Quanti/iit. 
35. (§ 107 A) Protagoras said, "Of all things Man is the Measure." Plato (in Laws 4:716c) 
expressly contradicted him, by asserting that "God, not Man, is the Measure." When Hegel 

328 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
speaks of Nemesis as Measure he may have something from Pindar or the tragedians in mind. 
But we should remember the "broad oath" in Empedocles, and the Furies as "ministers of 
Justice" in Heracleitus, who will not suffer the Sun to "overstep his measures." Cosmic 
"justice" is first explicit in Anaximander. (See D.K., 31, B30; Aristotle, Metaphysics 
B.4.1000b12, 22B94, and 12B1 .) 
36. (§ 107 A) Wallace suggested Psalms 74 and 104; also Proverbs 8 and Job 38. The famous 
text, "Thou orderest all things in weight, number, and measure," is in the Apocrypha (Wis. 
11:21). 
37. (§ 108 A) The logical examples of the Sorites Paradox come from Diogenes Laertius, 
Cicero, and Horace. In the ancient tradition, the bald-tailed horse was a bald-headed man. 
According to Diogenes Laertius (2:108) it was Eubulides of Megara who first drew attention to 
the logical difficulty of deciding when someone is bald if one removes the hairs one by one. 
Horace turned the example from a man's head to a horse's tail in the first Epistle of his second 
book (line 65ff). The Greek sorites means a "heap"; and Cicero gives the original heap of wheat 
example in his Academica 2:92. I have not found the peasant with his overloaded donkey but it 
is proverbial, not original with Hegel-d. "it's the last straw that breaks the camel's back." 
(The Sorites Paradox should be distinguished from the Sorites Argument, where many syllog­
isms are heaped together into a single chain of premises with a final conclusion that connects 
the first and last terms.) 
38. (§ 109 A) Hegel's use of this image is not confined to natural philosophy. He used it first 
for the historical evolution of "Religion" in the Phenomenology (see Miller, § 681). Thus, the 
progressive self-determination of the Absolute Spirit in its history falls within the category of 
Measure. 
The Doctrine of Essence (§§ 112-159) 
1. (I 112 note a) See Introduction, pp. xxv-xxvi. 
2. (§ 112 R) See note 44 to § 44 R. 
3. (§ 112 A) See Introduction, pp. xviii-xix. 
4. (§ 112 A) We should notice that Hegel mentioned the French "Supreme Being" in the 
same breath between two references to the German "Supreme Essence." That the "etre 
supreme" is an "essence"-and a supremely empty one, not a concrete "being" at all-he 
showed in the Phenomenology (see Miller, §§ 557, 574-78, 586). 
5. On Grund as "ground" and "reason", see note 9 below. The French expression "raison 
d'etre" comes closest to what Hegel means by Grund. 
6. (§ 115 R) Abstraction is the method by which the understanding makes every content 
"absolute." For the speculative identity of the Absolute see the note to § 103 A above. The 
"contradiction" implicit in the form of any synthetic proposition is the foundation of the 
"speculative" proposition. Compare §§ ڗ2 (and Phenomenology, Miller, §§ 5ژ3). 
7. (§ 117 R) This is the so-called "Identity of Indiscernibles"; see the Monadology, § 9: "There 
is never in nature two beings [Le., "essences" in Hegel's sense] that are perfectly like one 
another, and where it is impossible to find an internal difference, i.e., one based on an 
intrinsic character." (The story in Hegel's lecture commentary, of the courtiers searching for 
two identical leaves, can be found in Leibniz, Nouveaux Essais, bk. 2, chap. 27, § 3.) 

NOTES 
329 
8. (§ 119 R) Note that every general concept is "contradictory" because it is both "A and not­
N' and neither "A or not-A." Anyone who says this in ordinary discourse is either stupid or a 
Sophist; but it is the key to the logical dialectic. The "polarity" of "forces" is how "real 
contradiction" appears in the real world. Fichte pioneered this conception of "contradiction" 
in logic, and Schelling in the philosophy of nature. 
9. (§ 121 R) See Leibniz, "Principles of Nature and Grace," § 7-8; Monadology, § 32. This is 
ordinarily called the "principle of sufficient reason" in English; but fidelity to Hegel's cate­
goreal structure obliges us to use the word "ground" here. "Reason" in Hegel is one name for 
the absolutely comprehensive category of the Logic (cf. § 82). As Hegel says in his commen­
tary only "the Concept" can be "the sufficient ground." Leibniz formulated and used the 
principle in this sense (see especially Monadology, §§ 32-38). The "principle of ground" is the 
logical demand for a final (rather than an efficient) cause. Hegel uses its logical character to 
bend the religious quest back upon itself. Logical cognition can only comprehend itself as its 
own end. 
10. (§ 121 A) The Sophists used the "principle of ground" dialectically, i.e., sceptically. It was 
Protagoras who formulated the principle that opposite but equal "grounds" could always be 
given. Socrates, in his reaction to the theory of Anaxagoras (Phaedo 97c), formulated the 
Leibnizian (or speculative) principle. No reason was sufficient, he argued, except a proof that 
the existing order was "for the best." (Hegel's own account of the "battle" is in Haldane and 
Simson, 1:384-89; cf. also 398-99.) 
11. (§ 124 R) The thinkable but unknowable, and hence completely problematic, ground of 
"appearance" in Kant's critical theory (see § 44 and the note to it). In Hegel's theory of 
experience the Ding an sich is replaced by the self-knowing Sache selbst (see Introduction, p. 
xxv). In Hegel's use (following but dialectically controverting Kant) the simple Ding is the 
essence that is "truly taken" in perception (Wahr-nehmung). Compare Phenomenology, chap. 2. 
12. (§ 126 R) Hegel uses the (now defunct) scientific theory of "matters" as a conceptual 
bridge between "perception" and "understanding." As he rightly says, no one regarded the 
"matters" as proper "things." In his own view (as in ours) magnetism, electricity, etc. were 
"forces." But the theoretical mistake was logically necessary for the development of the 
Concept, because in a "thing-world" the transient and variable "properties" of the real things 
have to be conceived as having a "real" foundation. (See further Phenomenology, chap. 2; 
Science of Logic, Miller, 491-98; Philosophy of Nature, § 334.) 
13. (§ 130 note a) See the Introduction, pp. xxv-xxvi. 
14. (§ 130 R) The theory of "pores" comes from Empedocles (see D.K. , 31, A86). But among 
the scientific thinkers of his time Hegel found it specifically in John Dalton (compare Phe­
nomenology, Miller, § 136, and the note in G. Wo, 9:495-96; also Science of Logic, Miller, 496-98). 
15. (§ 131 A) This was published in 1801. Hegel's comments show how far he was from being 
a "subjective idealist," i.e., an "idealist" in the traditional sense of the term; compare the note 
to § 95 R above. 
16. (§ 136 R) Gott. Einige Gespriiche was first published in 1787. Hegel wrote a review of the 
second edition (1800); but it was never published, and is now lost. There is an English 
translation by F. H. Burkhardt (lndianapolis, LLA, 1940). For the place of Herder's polemic in 
the Spinoza controversy see Beiser, The Fate of Reason, chap. 5. 
17. (§ 136 A2) Newton himself was, of course, a devout believer in the revealed truth of the 
Scriptures. But the image of him as the father of Deism was set already by Leibniz. (For 
Hegel's critique of Deism compare § 73-74.) 
18. (§ 140 note*) Goethe's response appeared first in his Zur Morphologie (1820); see now 
Werke, 1:555-56. The poem of von Hailer on "The Falsity of Human Virtues" appeared in his 
Gedichte (Bern, 1732); it can be found now in the Critical Edition (Frauenfeld. 1882), 61H. 

330 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Hegel changes the weisl ("shows") of both poets into his Swabian weissl (3d sing. present 
indicative of wissen). Otherwise, what he quotes here is Goethe's version. 
19. (§ 140 A) See, for instance, Phaedrus 247a, Timaeus 2ge, Metaphysics A.2.983a4. Compare 
also Haldane and Simson, 2:134-36. 
20. (§ 140 A) Maxime und Reflexionen (from "Ottilie's Diary" in the Wahlverwandschaften, 
1809), Werke, 18:479. 
21. (§ 140 A) History written in order to teach lessons of morality and prudence. The concept 
originates in Polybius, History 9.2.5 and is characterised by Hegel in his Introduction to the 
Philosophy of History (Rauch, 7-9). 
22. (§ 140) See "Minority Comments," above, as weIl as note 22 to the Glossary. Formell, 
together with "subjective", distinguishes the interests that are here referred to from the true 
import of the will and deeds of world-historical individuals. See Hegel's Lectures on the 
Philosophy of History (T.W-A., 12:46-48; Rauch, 32-35). (See also what Hegel says about the 
modern idea of "virtue" in the Phenomenology of Spirit, especiaIly Miller, 234 [ =  Suhrkamp 
Werke, 3:290].) In the present context formell could be rendered with "hoIlow". 
23. (§ 142 A) For Hegel's view of "Aristotle's polemic against Plato" in greater detail, see 
Haldane and Simson, 2:139-41 .  
24. ( §  143 R) ePR B, 266 (compare Hegel, Difference, Harris and Cerf, 80). 
25. (§ 145 A) Hegel is often accused of doing this, both in the field of natural science and in 
that of history. But whatever mistakes he may make, it is a mistake of his interpreters to 
suppose that this is the basis of them. Far from being a rational determinist of some kind, he 
is logically concerned to demonstrate that contingency is necessary (both in the order of 
nature, and in the realm of spirit) and that freedom is fundamental to the existence of 
scientific cognition. About "chance" in Nature he is Aristotelian (rather than Kantian); and he 
himself says here that the view of history which is often ascribed to him is "an empty word­
game and a strained sort of pedantry." None of those who suppose themselves to be his 
critics have ever put it more dearly. 
26. (§ 147 note b) See the Introduction, p. xxv, and note 15 to the Glossary. 
27. (§ 147 A) This thumbnail account of "Providence" as the rational pattern of history is 
explained more fully in the Introduction to the Philosophy of History (Rauch, 12-18). Compare 
(and contrast) Schelling's System of Transcendental Idealism (Werke, 3:602--{j04; Heath, 210-12). 
"Providence" is not discussed often in the Philosophy of Religion lectures, and Hodgson has 
not indexed it. The references are: 1:249 (1820); 334 (1824); 402n (1827?); 2:163n, 182--85 (1820); 
198, 213, 486 (1824); 561n, 667--{j8 (1827); 3:75, 378 (1820). 
28. (§ 147 A) For pagan "necessity" and "Fate" see especially Hodgson, 2:126-27, 141-52 
(1821); 395-404, 469-70, 480--82, 499-500 (1824); 651-52, 665-{j7 (1827); 756-57 (1831). For 
Christian self-knowledge of Spirit, see Hodgson, 3:64-{i5, 132--{j2 (1820); 237-47 (1824); 266-
71, 334-47 (1827); 371-74 (1831). But see also Phenomenology, chap. 7. 
29. (§ 149) Hegel's use of the Singular verb wird has the effect of identifying the "ground" with 
the "contingent condition." The coincidence of the two is what comes about in their "imme­
diacy." But it is not dear whether that is all that Hegel means. 
30. (§ 151 A) God as Ding is what we have in Deism; God as Sache is what we have in 
Spinoza's Ethics; God as "principle of personal individuation" is what we reach in the Mon­
adology. These examples will help the comprehension of the conceptual progression (and vice 
versa). The "Oriental intuition" of God is the Mosaic Lawgiver. This is the Sache selbst, not a 
person. Only a subject for whom a community of other subjects is logically necessary is a 
"person." Thus, from the point of view of someone for whom God is a "person" Spinoza is 
an "atheist"; otherwise not. But we ought to say of him whatever we say of Moseǟxcept 

NOTES 
331 
that because Moses is not a philosopher this logical requirement is not clear to him (or to 
those who read about him). 
About "pantheism" (and hence about Spinoza's "acosmism") Hegel's position is (arguably) 
affected by the need for a definition that cannot be applied to his own (and Schelling's) 
idealism. For Hegel's view of Spinoza see further the Science of Logic (Lasson, 2:164-67; Miller, 
536--40); and the History of Philosophy (T.W-A., 20:161-97 with Vorlesungen, 9:103-13; Haldane 
and Simson, 3:256-90). See also the Philosophy of Religion; for the relevant discussions refer to 
"Pantheism" in the Index as well as "Spinoza". 
31. (§ 153 R) Werke, 4:2, 144-46. See further Faith and Knowledge, Cerf and Harris, 97-116, and 
Haldane and Simson, 3:411-16). Wallace's explanatory note, 3d ed., 329, is also helpful. 
32. (§ 158 A) See Ethics 5, props. 27, 32, 36, etc. This love, which is a direct participation in 
God's life and love, comes to us when we achieve "intuitive science." 
The Doctrine of the Concept (§§ 160-244) 
1. (§ 160) indem. The original 1830 edition reads "in dem" which is grammatically imposs­
ible. Nicolin and Poggeler suggest "Totalitat, in der . . . " This would have to be translated 
"and [the Concept] is a totality, in which each of the moments is the whole that it [the Concept] 
is". The 1827 edition reads, " . . .  and as the totality of this negativity, in which each of the 
moments is the whole that it is, and is posited as inseparable unity with it, it [the Concept] is 
in its identity with itself what is in and for itself determinate." 
2. (I 160 A) "der Begriff als so1cher laBt sich nicht mit den Handen greifen." Hegel is 
probably playing here on the verbal connection between "Begriff" and "greifen". 
3. (§ 161 A) Bonnet's theory of Emboftement was inspired by Leibniz (who was himself 
reviving the Stoic and Mediaeval theory of the "seminal reasons"). Bonnet himself rejected 
the box analogy, claiming that each germ contained the next, in the way the plant contains the 
seed. Logically, the point is that no free development is possible. Hegel himself does not 
believe that there is real "evolution" in nature. But his dialectical theory of conceptual develop­
ment provides a logical theory that is properly prepared for the possibility of natural evolu­
tion. Kant's Cl, § 80 compares the rival theories of "epigenesis" and "preformation" in their 
logical aspects. Wallace provides illuminating quotations from the "Chinese box" tradition (3d 
ed, 329-30). 
4. (§162 R) Hegel's letter to Niethammer (Letter 122, 20 May 1808, Hoffmeister, 1:229; Butler 
and Seiler, 175) tells us who some of the "ordinary logicians" were who fattened up their 
discussions in this way-Steinbart, Kiesewetter, and Mehmel. 
5. (1 163 AI) Clearly Hegel is restating Aristotle's theory of "natural slavery" in the language 
of post-Kantian idealism (cf. Politics 1:3-7.1253bl-1255b30). Aristotle was not consistent about 
the slave's "selfhood." For he said that, although the free man could not be friends with a 
slave "as a slave," there could be friendship with him "as a man" (Ethics 8.11.1161b5-8; cf. 
Politics 1 .1255b12-15). But probably this distinction only acknowledges the empirical fact that 
many men of slave status were not "natural slaves." 
6. (§ 163 AI) See the Social Contract, bk. 2, chap. 3. 
7. (§ 165 R) clear, distinct [deutliche], and adequate. The classification comes from Descartes 
(Meditation III) and Leibniz. But when he calls it "ordinary" Hegel is referring us to the logic 
books of the school of Wolff. Thus Wallace's reference to Baumeister's Institutes of Rational 

332 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Philosophy was very apt (3d ed., 300-301). But no one reads Baumeister now, while all readers 
of Hegel's logic ought to be readers of Leibniz. See therefore "Meditations on Knowledge, 
Truth and Ideas" (Philosophical Papers, ed. L. E. Loemker, 1:448-50). (It is fairly clear that 
Hegel himself did not have Baumeister's slightly more complex classification in mind. G. w. ,  
19:515, note to 139, 18--19, supplies the appropriate reference for Kiesewetter's Logic.) 
8. (§ 165 R) For some "ordinary logic books" in which these distinctions were made, see 
G. w., 19:515-16, note to 139, 27-31. 
9. (§ 166 A) In the early history of embryology the blood spot in a fertile egg was identified 
as the "salient point" from which the development of the living organism begins. See, for 
instance, Aristotle, History of Animals 6.3. 
10. (§ 169 R) Compare here the Phenomenology Preface, Miller, § 62. 
11. (§ 171 A) See CPR B, 95. 
12. (§ 172 R) It is important to realise that Hegel's Logic is concerned with "relations of ideas," 
not with "matters of fact." Compare Phenomenology Preface, Miller, § 39-42. 
13. (§ 174 A) Reading "der Begriff desselben" instead of "derselben". 
14. (§ 175 A) "im singuliiren Urteil" . See the Introduction, pp. xix-xx. 
15. (§ 175 A) Hegel's Logic is concerned with the universal truths of scientific observation and 
natural law. But this example from his study of Blumenbach (see Science of Logic, Lasson, 
2:455; Miller, 798) shows vividly that philosophical "truth" is a value concept. If dolphins 
could talk we should have to revise our human concepts radically. 
16. (§ 177 A) To understand the disjunctive "necessity" here we must read this assertion as, 
"A primary colour, for painting, is either red, yellow, or blue." (But the triadic division of 
poetry is directly based on the moments of the concept, so it is altogether more interesting to 
reflect upon.) 
17. (§ 182 R) The "current meaning" of the distinction between "syllogism of understanding" 
and "syllogism of reason" is probably that given by Kant in CPR B, 359 ff. 
18. (§ 182 A) See further the Philosophy of Religion, Hodgson, 1:126-27. Pre-Kantian "Deism" 
seems never to be discussed in the Lectures; for the "Trinity" see Hodgsorrs index. 
19. (§ 187 R) The figures (schemata) of the syllogism arise from the order of the terms in the 
two premises and the conclusion. Using S, M, and P for the three terms in any valid syllog­
ism, valid arguments can be constructed (so Aristotle said in Prior Analytics 1.4.26a21) in 
three schematic patterns: 
first figure: S-M, M-P :. S-P 
second figure: M-S, M-P :. S-P 
third figure: S-M, P-M :. S-P 
But it is clear that Aristotle realized that valid syllogisms were possible in a fourth figure: 
P-M, M-S :. S-P. All valid arguments in this figure can be presented in the first figure quite 
easily. Theophrastus (who is supposed to have shown this) was presumably only teaching 
Aristotle'S own doctrine. 
The definite acknowledgement of a "fourth figure" was credited to Galen through a misun­
derstanding caused innocently by a late scholiast (see I. M. Bochenski, A History of Formal 
Logic, sec. 24.30 to sec. 24.34). Zabarella published the error in the West; see W. and M. 
Kneale, Development of Logic, 183. 
Aristotle did not recognise four figures, because his theory is not based on the formal 
placement of the terms 5 and P in the conclusion. He defines S and P "according to their 
extension, and so not a formal definition but one dependent on their meaning" (Bochenski, A 

NOTES 
333 
History of Formal Logic, 13.21). The same is true, certainly, of Hegel's "speculative syllogistic " 
So, however he himself understood Aristotle's theory, he was certainly within his rights in 
rejecting the "fourth figure." (The fourth figure was admitted on formal grounds by a 
thirteenth-century Jewish logician-whose work never reached the Latin world. Leibniz was 
apparently the first Western logician to formalize the syllogism completely in the modern 
way. See Bochenski, 32. 18-32.32 and 36. 11.) 
20. (§ 187 R) Compare further Haldane and Simson, 2:196-201. 
21. (§ 190 A) We see here that "Observational Reason" (Phenomenology, chap. SA) is "in­
stinctive" for a logical reason. The scientific observer must move from a finite set of observed 
cases to the "intuition" of the essence. Hegel's conception of scientific method is itself still 
only "instinctive." But we can see, at least, that what makes an observational leap "reason­
able" is the fact that it fits into the "concept" of a whole. 
22. (§ 190 A) It is principally followers and allies of Schelling who have brought the philoso­
phy of nature into discredit. The inspiration of Hegel's own philosophy of nature comes from 
Schelling's work. So, although Schelling was sometimes guilty of analogical reasoning, that is 
not all there is in his theory. We should notice that Hegel does not want his own philosophy 
of nature to be interpreted analogically. (Compare the note to §§ 145 A above.) 
23. (§ 192 A) It is principally Kant's critical employment of this distinction in the CPR that 
makes it necessary for Hegel to attack it here. We should notice that in Hegel's Logic (as in 
Aristotle) "syllogism" is the method of science. The logic of Being and Essence is Hegel's 
"doctrine of elements"; the logic of the Concept is his "doctrine of method." The difference 
from the "traditional" usage (as defined, notably, in CPR B, 735-36) is quite striking. 
24. (§ 193 R) Pros/ogium, chap. 2. Compare Descartes, Meditation Ill; Spinoza. Ethics, 1, prop. 
11. What "happened to Anselm's argument long ago" was the response by Gaunilo, "On 
Behalf of the Foo!." which (in accordance with Anselm's own decision) is always printed with 
the Proslogium. (See further Hegel's exposition of Anselm in Haldane and Simson, 3:61-67; 
Vorlesungen, 9:33-35.) The great "attempt to look down upon the so-called ontological proof" 
was that of Kant in CPR B, 625-27. 
25. (§ 194 R) See the "Principles of Nature and of Grace" as well as the Monadology. Compare 
Haldane and Simson, 3:328-48; also Vorlesungen, 9:130-36. 
26. (§ 194 AI) No one has yet found any passage that exactly bears out what Hegel claims 
here. WaIlace points to the "First Introduction to the Wissenschaftslehre" (1797), Werke, 1:430; 
Heath and Lachs, 13. But this refers only to "fatalism," not to "superstition and fear." Stu­
dents at Berlin in the 1820s would surely think of the Atheismusstreit when Hegel praised 
Fichte in this way; and although he did not speak of "God as Object" Fichte did characterise 
the position he was opposing as one of "superstition and fear." See, for example, the Appela­
tion an das Publikum (1799), Werke, 5:209, 230. (In the main, however, Hegel is expressing what 
Fichte meant to him and other young Romantics in the Tubingen Seminary during the early 
years of the Revolution.) 
27. (§ 195 R) In the Phenomenology Hegel presents "mechanical piety" as a necessary phase in 
the evolution of our culture (Miller, § 217, 228-30), just as he claims in his lecture commentary 
below that "mechanical memory" is a necessary moment of subjective psychology (cf. En­
cyclopaedia, §§ 461-64). 
28. (§ 195 A) "der noch in sich unaufgeschlossen Materie". unaufgeschlossenen, from 
aufschliefJen, yet another play with schliefJen, on which see notes 31 and 32 below. 
29. (§ 204 R) See De Anima 2.1.412a14: "By life we mean self-nutrition, together with growth 
and decay"; 2.415b15: "The soul is the final cause of its body." But Aristotle's main discussion 
of teleology is in Physics 2.8. For Kant's theory of "internal purposiveness" see q, §§ 61-66. It 

334 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
was the foIlowers of Wolff who were the chief proponents of "finite or external 
purposiveness." (See Hegel's commentary on § 205 for examples of what is meant.) 
30. (§ 206 A) The reference is to the thesis of Thales from which the Ionian philosophy began. 
But water is also the "neutral" element in Hegel's theory of the elements (see Encyclopaedia 
§ 284; Philosophy of Nature, ed. Petry, 2:39-41; and Haldane and Simson, 1:173-82). 
31 . (§ 206 A) zusammenschliefJen. See Introduction, p. xxvii. Here, and in the foIlowing lines, 
Hegel uses various cognates of schliefJen. 
32. (§ 206 A) BeschliefJen and sich entschliefJen (v.i.) both mean "to decide", but the two 
German expressions allow Hegel to distinguish between the two aspects of decision-making. 
33. (§ 214 R) This is a deliberate echo of Kant's famous criticism of the Ontological Argument 
(CPR B, 631). See also § 51 and Remark. 
34. (§ 216 A) See Generation of Animals 1 .  19. 726b24. 
35. (§ 218 A) This triad goes back to van HaIler (and perhaps further). But it was a lecture of 
C. F. Kielmeyer in 1793 that focused the attention of the Romantic philosophers of nature 
upon it. See especially Schelling's treatise On the World-Soul, Werke, 2:503-69. In chap. 5 of the 
Phenomenology Hegel criticises the attempt to found an observational science of the living 
organism upon it. But he still employs it in his own "speculative" theory. 
36. (§ 221) On its "objective" side Cattung here means what is ordinarily (but loosely) called 
"the human species" . But spiritually (and also in the technical parlance of biological classi­
fication) "humanity" is a genus; and in Hegel's Logic it is "the Genus" . 
37. (§ 226 A) See note 8 to § 8 R. 
38. (§ 226 A) It must have been some foIlower of Locke who fathered the tabula rasa off upon 
Aristotle. (As Hegel argued in § 8 R, it is a complete misinterpretation of the primacy of 
sense-experience in Aristotle's theory of knowledge.) 
39. (§ 227) Both this and the synthetic method (§ 228-31) are explained much more fuIly in the 
Science of Logic, Miller, 786-S18. 
40. (§ 227 A) See above § 38 A; but also compare Haldane and Simson, 3:298-300. 
41. (§ 229 A) See note 36 above. 
42. (§ 229 A) The difficulty is that a properly speculative definition (e.g., the definition of 
substance as "cause of itself") is a contradiction. Schelling's most noteworthy imitation of the 
Spinozist method was the "DarsteIlung meines Systems;' Werke, 4:104-212. 
43. (§ 230 A) Hegel committed himself to this view of the classification of animals already in 
the Phenomenology (Miller, § 246). In his Berlin lectures on Philosophy of Nature he cites Cuvier 
in support of it (Encyclopaedia, § 370 A; Petry, 3:182). But his knowledge of Cuvier's work 
(1812) was necessarily later. In 1807 he was depending on Aristotle, Linnaeus, and 
Blumenbach. 
44. (§ 230 A) Cl, § 9 (note). The logical explanation for fourfold division in Nature, and triadic 
division in Spirit. seems to be a lineal descendant of the "square" of Nature and "triangle" of 
Spirit in the Disputation Theses of 1800 (Thesis Ill, Erste Druckschriften, ed. Lasson, 404; 
trans. N. Waszek in ed. D. Lamb, Hegel and Modern Philosophy, 253-55). 
45. (1 231 R) For examples, see the Science of Logic, Miller, 815-16. Hegel also says there that 
Spinoza's model of "mathematical method" was "exploded by Kant and Jacobi." 
46. (§ 231 R) See Prolegomena, §§ 4 and 7; and CPR B, 741. The "construction of concepts in 
intellectual intuition" became ScheIling's official method. The "misuse" of it is mainly to be 
attributed to his "formalist" associates and students. Compare Phenomenology, Preface, Miller, 
§§ 50-53, and note 2 to the 1817 Preface above. But we find the method itself under attack 
already at the (fragmentary) beginning of the Jena Logic; Burbidge and Di Giovanni, 5-8. 

NOTES 
335 
47. (§ 232 A) See note 38 above; and note 8 to § 8 R. 
48. (§ 234) See note 20 to § 94. 
49. (§ 234 A) For the "contradictions" in which moral reflection goes round and round 
(herumtreibt), see further the sections of the Phenomenology titled "The Moral World-view" 
and "Dissemblance," Miller, §§ 59Ҫ31 . 
50. (§ 236 A) What Aristotle actually defines as noesis noesees is God's own noesis. See Meta­
physics Lambda 9.1074b33. Hegel quotes the passage itself at the end of the Encyclopaedia. 
Hegel, on the other hand, is clearly claiming that our thinking has at this stage become 
"divine." 
51 . (§ 238) For a much more detailed account of the moments of the speculative method see 
Science of Logic, Lasson, 2:485ff; Miller, 825ff. 
52. (§ 239 note b) fur eines. See Science of Logic, Lasson, 1:149ff; Miller, 159ff. "To be for one" 
expresses the return of Dasein within the being-for-itself, or how, in its unity with the infinite, 
the finite is something-ideal (Ideel/es). It is the relationship (Verhalten) of what is ideal to itself 
as ideal. Here, in § 239, this term serves to remind us of the ideal nature of all distinct terms 
that are produced by the progression of the Concept. All of them, even the beginning itself, 
are posited and mediated and not something that simply and immediately is. See the follow­
ing addition. 

German term 
Absicht 
abgesondert 
Abhangigkeit 
Abwechslung 
Affirmation 
allgemein 
AIIgemeine (das) 
AIIgemeinheitl 
AlIgemeinheiten 
Allheit31 
an ihm selbst' 
an sich' 
an sich (selbst)' 
an und fur sich' 
andere 
Andere (das) 
Anderes (ein) 
Anderes 
Anderssein 
Anderung 
anerkennen 
Anerkenntnis 
Anerkennung 
Angabe 
angemessen 
Anlage 
anschauen 
Anschauung 
Ansich (das)' 
Ansichsein' 
Ansicht 
AnstolS 
Antithese17 
Anundfursichsein' 
Anzahl 
Arbeit 
Art 
auffassen 
Auffassen (das) 
Auffassung 
Auffassungweise 
aufheben3 
Aufheben (dasp 
Aufhebung3 
336 
GLOSSARY 
English 
translation 
intention, aim 
separate(ly) 
dependence 
alternation 
affirmation 
universal. general(ly) 
Related terms 
Ziel 
trennen 
Unselbstandigkeit 
Wechsel 
Behauptung, 
Versicherung 
the universal, what is universal 
universality 
generalities 
allness 
in itself, in its own right 
in-itself, implicitly 
in itself, on its own part 
in and for itself 
other, else 
the other 
an other 
another 
otherness 
alteration, change 
recognise 
recognition 
recognition 
specification 
adequate, appropriate 
talent, disposition, aptitude 
intuit 
intuition 
the In-itself 
being-in-itself 
view, perspective 
shock 
anti-thesis 
being-in-and-for-itself 
annumeration, annumerator 
labour 
kind, species, type 
interpret, apprehend, grasp 
interpreting, apprehending 
interpretation 
approach 
sublate 
the sublating 
sublation 
Inbegriff 
= an sich (seJbst) 
fur sich 
= an ihm selbst 
Veranderung 
erkennen 
Spezifikation 
Gesinnung, Talent 
Fursichsein 
Betrachtung 
Gegensatz 
Gattung 
fassen, erfassen 

GLOSSARY 
337 
Aufstellung 
setting-up 
aufzeigen 
exhibit, show, expound, point 
out 
Ausbreitung 
expansion 
Breite 
aulSere 
outer, outward, external 
aulSerlich 
AulSere (das) 
what is outward 
aulSereinander 
mutually external 
AulSereinander (das) 
mutual externality 
aulSerlich 
external 
aulSere 
AulSerlichkeit 
externality, outwardness 
aulSern (sich) 
manifest (oneself) outwardly 
AulSersichsein 
self-externality 
AulSerung' 
utterance, manifestation 
EntaulSerung 
Band 
bond 
Verbindung 
Bedeutung 
significance, meaning, sense 
Sinn 
bedingen 
condition 
Bedingung 
condition 
Befriedigung 
satisfaction, contentment 
Zufriedenheit 
Beglaubigung 
attestation, authentication 
Bewahrung 
begreifen5 
comprehend 
begrenzen 
limit 
beschranken 
Begriff5 
concept 
Vorstellung 
begrifflos 
conceptless, without concept, 
that lacks the concept 
Begrundung 
grounding 
Berechtigung 
behaupten 
assert, claim, maintain 
Behauptung 
assertion, claim 
Affirmation, 
Versicherung 
bei sich (sein) 
(being) at home with oneself 
Bei-sich-sein (das) 
being-with-oneself 
bekannt 
familiar, well-known 
vertraut 
Bekanntschaft 
familiarity, acquaintance 
Berechtigung 
justification, qualification 
Begrundung, 
Rechtfertigung 
Beruf 
calling, profession 
Bestimmung 
Beschaffenheit6 
constitution, 
way of being constituted, 
character 
beschranken 
restrict 
begrenzen 
Beschranktheit 
restrictedness 
Beschriinkung 
the restricting 
besondere 
particular 
Besondere (das) 
the particular 
Besonderheit 
particularity 
Besonderung 
particularisation 
Bestand 
subsistence 
bestehen 
subsist 
bestehen aus 
consist of 
bestimmen 
determine 
bestimmt 
determinate, definite, precise 
Bestimmtheit' 
determinacy 
Bestimmtsein 
determinateness, 
determination 
Bestimmung7 
determination, 
Definition, 
vocation 
Beruf, Schicksal 

338 
betatigen (sich) 
betatigend (sich) 
Betatigung 
betrachten 
Betrachtung 
bewahren (sich)" 
Bewahrung" 
beweisen 
Beweis 
Beweisen (das) 
BewuBtsein 
BewuBtwerden 
Beziehung'l 
Bezogenheit 
Bildung 
Boden 
darstellen 
Darstellung 
DaseinlO 
Daseiendes 
Definition 
Denkbestimmungll 
denkenl2 
Denken (das) 
Dialektikl3 
das Dialektische 
different 
Differenz I' 
Differentiierung 
Dingl5 
Diremption 
dirimieren 
Eigenschaft 
eigentlich 
eigentiimlich 
Eigentiimlichkeit 
ein (Allgemeines) 
EinfalIe 
eingebiIdet 
Einheit 
Einigkeit 
Einteilung 
einzelnel6 
Einzelne (das) 
Einzelnen 
Eizelnheitl6 
Einzelnheiten 
actively 
self-actuating 
activation, activity, exercise 
regard, consider 
view, examination 
validate (itself) 
validation 
prove 
proof, demonstration 
process of proof 
consciousness, mind 
become conscious/aware of 
relation, reference 
relatedness 
education, training, culture 
soil, basis, domain, field 
present, display 
presentation, account 
being-there, thereness, 
what is there, way of being 
that which is there 
definition 
thought-determination, 
determination of thought 
think 
thinking, thought 
dialectic 
the dialectical 
differentiated 
difference 
differentiation 
thing 
sundering 
sunder 
property, feature, 
attribute (of God) 
proper, in the proper sense, 
authentic(alIy) 
peculiar 
peculiarity 
something-(universal) 
inventions, brain waves 
imaginary 
unity, unit 
union, harmonious unity 
division 
Singular, single 
the singular, single instance, 
singular being 
single instances, single bits 
singularity 
single instances 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
Hand.!ung, Tatigkeit, 
Tun, Ubung, Wirken 
Ansicht 
sich erweisen 
Beweis, Beglaubigung 
Bewahrung 
Verhaltnis 
gebiIdet 
Grund, Grundlage 
Existenz 
Bestimmung 
Gedankenbestimmung, 
Kategorie 
Gedanke 
Unterschied 
Sache 
Entzweiung 
Partikularitat 
Phantasie 
[See pp. xxxviii-I. ]  
Individuum 

GLOSSARY 
339 
empfinden 
feel, sense 
Empfindung 
sensation, sense-experience, 
Gefuhl 
feeling 
End 
end 
Zweck, Ziel 
Endzweck 
final purpose 
entauBern (sich)' 
divest oneself 
EntauBerung' 
uttering, self-emptying (of 
God) 
AUBerung, Entfremdung 
entfalten (sich) 
unfold (itself) 
Entfalten (das) 
the unfolding 
Entfremdung' 
alienation 
fremd, EntauBerung 
entgegensetzen 
oppose 
entgegengesetzt 
opposite 
Entgegensetzung17 
opposition 
Gegensatz 
Entwicklung 
development 
Entzweiung 
splitting in two, schism 
Diremption 
erfassen 
apprehend, grasp, capture 
fassen, auffassen 
ergeben (sich) 
follow from/as the result of, 
emerge, surrender 
erheben (sich) 
raise, elevate (oneself) 
Erhebung 
elevation 
erinnern (sich)1" 
recollect, be mindful of, 
remember 
Erinnerung 
recollection, reminiscence 
Gedachtnis 
erkennen19 
[re ]cognise, have cognizance 
kennen, wissen 
of, 
be(come) cognizant of 
Erkennen (ein) 
a process of cognition 
Erkenntnis 
cognition 
Erorterung 
explanation, discussion 
erscheinen20 
appear 
scheinen 
Erscheinen (das) 
the appearing 
Erscheinung20 
appearance, phenomenon 
Schein, Phanomen 
erweisen (sich) 
show itself, prove itself 
sich bewahren 
Etwas15 
something 
Existenz10 
existence 
Dasein 
Explication 
explication 
Faktum21 
factum 
Tatsache 
fassen 
grasp, apprehend 
erfassen, auffassen 
Figur 
figure 
Gestalt 
Form 
form 
formal22 
formal [formal] 
formelI22 
formal(ly), in a formal way 
Formelle (das) 
the formal aspect, what is 
formal 
formlich 
formalistic 
Fortbestimmung 
process of further 
determination 
Fortgang 
advance, progression, course 
Progress, Verlauf 
Fortgehen (das) 
progression 
Fortschreiten (das) 
advancing 
Frage 
question, quest 
fremd' 
alien 
Entfremdung 
fur eines 
for one 

340 
fUr sich 
Fiirsichsein 
Gang 
Ganze (das) 
Gattung 
Gebilde 
gebildet 
Gediichtnis 
Gedanke 
Gedankenbestimmung11 
gedankenlos 
Gedankenlosigkeit 
Gefiihl 
Gegensatz 
Gegenstand23 
gegenstandlich 
Gegenteil 
Gehalt24 
Geist25 
gemiiB 
Gemeinschaftlichkeit 
gemeint33 
Gemiit26 
Gesetztsein 
Gesinnung 
Gestalt 
Gestaltung 
Getrenntsein 
Gewalt 
Glaube 
gleich 
gleichgiiltig 
Gleichgiiltige (das) 
Gleichgiil tigkeit27 
Gleichheit 
G. mit sich selbst 
Gliickseligkeit 
Grenze28 
Grund 
Grundbestimmung 
Grundlage 
Grundsatz 
Handlung 
herabsetzen 
herauskommen 
heraussetzen 
for-itself, explicit 
by itself, on its own account 
being-for-itself 
journey, path, procedure 
the whole 
genus, kind 
[symbolic] pattern 
cultivated 
memory 
thought 
determination of thought, 
thought-determination 
unthinking, thoughtless, 
mindless 
absence of thought, 
unthinking (mind) 
feeling 
antithesis 
ob-ject, subject matter, topic 
ob-jective, of ob-jects 
opposite, contrary, 
counterpart 
import, basic import 
spirit, mind 
conform, in accordance with 
communality 
meant 
mind (and heart) 
positedness 
disposition 
shape 
formation, configuration 
separateness 
power, violence 
faith, belief 
equal 
indifferent 
what is indifferent 
indifference 
equality 
self-equivalence 
happiness 
limit 
ground, reason, basis 
basic determination 
foundation, basis 
principle 
action 
reduce, degrade 
come forth, result 
set forth 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
an sich 
= an sich (selbst) 
Verfahren, Verlauf 
Art 
Gestaltung 
Erinnerung 
Denken (das) 
Denkbestimmung 
Empfindung 
Antithesis, 
Entgegensetzung 
Objekt 
objektiv 
entgegengesetzt 
Inhalt 
Gemiit 
meinen 
Geist 
Anlage 
Figur 
Gebilde 
trennen 
Macht 
Indifferenz 
[Cf. p. xliv.] 
SeJigkeit 
Schranke 
Boden, Grundlage 
Boden, Grund 
Prinzip 
Betatigung, 
Tatigkeit, Tun 
zuruckfiihren 

GLOSSARY 
heraustreten 
herkommen 
hervorbringen 
hervorgehen 
Hinausgehen (das) 
hinausschicken 
hinausschreiten 
hinaustreten in 
Historie 
historisch 
Idee2' 
Idealitat29 
ideell29 
in sich30 
inadaquat 
Inbegriff31 
indifferent 
Indifferenz27 
Individuum 
Inhalt 
innere 
Innere (das) 
innerlich 
Innerlichkeit 
Innerste (das) 
Insichgehen (das) 
insichseiend30 
Insichsein (das)30 
Intelligenz 
Interesse 
Irrtum 
Isolierung 
Kategoriell 
kennen19 
kennenlernen 
Kenntnis 
Kenntnisse 
Kraft 
Kriterium 
Leben 
Lebendiges (ein) 
Lebendigkeit 
Lehrsatz 
Logik (die)32 
Logische (das)32 
step out of, move out of 
emerge 
produce 
emerge, go forth, issue from 
progression from 
project (beyond itself) 
transcend, go beyond 
emerge into 
descriptive collection 
historical. descriptive(ly), 
informative 
idea 
ideality 
ideal 
inward(ly), within itself, 
into itself 
inadequate 
unangemessen 
essential sum, 
AlIheit 
comprehensive sum, sum total Zusammenfassung 
undifferentiated 
gleichgiiltig 
Indifference 
Gleichgiiltigkeit 
individual 
Einzelne (das) 
content 
Gehalt 
inner, inward 
innerlich 
what is inner/inward, 
inwardness, the inner side 
internal 
inner 
inwardness, what is inward 
what is innermost, the inmost 
heart 
going-into-itself 
self-contained, that is 
within-itself 
being-within-self, self-
containment 
intelligence 
Vernunft, Verstand 
interest, concern, point 
error 
isolation 
category 
to be aware of 
to become acquainted with 
awareness, acquaintance 
information, learning 
force 
criterion 
life 
a living being 
vitality, organism 
thesis, theorem 
the Logic, logic 
the logical, logical thinking 
Tauschung 
Vereinzelung 
Denkbestimmung 
erkennen, wissen 
MaBstab 
Satz 
341 

342 
Macht 
Mangel 
mannigfaltig 
Mannigfaltigkeit 
MaBstab 
Material 
Materie 
meinen33 
Meinung33 
Menschenverstand 
Merkmal 
Moralitat 
nachdenken 
Nachdenken (das)34 
Nacheinander (das) 
naher 
nebeneinander 
Nichts35 
Objekt2J 
objektiv 
Objektivitat 
partikular 
Partikularitat 
Phantasie 
Phanomen 
Prinzip 
Progress 
Prozess 
prozesslos 
Rasonnement 
rasonnieren 
real36 
Realitat36 
Rechtfertigung 
reell36 
Reflexion34 
R. in sich 
R. in sich selbst 
relativ 
Relativitiit 
Sache15 
might, power 
defect, want 
manifold 
manifoldness, diversity, 
multiplicity 
standard, criterion 
material 
matter 
mean 
opinion 
common sense 
characteristic 
morality 
think (it) over, 
think about (things) 
the thinking-over, [reflective] 
thinking, meditation 
succession 
more precise(iy), more 
articulate 
side by side, juxtaposed 
nothing 
object 
objective 
objectivity 
particular [partikuliir] 
peculiarity, 
particularity [partikuliiritat] 
imagination 
phenomenon 
principle 
progress, progression 
process 
lacking all process, 
without process 
abstract argumentation 
argue (abstractly) 
real [real] 
reality 
justification, legitimation 
real 
reflection 
inward reflection 
inward self-reflection 
relational, relative(iy) 
relationality, relativity, 
relative character 
matter, matter [itself], 
thing in question, 
thing [Sache] 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA L
Gewalt 
Verschiedenheit 
Kriterium 
Stoff 
Sache 
gemeint 
Verstand 
Sittlichkeit 
Reflexion 
Gegenstand 
Besonderheit, 
Eigentiimlichkeit 
eingebildet 
Erscheinung 
Grundsatz 
Fortgang 
reell 
Wirklichkeit 
Berechtigung 
real 
Nachdenken, 
Widerschein 
in sich 
Ding, Materie 

GLOSSARY 
343 
sachlich 
simply factual 
Satz 
proposition, statement, 
Lehrsatz 
thesis 
scheiden 
divide, separate (out) 
trennen, teilen 
Scheidung 
division, separation, 
Einteilung, 
severance 
Trennung 
Schein20 
shine, semblance 
Erscheinung 
Scheinbarkeit 
apparent character 
scheinen20 
shine, seem 
Scheinen (das) 
shining 
Schicksal 
destiny, fate 
Bestimmung 
schlecht 
bad, spurious (infinity), 
wrongly 
schlieBen37 
conclude 
zusammenschlieBen 
SchlieBen (das) 
syllogistic reasoning 
SchluB37 
syllogism 
Schranke28 
restriction 
Grenze 
seiend sind38 
[simply) are 
Seiende (das)38 
what is 
sein38 
to be 
Sein (das)38 
being 
selbstandig 
independent, self-standing 
Selbstiindige (das) 
what is independent 
Seligkeit 
blessedness 
Gluckseligkeit, 
Unseligkeit 
setzen39 
posit 
Setzen (das) 
the positing 
Singularitiit 
singularity 
Einzelnheit 
Sinn 
sense, meaning, mind 
Bedeutung 
sinnlich 
sensible, sensory 
Sinnlichkeit 
sensibility 
sittlich 
ethical 
Sittlichkeit 
ethical life 
Moralitiit 
sollen4l 
ought, to have to be, 
to be supposed 
Spekulation41 
speculation 
das Spekulative41 
the speculative 
Spezifikationen 
specifications 
Angabe 
Stoff 
stuff, material 
Material 
Stoffe 
stuffs 
Talent 
talent 
Anlage 
Tat 
act 
tiitig 
active 
Tiitigkeit 
activity 
Betatigung, 
Tun 
Tatsache21 
fact 
Faktum 
Tauschung 
illusion, deception, mistake 
Irrtum 
Teil 
part 
teilbar 
divisible 
Teilen 
divide 
scheiden, trennen 
trennbar 
separable 
trennen 
separate, sever 
scheiden, teilen 
Trennung 
separation, severance 
Trieb 
drive, impulse 

34 
Tun (das) 
Ubergang 
i,!bergehen 
Ubergehen (das) 
iibergehend 
iibergreifen42 
iiberschreiten 
Ubung 
Umschlag 
umschlagen 
Umschlagen (das) 
Umstiinde 
umstiirzen 
unangemessen 
Unangemessenheit 
unendlich 
Unendlichkeit 
ungetrennt 
Ungetrenntheit 
unselbstiindig 
Unselbstiindigkeit 
Unseligkeit 
unterscheiden 
Unterscheiden (das) 
Unterscheidung 
Unterschied14 
unterschieden 
Unterschiedenheit 
Unterschiedensein 
Untrennbarkeit 
unverstiindlich 
Ursache 
veriinderlich 
Veriinderlichkeit 
Veriinderung 
veriindern 
verbinden 
Verbindung 
Verdammung 
vereinzeln 
vereinzelt 
Vereinzelung 
Verfahren (das) 
Verhiiltnis' 
Verhiiltnisse 
verhalten (sich) 
the doing, agency, the deed 
passage (into), transition 
pass over (into) 
the passing-over (into) 
in passage, transient 
overgrasp 
overstep, exceed 
exercise 
overturn 
overturn, turn over 
the overturning 
circumstances 
overturn, overthrow 
inadequate, incongruous 
lack of proportion 
infinite 
infinity 
not separate 
unseparatedness 
dependent, not independent. 
not self-standing 
dependency 
damnation 
distinguish 
the distinguishing 
the distinguishing 
distinction, distinctness 
distinct 
distinctness 
distinctness 
inseparability 
unintelligible 
cause 
alterable 
alterability 
alteration, change 
alter, change 
link, bound up, connect 
bond, association, 
combination 
anathema, damnation 
isolate 
in isolation 
isolation 
procedure 
relationship, ratio, 
perspective, situation 
situations, circumstances 
behave, conduct (oneself), 
relate 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
Betiitigung, Handlung, 
Tatigkeit 
vorubergehend 
Betatigung 
Verhiiltnisse 
inadiiquat 
Seligkeit, Verdammung 
Differenz 
different, 
verschieden 
Verschiedenheit 
Anderung, Wechsel 
verwandeln 
verkniipfen, 
zusammenfassen 
Band, Verkniipfung, 
Zusammenhang 
Unseligkeit 
lsolierung 
Gang 
Beziehung 
Umstiinde 

GLOSSARY 
Verhalten (das) 
verkehrt 
verkniipfen 
Verkniipfung 
Verlauf 
Vermogen 
Vernunftl3 
verniinftig"3 
verschieden 
v. sein von 
Verschiedenheit14 
verschwinden 
Versicherung 
Verstand43 
verstandig43 
verstandlich 
vertraut 
verwandeln 
Verwechslung 
Verwirrung 
Voraussetzung 
Vorbegriff 
vorhanden (sein) 
vorstellen5 
VorstellungS 
voriibergehen 
voriibergehend 
Vorurteil 
wahr 
Wahre (das) 
wahrhaft 
Wahrheit 
Wechsel 
Wechselwirkung 
Wert 
Wesen44 
Wesenheit 
wesentlich 
Wesentlichkeit 
Widerschein 
Widerspruch 
Willkiir 
willkiirlich 
Wirken (das) 
attitude, conduct, behaviour 
inverted 
connect, combine, link 
connection, combination, 
linkage 
course, journey 
faculty 
reason 
rational 
diverse, various 
diverge from 
Diversity 
vanish, disappear 
assurance, declaration 
understanding 
that belongs to the 
understanding 
intelligible 
familiar 
transform 
confusion 
confusion 
presupposition, assumption 
preliminary conception 
(to be) presentlgivenfbefore us 
represent, imagine 
representation, notion, 
representational thinking, 
representational consciousness 
verbinden, 
zussammenfassen 
Verbindung, Band, 
Zusammenhang 
Gang 
Verstand 
verstandig 
different, 
unterschieden 
Mannigfaltigkeit, 
Unterschiedenheit 
Behauptung 
Vernunft, Intelligenz 
verniinftig 
bekannt 
verandern 
Verwirrung 
Verwechslung 
Begriff 
pass away 
iibergehen 
passing away, transient 
iibergehend 
prejudice, assumption 
true 
what is true 
genuine(ly), truly 
truth 
exchange, variation 
reciprocal action 
value, worth 
essence 
essentiality 
essential 
essentiality 
reflexion 
contradiction 
freedom of choice, 
arbitrariness, 
caprice, whim, arbitrary choice 
arbitrary 
effective action 
A.bwechslung, 
Anderung, Veranderung 
Wesentlichkeit 
Wesenheit 
Reflexion 
Betatigung 
345 

346 
wirklich36 43 
Wirklichkeit36 
Wirksamkeit 
Wirkung 
wissenl9 
Wissen (das) 
Wissenschaft 
Ziel 
zufallig 
Z ufalligkeit 
ZufaII 
Zufriedenheit 
zuruckfuhren 
zusammenfallen 
zusammenfassen 
Zusammenfassen (das) 
Zusammenfassung 
zusammengehen 
Zusammenhalt 
Zusammenhang 
zusammenhangen 
zusammenschlielSen37 
Zweck 
zweckmalSig 
actual, effectively 
actuality 
influence 
effect, operation 
know 
the knowing, knowledge 
science 
goal, aim, fulfilIment 
contingent, random, chance 
contingency 
chance 
satisfaction 
trace back to, lead back into 
collapse, coincide 
combine 
combination 
comprehensive whole 
go together 
cohesion 
connectedness, coherence 
to (be) connect(ed) with, 
belong together 
con-elude 
purpose 
purposive, purposeful 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
erkennen, kennen 
End, Zweck 
Befriedigung 
herabsetzen 
verbinden, 
verknupfen 
Verknupfung 
Inbegriff 
Verknupfung 
schlielSen 
End, Ziel 

NOTES TO THE GLOSSARY 
1 .  Allgemeinheit. For Hegel, genuine universality is "concrete"; i.e., it represents the inward 
articulation of the Concept (Begriff) in its dialectical development. This universality is not just 
what individuals have in common, nor is it their exhaustive collection. Ultimately, or in its full 
development, the universal is the rational itself, and it can be thought only speculatively. As a 
logical category, universality is "abstract" if it fails to develop into particularity and sin­
gularity. The universality of a species with regard to the individuals that are subsumed under 
it is an abstract universality, established by the understanding. 
2. An sich most often means that which is as yet (onto-)Iogically undeveloped, or implicit. 
Used in opposition to "posited" (gesetzt), it expresses the lack of mediation (or of the recogni­
tion of mediation). This is how it is typically opposed to fur sich. An sich can also be the 
equivalent of an ihm (selbst); it then expresses what something is (or does) in its own right 
without foreign intervention. In the first two cases we use "in-itself", in the third case "in 
itself", "in its own self" (§§ 118, 119) or "in its own right" (§ 105); and exceptionally "inner" 
(§ 117 A) or "spontaneously" (§ 239). 
The composite Ansichsein is translated by "being-in-itself". Here, as elsewhere, hyphens 
are used to hold a German composite together visibly in English. In the Kantian perspective, 
das Ansich means the true being or nature of things. For Hegel, to stop at the mere Ansich 
means to grasp things not in their truth, but in the form of mere abstraction, i.e., in their still 
undeveloped state. 
Fur sich, as opposed to an sich, means what is, or rather has become "posited" (gesezt), or 
explicit, what has reached a stage of (at least relative) development. Often an element of 
(self-)consciousness is present. But fur sich also expresses a certain sufficiency. Both senses 
can be expressed by "for-itself"; but sometimes "explicit" is preferred to convey the first 
meaning, "on its own account" or "by itself" to convey the second. In this last case fur sich 
becomes almost identical with an ihm selbst and with an und fUr sich in the nonlogical, 
colloquial sense. 
An und fur sich, when used in conjunction with an sich and fur sich, means a fully devel­
oped and explicit return into itself from the stage of the (supposed) self-sufficiency of distinct 
and even opposite terms. It expresses the complete (but irreducibly processual) self­
comprehension (and being) of the Concept, of Spirit, and of the Idea. An und fur sich (selbst) 
can also be used in a more colloquial (and opposite) sense, meaning "taken abstractly", or 
"on its own and by its own nature". (See § 88 A.) Since the choice here is a matter of 
interpretation, we have translated it everywhere by "in and for itself' . 
3. Aufhebung. See Hegel's own explanation in § 96 A and in the Science of Logic, trans. Miller, 
106-107; see also the Introductions, pp. xxxi-xxxii, xlvi-xlvii. 
4. AUflerung means manifestation, expression, utterance, saying. In the Logic it is used 
mostly in connection with Kraft ("force"). We translate "utterance", because this word pre­
serves the etymological link between "utter", "outer", iiuflere. 
Entiiuflerung means divestiture, renunciation, and, in juridical contexts, alienation. The 
latter word has to be reserved for translating Entfremdung (fremd 
= "alien"). Used in a 
religious context, Entiiuflerung and sich entiiuflern recall the biblical term kenosis which is used 
for the self-humbling of God in his incarnation as a man. Literally it means the emptying-out 
of oneself. Motion into outwardness and rendering oneself vulnerable are components of the 
meaning. Where the expressive movement as such prevails, we use "uttering" (§ 117), but in a 
religious context we translate by "self-emptying" (Hegel's note on p. 16). 
347 

348 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
5. Begriff means the logical subject itself, logical thinking as it develops through its entire 
movement of self-comprehension. The word "concept" is used because of its etymological 
link with "comprehend"--begreifen. Far from being the static, neatly circumscribed thought­
content which we call a "definition", the Concept is the movement of comprehension itself. 
Where it is used in the absolute, and singularised, we write "the Concept"; where we have 
the plural or a particular instance, we do not use the initial capital. 
Vorstellung means what is represented, pointed out, laid before (vor) us. Sich vorstellen is to 
picture something to oneself or to imagine it. It is the thinking of ordinary life. We translate it 
by "representation" or "notion". The latter word has been used, quite inappropriately, for 
Begriff. It means a general, vague, or imperfect idea of something, an opinion or subjective 
view. All this is often expressed by Vorstellung, never by Begriff. 
Locke's "way of ideas"-and all of the "common sense" philosophising that was founded 
upon it-was (and is) a deliberate effort to interpret Begriffe in terms of Vorstellungen. For 
Hegel, philosophy consists in replacing Vorstellungen with Begriffe, without leaving the first 
simply behind. See also pp. lxi-lxii. 
6. Beschaffenheit means the state or condition of a thing, its quality, its disposition or nature, 
but also the constitution-{)f a body, for example. It expresses the fact of being determined, 
not just in-itself, but also outwardly. Nevertheless, this outward determination is itself a part 
of a thing's own, immanent determination. The word "constitution" best expresses this com­
plex notion. 
7. Bestimmtheit is a state of being determined or fixed by the process of Bestimmung. Transla­
tors have usually used "determinateness" for this; but "determinacy", which was designated 
"rare" in the New English Dictionary, is less cumbrous and more natural. We believe that, 
thanks largely to the rising fortunes of "indeterminacy", it now stands a fair chance of 
entering the language of philosophy and science. 
Bestimmung means decision, appointment, definition, but also prescription, destination, 
and vocation. It is a more "dynamic" term than Bestimmtheit. "Determination" renders this 
active sense well. The entire Logic is one movement of self-determination. In the Philosophy 
of Spirit, it often refers to the human (rational) "vocation"; so in those contexts we translate 
accordingly. 
8. 
Bewiihren means to confirm, aver, verify, substantiate; sich bewiihren means to prove true, 
to hold good. We could have translated it by "verify" and "verification" to preserve the link 
with wahr-"true" (verum). But Bewiihrung has little to do with verification in the ordinary 
sense (for instance, in the empirical sciences). "Validation" and "validate" better express the 
meaning of the German term which includes the ontological reference to nature and spirit. 
9. Beziehung, Verhiiltnis. See the Introduction, p. xix. 
10. Dasein often expresses the mere presence of a (finite) being. But in its most primitive 
logical sense, it is "determinacy" itself in all its generality or indeterminate variety. We 
translate it by "being-there". See further the Introductions, pp. xx-xxi, xxxvi-xxxviii. 
Existenz is essential being, or essence as appearing in immediacy. It is the first (and least 
articulate) return of being within essence. It is here that we have to use the word "existence". 
See also the Introduction, pp. xx, xxxviii. 
11. Denkbestimmung means a determination of thought; Hegel also uses Gedankenbestimmung 
for it. Especially in the Logic these terms stand for what we (and sometimes Hegel himself) 
call "the categories", i e., those meanings that have become thoroughly independent of any 
particular form of reality. When these properly logical universals are meant, we speak of "the 
thought-determinations", just as we do of "the categories" (Kategoriel1). Every moment in the 
Logic is a Bestimmul1g of pure thought; so there are more "categories" in Hegel's Logic than 
there are in the familiar lists of Aristotle and Kant. 

NOTES TO THE GLOSSARY 
349 
12. Denken means "thinking" in the ordinary discursive sense, too. But for Hegel it refers to 
that which makes all human activity properly human: the production of meaning, the "mak­
ing sense" that pervades even perception, feeling, willing, etc. Genuinely philosophical, i.e., 
speculative, thinking is the thinking that comprehends all production of meaning as such. 
Precisely this universality is its peculiarity. Philosophical thinking is that form of thinking 
which comprehends the articulation of thinking in all its forms, including philosophy (see 
§ 2). Thinking is "logical" inasmuch as it develops those meanings that are independent of 
any particular form of reality within one coherent movement of self-articulation. 
13. Dialektik, das Dialektische. Although Dialektik sometimes stands for the entire movement 
of the self-articulation of meaning or thought, this term refers more specifically to the self­
negation of the determinations of the understanding (Verstand), when they are thought 
through in their fixedness and opposition. This is "the dialectical" as the very principle of all 
movement, life, and cognition. (See in particular § 81, including R and A) 
14. Differenz, Unterschied, Verschiedenheit. See the Introductions, pp. xxiii-xxiv, xliv-xlvi. 
15. Ding, Etwas, Sache. Etwas means a determinate and finite thought-content, "something" 
in general, not some "thing"; it is the opposite of the "other" in the dialectic of "Quality" (or 
"suchness"). 
Ding and Sache are more developed thought-determinations. Ding is the logical equivalent 
of what we call a "thing" when we are speaking of the objects in our physical environment. 
Sache involves the presupposition of conditions and activities necessary to the solution of a 
theoretical problem or the pursuit of a practical "cause" (see § 148); most often it is a content 
of meaning (which may be that of a "thing") that is recognised as such. We have generally 
translated Ding with "thing" and Sache with "matter". See further our remarks in the Intro­
duction, pp. xxiv-xxv. 
16. Einzelne, Einzelnheit. See the Introduction, pp. xix-xx. 
17. Entgegensetzung is to be distinguished from Gegensatz; it is a more developed and more 
dynamic category (see § 119). "Opposition" is the best translation (cf. setzen 
= "to posit"). 
For Gegensatz "antithesis" is available, provided we do not interpret this term as indicating 
the "anti-thesis" in the Fichtean sense of the negation of the "thesis". Antithese in the latter 
sense is translated by "anti-thesis". Hegel's table of oppositions doses with Widerspruch, or 
"contradiction", as its supreme form. 
18. Erinnern means to remind or call to mind Sich erinnern means to remember. Both erin­
nern and Erinnerung retain in Hegel's use of them a link with their root inner ("inner"); it is 
the gathering up and recollecting of the preceding stages of a movement. "Recollect" conveys 
this meaning best, with a few exceptions. 
19. Erkennen, kennen, wissen, and cognates. See the Introductions, pp. xxi-xxii, xl-lii. 
20. Erscheinen, scheinen, Erscheinung, Schein. See the Introduction, pp. xxv-xxvi. 
21. Faktum is to be distinguished from Tatsache; the latter means "fact" in the ordinary sense 
of the word. Faktum stands for a content of experience which, though it is given as already 
expressed, is open to further interpretation. 
22. Formal, formel/. Formell is mostly a negative term: It expresses the absence of content. 
Often this is made explicit by the use of the expression "merely formal" . Formal expresses 
rather the presence of a form; but it also tends to get the negative connotation of "being taken 
separately and abstractly" (§ 19 R). These two terms are sometimes used interchangeably (the 
Science of Logic speaks of "der formale mechanische ProzeB", but already the first edition of 
the Encyclopaedia uses the term "formeller Mechanismus"). In our text formal occurs much 
less frequently. We translate formell by "formal", and while we use the same term for formal 
we add the German in a footnote. See also pp. xlii-xliii. 

350 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC
23. Gegenstand, Objekt. See the Introductions, pp. xxii-xxiii, xliii-xliv. 
24. Gehalt refers to the constituents or ingredients, but more specifically to the intrinsic value 
of something; for instance, to the proportion of gold in an alloy (the "grade"). We have 
translated it by "import" or "basic import" in the sense of "meaning (content)" .  Inhalt is, of 
course, translated simply as "content". See also p. xliv. 
25. Geist; Subjekt, Subjektivitiit; Bewufltsein, Selbstbewufltsein. Geist is the word, the notion, 
and the concept that constitute the highest definition of the Absolute. As finite or human, 
spirit is distinct from nature, but in the fullness of its meaning, spirit overgrasps nature. This 
does not mean that only thought or mind (in the ordinary sense) exists, but rather that Hegel 
conceives the Absolute as being essentially what we might call "the universe of meaning" . 
"Spirit" expresses this universe as self-articulating, as in that sense "subjective". "Subjec­
tivity" here transcends its correlativity with regard to "objectivity". It overgrasps objectivity; 
it is not relative, but it remains (inwardly) relational. 
"Spirit" refers primarily to the interlocutive and interpersonal relation that underlies and 
activates all community. It names the concrete subject of the production of meaning, a 
production in which we all participate, but which none of us can claim for oneself. Ultimately, 
however, the process of the articulation of meaning has no other subject but meaning itself: 
In that sense "spirit" is nothing but the Idea "as being for-itself and coming to be in and for 
itself" (§ 18 R). 
Bewufltsein or "consciousness" is how spirit appears: as initially a thinking subject facing a 
world of ob-jects. It is spirit only in-itself or implicitly. The Phenomenology of Spirit is the 
science of the experience of consciousness through which it becomes spirit conscious of itself 
as spirit. Self-consciousness is spirit for itself. But the result of the experience of conscious­
ness is not just consciousness of the individual self, or of the communal self, but in and 
through both it is the knowledge of spirit as the ultimate Self, as the Idea itself. 
26. Gemiit means feeling, heart (as in "good-hearted"), but also disposition and turn of mind. 
We translate it by "mind and heart", except where one of these words already occurs. Hegel 
probably took over this usage from Schiller, who used Gemiit to designate the integrity or 
"wholeness" of the human personality. 
27. Gleichgiiltigkeit, Indifferenz. See the Introductions, pp. xxiv, xlv-xlvi. 
28. Grenze, Schranke. Grenze is best translated by "limit", and begrenzt by "limited". Be­
schriinken is stronger than begrenzen; "to restrict" best renders this aspect. In its relation to the 
"ought" (sol/en) of its transgression, "limit" (Grenze) becomes "restriction" (Schranke). 
29. Idee, ideel/, Idealitiit, Idealismus. Idee is Hegel's term for the Absolute inasmuch as it is the 
total process of the self-articulation of meaning and of what is meaningful. We translate it as 
"the Idea". Where it is used in the plural or as particularised ("the idea of . . . "), we drop 
the initial capital. But everywhere the Idee is the Begriff as realised, or as being realised. See 
the Science of Logic, Miller, 755ff. What is recognised as a moment in the Idee is called ideel/; 
and IdealWit belongs to what is ideel/. "Ideality" is the truth of what is finite, of reality; and 
the recognition of this ideality is "Idealism" in Hegel's sense. See § 95 R. 
30. In sich can mean either "within itself" or "into itself". Where the choice between them is 
clear from the context we have used the one or the other expression. But it is often possible to 
interpret Reflexion in sich in both ways, with the reader having to decide which of the two is 
preferable. For this reason we quite often use "inward reflection", preserving the ambiguity 
of the German. 
Insichseiend, Insichsein. The adjective is translated by "self-contained", the noun by "sel£­
containment", or "being-within-self". In the dialectic of "Quality" it is the opposite of 
"being -for-other" . 

NOTES TO THE GLOSSARY 
351 
31. lnbegriff, Allheit. lnbegriff means more than just the sum of a multitude of things (or 
properties, attributes). It is not just an aggregate, but rather the comprehensive whole of an 
internally related network (like "the press", das Zeitungswesen, or "the taxation system", das 
Steuerwesen) . We translate it with "essential sum", "comprehensive sum", "sum total" . "Es­
sential sum" can be said of God as lnbegriff aller Realitaten, or Omnitudo realitatis, i.e., as the 
eminent source and "compendium" of what makes everything that exists "real." Allheit 
means the universality of the subject term in universal judgment. Hegel takes this category 
from Kant's table of judgments and makes it into the first form of the syllogisms of reflection 
(see Enc. § 190). We translate it by "allness". 
32. Logik, das Logische. We write "the Logic" wherever Hegel refers to his speculative logic, 
which is identical with metaphysics. Speculative logic is the metaphYSiCs of the logos or of 
"reason." The first part of the Encyclopaedia is "the Logic," as distinct from the Realphilosophie 
contained in "the Philosophy of Nature" and "the Philosophy of Spirit." Sometimes die Logik 
refers to "logic" in the traditional sense, and we translate accordingly. Das Logische 
sometimes stands for the subject matter of Hegel's Logic, just as die NatuT is the subject matter 
of the Philosophy of Nature. But it has also a more explicit and dynamic meaning, best 
expressed by "logical thinking", which we use together with " the logical" . 
33. Meinung refers either to a personal, subjective opinion, or to the bare intention to signify. 
Hegel often stresses the etymological link with mein ("mine"). Where appropriate, we trans­
late it as "opinion", but sometimes as "what is (only) meant" (meinen = "to mean"). 
34. Nachdenken means to reflect (on something), to think about something, to think it over. 
But das Nachdenken cannot be translated by "reflection", since this term has to be reserved for 
Reflexion . We use "thinking-over" and "to think it over" or "to think about it" . 
Reflexion often refers to "reflection" in the ordinary sense of a subjective consideration of 
some matter or other. But Hegel frequently uses it to express the (inward) articulation of 
meaning or thought-content, especially in the Doctrine of Essence. 
35. Nichts, as used by Hegel at the beginning of the Logic, does not mean what is "not 
something". Something is already a determinate being, distinct from something else. As "not 
something", nothing would itself be determinate. In contrast Nichts is to be taken in its totally 
indeterminate simplicity. "Nothingness" would express this better than "nothing". But Hegel 
uses the ordinary term Nichts; we translate with "nothing" while repeating Hegel's own 
warning. See the Science of Logic, Miller, 83. 
36. Real, reell, Realitiit; wirklich, Wirklichkeit. Although Hegel himself says that das Reelle and 
das Reale are practically synonymous, and that no interest is served by distinguishing dif­
ferent shades of meaning here (see the Science of Logic, Miller, 149), we have included the 
German term in a footnote wherever "real" stands for real. 
As a logical category, Realitat belongs to the dialectic of " Quality." It is Quality (or "such­
ness") inasmuch as it is opposed to the negation that is contained in it; it is Dasein as (a) 
determinacy that simply is (seiende Bestimmtheit). It means "to be such as not other" . This 
most abstract and poor category falls far short of Wirklichkeit. The latter expresses the unity of 
Wesen and Existenz; its development, as the last part of the Doctrine of Essence, deploys the 
most important categories of traditional metaphysics. What is wirklich is rational in the 
Hegelian sense, i.e., "meaningful", a worthy expression of the Idea, which is "quite simply 
effective (das Wirkende) and actual (das Wirkliche) as well" (§ 142 A). We translate Wirklichkeit 
by "actuality". See also Dasein and Existenz. 
37. Schlieflen, Schlufl, zusammenschlieflen. See the Introductions, pp. xxvii, xlvii. 
38. Sein, das Sein, das Seiende, sind seiend. In Hegel's Logic, the term "being" first refers to 
"pure being" understood as absolute absence of determinacy, not as the result of a process of 

352 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
abstraction, but meant to be as strictly immediate. But the same tenn stands, more generally, 
for the entire first part of the Logic in which "immediacy" is prevalent and the movement 
from one category to the next is called a "passing-over" (iibergehen). "To be seiend" means to 
be taken as immediate; we translate sind seiend with "[simply] are." (See §§ 80, 84, 89, 113.) 
39. Setzen is translated by "to posit"; it most often means "to be made explicit" as a moment 
in the process of the self-articulation of meaning. It is thus opposed to an sich. 
40. Sol/en as a logical category is a moment in the dialectic of Quality; we translate it by 
"ought" (see note 28 above). But this term also means "ought" in the sense of obligation or 
duty. It further refers to what is "supposed" to be such and such. We translate it accordingly. 
41 . Spekulation, das Spekulative. The "mirroring" (speculum = "mirror") is for Hegel not that 
of reality or nature in the mind. It takes place in the thinking-together of thought­
determinations that for the understanding are radically opposed, and even contradict each 
other. In speculative thought they "mirror" each other and only in this way can they be 
genuine comprehension. "The speculative" unites them as their (inwardly articulated, or 
"reflecting") totality. It is expressed by using one of the opposed terms which is now under­
stood as "overgrasping" (iibergreifen) the other. "The speculative" is the thought of what is 
"rational" (or "meaningful"). (See in particular § 82, including R and A.) 
42. Ubergreifen. See the Introduction, pp. xxvi-xxvii. 
43. Vernunft, verniinftig; Verstand, verstiindig. A thinking that is merely verstiindig lets the 
determinate distinctions count as ultimate, as fixed and final. Verstand is precisely this way of 
thinking; it is not a faculty of the soul in the traditional sense. Verniinftig is not generally what 
we call "rational" in ordinary usage; it is certainly not "rationalistic". In Hegel's use it is 
rather that which is truly "meaningful", what exhibits the Idea. But we have to translate it 
with "rational", and Vernunft with "reason". Reason is the dialectical and speculative way of 
thinking that sublates (aufheben) the fixed distinctions of the understanding. This is why, 
while there can be understanding without reason, there can be no reason without under­
standing. But "reason" is also "objective": It is the meaningful structure of reality, that what 
makes it wirklich (or "actual"). And the proper philosophical significance of "reason" is the 
Idea (see § 214). 
44. Wesen. See the Introduction, pp. xviii-xix. 

INDEX OF REFERENCES 
All identifiable works referred to in Hegel's text or our notes are listed here, except for 
classical authors. The fragments of pre-Socratic philosophy are in Diels and Kranz, or trans­
lated in Kirk and Raven; both these works are listed. Other classical authors--when not 
readily available in many editions--can be found in the Loeb Classical Library. The object of 
this index is primarily to direct the reader to the best modern editions, and especially to 
English translations where these are known to us. Some information about the texts used by 
Hegel himself has occasionally been added. 
ANSELM (of Canterbury), Cur Deus Homo and Proslogion (with Gaunilo, Apologia pro Insip­
iente). In F. S. Schmitt, ed., Opera Omnia Edinburgh: Nelson, 1946. The best English 
translations are: Why God Became Man, J. M. Colleran, trans. Albany: Magi Books, 1969; and 
Proslogion with Gaunilos Reply, M. J. Charlesworth, trans. Oxford: 1965. 
BAADER, Franz Xaver von, Bemerkungen uber einige antireligiiise Philosopheme unserer Zeit. 
Leipzig: 1824; and Fermenta Cognitionis. 5 vols. Berlin: 1822-24; both in Siimtliche Werke. 
____ , "Hegel liber meine Lehre." In Siimtliche Werke. Vol. 10, 306-309. 
____ , Siimtliche Werke. F. Hoffmann et aI., eds. 16 vols. Leipzig: 1851-60. 
BEISER, Frederick C, The Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte. Cambridge: 
Harvard Univ. Press, 1987. 
BOCHENSKI, I. M., A History of Formal Logic. Notre Dame, IN: Univ. of Notre Dame Press, 
1961 . 
BODAMMER, T., Hegels Deutung der Sprache. Hamburg: Meiner, 1969. 
BOEHME, Jakob, Theosophia Revelata. 2 vols. [Hamburg): 1715. (The edition used by Hegel; it 
includes the "Life of Boehme" by A. von Frankenburg.) 
___ , The Works of Jacob Behmen. 4 vols. London: 1644-52; reprinted, 1909-24. 
BOURGEOIS, Bernard. See HEGEL, Encyclopedie. 
BROWN, R., and STEWART, J. M. See HEGEL, Lectures. 
BRUCKER, J. J., Historia critica philosophiae. 5 vols. Leipzig: 1742-44. 
BUTLER, C, and SElLER, C See HEGEL, Letters. 
CERF and HARRIS. See HEGEL, Faith and Knowledge. 
CLARK, M. See Bibliography. 
COOK, D., Language in the Philosophy of Hegel. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1969. 
DE NEGRI, Enrico. See HEGEL, Fenomenologia. 
DESCARTES, RemԹ, Discourse on Method and Mediations. 0. A. Cress, trans. Indianapolis: 
Hackett, 1979. 
____ , Lettres de M. Descartes. Clerselier, ed. 3 vols. Paris: 1657. 
____ , Philosophical Letters. A. Kenny, trans. Oxford: Blackwell, 1970. 
____ , Oeuvres de Descartes. C Adam and P. Tannery, eds. 12 vols. Paris: 1897-1910; 
Index general. Paris: 1913. 
___ , The Philosophical Writings of Descartes. J. Cottingham, R. Stoothoff, and 
0. Murdoch, trans. 2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985. 
DIELS, H., and KRANZ, w., Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. 7th ed., 3 vols. Berlin: Wiedmannsche 
Buchhandlung, 1954. ( =  D. K.) 
353 

354 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
DI GIOVANNI, George, "The Facts of Consciousness." In Between Kant and Hegel: Texts in the 
Development of Post-Kantian Idealism, 3-50. Albany: SUNY Press, 1985. 
___ , and HARRIS, H. 5., Between Kant and Hegel: Texts in the Development of Post­
Kantian Idealism. Albany: SUNY Press, 1985. 
[DIONYSIUS,] "On the Divine Names." In The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite. J. H. Parker, 
trans. London: 1987-99; photoreprinted, Merrick, NY. Richwood, 1976. 
FICHTE, Johann Gottlieb, Appelation an das Publikum. 1799. In Fichte, Siimtliche Werke, I. H. 
Fichte, ed. 8 vols. Berlin: Veit, 1845/6; photoreprinted, Berlin: de Gruyter, 1971. Vol. 5. 
___ , "Darstellung der Wissenschaftslehre," 1801 (first printed 1845). In Werke. 
Vol. 2. 
____ ,' The Science of Knowledge (Wissenschaftslehre, 1794) with the Two Introductions 
of 1797, P. Heath and J. Lachs, trans. New York: Appleton, 1970. 
FORSTER, Michael N., Hegel and Scepticism. Cambridge: Harvard Univ: Press, 1989. 
GERAETS, Theodore F., "Les trois lectures philosophiques de l'EncycIopedie ou la realisation 
du concept de la philosophie chez Hegel." Hegel-Studien 10 (1975):231-54. 
GOETHE, J. W. von, Werke, Berliner Ausgabe, 22 vols. Berlin: Aufbau Verlag, 1973ff. (The 
edition cited herein. Faust in Band 8.) 
GRAY, J. Glenn, "Hegel's Logic: The Philosophy of the Concrete." Virginia Quarterly Review 
(Spring 1971): 175-89. 
GRIER, Philip T., "Abstract and Concrete in Hegel's Logic." In G. Di Giovanni, ed. Essays on 
Hegel's Logic. Albany: SUNY Press, 1990. 
GROTIUS [Hugo de Groot,] On the Law of War and Peace. Paris: 1625. F. W. Kelsey, trans. 
Oxford: Clarendon, 1925. (The Prolegomena is reprinted, Indianapolis: Library of Liberal 
Arts, 1957.) 
HALDANE, E. 5., and SIMSON, F. H. See HEGEL, Lectures. 
HARRIS, H. 5., "The Cows in the Night." Dialogue 26 (1987):627-43; and "Postscript," 66H8. 
___ and CERF. See HEGEL, Difference. 
___ and KNOX. See HEGEL, System of Ethical Life. 
HEGEL, G. W. F., Aesthetics. T. M. Knox, trans. 2 vols. Oxford: C1arendon Press, 1975. 
___ , "Aphorisms from the Wastebook" (1802-06). In Rosenkranz, supplemented by 
F. Nicolin, Hegel-Studien 4 (1967):9-19; S. Klein et aI., trans. Independent Journal of Philosophy 
3 (1979): 1-5. 
___ , Berliner Schriften, J. Hoffmeister, ed. Hamburg: Meiner, 1956. 
___ , Briefe van und an Hegel, J. Hoffmeister and F. Nicolin, eds. 4 vols. Hamburg: 
Meiner, 1952-81. 
___ , The Difference between Fichte's and Schellings System of Philosophy. H. S. Harris 
and W. Cerf, trans. and eds. Albany: SUNY Press, 1977. 
___ , Disputation Theses of 1800. Erste Druckschriften. G. Lasson, ed. 403-404; 
N. Waszek, trans. In D. Lamb, ed., Hegel and Modern Philosophy. London: Croom Helm, 
1987. 
___ , Doctrine of Reflection (Book 2 of Science of Logic). W. T. Harris, trans. New York: 
Appleton, 1881. (Not consulted by us.) 
___ , Encic/opedia I: La scienza della logica (con le aggiunte), a cura di Valerio Verra. 
Turin: UTET, 1981. 
___ , Encyclopedie des sciences philosophiques I: La science de la logique. Traduit par B. 
Bourgeois. Paris: Vrin, 1970. 
___ , Encyc/opedie des sciences philosophiques en abrege. Traduit par M. de Gandillac. 
Paris: Gallimard, 1970. 
___ , Encyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften. Heidelberg: Osswald, 1817; re­
printed in Werke Oubilaumsausgabe), Band 6. 

INDEX OF REFERENCES 
355 
____ ,' Encyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften. 3d ed. C. F. Winter, 1830; F. 
Nicolin and 0. POggeler, eds. Hamburg: Meiner, 1959. 
____ ,' 
Encyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse. 2d ed. 
Heidelberg: Osswald, 1827; W. Bonsiepen and H.-C. Lucas, eds. In Gesammelte Werke, Band 
19. Hamburg: Meiner, 1989. 
____ ,' Erste Druckschriften. G. Lasson, ed. Leipzig: Meiner, 1928. 
____ ,' Faith and Knowledge. W. Cerf and H. S. Harris, trans. and ed. Albany: SUNY 
Press, 1977. 
____ ,' Fenomenologia de/lo Spirito. 2 vols. A cura di E. De Negri. Florence: La nuova 
Italia, 1936; 2d ed., 1960. 
____ ,' Gesammelte Werke. Rheinisclte-westfiilischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
ed. Hamburg: Meiner, 1968ff. (The Wissenschaft der Logik [1812-16] is in Band 11-12; the 
1831 revision of volume 1 is in Band 21. The Enzyklopiidie [1827] is in Band 19.) 
____ , Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts. 4th ed. J. Hoffmeister, ed. Hamburg: 
Meiner, 1955. 
____ , Hegel's Doctrine of Formal Logic. H. S. Macran, trans. Oxford: Clarendon, 1912. 
____ , Hegel's Logic of World and Idea. H. S. Macran, trans. Oxford: Clarendon, 1929. 
____ , Introduction to the Philosophy of History. L. Rauch, trans. Indianapolis: Hackett, 
1988. 
____ , The Jena System of 1804-05: Logic and Metaphysics. J. Burbidge et aI., trans. 
Kingston and Montreal: McGill-Queerrs Press, 1986. 
____ , Lectures on the History of Philosophy. E. S. Haldane and F. H. Simson, trans. 3 
vols. London: Kegan Paul, Trench Tlibner & Co. Ltd, 1896 (latest reprint, Atlantic High­
lands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1983). 
____ , Lectures on the History of Philosophy. R. Brown and J. M. Stewart trans., with the 
assistance of H. S. Harris. 3 vols. Los Angeles: Univ. of Calif. Press (vol. 3, 1990; vols. 1 and 
2, in preparation). (A translation of the lecture course of 1825-26 as edited in Vorlesungen, 
Band 6-9.) 
____ , Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion. P. C. Hodgson et aI., trans. 3 vols. Los 
Angeles: Univ. of Calif. Press, 1984--87. (Translation of Vorlesungen, Band 3-5.) 
____ , Letters. C. Butler and C. Seiler, trans. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press, 1984. 
___ , Logic, being Part One of the Encyclopaedia (1830). William WaUace, trans., with 
foreword by J. N. Findlay. Oxford: Clarendon, 1975. (This is the third edition; first edition, 
1873, second 1892.) 
____ , Logique. Traduit par A. Vera. 2 vols. Paris: Ladrange, 1859; photostatic reprint, 
Brussels: Culture et Civilisation, 1968. 
___ , Phenomenology of Spirit. A. V. Miller, trans. Oxford: Clarendon, 1970. 
____ , Philosophy of Nature. M. J. Petry, trans. 3 vols. London: Alien and Unwin, 1970. 
____ , Philosophy of Nature. A. V. Miller, trans. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970. 
____ , The Philosophy of Right. T. M. Knox, trans. and ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1942. 
____ , Philosophy of Subjective Spirit. M. J. Petry, trans. Dordrecht: Reidel. 1979. 
___ , "Reason and Religious Truth." Foreword to H. F. W. Hinrichs, Die Religion usw, 
1822. A. V. Miller, trans. In Beyond Epistemology, 227-46. F. G. Weiss, ed. The Hague: 
Nijhoff, 1974. 
____ , Science of Logic. W. H. Johnson and L. G. Struthers, trans. 2 vols. London: 
Alien and Unwin, 1928. 
____ , Science of Logic. A. V. Miller, trans. London: Alien and Unwin, 1969. 
____ , Selections. M. Inwood, ed. New York: Macmillan, 1989. 
____ , Subjective Logic (Book 3 of Science of Logic). H. Sloman and J. Wallon, trans. 

356 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
London: John Chapman, 1855. (Rather loose paraphrase, but the earliest rendering of any 
part of Hegel's Logic in English. Not consulted by us.) 
____ , System der Wissenschaft: Erster Teil, die Phiinomenologie des Geistes. Bamberg and 
Wurzburg, 1807. (The first edition of the Phenomenology; see Gesammelte Werke, Band 9.) 
____ , System of Ethical Life and First Philosophy of Spirit. H. S. Harris and T. M. Knox, 
trans. and eds. Albany: SUNY Press. 1979. 
___ , Texts and Commentary. W. A. Kaufmann, trans. Garden City, N.Y. :  Anchor, 
1966. 
____ , Vorlesungen uber die Geschichte der Philosophie IV. P. Garniron and W. Jaeschke, 
eds. Hamburg: Meiner, 1986 (Vorlesungen, Band 9). (The first three volumes Vorlesungen, 
Band 6-8, are in preparation.) 
___ , Vorlesungen uber die Philosophie der Religion. W. Jaeschke, ed. Hamburg: Meiner, 
1983-85 (Vorlesungen, Band 3-5). 
___ , Werke (complete edition, edited by a committee of Hegel's friends). 18 vols. in 
21. Berlin: 1832ff. Band 6: Encyklopiidie . . .  Erster Teil: Die Logik . . .  mit Zusiitze. L. 
Boumann, ed. Berlin: 1840. 
____ , Werke ijubilaumsausgabe). H. Glockner, ed. 20 vols. Stuttgart: Fromann, 1927ff 
(includes Hegel-Lexikon, 2 vols.). 
____ , Werke in 20 Biinden (Theorie-Werkausgabe). E. Moldenhauer and K. M. Michel, 
eds. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1970. Band 7: Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts; Band 8: 
Enzyklopiidie . .
. (1830) Erster Teil. Die Wissenschaft der Logik. Mit den mundlichen 
Zusatzen. ( = T. W-A.) 
___ ,' Wissenschaft der Logik. 3 vols. Nuremberg: 1812-16; reprinted in Gesammelte 
Werke, Band 11 and 12. 
___ , Wissenschaft der Logik. 2 vols. G. Lasson, ed. Leipzig: Meiner, 1923. 
___ and SCHELLING, F. W. J.. Kritisches Journal der Philosophie. 2 vols. Tubingen: 
Cotta, 1802ҫ3; reprinted complete in Gesammelte Werke, Band 4. 
HERDER, G. W. von, Gott. Einige Gespriiche (1788, 1800); God. Some Conversations. F. H. 
Burkhardt. trans. Indianapolis: Library of Liberal Arts, 1940. 
HERMANN, Gottfried, Handbuch der Metrik. Leipzig: 1790. 
HIEROCLES [K. W. Ramler,] Scherzreden. Berlin: Aus dem Griechischen des Hierocles, 1782. 
HINRICHS, H. W. F. Die Religion im inneren Verhiiltnisse Zur Wissenschaft. Heidelberg: Groos, 
1822. 
HOTHO, H. G., De philosophia Cartesiana. Berlin: 1826. 
HUME, David, History of England. W. B. Todd. ed. 6 vols. New York: Liberty Classics, 1983. 
___ , Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding. L. A. Selby-Bigge, ed. Oxford: Clar-
endon, 1902. 
____ , "Natural History of Religion." In Essays Moral, Political and Literary. Oxford: 
Clarendon, 1969. 
INWOOD, Michael, ed., Hegel. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1985. (See also HEGEL, Selections.) 
JACOBI, F. H., Briefe uber Spinoza (1787); reprinted in Werke, Vol. 4. (An abridged translation 
is in preparation. See the following item. ) 
Werke. 
6 
vols. 
in 
8, 
Leipzig; 
photographic 
reprint, 
Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1968. (A translation of selected Jacobi texts by G. Di 
Giovanni is in preparation. ) 
JAESCHKE, W. See HEGEL, Vorlesungen uber die Philosophie. 
KANT, Critique of Judgment (Riga, 1790, 1793). L. W. Pluhar, trans. Indianapolis: Hackett. 1987. 
___ , Critique of Practical Reason (Riga, 1788). L. W. Beck, trans. Chicago: Univ. of 
Chicago Press, 1949; reprinted, New York: Garland. 1976. (Includes also the Foundations of 

INDEX OF REFERENCES 
357 
the Metaphysics of Morals; the Critique is also reprinted separately in the Library of Liberal 
Arts, 1956.) 
___ , Critique of Pure Reason (A and B). Norman Kemp Smith, trans. London: Mac­
millan, 1933. (Critik der reinen Vernunft, Riga, 1781 [ =  Aj; Hegel used the 2d ed., Riga, 1787 
[ = B]). ( = CPR) 
___ ,' Gesammelte Schriften. The Prussian Academy of Sciences, ed. 9 vols. Berlin and 
Leipzig: 1910-23. ( =  Akad) 
___ , Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals (Riga. 1785). J. W. ElIington, trans. 
Indianapolis: Hackett, 1981. 
___ , Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics. J. W. Ellington, trans. Indianapolis: 
Hackett, 1977. 
KASTNER, A. G., Angfangsgrunde der hiiheren Mechanik. 2d ed. Leipzig: 1793. 
KAUFMANN. See HEGEL, Texts and Commentary. 
KERNER, Justinus, Die Seherin von Prevorst. Stuttgart and Tiibingen: 1829. 
KIRK, G. S., and RAVEN, J. E., The Presocratic Philosophers. 3d ed. Cambridge: Cambridge 
Univ. Press, 1989. 
KNEALE, William C. and Martha, Development of Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962. 
KOYRE, Alexandre, "Note sur la langue et la terminologie hegeliennes." Revue philosophique 
de la France et de /'1.tranger 112 (1931):409-39; reprinted in Etudes d'histoire de la pensee 
philosophique. Paris: Gallimard, 1971. 
LAMB, David, ed., Hegel and Modern Philosophy. London: Croom Helm, 1987. 
LASSON, G. See HEGEL, Wissenschaft. 
LEIBNIZ, G. w., Monadology and Other Essays. P. Schrecker, trans. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1965. 
(Includes "Principles of Nature and of Grace.") 
___ , Nouveaux Essais (1765). P. Remnant and J. Bennett, trans. Cambridge: 
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1981. 
___ , Philosophical Papers and Letters. L. E. Loemker, trans. and ed. 2 vols. Chicago: 
Univ. of Chicago Press, 1956; reprinted, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1969. 
___ , Theodicy. A. Farrer, ed.; E. M. Huggard, trans. London: Routledge, 1952; 
abridged reprint, D. Alien, ed. Indianapolis: Library of Liberal Arts, 1966. 
LOCKE, John, Essay on Human Understanding. J. Yolton, ed New York: Dent, 1961 . 
MACRAN, H. S. See HEGEL, Logic. 
McCUMBER, John, "Hegel's Philosophical Languages." Hegel-Studien 14 (1979):183-96. 
MARX, Kar!, and ENGELS, Friedrich, Collected Works. Vol. 1. Moscow: Progress Publishers, 
1975. 
MILLER, A. V. See HEGEL, Phenomenology, Philosophy of Nature, Science of Logic. 
MUIRHEAD, J. H. "How Hegel Came to England." Mind 36 (1927):423-47; a revised version 
was published in The Platonic Tradition in Anglo-Saxon Philosophy. London: Alien and Un­
win, 1931 (pt. 2, chap. 2, 147-73). 
NEWTON, 1., Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica. London: 1687, trans. from the 3d 
ed. (1726) and E Cajori, ed. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1934 (paper, 1962). (Hegel 
owned the 2d ed., Amsterdam: 1714.) 
NICOLIN, E, and POGGELER, O. See HEGEL, Encyklopiidie. 
PARTINGTON, J. R., History of Chemistry. 4 vols. London: Macmillan, 1960-70. 
PEPERZAK, A. T. B., Philosophy and Politics. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1988. 
PETRY, M. J., "Hegel's Excerpts from the Morning Chronicle." Hegel-Studien 11 (1976):1lړ. 
See also HEGEL, Philosophy of Nature, Philosophy of Subjective Spirit. 
RICHTER, Jean Paul Friedrich, Titan. 4 vols. 1800-03; C. T. Brooks, trans. Boston: Ticknor and 
Fields, 1862. 

358 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
ROSENKRANZ, Karl, G. W. F. Hegels Leben. Berlin: 1844; photographic reprint, Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftlifche Buchgesellschaft, 1963. 
ROUSSEAU, J.-J., The Social Contract. G. D. H. Cole, trans. New York: Dent, 1913. 
SCHELLING, E W. J., Bruno. M. Vater, trans. Albany: SUNY Press, 1984. 
___ , "Darstellung meines Systems" (1801); see Siimtliche Werke. Vol. 4, 105-212. 
(First published in the Zeitschrift fUr spekulative Physik, 1800-01.) 
___ , "Einleitung zu dem Entwurf eines System der Naturphilosophie" (1799); re­
printed in Siimtliche Werke. Vol. 3, 269-326. 
___ , Ideas for a Philosophy of Nature. E. E. Harris and P. Heath, trans. Cambridge: 
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1988. 
___ , Siimtliche Werke. K. E A. Schelling, ed. 14 vols. Tibingen: Cotta, 1856-61 . 
Selected works from this edition have been photoreprinted in 8 vols., Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1966-68. 
____ , System of Transcendental Idealism (1 800). P. Heath, trans. Charlottesville: Univ. 
Press of Virgtnia, 1978. 
SCHILLER, J. c. E, On the Aesthetic Education of Man. E. M. Wilkinson and L. A. Willoughby, 
trans. Oxford: Clarendon, 1967. 
____ , On the Aesthetic Education of Man. Trans. with an introduction by Reginald 
Snell. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1954; New York: Frederick Ungar, 1965. 
SIMON, Josef, Das Problem der Sprache bei Hegel. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 1976. 
SPINOZA, Benedict de, Chief Works. R. H. M. Elwes, trans. 2 vols. New York: Dover Press, 
1951 . 
___ , Opera. H. E. G. Paulus, ed. 2 vols. Jena: 18024J3 (the edition used by Hegel). 
___ , Opera. C. Gebhardt, ed. 4 vols. Heidelberg: 1924 (the edition cited herein). 
STIRLING, J. H., The Secret of Hegel (1865). 2d ed. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd, 1898; pho-
tographic reprint, Dubuque, lA: Brown, n.d. (Includes translation of "Quality" and "Quan­
tity" from the Science of Logic; also of §§ 99--106 from the Encyclopaedia Logic.) 
THOLUCK, E A. G., Bliithensammlung aus der morgenliindischen Mystik. Berlin: 1825. 
___ , Die Lehre von der Sande und vom Versiihner. 2d ed. Hamburg: 1825. 
___ , Die spekuIative Trinitiitslehre des spiiteren Orients. Berlin: 1826. 
THOMAS AQUINAS, Summa Theologiae, pt. 1. In Basic Writings. A. C. Pegis, ed. 2 vols. New 
York: Knopf, 1944. ( =  S. T.) 
THOMSON, Thomas, ed., Annals of Philosophy; or Magazine of Chemistry, Mineralogy, Me-
chanics, Natural History, Agriculture, and the Arts. 16 vols. London: 1813-20. 
VERRA, Valerio. See HEGEL, Enciclopedia. 
WALLACE, William. See Bibliography; see also HEGEL, Logic. 
WESTPHAL, Kenneth R ,  "Hegel's Attitude toward Jacobi in the 'Third Attitude of Thought 
towards Objectivity.'" Southern Journal of Philosophy 27 (1979):135-56. 
ZOFLE, Manfred, Prosa der Welt Die Sprache Hegels. Einsiedeln· Johannes Verlag, 1968. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Two especially useful sources of bibliographical information regarding Hegel are K. 
Steinhauer, Hegel Bibliography (Munich/London: Saur, 1980), and Hegel-Studien (Bonn: 
Bouvier, 1961ff), which runs regular comprehensive surveys of publications on Hegel. Regu­
lar reviews of new publications on Hegel are found in "Bulletin de litterature hegelienne" in 
Archives de Philosophie, and in The Owl of Minerva, the biannual journal of the Hegel Society 
of America. 
The following lists (with just one exception) only writings on Hegel's logic as a whole, thus 
excluding treatments of particular themes. Within those limits the list is not meant to be 
exhaustive so much as useful. Naturally, in both respects there is an element of arbitrariness 
in what is included and what excluded. Not listed is the literature in German published 
during roughly the first half of nineteenth century, which can be found in Steinhauer's 
bibliography (cited above), or the conveniently assembled selective list in V. Verra's Italian 
translation of the Encyclopaedia Logic, La Scienza della Logica di Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel 
(Turin: Unione Tipografico Editrice Torinese, 1981), p. 69. 
BAILLlE, J. B., The Origin and Significance of Hegel's Logic. A General Introduction to Hegel's 
System. London: MacMilIan, 1901; reprinted, New York: Garland, 1983. Mainly chaps. 8 
and 9. 
BIARD, J., BUVET, D., KERVEGAN, J.-E, KLlNG, J.-E, LACROIX, A., LECRIVAIN, A., and 
SLUBICKI, M., Introduction ii la lecture de la Science de la Logique de Hege/. 3 vols. Paris: 
Aubier-Montaigne, 1981-87. 
BURBIDGE, J., On Hegel's Logic. Fragments of a Commentary. New York: Humanities Press, 
1981 . 
CASSIRER, E., Das Erkenntnisproblem in der Philosophie und Wissenschaft der neueren Zeit. Vol. 
3, 328--362. (1920). 2d ed Berlin: R Cassirer, 1923. 
CLARK, M., Logic and System. A Study of the Transition from "Vorstellung" to Thought in the 
Philosophy of Hegel. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1971 . 
CORETH, E., Das Dialektische Sein in Hegels Logik. Vienna: Herder, 1952. 
DAMEROW, P., and LEFEVRE, w., "Die wissenschaftliche Problemlage fur Hegels 'Logik'." 
Hegel-Jahrbuch (1979):349--{j8. 
DJ GIOVANNI, G., ed, Essays on Hegel's Logic. Albany: SUNY Press, 1990. 
ELEY, L., Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik. Leitfaden und Kommentar. Munich: Wm. Fink, 1976. 
FINDLAY, J. N., Hegel: A Re-Examination, chaps. 6-8 (1958). 2d ed. London: George AlIen and 
Unwin, 1964. 
FISCHER, K., Hegels Leben, Werke und Lehre (Band 8, I Teil of Fischer's Geschichte der neueren 
Philosophie). 2d ed. Heidelberg: Carl Winter, 1911; Kraus reprint, 1973, pt. 1., bk. 2., chaps. 
13--22. 
FLEISCHMANN, E., La Science universelle ou la logique de Hege/. Paris: PIon, 1968. 
FULDA, H. E, Das Problem einer Einleitung in Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik (1965). 2d ed. 
FrankfurtlM. : V. Klostermann, 1975. 
___ ., HORSTMANN, R -P., and THEUNISSEN, M., Kritische Darstellung der Meta­
physik. Eine Diskussion uber Hegels Logik. Frankfurt/M. : Suhrkamp, 1980. 
359 

360 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
GADAMER, H.-G, "The Idea of HegeI's Logic." In Hegel's Dialectic. Five Hermeneutical Studies, 
75--99. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1976. 
GENTILE, G, "The Reform of the Hegelian Dialectic." A. Armstrong, trans. Idealistic Studies 
11 (1981):187-213. 
GUZZONI, o., Werden zu Sich. Eine Untersuchung zu Hegels "Wissenschaft der Logik". Freiburgl 
Munich: Karl Alber, 1963. 
HARRIS, E. E., An Interpretation of the Logic of Hegel. Lanham, MD: Univ. Press of America, 
1983. 
HARRIS, W. T., Hege/'s Logic. A Book on the Genesis of the Categories of the Mind. A Critical 
Exposition, mainly chaps. 11-32. Chicago: Griggs, 1890; reprinted, New York: Garland, 1983. 
HARTMANN, N., Die Philosophie des deutschen Idealismus. Band 2, pt. 3. Berlin: Waiter de 
Gruyter, 1929. 
HENRICH, D., ed., Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik. Formation und Rekonstruktion. Ver­
offenlichungen der Internationalen Hegel-Vereinigung, Band 16. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta Ver­
lag, 1986. 
HIBBEN, J. G, Hegel's Logic. An Essay in Interpretation. New York: Scribner's Sons, 1902; 
reprinted New York: Garland, 1983. 
HOSLE, v., Hegels System. Der Idealismus der Subjektivitiit und des Problem der Intersubjektivitiit. 
Band 1, Systementwicklung und Logik. Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1987. 
HYPPOLITE, J., Logique et existence Essai sur la logique de Hegel. Paris: Presses Universitaires 
de France, 1961. 
___ , "On the Logic of Hegel" (1952). In J. Hyppolite, Studies on Marx and Hegel, 169-
84. London: Heinemann, 1969. 
INWOOD, M. J., Hegel. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1983. 
JOHNSON, P. E., The Critique of Thought. A Re-Examination of Hegel's 'Science of Logic'. Al­
dershot: Averbury/Gower Publishing Co., 1989. 
KRONER, R., Von Kant bis Hegel, 2:415--502. (192411927). 2d ed Tiibingen: J. c. B. Mohr, 1961. 
LAKEBRINK, B., Kommentar zu Hegels "Logik" in seiner "Enzyklopiidie" von 1 830. 2 vols. 
Freiburg/Munich: Karl Alber, 1979, 1985. 
LENIN, V. I., Philosophical Notebooks. Vo!. 38 of the Collected Works, esp. 85--243, 317-26. 4th 
ed. Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1961 . 
LEONARD, A., Commentaire litteral de la logique de Hegel. Paris: VrinlLouvain: Editions de 
l'Institut Superieur de Philosophie, 1974. 
McTAGGART, J. M. E., A Commentary on Hegel's Logic. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 
1910; reprinted, New York: Russell & Russell, 1964. 
MARCUSE, H., Hegel's Ontology and the Theory of Historicity, pt. 1 (1932). 2d ed., 1968. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987. 
___ , Reason and Revolution. Hegel and the Rise of Social Theory, pt. 1 ,  chap. 5 (1941). 
2d ed. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1955. 
MARX, w., Hegels Theorie logischer Vermittlung. Kritik der dialektischen Begriffskonstruktion in 
der "Wissenschaft der Logik." Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1972. 
MURE, G. R. G, A Study of Hegel's Logic. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1950. 
NOEL, G., La Logique de Hegel, mainly chaps. 2-4. Paris: Alcan, 1897. 
PELLOUX, L., La Logica di Hegel. Milan: Vita e Pensiero, 1938. 
PINKARD, T., "The Logic of Hegel's Logic." Journal of the History of Philosophy 1 7  (1979):417-
35. Reprinted in M. lnwood, ed., Hegel. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1985. 
___ , Hegel's Dialectic, chaps. 1-5. Philadelphia: Temple Univ. Press, 1988. 
PIPPIN, R. B., Hegel's Idealism. The Satisfactions of Self-Consciousness, pt. 3. Cambridge: 
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1989. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
361 
RADEMAKER, H., Hegels "Wissenschaft der Logik" Eine darstellende und erliiuternde Einfuhrung. 
Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Veriag, 1979. 
ROSEN, M., Hegel's Dialectic and its Criticism. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1982. 
ROSEN, 5., G. W. F. Hegel. An Introduction to the Science of Wisdom, chaps. 3-5. New Haven: 
Yale Univ. Press, 1974. 
ROYCE, J., "Hegel's Terminology." In J. B. Baldwin, ed., Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology, 
1:454-65. Rev. ed. New York: Macmillan, 1925. 
SCHMIDT, J., Hegels Wissenschaft der Logik und ihre Kritik durch Adolf Trendelenberg. Pullacher 
Philosophische Forschungen, Band 13. Munich: Johannes Berchmans Veriag, 1977. 
SPAVENTA, B., "Le prime categorie della logica di Hegel" (1864). In Scritti filosofici, 185-252. 
G. Gentile, ed. Naples: Morano, 1900. 
STACE, W. T., The Philosophy of Hegel. A Systematic Exposition, pt. 2. London: Macmillan, 1924. 
TAYLOR, c., Hegel, pt. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1975. 
THEUNISSEN, M., Sein und Schein. Zur kritischen Funktion der Hegelschen Logik. FrankfurtIM. : 
Suhrkamp, 1980. 
WALLACE, w., Prolegomena to the Study of Hegel's Philosophy and Especially of His Logic, mainly 
chaps. 26--32. 2d ed. Oxford: Univ. Press, 1894. 
WEISS, F. G., ed., Beyond Epistemology. New Studies in the Philosophy of Hegel. The Hague: 
Nijhoff, 1974. 
BRIEF GUIDE TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY 
PRIMARILY GENERAL APPROACHES TO HEGEI.:S LOGIC 
GADAMER, HYPPOLITE (1969), and PINKARD (1979) are brief overall perspectives on the 
subject. The second may be supplemented by the author's earlier book. PINKARD (1988) 
regards Hegel's logical theory as an "explanation of possibility." ROYCE is a very useful 
guide to central concepts. 
BAILLIE, W. T. HARRIS, and WALLACE are older works, written from an Absolute Idealist 
standpoint and thoroughly sympathetic to Hegel. CLARK is a study of Hegel's conception 
of the relation of ordinary language (Vorstellung) to thought proper (Denken). CORETH is 
on Hegel's conception of ontology (Thomist orientation). DAMEROW/LEFEVRE situates 
Hegel's logic with respect to the scientific scene of the time, especially mathematics, and 
follows a Marxist orientation. FULDA is a detailed discussion of the question of the appro­
priate "entry" into the Logic, vis-a-vis the claims of the Phenomenology of Spirit and the 
earlier sections of the first part of the Encyclopaedia. GUZZONI's theme is Hegel's idea of 
development as realisation of the implicit. HENRICH brings together a wide range of 
papers on the Logic as a whole (especially in the first part of the book) and on particular 
topics, from a variety of standpoints. 
HOSLE discusses the historical background of the Hegelian philosophy, analyses the struc­
ture of his system and his method, and develops the main thesis of the work, namely, that 
there is no thorough-going correspondence between the Logic and the "Realphilosophie". 
INWOOD's very long book places a heavy emphasis on the introductory sections of the 
Encyclopaedia Logic; it is at once expository and critical. W. MARX and M. ROSEN are 
highly critical. S. ROSEN has much on the historical affiliations of the Logic. SCHMIDT is a 
Thomist-oriented response to Trendelenberg's critique of Hegel's logic. 

362 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
THEUNISSEN presents a distinctive interpretation according to which Hegel's "objective" 
logic is an exhibition of traditional metaphysics which is simultaneously a critique of its 
pretension to represent the truth (Schein) and an unveiling of the truth (Sein), whilst the 
"subjective" logic is a presentation of the latter in the form of a theory of "communicative 
freedom," found in Hegel's theory of the judgment. The account is discussed in FULDAI 
HORSTMANNm-IEUNISSEN. SPAVENTAS essay inspired GENTILE'S "reform of the di­
alectic," which was very influential on the second generation of Anglo-Hegelians (es­
pecially Collingwood). 
WHOLLY OR PRIMARILY STEP-BY-STEP COMMENTARIES 
PARTS OF BOOKS 
WALLACE, already mentioned, also belongs here. FISCHER's presentation, part of his large, 
nineteenth-century Geschichte der neueren Philosophie, is wooden, sticking closely to the 
original texts. CASSIRER (in his usual elegant style), HARTMANN, and KRONER present 
the Logic in the context of "classical" German idealism. STACE essentially paraphrases the 
Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences; though, like FISCHER, it is on the whole pretty 
wooden, Stace can often be very helpful, especially as a guide to a first reading of the Logic. 
FINDLAY was the first book to try to make Hegel accessible to "analytically" minded 
philosophers. TAYLOR also attempts to make sense of Hegel, and in particular the Logic, in 
a no-nonsense, "contemporary" way. It is highly recommended. LENIN presents reading 
notes on the Science of Logic made in late 1914-15; it is especially influential on Soviet 
writing on Hegel, and very stimulating in many ways. MARCUSE (1955) is also a Marxist 
treatment, emphasising the social-critical significance of the Logic, whilst his earlier work 
(1987), strongly influenced by Heidegger, is, as its title suggests, a presentation of the Logic 
from the point of view of an ontology of history. 
MONOGRAPHS 
BASED WHOLLY OR MAINLY ON mE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
HIBBEN is a short work by one of the earlier American Hegelians, not without value as a first 
orientation. MURE is a solid commentary, published at a time when most Anglophone 
philosophers could scarcely spell Hegel's name. It emphasises Hegel's affiliations with 
Aristotle. E. E. HARRIS is a useful book, though his closeness to what he is commenting 
upon often leads to his failing to see what readers not so identified with Hegel might 
require to be elucidated. These works follow the general drift of the Encyclopaedia. 
LAKEBRINK and LEONARD offer sentence-by-sentence commentaries on that text though 
with extensive reference to the larger Logic. Both are Thomist in orientation, the first more 
explicitly so. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
363 
BASED WHOLLY OR MAINLY ON THE SCIENCE OF LOGIC 
W. T. HARRIS, NOEL, and McTAGGART are older commentaries, all written from an Idealist 
standpoint. The first two are fairly brief and may be useful to the beginner. The third is an 
elaborate work and not recommended to the novice. (E. E. Harris's book has many polemics 
with McTAGGART.) PELLOUX comes from a Catholic press. FLEISCHMANN is a detailed 
commentary; ELEY and RADEMAKER are briefer, the former making considerable use of 
the resources of modem formal logic. 
BIARD ET AL. is a meticulous commentary on the text of that work, one volume's being 
devoted to each of the three main parts. JOHNSON's book is very much looser in exegesis, 
its aim being mainly to bring out the significance of the Logic for general philosophical 
problems, particularly as they occur in more recent discussion. PIPPIN's account of this 
part of Hegel's work does not attempt a commentary on the whole of it. Rather, he is 
concerned to show that the general thesis of his book, namely, that Hegel was basically 
rethinking Kant's project in the Critique of Pure Reason, is confirmed and further illuminated 
there. BURBIDGE is a very dense commentary on the first chapter of each of the three parts 
of the Logic, plus chapters on related topics. The volume edited by G. or GIOVANNI 
contains the papers given at the Conference of the Hegel Society of America (Chicago, 
1988) on "Hegel's Logic." 

ANALYTICAL INDEX 
by H.S. Haris 
For the most part this index aims to be as exhaustive as possible. But some 
entries are illustrative only, and some are incomplete because time and 
patience were exhausted first. 
I have capitalized the headings that I take to be links in Hegel's logical 
chain. My decisions were taken after consulting both Wallace and Stace. I 
have tended to agree more with Stace, but I have not exactly followed 
either of them. (H stands for Hegel; and the letters U, P, S stand for 
Universal, Particular, Singular.) 
364 

ANALYTICAL INDEX 
Absolute: supersensible, xv-xvi, 54; as 
Idea, xv (see Idea); Subject-Object indif­
ference, xxiv, 37; topic of philosophy, 10, 
38, 138; wholly present, 59; speculative 
Identity, 69, 85; progressive definition, 
135, 137, 139, 140, 145, 158, 170, 175, 
237, 257, 263, 272-73, 286-87; abstract, 
180, 328n.6; H's use, 324n.3, 326n.21 
Absolute Idea: unity and distinction, 291, 
303-7; self-thinking Idea, 303 
abstract(ion): utility of, 52; being, 94, 
139-40; analytical, 179-80, 296-98, 
328n.6; of Concept, 236-37, 240, 242; 
judgment, 246-47; H's use, 314n.29 
Accident: see Substance 
accidental: see contingen(t)(cy) 
ACHILLES: 203 
acquaintance (Kenntnis): usage, xxi, xl-xlii; 
examples, 26, 28, 40, 53 
activity (Ttitigkeit): thinking, 49; spirit, 72; 
form, 220, 224, 225; sublates contradic­
tion, 302 
Actual[ityj (Wirklich{keit1): of reason, 
29-30, 214; and contingency, 29-30, 
217-20; empirical, 40, 77; Inner/Outer 
identity, 213; Essence/Existence unity, 
213-35; and Possibility, 215-16; Singular 
Concept, 240; usage, 351n.36 
actuosity: of God, 72, 314n.26 
ADAM: 62 
Additions (Zusiitze): relation to text, 
vii-viii, xviii, 312n.l 
agreement: of ob-ject and representation, 
59-60 (see correctness); of content with 
itself, 60 (see truth); of intuition and 
understanding, 103 
alien (jremd): content, 87, 347n.4 
AlIness (Allheit): judgment, 252-53; syllo­
gism, 264-66; usage, 351n.31 
Alteration (Verinderung): mediates truth, 
54; and alternation, 148--49; of Quantity, 
158, 172 
Analogy: Reflective SyllOgism, 265-66 
analysis: by abstraction, 78-79; of Being 
and Nothing, 141; produces definitions, 
296-99; philosophical, 306 
ANAXAGORAS: impiety trial, 312n.4; 
monotheist, 323n.99; Socrates on, 
329n. l0 
ANAXIMANDER: 328n.35 
al1erkennen: and erkennen, xxii 
animal: concrete universal, 56-57 
Annumeration (Anzahl): xxxv, 161ʞ, 
327n.28 
365 
ANSELM: faith seeks understanding, 14n, 
123n, 309n. 14, 323n.105; his "proof," 
270-71, 323n.24 
anthropology: 312n.17 
antinomies: Kant's, 91-94, 129, 317(nn.49, 
52); of Quantity, 160; of Measure, 170-71 
antithesis (Gegensatz): usage, xxiii, 317n.52, 
349n.17; conditioned/unconditioned, 8n; 
thoughtlDaseil1, 35, 54, 98-100; universaV 
singular, 53, 98; Subject/Object, 56, 268, 
273; of consciousness, 62֖; good/evil, 
62, 72, 73; finite/Absolute, 64; of under­
standing, 64, 65, 185-86; cosmological, 
72; freedom/necessity, 72, 73; reality/ 
negation, 73; duty/happiness, 104-5; 
mediated/immediate, 114; 
understanding/sense, 126; Being! 
Nothing, 139-41; FinitelInfinite, 150-52; 
Repulsion/Attraction, 155; reality/ 
Appearance, 201; Form/Content, 201; 
Whole/Parts, 205; Inner/Outer, 212-13, 
actuality/idea, 214; Concept/Object, 271 
anti-thesis (Antithese): 93, 348n.17 
Apodeictic Judgment: 256, 257 
Appearance (Erscheinung): usage, xxv-xxvi; 
Actuality and, 29-30; natural phenom­
ena, 53; cognition of, SO, 88, 92; and 
Essence, 177-78; self-sublating Existence, 
198-213; truth as World of, 200-201; con­
tains Form, 200-201; Relationship in, 204 
apperception: 83-85 
argument (Riisonnieren): theological, 21; 
thinking mode, 25, 35; finite grounds, 
40-41; nonphilosophic, 123, 208; 
dialectical, 191 
ARISTOPHANES: Socrates in, 323n.99 
ARISTOTLE: definition of purpose, 10; 
influence, 13n; on Idea(s), 17, 214-15, 
330n.23; human vocation, 22, 55; empiri­
cism, 32, 296, 311n.8, 334n.8; logic of, 
51-52, 260, 262ʟ3, 313n.7, 332-33n. 19, 
348n. ll; metaphysics, 76; on Presocratics, 
165, 324n.l0, 325n. l0, 326n. 14, 327n.33, 
328n.35; theology, 211, 303, 335n.50; on 
life, 2SO, 291, 332n.9, 333n.29, 334n.43; 
on consensus, 322n.98; chance, 330n.25; 
slavery, 331n.5; references, 310n.8, 
313n. l l ,  330n.9, 334n.34 

366 
arithmetic: calculation in, 162Ǜ3 
Art: as cognitive, 102; understanding in, 
127; form is content, 203 
Assertoric Judgment: 255 
atheism: and faith, 14, 119; relative term, 
33On.29 
atomism: abstract singularity, 49, 155; 
history of, 155, 156, 164; political, 155; 
Aristotle on, 326n. 12 
Attraction: see Repulsion 
aufheben: use and translation, xxv-xxvi, 
xxxv-xxxvi, l54 
BAADER, E von: and H, 14-16, 309n.17; 
mentioned, 314n.26 
BACON, E :  314n.30 
BARDILI, CG. :  327n.29 
BAUMEISTER, Ee.: Institutll, 331-32n.7 
BAUMGARTEN, A. : 324n.4 
BAYLE, p.: 317n.57 
BEATTIE, J.: 322n.97 
BECK, J.S. : 312n. 16 
Becoming (Werden): and Thereness, xx-xxi, 
146; Heracleitus, 37, 144-45; Being­
Nothing unity, 141-44, 325n.l0 
beginning: problem, 24; of philosophy, 30, 
41, 136-37, 324-25nn.֗; of theological 
proofs, 95-96; represents Being-Nothing, 
143; Concept not, 234-35; moment of 
method, 304-5 
Being (Sein): categories of, xv, xxvii, 136; 
universally present, 27; Eleatics, 37; pure 
thought, 59; sensible, 86; God as, 95--%, 
325n.1l; and Essence, 133-34, 173, 175--
76; immediacy, 133-34; Quality, 136; 
Being-in-self. 147-48; Being-for-self, 151, 
153; Quantity, 161; completed in Mea­
sure, 169; restored in Existence, 192; in 
Judgment, 24S-9; as passage, 3֘; uses, 
351-52n.38; see also Pure Being 
Being-for-self (Fiirsichsein): knowledge, 
xxi-xxi; Concept, xxvii; One, xxxviii-ix, 
153; I, 57, 153; double negation, 151; 
ideality, 152-53; atom, 155-56; sublation 
of, 157; Degree, 161 
Being-there (Dasein): see Thereness 
Being-within-self (lnsichsein): 178, 187, 197, 
350n.30 
BEISER, E: 308n.l, 329n. 16 
believing: (in God) see faith 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
BERKELEY, G. : H and, 327n.22 
Bible: Matthew 7:20, 19, 211-12; Romans 
3:4, 22, 35, 310n. 7, 31ln. 12; John 7:38, 20; 
John 18:38, 46-47; John 4:24, 47; Matthew 
6:33, 52; Genesis 2--3, 61ʟ3; Matthew 
18:3, 62; Measure in, 169--70, 328n.36 
BLUMENBACH, J.E: 332n. 15, 334n.43 
BOCHENSKI, I.M.: 332-33n. 19 
BODAMMER, T. : xxix 
body: reality of soul, 147; immediate pur­
pose, 284; members of, 291 
BOEHME, J. : QUill in, 12, 309n. 1O; 
"Teutonic Philosopher," 15, 309n. 15; 
mentioned, 314n.26 
BONNET, C: Emboftement, 331n.3 
BOURGEOIS, B.: ix, xx, 326n.16 
BROUGHAM, Henry (Lord): 32n 
BRUCKER, J.J.: method of History, 10-11, 
309n.8 
Buddhism: 139, 141, 325n.8 
BURGH, A. : 309n.18 
BURKHARDT, EH. : 329n. 16 
CAESAR, C Julius: 246 
CANNING, George (Lord): 32n, 31ln.7 
CllpUt mortuum: 87, 175, 177, 316n.45 
Categorical Judgment: 254 
Categorical Syllogism: 267 
category (Klltegorie): concepts, 26-27; 
familiar, 45; Subject as, 51; Kant's, 84-87; 
thought-contents, 86-87, antinomic, 
91-92; deduction, 108; restricted, 109; 
use of term, 348n.11 
CIIUSII sui: 228, 318n.61 
Cause and Effect (UrSlche, Wirkung): 
efficient and final, 72, 191, 280, 329n.9; 
Kantian category, 85-86; Ur-Sllche, 227-
28; Relationship, 227--30; finite, 22S-29; 
necessity, 229 
centrality: negative unity, 276 
chance (Zufa/l): 155, 217 
character: 126, 147 
Chemism (Chemismus): differentiated 
Objectivity, 273, 277-79; confused with 
Mechanism, 277-78 
chemistry: 79, 196 
Chinese box: Bonnet's theory, 238, 331n.3 
Christ: see JESUS 
Christianity: Protestant, 13n, 14, 19-21, 30-
31; doctrine, 21, 74; rational revelation, 

ANALYTICAL INDEX 
75; Spirit, 208; freedom, 240-41; see also 
God, religion 
CICERO, M. Tullius: Tusculans, 18; con­
sensus gentium, 118, 322n.98; sceptic, 
323n.113; sorites, 328n.37; reference, 
327n.24 
circle: mark of whole, 39; philosophical, 41; 
modern thought as, 122-23; Reciprocity, 
230; Concept, 233-35 
CLARK, M. : xxix 
classification: in zoology, 298, 334n.43 
CLERSELIER, c.: 322n.93 
Cognition (Erkenntnis): usage, xxi-xxii, 
xl-xlii; philosophical, 2-3, 4, 24-25; 
empirical, 5-6, 76--81, 85--86, 87-88, 207; 
religious, 14-15; by fruits, 19, 211-12; 
finite and infinite, 31-34, 40-41, 46-47, 
71-72, 203, 206-8, 295-96; critique of, 
33--34, 82-84, 92; levels of, 49-50, 60-61; 
divine, 62-@; of God, 73--75; of 
appearances, 80, 92, 105-6, 107-10; 
dialectical, 82, 129; of Ding-an-sich, 89, 
194; understanding, 126, 295-300; of Es­
sence, 176-77; of Force, 206-8; overcomes 
contingency, 218; reciprocal, 231-32; me­
diated Idea, 291, 294-303; spiritual, 294; 
absolute, 303-4 
coherence (Zusammenhang): logical, 4; of 
manifold, 89; finite, 110; of thought and 
being, 114, 117; external, 117; immanent, 
128; of contents, 142; of judgment theory, 
248-49 
common sense: prejudices of, 25, 65, 66, 
90, 95, 109; as immediate truth, 112 
comparison: finds Diversity, 182; presup­
position of, 184 
comprehension (Begreifen): goal of logical 
thought, xxvi, 35-41; of Being and 
Nothing, 142; cognition, 190, 193; Re­
ciprocal, 231-32; absolute, 288, 303 
Concept (Begriff): and Life, xv, 291-92; 
movement, xvi-xviii, 1, 16-17, 237; U, 
P, S moments, xix, 239, 241-42; and 
Vorstellung, xxixn.lO, 24, 26-27, 41, 81; 
and Ide֙ 5, 242, 286, 303-4, 306-7; ab­
stract, 7, 33, 73, 98-99, 236-37, 240, 242, 
259; language of, 11; and shape, 15-17; 
in Understanding, 27, 33, 81, 83-84, 126, 
238-39, 240-41; self-determining, 40, 
242-43, 245; circle of, 41; objectivity of, 
367 
56; self-agreeing truth, 60; concrete, 71, 
99, 125-6, 180-81, 236, 241-42, 259; self­
mediating immediacy, 133--34; in-itself, 
135; contradiction in, 186; true Necessity, 
221-22; truth of Substance, 232; truth of 
Being and Essence, 233--34, 236; division 
of. 238; of willing, 241; logical first, 241; 
grades of clarity, 242-43; in Judgment, 
248-49, 250, 255-56; in Syllogism, 257, 
262; Objective, 269-71; Purpose, 285--86; 
usage, 349n.5 
con-clusion (Zusammenschlief3en): usage, 
xxvii, xlvii-xlviii; syllogism as, 59; 
of Object, 275-77, 278, 280, 281-85; 
of Life, 292 concrete(ness): inwardly 
opposed, 187, 215-16; and abstraction, 
236-37; of Concept, 241-42; see also 
Concept 
CONDILLAC E.B. de M. de: 319n.77 
condition(s) (Bedingung): of philosophy, 3; 
of God as spirit, 16n; of truth, 21, and 
unconditioned, 96; contingent, 219-20; 
moment of Necessity, 224 
connection (Zusammenhang): see coherence 
consciousness (Broluf3tsein): experience of, 
xvii-xviii, 350n.25; ob-ject of, xxii; as 
Wissen, xl; facts of. 6, 41, 49, 113, 118, 
296, 308n.1; modes of, 25-26; mingled el­
ements, 27, 52; world of representation, 
57-58, 88; birth of, 62; idealism of. 70; 
certainty, 77, 112, 118; as "thinking," 122; 
assumes Being, 174, 200-201. 296 
consensus gentium: 118-19, 322n.9 
constitution (Verfassung): measure in, 171; 
(Beschaffenheit), 348n.6 
Content and Form (Inhalt, Form): conscious 
form-variation, 26, 47, 61, 31On.2; true 
form, 47, 61; Inner/Outer unity, 209; 
distinction in identity, 201-4, 206, 
209-10, 217, 220; in understanding, 
202; Substance as, 225-27; Logic as, 
304; see also Form and Matter 
Contingency (Zufiilligkeit): of language, 
xx, xxxii; of existence, 32; of empirical 
science, 36, 80, 95-100; of grounds, 40; 
external concreteness, 217; in Nature, 
218-19; in volition, 218-19; actuality 
as, 225; of formal syllogism, 260-61 
continuity: and One, xxix; and discrete­
ness, 160, 161, 163 

368 
contradiction (Widerspruch): philosophy 
and. 5; phase of thinking, 35; in finite 
cognition, 61, 329n.8, 349n.17; universal, 
91-93, 145; in living things, 105-6, 149, 
293-94; sublated. 146; in finite being, 149, 
187; in Quantity, 169; explicit in Essence, 
178; formal doctrine of, 185-86; in the 
concrete, 187, 215-16; in Ground, 189; in 
Thing, 198; in Existence, 199; in Possibil­
ity, 217; in Qualitative Syllogism, 261; in 
Object, 271, 277; in finite volition, 301-2 
COOK, D: xxix 
COPERNICUS, N.: 320n.86 
copula: universally present, 27; ob-ject 
of pure thought, 59; identity, 244-56 
passim; fulfilled in syllogism, 248, 256; 
overlooked, 289 
correctness: and truth, 59-60, 249-50; in 
linguistic analysis, 70; not philosophical, 
158; formal, 243 
cosmology: dogmatic, 72; Kant on, 91-94 
creation: God's, 16n; meaning, 198; doc­
trine, 241 
crime: and punishment, 86, 233; infinite 
judgment, 251 
Critical Journal: 80, 315n.33 
Critical Philosophy: main discussion, vii, 
34, 80-108; sceptical, 54, 66; and empiri­
cism, 80, 106; importance of, 81-,'13, 107; 
and dialectic, 82; attacked by Jacobi, 
1OS-1O 
CUVIER, G. : 334n.43 
Dalai-Lama: God, 112, 120 
DALTON. J. : pores, 329n. 14 
DANTE ALIGHIERI: 19, 310n.3 
death: contradiction in life, 105-6, 149, 
293-94; infinite judgment, 251 
decrease: see increase 
deduction: of Categories, 84; systematic, 
108; ordinary use, 237 
definition (Definition): fixed by understand­
ing, 7; determines concept, 140, 297-98; 
correctness of, 298; contradictory, 
334n.42 
Degree (Grad): 163-65 
demonstration: as mediation, 299, 301 
DE NEGRI, E. : xxx 
DESCARTES, R. : cogito, 113-14, 122-23, 
318n.59, 321nn.92-94, 323nn. 102-3; On­
tological Proof, 122, 270-71, 333n.24; 
"meditation," 309n.5; God's "eminence," 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
314n.27; innate ideas, 322n.97; certainty, 
329n.4; clarity, 331n.7 
determinacy (Bestimmtheit): of conscious 
contents, 26; of pure thinking, 45; nega­
tive, 105-6; sublated. 157; of Quantum, 
167-{58; of form, 201; of concepts, 242-43; 
in Concept, 297-99, 303, 305, 307; usage, 
348n.7 
determination (Bestimmung): or vocation, 
4, 18; of philosophy, S-9; Christian, 
20; of thinking, 45 (see thought­
determinations); isolated, 50; objective 
thoughts, 56; restricted. 94; of Absolute, 
140; Concept as Judgment, 248; usage, 
348n.7 
development: Concept as, 233-34; process 
of Concept, 237; in nature, 238 
dialectic (Dialektik): and understanding, 
35; in reason, 91-93; phase of logiC, 125, 
128-31; God's might, 130; of Idea, 289; 
as progression, 305; usage, 314n.9 
DJELS, H.: 326n. 12 
difference (Differenz): usage, xxiii-xxiv, xlv­
xlvi; middle category, 135; mark of Es­
sence, 248-49; in Cognition, 291 
Difference Essay: 311n. 1l, 330n.24 
differentiated (different): Chemism, 273, 
277-79; Mechanism, 276, 277 
DJ GIOVANNI, G. : 308n. l, 311(nn.ll, 17), 
313n. 17, 314n.29, 320n.85, 324n. 113 
DJOGENES LAERTIUS: 313n.9, 324n. l0, 
328n.37 
Ps. DJONYSIUS: 314n.27 
discrete: see continuity 
Disjunctive Judgment: 254-55, 332n. 16 
Disjunctive Syllogism: 267 
Disputation Theses: H's, 334n.44 
Distinction (Unterschied): usage, xv, xxiii, 
xxx-xxxi, xlv; within unity, 7-,'1, 118, 
140, 273; good/evil, S-9; Thereness/ 
inwardness, 35; thought/representation, 
49-50; learning, 52-53, 313n 8; of under­
standing, 126; merely meant, 139-41; 
common ground of, 140; full/empty, 142; 
Something/Other, 148; continuous/ 
discrete, 163; negative relation, 179, 181-
88; and Identity, 181-,'12, 1֚; essen­
tial. 184-,'!6, 188-,'!9; of Properties, 195; 
explicit, 242-44, 306; of monads, 272; self­
distinction, 294, 298, 306; in finite cogni­
tion, 296; of methods, 299 
Diversity (Verschiedenheit): usage, xxiii; 

ANALYTICAL INDEX 
Subject/Object, 7֛; good/evil, 8; man/ 
God, 8n; philosophy/consciousness, 25; 
religion/philosophy, 27-28; speculation/ 
meditation, 33; thoughtlbeing, 99; of 
values, 101; BeingINothing, 141, 143; 
extensive/intensive, 163-64; in "passage" 
and "relation," 174; immediate 
Distinction, 182ʠ; CauselEffect, 229; 
subject/predicate, 246-48 
division: of Logic, 42, 133-34; of Being, 
136; infinite, 160-61; of Concept, 238; 
particularises Concept, 297, 298; 
tripartite, 298 
dogmatism: and criticism, 66; defined, 
69--70; of understanding, 93, 114 
drive (Trieb): rational, 140; living, 281 
dualism: 74, 151 
duty: universal in, 53, 102, 104; relativity 
of, 101 
Eden: xlii, 61Ǜ3 
education: 69, 115--16, 211 
Effect: see Cause 
Ego: see I 
Eleatics: 37, 138, 145, 167 
elevation: to supersensible, 95, 117, 281 
"else": and "other," 326n. 18 
EMPEDOCLES: 328n.35, 329n.14 
emphasis: conventions of, xxvii-xxviii 
empiricism: discussed, vii, 31-32, 7֜0, 
314n.30; merits, 31, 77, 78; defects, 31-32, 
77-79; presuppositions, 78; naive and 
metaphysical, 106-7, 319n.77 
Encyclopaedia: editions, vii-viii, xiii; func­
tion, vii-viii, 1, 4, 18, 22-23, 39; transla­
tions, ix, xiii, xxxi; circle not aggregate, 
39--40; references, xxx, xl, xlii, 9n, 309n. 17 
end: see Purpose 
Enlightenment: theology of, 13n, 21, 120-
21, 177, 310n.6; 3 positions in, 121; justi­
fication of, 208 
EPICURUS: 131, 322n.98 
EquallUnequal: and likeness, xliv; good/ 
evil, 9; and unity, 162; external 
Distinction, 182ʠ; syllogism of, 26֝ 
ERIUGENA: 312n. 19 
ESCHENBERG, J.J. : 312n.3 
Essence (Wesen): usage, xviii-xix, 176, 
314n.28, 328n.4; in Ontology, 70; God as, 
94, 176-77, 208; logical mediation, 114-
15, 133-34, 173, 192; mediately immedi­
ate, 137; passage to, 174; all relational, 
369 
174-75; reflective, 175--79, 192-98, 306; 
and Appearance, 177-78, 19S-200; con­
tradiction in, 178, 18֞6, 189, 19S-99, 
306; as Ground, 188; in Judgment, 24S-49 
essential sum (Inbegriff): God as, 137, 
351n.31 
eternity: and time, 138 
ethical [life] (Sittiich[keitl): 32, 49, 115, 172, 
191, 233 
EUBULIDES: 328n.37 
eudaemonism: 101, 318n.66 
EVE: 62 
evil: enlightened, 6; and good, 7, 9, 61Ǜ3, 
73; Entzweiung, 9-10, 62; origin of, 61ʞ 
excluded middle: 18֟6, 187 
Existence (Existenz): usage, xx, xxxvii, 
320n.83, 348n.1O; contingent, 29, 86, 99; 
of crime, 86; of God, 113; essential, 113, 
178; mediation of, 115; self-sublated me­
diation, 191-93; and Appearance, 212 
experience: of consciousness, xvii, 29, 64; 
principle of, 31-32, 35-37, 76-81, 90, 115, 
164; proof by, 100, 119 
extensive: and intensive, 157-58, 163-65 
externality (Aufierlichkeit): of Purpose, 1 (see 
Purpose); of order, 1-2, 40; of space and 
time, 83-84; of Quantity, 136, 168; of 
Number, 165; of Nature, 210-11; of 
Actuality, 217-18 
factum (Faktum): types, 6; philosophy, 11, 
121-22; thought-determinations, 49; 
mediation, 118; consciousness, 118; 
usage, 349n.21 
faculty(ies): cognition, 34; spiritual, 35; 
overgrasped, 57; theoretical, 83 
faith (Glaube): and knowledge, xv; in truth, 
13; Christian, 19-21, 111-12; enlightened, 
21; in God, 26, 119n; immediate know­
ing, 31, 110-11; variety of, 112, 119n; 
unconscious elevation, 117 
Faith and Knowledge: 315n.37, 327n.31, 
331n.30 
Fata Morgana: 12, 309n. 11 
feeling (Gefiihl): primitive consciousness, 
12, 25, 47; modes of, 47 
FICHTE, J.G. : merits, 84, 108, 315n.40; 
Ought, 150, 302, 313n. 1O, 326n.20; Sun­
clear Report, 201; God as Object, 272, 
333n.26; and Kant, 312n. 16, 313n.5, 319-
20n.81; "synthesis" triad, 317n.52, 
348n. 1 7; thinking, 31 3n. 1 O, 318n 69, 

370 
323n. 109; "I = 1," 324n.4, 325n.6 
figures: of syllogism, 260, 262-63, 266, 
332-33n. 19 
Finit[e][ude] (Endlich[keitJ): cognition, 5-6, 
31-34, 40-41, 46-47, 71-72, 76-81, 85-88, 
207, 295-96; form and matter, 40-41; un­
truth, 60-61; dialectical, 128, 130; sphere 
of Difference, 135; alterable, 148; ideality 
of, 152, 153, 335n.52; contradiction in, 
149, 187; Judgment, 246; Purpose, 282-86; 
will, 301-2; see also Infinite, Relationship 
for itself (fur sich): spirit as, 42; ideality 
of the real, 153; opposites as, 188; 
explained., 347n.2 
for one (fUr eines): Concept posited, 305; 
explained, 335n.52 
Force and Utterance (Kraft, Auf3erung): 
complex Reflection, 205-9; finite-infinite 
Relationship, 206-8; finite, 206; usage, 
347n.4 
Form and Matter (Form, Materie): of 
thought, 25, 26; satisfaction of, 33; em­
pirical but intuitive, 41; absolute, 46, 59; 
sensible and intellectual, 58; of knOWing, 
86; determinate, 197-98; Form contains 
Matter, 201 (see Content and Form) 
formal (formal, [ormeU): usage, xxv, xli-xliii, 
330n.22, 349n.22 
formalism: in philosophy, xiv, xvi, 37; 
negative, 21; schematic, 1-2, 300, 
308(nn. 1, 2); in theology, 21; Kantian, 
108; of Ground, 189-92 
FORSTER, M. N. :  313n. 17, 324n. 1l3 
FRANKENBURG, A. von: 309n. 15 
free choice (Willkiir): contingency of will­
ing, 218-19, 233 (cf. 21) 
freedom (Freiheit): abstract, 21, 55, 58, 
218-19; thoughtful, 21, 22, 37, 55, 69, 
107, 140-41, 218-19, 223-24; defined, 
58, 79; and necessity, 72-73, 93-94, 
100-101, 222-23, 232-34; Nothing as, 
140, 325n.9; Being-for-self, 153; ethical, 
233; of Concept, 236, 294 
FRIES, J.E : 312n. 1, 320n.84, 321n.88 
GALEN: 332n. 19 
GALILEO GALILEI: 326n.20 
GAUNILO: 333n.24 
General Will: and Will of Al, 241 
genius: Kant's theory, 103 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Genus (Gattung): living kind, 57, 140, 
161, 253, 293-94, 297; species and, 242, 
254-55, 297-98; procesƷ 293-94; 
usage, 334n.36 
geology: Matters in, 196 
geometry: intuitive, 45, 300; method, 227, 
298-300 
GERAETS, T.E: viii-ix 
gnosticism: 15-16 
God: Essence, xviii, 73-75, 94--100, 112, 
176-77; logical topic, xxi, 132, 135; self­
emptying, xxxiv, 16n; Thereness, xxxviii, 
26, 66-67, 73, 75, 94--100, 317n.54; Cre­
ator, 7, 198, 241, 288; Trinity, 12-15n. 15, 
159, 217, 238; Judge, 19-21; truth, 24, 46, 
60; Actuality, 29, 72; pantheism, 8-9n, 
74, 331n.29; Substance, 9-11, 226-27, 
330-31n.29; and man, 9-11, 62-63; cogni­
tion of, 32, 34, 36, 74-75, 109, 134; Abso­
lute, 36; Spirit, 47 (see Spirit); in 
representation, 50, 75, 1 19-21, 271; pred­
icates of, 66-69; many names, 67-68; du­
alist view, 74; essential sum, 94, 316n.44; 
must exist, 99-100, 1 13, 122, 270-71; pos­
tulate, 104; person, 1 11, 223, 226, 330-
31n.29; unknown, 120, 240; attributes of, 
127, 130, 200, 316n.47; Being, 135, 137, 
139, 141; and Number, 159; Measure, 
169-70; Lord, 177; Identity, 181; Demi­
urge, 198; Force, 206-8; not jealous, 211; 
Providence, 222-23, 330n.27; destiny, 
222-23; Subjectivity, 223; Object, 268; 
Procession from, 312n. 19; Ideal, 316n.44, 
317n.53; see also Absolute, Christianity 
GOERRES, J. : 308n.2 
GOESCHEL: 309n.9, 31On.2 
GOETHE, J.W. von: Faust, 6, 79, 309n.3, 
314-15n.31; greatness, 60, 126, 212, 
323n.l07, 330n.20; nature, 210, 31ln. 18, 
329-30n. 18 
good: distinct from evil, 8-9, 73; cognition 
of, 61-63; postulate, 101-2, 104-5; natural 
order as, 127; God as, 127, 130, 200, 
316n.47; fulfilled, 286; subjective Idea, 301 
GORGIAS: 325n.8 
grammar: H's violations, xxvii; rules, 52-53; 
value, 59 
gravity: specific, 163-64 
GRAY; J.G. : 314n.29 
Greek(s): philosophy, 30, 48, 69, 167; re-

ANALYTICAL INDEX 
ligion, 119n, 223; and barbarians, 240 
GRIER, P. : 314n.29 
GRIESHEIM, K.G von: transcripts, vii 
GROTIUS, H. : 31, 311n.5 
Ground (Grund): arbitrary, 40, 189-92; 
finite, 40-41; of Thereness, 179; Absolute 
as, 180; Essence as, 188-92; principle of, 
188-91, 329n.9; formalism of, 189-92; 
and consequence, 189, 192; Distinction 
of, 190; not yet Purpose, 192-93; self­
sublating, 193; complex Reflection, 195; 
of Appearance, 201; Being as, 233; Con­
cept as, 233, 269 
HALLER, A. von: poet, 166, 210, 327n.32, 
329-30n. 18; scientist, 334n.35 
HAMANN, J.G :  319n.78 
HARRIS, H.S. : viii-ix, 308n. 1, 313n. 17, 
324n. 113 
having: and being, 195, 244 
HEGEL, G.w.F. :  difficulty of, xiii-xiv; on 
logic and language, xiv-xvii; mentioned, 
80, 308-35, 347-52 
HEIDEGGER, M. : xxx 
HENGSTENBERG, A. von: 31On.2 
HERACLEITUS: Becoming, 37, 144-45; 
misquoted, 325-26n.12; measure, 328n.35 
heraldry: positive science, 40 
HERDER, lG von: 206, 329n. 16 
HERMANN, G: 106n, 319n.76 
HERODOTUS: 119n, 323n. 101 
HIEROCLES: 31 1n.10 
HINRICHS, H W. F. :  310n. 1, 317n.56 
history of philosophy: H's own, xxx, xxxi, 
309(nn.8, 10), 311(nn.7, 15), 317n.49, 
322n.97, 324n.112, 325-26n. 12; Idea in, 
10-1 1, 38, 138; contingent, 37-38, 40; 
scepticism in, 130-31; atomism in, 156; 
Presocratics in, 167 
HODGSON, P.e. : xxx 
HOLBACH, P.H.D. Baron d': 319n.77 
HOMER: 11, 203, 309n.9 
HORACE (Q. Horatius Flaccus): 328n.37 
HOTHO, HG: 113, 321(nn.92, 93) 
humanity: essential marks, 12, 25, 28, 51, 
62, 110, 161; nonessential mark, 253 
HUME, D. : sceptical empiricist, 80, 81, 90, 
95, 101, 314n.30, 315n.32, 318(nn.64, 77); 
H's study of, 315n.32, 323n.99; and Jac­
obi, 317(nn.56, 57), 319n. 78, 321n. 89 
Hypothetical Judgment: 254 
Hypothetical Syllogism: 267 
I: thinker, 49, 51, 113-14, 122; singular, 
51, 111; transcendental, 51, 83-90; 
infinite, 67; Fichte's Ego, 108, 137, 139, 
319-20n.81; Being-for-self, 153; self­
liberation, 234 
IAMBLICHUS: 327n.33 
Idea (Idee): Living, xv-xvi, 291-94; levels, 
371 
5, 40, 42, 86-87, 288, 290-91; Concept 
and, 5, 242, 286, 303-7, 35On.29; history, 
10-11, 37-38, 138, 156; religiouƇ 11-12, 
15-17, 288; concrete, 30, 38-39, 60, 89, 
98, 106, 159, 287-S8; abstract, 30, 214; 
Essence, 36; circle, 39; logical, 45, 86-87, 
200, 303; Kantian, 88, 102-5; innate, 115-
16, 238, 322n.97; Platonic, 116, 214; truth 
of, 117-18; Substance, 226, 287; Subject­
Object, 238-39, 288; Purpose, 285-86 
ideal[ity] (Idea/fitiit}): usage, xxv; of reason, 
94, 98, 102; actual, 102, 318n. 70; truth of 
(finite) reality, 152, 153, 181, 335n.52 
Identity (Identitiit): and Distinction, xxiii, 
181-86, 328n.7; and Difference, xxiii, xlv­
xlvi; philosophy, 7, 164, 184, 327n.29; 
man-God, 8-9n; good-evil, 8-9n; ab­
stract, 11, 74, 76, 100-102, 108-9, 121, 
144, 179-81, 185-86; in diverse forms, 26, 
38, 304; Subject-Object, 37; concrete, 38, 
144, 180-81, 206; Being-thinking, 144; re­
flective, 178-82; and contradiction, 185-
87; in Ground, 188-89; in Thing, 195; in 
Whole-Parts, 204-5; of Inner-Outer, 209-
10, 212; of Substance, 225; of Reciprocity, 
230; of Concept, 236, 239, 290, 307; in 
Judgment, 243, 250; subject-predicate, 
244, 248; of syllOgism, 256; Concept­
Object, 270; of Idea, 290, 304; in Cogni­
tion, 294 
immanent: H's use, 1 10, 321n.87 
immediacy: of knowledge, 3 (see knowing); 
as principle, 11; of beginning, 24; and 
mediation, 36 (see mediation); of think­
ing, 37; of Being, 137 
immortality: 71 
import (Gehalt): of philosophy, 2, 5, 11, 15, 
17, 28-29, 64, 65, 92, 96-98, 107, 123; of 
religion, 9n, 11, 19-22, 98; Enlighten­
ment lacks, 2, 21, 128; usage, 350n.24 

372 
in and for itself (an und fur sich): Idea as, 
133, 286, 303, 306-7; Reciprocity as, 230-
31; Concept as, 236; Subjectivity as, 290; 
usage, 347n.2 
increase: and decrease, 157-58, 165, 168-
69, 171-72 
Indifference: usage, xxiv, xlvi; point of, 59; 
absolute, 137, 139 
indifference (Gleichgultigkeit): usage, xxiv, 
xlvi; of determinacy, 157, 158; of 
Matter and Form, 197; of Whole and 
Parts, 205 
Individual(ity) (Individuum): and 
Singularity, xix; as God, 19 
Induction: syllogism of, 264-66 
Inequality: see Equality 
Infinite Judgment: positive and negative, 
250--51; Idea as, 290 
Infinite Progress: in Kant, 105, 109-10; 
spurious infinity, 149-52, 165--66, 168, 
173, 326n.20; divisibility, 160, 205; causal 
chain, 229; formal syllogism, 261; means­
ends, 285; generations, 294; moral, 301-2 
(see Ought) 
Infinity (Unendlichkeit): spurious, xxxviii 
(see Infinite Progress); Concept grasps, 
33, 96; of understanding, 73-74, 76; in 
Kant, 101, 109-10; true, 149-52, 316nA7, 
321n.87 (see also Absolute, God) 
in itself (an sich): empirical given as, 36, 
54-55, 66, 83; supersensible, 88; innate, 
116; Being, 133-35; in abstracto, 194; in 
germ, 194, 245; and for itself, 230-31; i.e. 
for us, 238-39; substantial, 290; SUblation, 
295; usage, 347n.2 
Inner and Outer (Inneres, Aufieres): both 
present, 29, 31; sublation of Appearance, 
209-13; of Idea, 210--11; as Possible/ 
Contingent, 217-18 
innocence: function and fate, 61..{i2 
intensive: see extensive 
intuition (Anschauung): and representation, 
xlvii; speculative, S, 18, empirical, 26-28; 
inner and outer, 31, 41; pure forms of, 84; 
and concept, 86, 315n.42, 316n.44; intel­
lectual, 102, 111, 114; mathematical, 165; 
absolute, 289, 303, 307 
INWOOD, M.J. : xxix 
Islam: 177, 226 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
JACOBI, EH.: immediate knowing, vii, 14, 
111, 114, 308(nn.5, 2), 317n.56, 318n.69, 
319n.78, 320(nn.82, 85), 321nn.89-91; on 
understanding, 96-97, 109-10, 320n.86, 
321n.88; on Spinoza, 137, 228, 309n.7, 
317n.57, 324nA, 334nA5; on Leibniz, 
311n.8; reference, 322n.96 
JAESCHKE, W.: 312n.3, 313n.21, 314n.26 
Jahrbuch (1829, 1830): 310(nn.1, 5) 
Jena Logic: H's, xxx, 334n.46 
JESUS (called Christ): Passion, 13n, 46-47; 
our vocation, 19-20, 52, 62 
JOHNSTON, W.H. : xix 
Judaism: Oriental intuition, 226 
Judgment (Urteil): divine and human, 19; 
stage of Concept. 56; dogmatic, 66; types, 
84; faculty, 102-3; theory of, 243-56; Ur­
teil, 244-45; abstract, 244-46; subjective, 
245-46; living, 292-93; in Cognition, 
294-95; absolutڔ 305 
juxtaposition (Nebeneinander): in empirical 
science, 36; of philosophies, 38, 139; of 
parts of philosophy, 42; of faculties, 49; 
mark of sensible, 49-50; and succession, 
49-50, 80; itself a thought, 50 
KAESTNER, A.G. : 156, 329n.27 
KANT, I. : main discussion, vii, 80-108; 
Ding an sich, xxv, 87, 89, 194, 200, 
316n.44, 329n.11; Wissenschaft, xli; crit­
ical agenda, 34, 80-83, 308n.5, 31ln.9, 
312n.16, 326n.22; "I think," 51, 83-87, 
313n.5; appearance, 80, 88-89, 104-5, 
108, 200; and Hume, 81, 95, 101; impor­
tance, 82-83, 107, 319n.77; judgments, 
84, 248; c.P.R., 84-100, 315(nn.34-35, 
37--42), 316nn.46-48, 317nn.49-54, 
318(nn.60, 62, 70), 319n.75, 332n.17; cate­
gories, 84-87, 348n.ll; antinomies, 91-94, 
317(nnA9, 51); God, 94-100, 317nn.53-
54, 318n.60, 324nA, 333n.24, 334n.33; Cf, 
102, 318(nn.67..{i8, 71-74), 333-34n.29; 
morality, 100--102, 104-5, 150, 302, 
318(nn.63, 65--66); teleology, 102-3, 280, 
302; bad infinity, 105, 166, 326n.20, 
327n.32; dialectic, 129-30; matter, 155-56, 
327n.25; modality, 215; trichotomy, 298; 
theory of method, 299-30, 333n.23, 
334nnA5-46; anthropology, 312n.75; 

ANALYfICAL INDEX 
historisch in, 319n.80; embryology, 
331n.3; in-itself, 347n.2 
KAUFMANN, W.A.: xxixn.10 
KENNY, A.: 322n.93 
KEPLER: 320n.86 
KERNER, J. : 31On.5 
KIELMEYER, C E :  334n.35 
KIESEWETTER, J.G. : 331n.4 
KIRK, G.S. : 325n.5 
. KLOPSTOCK, EG.: 166 
KNEALE, W. and M.: 332n.19 
knotted line: of Measure, 172, 328n.38 
knowing (Wissen): usage, xxi-xxii, xl-xlii, 
321n.89; immediate, 3, 6, 26, 28, 31, 46, 
61, lOO, 108-24, 271; modes of, 26-27; 
never immediate, 36, 115-16, 121; human 
vocation, ՘55; of good and evil, 61"'{;3; 
absolute, 64; mechanical, 274 
KNOX, T.M. : xxii 
KOYRE, A. : xxix 
KRUG, W.T.: 308n.3 
labour: significance of, 62"'{;3 
LAGRANGE, J.L.: 320n.86 
LALANDE, J.J. le E de: 110, 321nn.87-88 
LAMETTRIE, J.o. de: 319n.77 
language: natural and logical, xiv-xlvii, 
59"'{;0; Dasein of spirit, xx, xxii; contin­
gency of, xx, xxii, xxxiii, 219; work of 
thought, 50 
LAPLACE, P.5. Marquis de: 32On.86 
law(s): of thought, 51, 180, 268; of 
grammar, 52-53; of nature, 53; of 
freedom, 100; reality of freedom, 147; 
of Appearance, 202-3 
LEIBNIZ, G. W. von: indiscemibles, 182, 
183, 328n.7; sufficient reason, 190-91, 
328n.9; monads, 226, 272, 330n.29, 
333n.25; intellectus, 311n.8; Theodicy, 
314n.27; speculative, 318n.61; on ideas, 
322n.97, 331-32n.7; influence, 329n.17, 
331n.3; logic, 333n.19 
LESSING, G.E. : on Spinoza, 10, 309n.7 
LEUCIPPUS: 326n.12 
LICHfENBERG, G.C: 322n.96 
Life (Leben): and Purpose, 98; dialectical, 
128-29; deepened Becoming, 145; imme­
diate Idea, 291-94 
Limit (Grenze): qualitative, 148; quantitative, 
373 
161, 163; usage, 350n.28 
LINNAEUS (C Linne): 334n.43 
LIVERPOOL, R.B. Jenkinson, Earl of: 32n 
LOCKE, J. : empiricism, 297, 311n.9, 
314n.30, 319n.77, 334n.38, 346n.5; H's 
knowledge of, 319n.80; on innate ideas, 
322n.97 
Logic: H's Science of Logic, viii, xiii, xxix, 
xxx, 1, 29-30, 92, 310n.4, 313(nn.16, 19), 
315n.40, 317n.51, 325n.7, 327(nn.22, 25), 
334(nn.39, 45), 335n.51, 351n.35; and 
language, xiv-xvii, xxxiii-xxxiv; method 
of, xvii-xviii, 58-59, 84, 125-34, 237-38, 
298, 304-7, 333n.23; traditional, xxxn. 14, 
33, 51-52, 131-32, 189, 236, 238, 333n.23; 
speculative, 33, 35, 56, 131-33; science of 
Idea, 42, 45; division, 42, 133-34, 238-39; 
views about, 45-48; utility, 46, 52; 
absorbs metaphysics, 56, 179; pure and 
applied, 58-59; "proof" in, 84, 189; medi­
ation in, 114-.15, 121-22; in history, 138, 
325n.8 (see history); "content" of, 203, 
236-37, 239; usage, 351n.32 
love: religious, 14, 233, 273 
LUDER: 31On.5 
LUTHER, M.: significance of, 30-31 
McCUMBER, J. : xxix 
magnet(ism): impotent syllogism, 59; 
fictional "matter," 196 
magnitude: determinate quantity, 157-59, 
168-69 
MAIMON, 5. : on Spinoza, 317n.58 
manifold (Mannigfaltiges): of sense, 80, 
83-85; of representation, 83-84; of con­
sciousness, 90; of Appearance, 200; of 
forces, 207; concrete, 242; of objects, 269 
Many (Viele): usage, xl; positing of One, 
154; shape of atomism, 156; discrete and 
continuous, 160-61 
MARX, K.: xiii, xxix, xxxix 
materialism: and empiricism, 79, 106-7, 
319(nn.77, 78); Greek origin, 144, 167; 
Idea as Quantity, 158-59, 208 
mathematics: transcendence in, 85; de­
velops magnitude, 126, 157-59, 165..{;6, 
168-69; value of, 126, 158; sublates dis­
tinctions, 183; method, 227 (see method) 
matter (Sache): usage, xxv, 349n. 15; truth 

374 
as, S; religion as, 14; Logic as, 46, 47, 51, 
55; Universal as, 52; quantifiable thing as, 
158; actuality as, 220; moment of Neces­
sity, 224; God as, 226, 33G-31n.29; slave 
as, 241 
Matter and Form (Materie, Form): usage, 
xxv; not emanation relation, 16n; "Mat­
ter" abstract, 79, 139; "Matter" manifold, 
154, 156; indifference of, 158, 197-98; 
relation, 198-99 
Matters (Materien): usage, xxv, 329n.12; 
qualities, 147, 196; chemical elements, 
196; Properties, 195-96; fictional, 196, 
199; Thing-constituents, 196-98 
meaning (Meinung): is mine, 50; "meant" 
distinction, 139-41; usage, 351n.33 
Means (Mittel): 282-,'13 (see also Purpose) 
Measure (Mass): qualitative Quantity, 136, 
168-72, 328(nn.35, 38) 
Measureless: self-sublation of Measure, 
172-73 
mechanics: finite, 73; quantity in, 160 
Mechanism (Mechanismus): immediate 
Objectivity, 273-78; formal, 274 
mediation (Vermittlung): present in the im­
mediate, 36, 115, 117; supposedly ex­
cluded, 113-14; Essence as, 133, 175-76, 
178; in beginnings, 137, 306; Reciprocal, 
231; in Judgment, 255-56; Syllogistic, 256, 
262, 264; Absolute, 263, 306-7; Objective, 
276-77 
meditation (Nachdenken): reflective 
thought, 6, 26, 28, 176; naive mode, 
30-31, 33, 65; speculatIve, 33, 65, 140; 
productive activity, 52-55, 119; usage, 
309n.5, 351n.34 
MEHMEL, G.E.A. : 331n.4 
memory: mechanical, 274-.75 
MENDELSSOHN, M. : 318n.66, 324n.4 
metaphysics: becomes Logic, 56, 179; dog-
matic, 65-76, 79, 82, 314n.25, 324n.4; 
unavoidable, 156; bad, 156, 158, 164; 
speculative, 166--67, 321n.92 
method: H's logical, xvii, 1, 5, 18-19, 58-59, 
84, 125-34, 237-38, 298, 304-7, 333n.23; 
schematic, 1-2, 300; of understanding, 7, 
66-67, 69, 76; not presupposed, 24; ana­
lytical, 78-79 (see analysis); mathemati­
cal, 227, 298-300; traditional doctrine, 
267; synthetic, 297-300, 334n.39; con­
structive, 299-300; moments of, 304-.5 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
MICHEL, K. -M. : vii 
middle term: of formal syllogism, 260-61; 
P, S, U as, 262-64; activity as, 283-84 
MILLER, A. V. : xix, xxix, xxi, xl 
mind and heart (Gemiit): 66, 67, 35On.26 
misology: avoidable, 35 
MOHAMMED: 177, 226 
MOLDENHAUER, E. : vii 
morality (MoraIWit): 25, 53, 302 
MORGAN le FAY: 309n.1l 
MOSES: 61ՙ2, 33G-31n.29 
MOZART, W.A. : 212 
MUIRHEAD, J.H.: xxix 
mysticism: and speculation, 133 
Nature: and Spirit, 24, 56; "impotent," 40, 
59; laws of, 53-54; state of, 63; "no leaps," 
72; not God, 97; dialectical, 130; Quantity 
in, 15՚; Measure in, 170; Inner and 
Outer, 210-13; divine revelation, 211; 
Contingency in, 218-19; development in, 
237-38, 331n.3; Mechanism in, 274-.75; 
division in, 298, 334n.44; release of 
Particularity, 307 
NEANDER, A.: 313n.21 
Necessity (Notwendigkeit): conceptual, 
16-17; problem of, 33-34, 81, 298; con­
tingency and, 72; external, 73, 301; and 
freedom, 93-94, 232-33; as drive, 140; 
totality of conditions, 220-21; blind and 
sighted, 221-22, 330n.28; moments, 224; 
Substantial, 224-.25; Reciprocal, 232; 
Judgment of, 253-55; Syllogism of, 
266-68; Concept an sich, 301 
negation (Negation): restriction, 94; thought 
as, 96; living, 10՛, 281; dialectical, 128; 
as affirmation, 140; determinate, 147, 
242-43; doubling of, 150-52, 172-73, 175, 
281; in Thing, 198-204; "first," 242--43; 
purposive, 279-,'!0; Conceptual motion, 
304-7 
Negative: see Positive 
Negative Judgment: 249, 251 
Nemesis: 169-70, 327-28n.35 
neutrality: in Chemism, 278-79 
NEWTON, I. : "philosopher," 31, 156; God, 
208, 329n.17; Principia, 320n.86; bad 
infinite, 326n.20; corpuscles, 327n.26 
NICOLIN, E :  vii, 309(nn. ll, 17), 31On.4, 
331n.1 
NIETHAMMER, I.: 331n.4 

ANALYTICAL INDEX 
nominalism: xix-xx 
Nothing (Nichts): 138-45, 351n.35 
notion (Vorstellung): usage, xxix-xxx, xlvii; 
not used for Begriff, 348n.5; see 
representation 
nous: 32, 56-57 
Number: determinate Quantum, 161Ҭ3; 
externality of. 165; Pythagorean, 166-68 
Object (Objekt): usage, xxii-xxiii, xliii-xliv; 
real Concept. 268-70; related concepts, 
269; theory of, 270-86; and Subject, 288 
(see Subject) 
ob-ject (Gegenstand): usage, xxii-xxiii, xliii­
xliv; of philosophy, 24; infinite. 32-34, 67; 
thoughts, 67; phenomena, 88; com­
prehension of, 245; and Object, 268 
Objective Concept: 238-39, 270-86, 294 
objectivity: of thought, 81ҭ3; three senses, 
83; finite and conceptual. 271; stages of, 
273; see also subjectivity 
One (Eins): usage, xxxviii-xxxix; exclusive, 
153; continuous and discrete, 16Ү1 
ontology: dogmatic, 70; Ontological Argu­
ment, 98-100, 269-71 
Opposition (Entgegensetzung): predicates, 
68; and Diversity, 184; essential Distinc­
tion, 18ү7, 188; principle of, 186; 
polarity and, 186; and Relationship, 
203-4; usage, 349n.17 
order: logical and external, 1-2, 39-40 (see 
method) 
organism: purposive, 102; not whole of 
parts, 196, 204; Concept in Nature, 
237-38; and environment. 293 
OSWALD, J. :  322n.97 
Ought (Sol/en): severed from Is, 30, 102, 
104-5; banished by empiricism, 77-78; 
bad infinity, 149-50, 302; H's antipathy, 
326n.20; usage, 352n.40 
outer: see Inner 
overgrasping (iibergreifen): usage. xxvi­
xxvii; of sensible, 50; of nature and spirit. 
57; absolute, 290; in concepts, 350n.25, 
352n.41 
pantheism: Tholuck's view, 9n, 309n6; 
fashionable polemic, 9n, 325n.1O, 
331n.29; God-World identity, 74; eternity 
of matter, 144; and atheism, 226-27 
paralogisms: 90-91, 95, 316n 48 
PARMENlDES: Pure Being, 138, 167, 
324-25(nn.4, 6); One God, 322n.99, 
326n. 14; misdated, 326n.12 
375 
PARRY, W.E. : 119n, 323n.100 
Particular[ityl (Besonderel -heit1): usage, xix; 
U, P, S moments of Concept. xix, 58-59, 
239-76 passim, 297-98; U, P external, 33, 
38; indifference to, 37, 39; determination 
of, 38; of will, 63, 155; U, P united, 102-3; 
Partiku/aritiit, 155, 252; subjective, 223; 
and Distinction, 242-43; Particular Judg­
ment, 252; in Chemism, 278; in sex, 293 
PARTINGTON. J.R.: 311n.6 
passage (iibergehen, Ubergang): to God, 96; 
to Quantity, 157; circular, 173; in Being, 
174, 237; ends in Actuality, 214; of Acci­
dents, 225; to Freedom, 234; to Object. 
2Ұ9 
past: and eternal present, 138, 195 
PAULUS, H.E.G. :  327n.31 
PELAGIUS: 9n 
PEPERZAK, A.T.B. :  312n.1 
perception (Wahrnehmung): empirical, 
77-91; foundation of cognition, 95; 
bounds of, 164 
perfect: and imperfect. 233-34 
person(ality): 111, 223, 226, 330-31n.29 
PETER (Apostle): 19, 310n.3 
PETRY, M.J.: on WaUace, xxix; H and Morn­
ing Chronic/e, 311(nn.6, 7), 323n1ffi 
Phenomenology of Spirit: science of experi­
ence, xiii, xvii; on language, xx. xxi; Sache 
in, xxv; absolute knowing, xli-xlii; rela­
tion to Logic, 64, 313n. 19; Preface, 
308(nn.1, 4), 313n. 15, 314n.23, 323n.108, 
332(nn.1O, 12), 334n.46; absolute pro­
cession, 312n. 19; Category, 313n.6; H's 
"deduction," 315n.40; "Truth of En­
lightenment," 321n.91, 328n.4; "Re­
ligion," 328n.38; "Perception," 329(nn. ll, 
12, 14); "Virtue," 330n.22; "Observation," 
333n.21, 334(nn.35, 43); "Unhappy Con­
sciousness," 333n.27; "Moral World 
View," 335n.49 
PHILO: 313n.21 
philology: seeming "aggregate," 40 
Philosophy: goal and ob-ject, 4-5, 16-17, 
41, 63-64, 273, 288; Identity, 7, 164-84; 
history, 10 (see history); and religion, 
11-17, 19, 24, 61; need of, 17, 22, 35-36; 
popular view of, 18-19, 27, 28; above 

376 
polemic, 21; highest good. 22; no presup­
positions, 24, 41, 203, 324--25(nn.4, 6); 
universal thinking, 24--26, 30-31; actual 
rationality, 28--30; empirical, 31-32, 36, 
37, 7D--80; speculative, 32-34, 65, 95-98; 
critical, 34, 54, 80--108, 200; diverse, 38; 
science of Idea. 3S-39; division, 42; con­
firms common belief, 54--55, 112-13, 132; 
understanding in, 64, 127-28; dogmatic, 
65-69, 70-76; sceptical, 69--70, 81, 131; 
materialism, 167 (see materialism); ideal­
ism, 167 (see idealism); form and content 
in, 203 
philosophy of history: H's Lectures, xx, 
312n.8; pragmatic, 212-13, 330n.21; Pos­
sibility in, 216; not a priori, 219, 330n.25; 
theodicy, 222, 330n.27; historisch, use of, 
319n.8O 
philosophy of Nature: empirical, S, 31; mat­
ter in, 15-16n, 309n. 17; Idea in otherness, 
42, 307; applied logic. 5S-59; not analOgi­
cal, 266, 333n.22 
philosophy of religion: H's Lectures, xxx, 
xli, 312n.3, 313n. 18, 314n.21; on fate and 
consolation, 223; see also Religion 
Philosophy of Right: 29 
Philosophy of Spirit: in Encyclopaedia, xxix; 
Idea returned to self, 42; applied logic. 
58; see also Spirit 
pietism: 12-13n, 21 
PILATE, Pontius: 46-47 
PINDAR: 328n.35 
PLATO: teleology, 10; influence, 13n; 
Idea(s), 17, 214-15, 33On.23; misology, 
35, 31 1n. 13; not dogmatist, 76, 151; remi­
niscence, 115-16, 238, 322(nn.95, 97), 
324n. 111; dialectic, 129, 191, 313n 17, 
324n. 110; God. 149, 211, 326n. 19, 327n.8, 
330n. 19 
PLUTARCH: 313n.9 
POEGGELER, 0.: vii, 309(nn. 1 1, 1 7), 
331n.1 
political economy: 31-32 
POLYBIUS: 330n.21 
POPE, A.: xxix 
porosity: 19S-99 
positing (setzen): of Quantum, 165; Essence 
as, 175, 269; of contradiction, 178; Possi­
bility, 215; Effect. 229; in Reciprocity, 231-
32; of free Concept, 239; self-positing of 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
Concept. 285; Life-World not yet posited, 
294--96; usage, 352n.39 
Positive and Negative: essential Distinc­
tion, 174, 179, 184--85; exchangeable, 
18D-87 
Positive Judgment: 249 
Possibility: sublated Inner, 215; empty, 
215-17; contradiction in, 217 
practical reason: see reason 
predicate(s): finite, 66-69; contains thought, 
135-36, 247; and subject, 244--56 
prejudice (Vorurteil): age-old, 25, 28, 55, 
11S-19, 132; philosophy confirms, 54--55, 
112-13, 132; of this time, 105, 107, 112-
13; philosophy avoids, 124; obstructive, 
160; (mis)usage, 319n.79, 323n. 106 
presentation (Darstellung): Science as, 42; 
single sphere as, 136 
presupposition (Voraussetzung): un­
philosophic, 24; dogmatic, 82; all are 
prejudice, 124; obstructs understanding, 
142; of immediacy, 233-34; in finite pur­
poses, 281--S2; of life-world, 294-96; see 
also prejudice 
PREVORST, medium of: 19-20, 31On.5 
Problematic Judgment: 255 
PROCLUS: 312n. 19 
progress: see Infinite Progress 
proof (Beweis): rational, 1-2, 7, 41, 75, 
134, 299; dogmatic, 73-75, 94-100, 109, 
117-19, 288-S9; critical deduction, 84 
proposition (Satz): superfluous form, 69, 
136, 247; speculative, 132, 142, 143; iden­
tical. 180, 183; promises distinction, 180, 
183; and jUdgment, 246 
PROTAGORAS: man, xxv, 327-28n.35; 
dialectic, 129, 329n. l0; God, 312n.4, 
323n.99 
Protestantism: see Christianity 
Providence (Vorsehung): purposive Neces­
sity, 222, 330(nn.27, 28); cunning, 284; 
governs world, 288, 302 
psychology: empirical, 71-72; rational, 
71-72, 90--91; historical. 212-13 
punctum saliens: Concept as, 245, 332n.9 
Pure Being: as beginning, 136-37; in his­
tory, 13S-39; equals Nothing, 139-44 
Purpose (Zweck): external, 1, 103, 281-S2; 
of Science, 41; finite ends and means, 53, 
142, 285-S6; in Nature, 98; Endzweck of 

ANALYTICAL INDEX 
world, 102-3, 301-3; organic, 103--4; 
sighted Necessity, 221; free Concept, 
2՜6 
purposiveness (Zweckmiijligkeit): 102, 
318n.67 
PYRRHO: 314n.24, 315n.32 
PYTHAGORAS: numbers, 16ɝ7, 327n.33 
Quality (Qualitiit): Dasein as, xx, 146; con­
tinuous, 72; immediate Being, 136; natu­
ral not spiritual, 146-47; Being-in-itself, 
147; completed in One, 153; of Quantum, 
168; returns, 169; Judgments, 249-51 
Quantitative Ratio (quantitative Verhiiltnis): 
relation of quanta, 16՝9 
Quantitative Syllogism: 263-64 
Quantity (Quantitiit): difference of, xxiv; 
and Quality, xxxviii-xxxix, 16S-73; exter­
nal to being, 136; indifferent to being, 
146, 169; sublation of One, 155; category 
of finitude, 177 
Quantum: limited Quantity, 161; posited 
in degree, 165; posited on itself, 168 
RAPHAEL (Raffaello Sanzio): 212 
ratio (Verhiiltnis): see Relationship 
RAUCH, L. : xxx 
RAVEN, J.E.: 325n.5 
real[ity] (reell, Rea/[itiitl): usage, xxv; phi­
losophy, 87, 315n.43; Dusein generally, 
147; as truth, 147--48; and ideality, 
152-53; of Nature, 153; All of, 316n.44; 
and actuality, 351n.36 
Real Possibility: circle of possible and 
actual, 220 
Realized Purpose: 282--a3, 285-86 
reason (Vernunft): theoria, 22; Actuality of, 
29-30, 56-57, 211; subjective, 33, 211, 
256--57; infinite, 6ɝ7; dogmatic, 6S-76, 
90-100; critical, 87-104; abstract, 100 (see 
understanding); practical, 100-102; spec­
ulative, 124, 131-33, 263; dialectical, 124, 
128-31; syllogistic, 256--57, 263; instinct 
of, 266, 333n.21; cunning of, 284; Idea as, 
28S-89; conscious, 295; usage, 352n.43 
Reciprocity (Wechselwirkung): causal inter­
action, 230-35 
recollection (Erinnerung): usage, xxxiv, 
324n.4, 349n. 18; scientifiC, 17, 129; of 
cognition in will, 302 
377 
reflection (Reflexion): usage, xxvi, 351n. 34; 
meditation, 25--26, 209-10, 252; stand­
point of Essence, 175-79, 189; in sich, 
175, 178; in(to) self and other, 188, 192-
97, 200, 20S-9; external, 243; U, P, S in, 
244; Judgment of, 251-53; subjective, 252, 
253; Syllogism of, 264-6 
Reformation: significance, 30-31 
refutation: in philosophy, 138, 145 
REID, T. : 322n.97 
REINHOLD, K.L. : Urwahre, 34, 311n.11; 
"Philosophy," 312n.16; "facts;' 312n.17; 
identity, 327n.29 
relation (Beziehung): usage, xix; necessary, 
81; self-relation, 154-55, 173, 175, 178, 
205, 232; reciprocal, 155; transition in 
Essence, 174--75; relation to other, 178; 
of life and world, 294 
Relationship (Verhiiltnis): usage, xix, xxiv; 
finite, 5-6, 207; of thought, 10-11, 61; 
finite-infinite, 96; Content-Form, 202-3; 
Whole-Parts, 204-5; mechanical, 205; 
Force-Utterance, 205-9; infinite, 206; 
Inner-Outer, 209-12; Substance-Accident, 
225-27; Cause-Effect, 227-30; external, 
258; of conscious reason, 294--95 
Religion: and philosophy, xv, 7, 11-17, 19, 
24, 61; of the heart, 6, 12-14; and 
thought, 25, 53-54; and Actuality, 29; 
useful, 52; rational, 73-75; Christian, 
74-75, 272-73; idolatrous, 97, 119n, 273; 
understanding in, 127; of fear, 272-73; 
see also philosophy of religion, God 
reminiscence: Platonic, 115, 116, 128, 238, 
322n.97 
representation (Vorstellung): usage, xxix, 
xlvii, 348n.5; modes of, 11, 25, 26; source 
of given, 24, 49--50; thought-content, 
49--50; and self, 51; form and content, 
58, 68; dogmatic use, 68, 70; in religion, 
74-75, 270-71; "ideas" in, 88; of Being­
Nothing, 142; presuppositional, 154, 158; 
two-way sublation, 295; and imaginatio, 
317-18n.59 
Repulsion (and Attraction) (Repulsion, 
Attraktion): logical, 154-55, 160; of 
Substance, 232; of Life into self and 
world, 294 
restriction (Schranke): of thought, 67-68; of 
categories, 94; of theoretical reason, 101; 

378 
of natural life, 105--{i; of cognition, 110; as 
determinacy, 148; usage, 350n.28 
resurrection: spiritual, 13 
RICHTER, J.P.E Gean Paul): Titan, 308n.2 
right (Recht): of formal freedom, 21; mark 
of humanity, 25; nonsensible, 33, 49--50; 
immediately known, 115-16 
Romans: religion of, 273 
ROSENKRANZ, K.: xiv-xvi, xxix 
ROSS, Sir J.: 119n, 323n. 100 
ROUSSEAU. J.J. : Contrat Social, 241, 331n.6 
rule (Regel): Measure, 171; see law 
scepticism: modern, 2, 80, 130-31; ancient. 
61, 69-70, 80, 130-31, 314n.24; Kantian, 
106; inadequacy, 124; dialectic, 128-30; 
H's essay, 313n. 17, 324(nn.112, 113) 
SCHELLING, EW.J. : "school." xiv, 
308(nn.1, 2), 333n.22; Indifferenz, xxiii­
xxiv, 324n.4; nature, 56, 313n.12, 
327n.23, 334n.35; method. 298, 
334(nn.42, 46); Absolute, 311n. 14, 
312n.19, 324n.3; philosophy, 312n.16, 
318n.69, 325n.6, 327n.29; Providence, 
330n.27 
SCHILLER, J.CE von: aesthetic Idea. 102, 
318n.67; Gemiit in, 350n.26 
SCHLEIERMACHER, EE.D. : immediate 
knowledge, 308(nn.5, 2), 31On.l; H's 
polemic, 313n.10, 317n.56 
scholasticism: spun out logic, 51-52; not 
free philosophy, 69, 79; God of, 72; 
heritage of, 76 
SCHULZE, G.E. : 308n.3, 314n.30 
Science (Wissenschaft): usage, xxi, xli, 
321n.89; and religion, 14; goal and task, 
17, 29, 38-42; empirical, 26, 40; empirical 
insight. 41; division, 42; effect of Cri­
tique, 106, 110; comparison in, 183-84; 
content and form, 203; persecution of, 
208 
Scottish philosophers: 116, 322n.97 
semblance (Schein): usage, xxv-xxvi; evil as, 
73; world as, 96, 295; Essence as, 175-76; 
and Appearance, 199 
sensation (Empjindung): basis of empiri­
cism, 32, 65, 76-81; animal origin, 47, 57; 
external, 49; subjective, 58, 82-S3, 126; 
and thinking, 95; both concrete and 
abstract. 136 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
sense (Sinn): mind, 5, 41, 60; empirical, 32; 
subjective, 245-46; logical, 245-46, 248 
sensibility (Sinnlichkeit): sense-contents, 
79-S3; forms of, 84; sense-knowledge, 
178 
sensus eminentior: 74, 314n.27 
servitude (Knechtschaft): to God. 20, 63, 
272; to the law, 63; see also slavery 
sex: 293-94 
SEXruS EMPIRICUS: scepticism, 131, 
313n.17, 314n.24, 324n.1I3 
SHAKESPEARE, W. : 203, 312n.3 
shame: human mark, 62 
shape (Gestalt): phenomenal, 5, 64, 70; 
conceptual, 14-17, 58, 156, 303 
shine[ing] (Schein[en1): usage, xxv-xxvi; 
semblance, 96 (see semblance); reflection, 
mark of Essence, 175, 179-S0, 185, 191, 
198-99, 233-34, 237, 306; relational, 
174-75, 239 
shock (AnstofJ): Fichtean, 108, 319-20n.81 
simplicity (Einfachheit): and universality, 49; 
of self, 57; of soul. 71, 76-77; abstract, 90 
SIMPLICIUS: 327n.30 
sin: 12-13n, 61-63 
Singular[ity] (Einzeln[heit1): usage, xix, xxx; 
U, P, S moments of Concept. xix, 58-59, 
239--76 passim; universally present. 27; of 
data, 40, 49, 50, 57; itself a thought, 50-
51; of self, 51, 57, 90; natural. 63; of Pur­
pose, 63, 155, 283; of Concept. 241; posits 
U, p. 242, 257; abstract. 244-47 
slavery (Sklaverei): abolition, 240-41 
SOCINUS, E (and L.): 9n 
SOCRATES: purpose, 10, 329n. l0; dialectic, 
129, 191; trial, 312n.4, 323n.99 
solar system: Measure, 170; Mechanism, 
278 
SOLOMON. King: 47 
SOLON: 54, 313n.9 
Something (Etwas): usage, xxxi, 349n.15; 
and Other, 147-49; and Thing, 195 
Sophist(ry): and dialectic, 128-29; use of 
"grounds," 191, 329n. 1O 
sorites: paradox, 171-72, 328n.37 
soul (Seele): and spirit. 12; of world. 56; 
simplicity, 66-67; thing, 71-72, 90-91; 
and body, 76, 284, 291 
space: limit in, 72; form of senSibility, 84, 
316n.44; antinomy, 93-94, 160; bad in-

ANALYTICAL INDEX 
finite, 149--50; quantitative, 158 
speculation (Spekulation): ancient, 11, 
70; and meditation, 33--34; and finite 
thought, 33, 65; phase of Logic, 125, 
131-33, 291, 304-7; secondary senses, 
132; Idea as, 288-90, 298; usage, 352n.41; 
see also Philosophy 
SPINOZA, B. :  Substance, 8-10, 226, 234, 
298; Lessing on, 10, 309n.7; God, 8, 
123n, 270-71, 314n.27, 317n.57, 318n.61, 
323n. l04, 324n.3; acosmism, 97, 317n.58; 
Jacobi on, 109, 137; determinate nega­
tion, 147; imagination, 166; love, 233; 
method, 298, 299; truth, 309n. 18 
Spirit (Geist): Thereness of, xx; free element, 
5; factum, 9n; religion of, 12-13; Holy, 
13n, 20, 47, 98, 1 12, 238; human, 24; 
Creator, 32, 38; levels of, 35, 47, 57; free, 
58, 219; fall and return, 61ė3, 72; Inner­
Outer, 72, 210-13; proper beginning, 98; 
self-mediating, 120-21; dialectic in, 130; 
richer Becoming, 145; and Nature, 153; 
Quantity in, 159--60; not Whole-Parts, 
205; concrete, 242; Mechanism in, 274-75; 
usage, 3SOn.25 
STACE, W.T. :  xxix, 364 
State (Staat): and religion, 48; perfection 
of, 127; Measure, 171; three syllogisms, 
276-77 
STEFFENS, H. : 308n.2 
STEINBART, G.S. : 331n.4 
STIRLING, J-H. : xxvii, xxix-xxx, xxi, 
xxxv-xxxvi 
Stoics: 131, 322n.98 
STRUTHERS, L. G. : xix 
subject(-ive) (Subjekt): forming of, 41, 
46; Singularity of, 242; and predicate, 
244-56; see also I, predicate 
subject matter: see matter (Sache) 
Subjective Concept: doctrine, 238-39, 267-
68; formal, 242 
Subjective Purpose: 279-84 
subjectivity: of all experience, 81; of sense, 
82-83; of categories, 81-86, 108-10; of 
grounds, 191; infinite value, 223; logical 
grounding, 267ʀ; usage, 3SOn.25 
sublation (Au/hebung): usage, xxvi, xxxv­
xxxvi, 154; of difference, 8-9n; in totality, 
70; dialectical, 128-29; of finite, 128-29, 
152; of Becoming, 144, 325n. l0; of deter-
379 
minacy, 157; of Measure, 172-73; of 
Being, 176-77; of contradiction, 187, 288-
89; of understanding, 128-29, 288-89; im­
plicit, 295 
subsistence (Bestehen): complex reflection, 
199; sublated, 201 
Substance (Substanz): Spinoza's, 8-10, 97, 
226-27, 234, 298; identity of Relationship, 
225-27; returns as Reciprocity, 230; truth 
of, 231, 234; monadic, 273 
succession: of sensation, 49, 80; of 
thoughts, 50; of philosophies, 138; of 
time, 149-50 
SUCHTING, w.A.: role of, viii-ix, xivn, 
xxii-xxiii; views of, xxviii, xxxii-xlviii 
sufficient reason: see Ground 
Syllogism (SchluP): usage, xxvii, 333n.28, 
334(nn.31, 32); developed Concept, 56; 
U-P-S objectively universal, 58-59, 256-
57; of understanding, 95, 258-64, 267ė8; 
cogito not, 113-14; fulfilled copula, 248, 
256; Concept-Judgment unity, 256-57; 
formal, 256-57, 259-64; figures, 260 (see 
figures); absolute, 263; of Reflection, 
264-6; inductive, 2ʁ6; of Necessity, 
266-67; Object as, 268; of absolute 
Mechanism, 276-77; of Teleology, 
281-84; of Life, 292 
synthesis: method, 297-300; philosophical, 
306; triad not used, 317n.52, 348n. 17 
System: essential, 38-39; structure of, 42; of 
Logic, 56, 125-34 
tabula rasa: 296, 311n.8, 334n.38 
Teleology: con-clusive Objectivity, 273; 
internal, 279--86; external, 281-82; see 
also Purpose 
temperature: 164; sublation of Quality, 1 71 
THALES: 334n.30 
theft: grounds of, 190 
theology: polemical, 19; natural, 73-75; 
positive, 74; rational, 94-100; see also 
Religion, speculation, God 
THEOPHRASTUS: 332n. 19 
theorem: singularises Concept, 297, 299 
Thereness (Dasein): usage, xx-xxi, xxiii, 
xxxvii-xxxviii, xliv, 317n.54; of God, 
xxxviii, 26, 66-67, 73, 75, 94-100, 
317n.55; of Spirit, 35; predicate, 66; finite 
category, 67; topic of cosmology, 72; rest-

380 
unrest unity, 143-46; needs Limit, 148; of 
Quantity, 161; Judgment of, 249; Syllog­
ism, 259 
Thing and Properties (Ding, Eigenschaften); 
usage, xxv, 329n. 11, 349n. 15; ambiguity 
of Thing, 71; what exists, 193-99; Proper­
ties, 194-95; complex reflection, 197; con­
tradiction in, 197-98; Sache, see matter; 
originating thing, see Cause 
thing-in-itself (Ding an sich); usage, xxv; 
cognition of, 87, 89, 108; abstraction, 87, 
194; as Matters, 198; Appearance and, 
200 
thinkable: useless category, 215-17 
thinking (Denken): and experience, xvii­
xviii, 25-28; pure, xvii-xviii, 25--28, 31-34, 
124, 245-46, 315(nn.36, 42), 349n. 12; hu­
man mark, 12, 25, 28, 51, 161; developing 
process, 24; reflective, 25 (see meditation); 
dialectical understanding, 35; negative, 
35-36, 48, 96; formal, 37; logical, 45-65; 
subjective, 47-48, 51, 57-58, 107-9, 245-
46; as truth, 54-55; independence of, 55, 
107--8; objective, 56-57; finite, 60-61, 66-
67; absolute, 61, 66-67; and objectivity, 
64-124; understanding, 76, 125-27, 240; 
a priori, 81; elevation to supersensible, 
95-97; and being, 98--100, 144; will as, 
100-2; and immediate knowing, 110-11, 
240; as beginning, 137; Identity in, 181; 
of Necessity, 234 
thinking over (Nachdenken); see meditation 
THOLUCK, EA.G. : 8--9n, 12-13n, 
309(nn.5, 11, 14) 
THOMAS Aquinas: 314n.27 
THOMSON, T. : Annals, 31n, 311(nn.6, 7) 
thought-determinations (Denkbestimmungen): 
finite, 6, 64-67, 70-71, 128, 239; confu­
sion of, 16n; topic of Logic, 58--59; pure 
spirits, 59; simple, 65; dogmatic, 66, 81-
82, 90; critique of, 81--84, 90; speculative, 
70, 131, 135--307 passim; deduction of, 
84; innate, 116; in immediate knowing, 
118; and Concepts, 238-39; categories, 
348n.ll 
time: limit in, 72; form of sensibility, 84, 
316n.44; antinomy, 93-94, 160; bad 
infinite, 149-50; quantitative, 158 
totality (Totalitat): of logical spheres, 135, 
136; concrete identity, 206; of actual 
Sache, 220 
THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA LOGIC 
transcendent: and transcendental, 85, 89 
Trinity: 12-13n, 15, 159, 217 
truth (Wahrheit): develops, xxv-xxvi; and 
falsity, 17; philosophical, 24, 59-61, 204; 
of experience, 29, 60; Urwahre, 34; Logic 
as, 46; and correctness, 59-60, 287; reflec­
tive, 60; ob-jectivity of, 63-64; dogmatic, 
65; of Concepts, 70, 134; of sensation, 86; 
self-mediation of Idea, 117-18, 120-21; 
circle of Concept, 233-35; living, 239; not 
in qualitative Judgment, 249-50; Idea as, 
286; correspondence, 286-88; value­
concept, 332n.15; see also correctness 
unconditioned (Unbedingt): God, 8n, 
94-100; ob-ject of reason, 87, 89-100 
Understanding (Verstand): fixes antitheses, 
xv, 118, 185-86; dialectically contradic­
tory, 5, 35, 126-28, 130, 288-89, 323n.108; 
critical, 5-6, 81-107; dogmatic, 5-6, 8-9n, 
65--76, 90-100, 121, 164; finite, 5-6, 
64-76, 96-97, 107--8; Concepts, 27, 33, 
81--84, 126, 236-39, 240; subjective, 30, 
64, 82--89, 108-9, 236-37, 245-46, 254-55, 
257-58; prescriptive, 30; representative, 
50; objective, 56, 82--83, 227; intuitive, 
102-3, 111, 318n.67; usage, 88, 316n.47, 
352n.43; identity, 121, 178-80, 185-86, 
328n.6; phase of logical reason, 125-28; 
fictions of, 196-98; Judgments, 244-56; 
syllogisms, 258-68; in cognitive process, 
295--301 
Unitarians: 13n, 309n. 12 
unity (Einheit): spiritual, 7; with Nature, 
61-63; God and World, 97; thought­
extension, 97; Being-Nothing, 142-43; 
of Quantum, 161-63 
Universal[ityJ (Allgemein[heiti): usage, xix; 
U, P, S moments of Concept, xix, 58-59, 
239-76 passim; of Understanding, 27 (see 
Understanding); empirical, 31, 33, 40, 
118-19; U, P external, 33, 38; first con­
cern, 37; determination of, 38; active, 
49; language, 50; I, 51, 55; rules, 52-53; 
practical, 100-2; U, P united, 102-3; of 
Appearance, 204; of Concept, 239-41; 
concrete, 239-42, 253-54, 347n. l; 
abstract, 240, 244-47, 347n. l; U to S 
process, 257; abstracting of, 296-97 
utility: 46, 52, 282 
Utterance (iiuperung): see Force 

ANALYTICAL INDEX 
Uttering (Entiiuflerung): usage, xxxiv, 
347n.4; of God, xxiv, 16n; of Idea, 42; of 
Concept, 244 
validation (Bewiihren): 134, 15B, 34Bn.B 
VERRA, V. : ix, xxi, 326n.16 
vocation: see determination 
VOSS, J.H.: H's letter to, xvi-xvii 
WAGNER, J.J.: 30Bn.2 
WALLACE, W. : translation, ix, xiii-xiv, xix, 
xxix. xl, 364; notes of, 311(nn.7, 10, 15), 
312(nn.I6-19, 1), 313(nn.5, 12), 316n.47, 
317n.57, 321n.BB, 324(nn.l09, 4, 5), 
325n.l0, 327(nn.23, 32), 32Bn.36, 
331(nn.3O, 3, 7), 333n.26 
WALTHER, B. : 309n.15 
WEISS, EG. : 31On.l 
WESTPHAL, K. : 320n.82 
Whole and Parts (Gllnze, Teile): organic 
whole, 42, 45, 204; immediate Relation­
ship, 204-5, 206 
Willing (wollen): singular, 63; particular, 
63, 155; moral, 100-102, 302; universal, 
191, 3ffi-3 
WOLFF, c.: dogmatic metaphysics, 299, 
314(nn.25, 27), 317n.54, 318(nn.61, 77); 
clarity, 331-32n.7; external teleology, 
333-34n.29 
world: acosmism, 10, 97; of consciousness, 
29; reason in, 56-57; antinomies, 66-67, 
72, 91-94; Endzweck of, 104-5; reality of 
Concept. 147; of Appearance, 201; as 
Object, 268-69; as Idea. 302 
XENOPHANES: 322n.99 
ZABARELLA, J.: 332n.19 
ZENO (of Citium): xxvi 
ZENO (of Elea): motion, 145, 326n. 14; 
repetition, 165; dialectic, 324n.ll0 
ZUEFLE, M. : xxix 
Zusiitze: see Additions 
381

