HEGEL'S 
PHILOSOPHY 
OF NATURE 
EDITED AND TRANSLATED 
WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND EXPLANATORY NOTES BY 
M. J. PETRY 
M.A., D.Phil. (Oxon.) 
VOLUME I 
LONDON . GEORGE ALLEN AND UNWIN LTD 
NEW YORK· HUMANITIES PRESS, INC 

FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1970 
This book is copyright under the Berne Convention. All rights 
are reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of 
private study, research, criticism or review, as permitted under 
the Copyright Act, 1956, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any 
form or by any means, electronic, electrical, chemical, mechan-
ical, optical, photocopying recording or otherwise, without the 
prior permission of the copyright owner. Enquiries should be 
addressed to the Publishers. 
This translation © George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1970 
SBN 04 100021 8 
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 
in 12 on 13 point Bembo type 
BY UNWIN BROTHERS LIMITED 
WOKING AND LONDON 

PREFACE 
Without the patience and linguistic help of my wife, this book could 
never have been written. Her family, and the German friends I made at 
Elsinore, have helped me to avoid many of the flaws generally incident to 
English translations from the German. I should like to express my very 
deep gratitude for all the help that they have given me. 
Without the full co-operation of the Copenhagen Royal Natural 
Science Library and the University Library at Lund, I could never have 
undertaken the writing of the commentary. At one time it was, indeed, 
solely the cheerfulness, enthusiasm and efficiency with which their staffs 
helped me to trace references and acquire books, that encouraged me to 
believe that the work I had undertaken was completable. 
I should like to acknowledge my indebtedness to Father F. C. Copleston 
5.]., whose perspicacity and tolerance made my work on Hegel at Oxford 
so rewarding and enjoyable, and to Sir Malcolm Knox and Professor 
W. B. Lockwood, who recommended my fmished labours to the pub-
lishers. 
Reading 
August 1968 
M.J.P. 


PREFACE 
INTRODUCTION 
a Encyclopaedias 
CONTENTS 
b Levels, Hierarchies and Spheres 
c Logic, Nature, Spirit 
d Development 
e The Notion 
r The Idea of Nature 
g 
Critics 
h Text and Sources 
Terminology 
FOREWORD by K. 1. Michelet 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
7 
II 
II 
21 
40 
63 
85 
105 
II4 
122 
141 
179 
191 
Introduction to The Philosophy of Nature 
191 
A Ways of regarding nature § 245-246 
193 
B 
The Notion of nature § 247-251 
205 
C The division of the philosophy of nature (Division) 
§ 252 
217 
SECTION ONE 
MECHANICS § 253 
Chapter One: Mathematical mechanics (Space and time) 
A Space § 254 
§ 255 
Dimensions 
§ 256 Figurations 
B Time § 257-259 
C 
The union of space and time (Place and motion) 
§ 260 Place 
§ 261 
Motion and matter 
Chapter Two: Finite mechanics (Matter and motion) Gravity 
A Inertia (Inert matter) § 263-264 
B Impact § 265-266 
C Fall § 267-268 
A* 
221 
223 
223 
225 
226 
229 
236 
236 
237 
§262 241 
244 
246 
253 

CONTENTS 
Chapter Three: Astronomy (Absolute mechanics) 
§ 269 Universal gravitation 
§ 270 Kepler's laws 
§ 270-27I The totality of the solar system 
NOTES 
INDEX TO TEXT 
INDEX TO FOREWORD AND NOTES 
260 
260 
263 
275 
284 
375 
383 
The words in roman are those of Hegel's headings which appeared in the 
first edition of this work. The words in italics do not appear as headings 
in the text, but such identification of these passages was made on the 
contents page of the first edition of the work. 

INTRODUCTION 
Q. ENCYCLOPAEDIAS 
'Systems are useful not only in that one thinks about matters in an or-
derly manner, according to a certain plan, but in that one thinks about 
matters at alL The latter use is undoubtedly greater than the first.'-
G. C. Lichtenberg. 
If the Hegelian system is to be fully appreciated, it has to be grasped as 
a whole. Experience has shown that this is no easy matter, not only because 
the general principles involved in its structuralization have never been 
clearly presented and effectively criticized, but because, in the range of its 
subject matter, it is so bewilderingly comprehensive. Hegel's own teaching 
experience had made him aware of the difficulties involved in communi-
cating satisfactorily however, and it was mainly in order that his system 
might be conveniently considered in its entirety that he produced his 
'Encyclopaedia'. This work, which is therefore central to any understand-
ing of his manner of thinking, was designed as a general guide to the 
courses of lectures he delivered at Heidelberg and Berlin between 1816 
and 183 I. As it was primarily a teaching book, he was constantly revising 
it, and during his lifetime three editions of it were prepared for the press 
(1817, 1827,1830). The lectures were designed mainly for undergraduates, 
and it is therefore a consideration of Hegel as an encyclopaedist and a 
teacher which provides one of the readiest introductions to his philo-
sophical system. 
The problems facing encyclopaedists have changed very little since the 
beginning of the last century. Then, as now, most specialists were un-
willing or unable to assess their disciplines in a satisfactory manner within 
any comprehensive or systematic exposition of knowledge as a whole. 
Aristotelianism had long since ceased to dominate the university teaching 
of Europe, and most philosophers, as philosophers, were as incapable as 
they are today of saying anything very helpful about the labours and prob-
lems of their academic colleagues and fellow citizens. Then, as now, the 
need for a synoptic view of knowledge was forced upon the notice of 
specialists as fresh discoveries gave indications of formerly unsuspected 
connections, especially in the natural sciences. Then, as now, various 
II 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
attempts were made to evolve such a view from inadequate premises and 
ephemeral interpretations, and then, as now, these attempts were over-
valued and capably criticized. 
The encyclopaedists of Hegel's day had already begun to assess this state 
of affairs in much the same way as their present-day counterparts. Philo-
sophical encyclopaedias, such as Hegel's, were generally regarded as un-
satisfactory in that they tended to impose a more or less arbitrary struc-
turalization upon subject matter which was to be acquired in a much more 
trustworthy and intelligible manner from the specialists themselves. Etienne 
Chauvin (1640-1725), a French Huguenot pastor living in Berlin, had at-
tempted to expound Cartesianism in an encyclopaedic form in his 'Lexicon 
rationale' (Rotterdam, 1692), Christian Wolff (1679-1754) had attempted 
to scholasticize Leibniz in a similar manner,l and J. J. Eschenburg pro-
duced the Kantian equivalent of their work in his 'Lehrbuch der Wissen-
schaftskunde' (Stettin and Leipzig, 1792). It was generally realized that 
writings of this kind merely emphasized the limitations and datedness of 
the philosophies on which they were based, and the irresponsible extrava-
gances of Schellingianism fmally brought the whole concept of philo-
sophical encyclopaedias into disrepute. The effect of organizing knowledge 
in order to further particular ends had become evident in the success of 
Bayle's 'Dictionnaire historique et critique' (2 vols. Rotterdam, 1697) and 
Diderot's 'Encyclopedie, ou Dictionnaire raissone des sciences, des arts et 
des metiers' (35 vols. Paris, 1751-1780) in creating and consolidating the in-
tellectual atmosphere of the eighteenth century enlightenment. Although 
they are basically similar to the purely philosophical encyclopaedias, works 
of this kind have now proved their social effectiveness, and are therefore 
still compiled and countenanced by certain interests, regimes and churches. 
As they have never completely succeeded in integrating their subject mat-
ter into the ends for which they have been written however, they have 
generally been criticized for their lack of' objectivity'. 
Then, as now therefore, the most generally acceptable kind of encyclo-
paedia was arranged alphabetically, and like its modem counterpart, simply 
attempted to supply required information in a convenient manner. Com-
pilations of this kind first made their appearance at the beginning of the 
eighteenth century, and enjoyed immediate popularity. In England, the 
'Lexikon technicum' (London, 1704) by John Harris (1666?-1719) and the 
1 F. W. Kluge 'Christian von Wolff der Philosoph' (Breslau, 1831); W. Amsperger 'Christhn 
Wolff's Verhaltniss zu Leibniz' (Heidelberg, 1897). See 'Die philosophischen Schriften von G. W. 
Leibniz' (ed. Gerhardt, Berlin, 1875-1890) vol. IV pp. 27-102, vol. VII pp. 43-247 for the possible germ 
of Wolff's encyclopaedic work. 
12 

INTRODUCTION 
'Cyclopaedia' (London, 1728) by Ephraim Chambers (c. 1680 ?-1740) 
proved to be the most successful works of this kind. Their German 
counterparts were the 'Reales Staats- und Zeitungs- Lexikon' (Leipzig, 
1704), edited by Johann Hubner (1668-1731) and the 'Allgemeines Lexicon 
der Kunste und Wissenschaften' (Konigsberg and Leipzig, 1721) by 
Johann Theodor Jablonski (1654-1731). In Germany however, this alpha-
betical arrangement tended to get out of hand as attempts were made to 
develop its comprehensiveness. The 'Grosses vollstandiges Universal-
Lexicon aller Wissenschaften und Kiinste' (64 vols. Halle and Leipzig, 
1731-1754) was finally completed by K. G. Ludovici (1707-1778), but 
despite its many excellences, it proved to be an unwieldy work, and even 
before it had been completed, parts of it were, of course, out of date. 
A similar fate overtook the immense 'Allgemeine Encyclopadie der 
Wissenschaften und Kunste' (Leipzig, 1818-1889), started by J. S. Ersch 
(1766-1826) and J. G. Gruber (C.1774-1851), which ran to 167 volumes 
before it was fmally abandoned. Nevertheless, alphabetically arranged en-
cyclopaedias of the modern kind and of modern dimensions were also begin-
ning to make their appearance during Hegel's lifetime. Under the editor-
ship of Archibald Constable (1774-1827), Macvey Napier (1776-1847) and 
Charles Maclaren (1782-1866), the fifth, sixth and seventh editions of the 
'Encyclopaedia Britannica' showed a steadily improving standard of ex-
cellence with regard to lay-out and calibre of articles, and in Germany. 
D. A. F. Brockhaus (1772-1823), R. G. Lobel (1767-1799) and C. W. 
Franke (d.1831) improved the famous 'Konversations-Lexikon' in a 
similar manner. 
Despite the well-tried success and convenience of the alphabetical en-
cyclopaedia, it has certain rather obvious drawbacks and limitations. It 
is now outdated so rapidly by the precision and efficiency with which 
knowledge is acquired and made available, that its value as anything but 
a general reference book for the non-specialist is extremely questionable. 
Its main fault is however, that it fails to bring out the natural interrelatedness 
of its subject matter. Georg Simon Klugel (1739-1812), professor of 
mathematics and physics at Helmstedt, was one of the first to realize this, 
and in his 'Encyklopadie, oder Zusammenhangender Vortrag der 
gemeinnutzigsten, insbesondere aus der Betrachtung der Natur und des 
Menschen gesammelten Kenntnisse' (3 vols. Berlin, 1782-1784), he made 
the first modern attempt at a non-philosophical systematic encyclopaedia. 
Charles Joseph Panckoucke (1736-1798) outlined a similar project in his 
'Plan d'une Encyclopedie methodique et par ordre des matieres' (Paris, 
1781), an essay which gave rise to a massive and uncompleted rearrange-
13 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
ment ofDiderot's work (196 vols. Paris, 1782-1832). It was Coleridge who 
originated the English equivalent of ventures of this kind, probably as the 
result of his having acquainted himself with the writings of Schelling, 
Oken and Hegel. 1 His introductory essay to the ill-starred 'Encyclopaedia 
metropolitana' (28 vols. London, 1817-1845) can hardly be expected to 
inspire confidence in the reliability of his method however, and has prob-
ably done more than any other single publication to bring 'systematic' 
encyclopaedias into discredit in the English-speaking world. All these at-
tempts at systematization were in fact arbitrary arrangements of subject 
matter entirely devoid of any effective, efficient or well-founded guiding 
principle.2 If the accomplished scientists and scholars of the day were 
persuaded to contribute to them, it was only on the understanding that 
although their articles might be situated in the works at the editor's dis-
cretion, the principles guiding the overall arrangement should not intrude 
upon their particular domains. Hegel may well have pondered over this 
kind of systematization as it was propounded in the early writings of 
Wilhelm Traugott Krug (1770-1842).3 
The subject matter of Hegel's 'Encyclopaedia' is of course dated, and it 
is therefore somewhat curious that the commentary to this edition of his 
treatment of the natural sciences should be the only attempt to place any 
part of it fairly and squarely in its historical context. It is to be hoped that 
the rest will now be submitted to similar treatment, for despite the im-
portance of the structuralization of knowledge worked out in the 'Encyclo-
paedia', it can hardly be maintained that an understanding of its subject 
matter is entirely irrelevant to any worthwhile criticism of it. It is the 
structuralization which constitutes the book's main importance however, 
and to some extent therefore, those who have hitherto attempted to de-
velop or refute its expositions and arguments, may be excused for having 
concentrated so exclusively upon this feature of it. Hegel's criticism of the 
encyclopaedists of the day is implicit in the structure of this work, and it is 
only by exhibiting the relevance and validity of the structuralization he 
elicits from its subject matter, that the claim that he has managed to over-
come the difficulties facing them and their modem counterparts can be 
substantiated. 
The succeeding chapters of this introduction should make it evident 
1 See his annotated editions of their works listed in the British Museum Catalogue; c£ J. H. 
Muirhead 'Coleridge as a Philosopher' (London, 1930). 
2 See the criticism, by G. F. Pohl (1788-1849), of the alphabetical treatment of physics, in his review 
of the third volume of 'Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' (Leipzig, 1827): 'Jahrblicher fur wissen-
schaftliche Kritik' July-Sept. 1829 (Stuttgart and Tlibingen, 1829). 
3 'Krug's Gesammelte Schriften' (12 vols. Brunswick, 1830-1841), vols VII and X. 
14 

INTRODUCTION 
that levels and hierarchies, the basic principles of the Hegelian structure, are 
as directly relevant to modern thinking as they were a century and a half 
ago. The current emphasis upon the importance of models and analogies 
in science might also provide a convenient introduction to Hegel's manner 
of thinking for many contemporary philosophers. 1 The central principle 
of the 'Encyclopaedia' is however the dialectic, and it is doubtful whether 
contemporary thinking is any more capable of employing it correctly 
than were Hegel's immediate followers. Despite the somewhat bizarre use 
of it made by the communists, Americans evidently feel obliged to deny 
that it is a principle at all,2 and although it originated in Hegel's inter-
pretation of the Trinity, Christian theologians, despite the present ferment 
of theological radicalism and re-orientation, have, in general, ignored it. 3 
The failure of many professed Hegelians to distinguish clearly between the 
dialectic and the categories assessed in the first part of the 'Encyclopaedia', 
and even between dialectic and formal logic, has contributed to the fairly 
general confusion concerning the precise nature of this principle. Although 
the principle of a sphere, as it is formulated by Hegel, is intimately in-
volved with the dialectic, it is also the immediate expression oflevels and 
hierarchies, and contemporary thinkers will therefore have little difficulty 
in grasping at least one important aspect of its general significance. It can 
hardly be maintained however that contemporary thinking, of its own 
accord, has come to recognize the importance of the three basic distinc-
tions in accordance with which the subject matter of the 'Encyclopaedia' 
is ranged within the spheres of 'Logic', 'Nature' and 'Spirit'. The wealth, 
variety and subtlety of logical categories as they are dealt with in most 
modern 'philosophies of science', would have delighted and fascinated 
Hegel, but there are no signs that contemporary thinkers are prepared to 
treat the investigation of their relative complexity as a separate discipline, 
essentially distinct from the natural and social sciences within which these 
categories make their appearance. 'Spirit' (Geist) as a general term applied 
to psychology, law, politics, human history, art, religion and philosophy, 
to all the phenomena characteristic of consciousness, does not have the 
1 M. B. Hesse 'Models and Analogies in Science' (London, 1963); B. H. Kazemier 'The 
concept and the role of the model in mathematics and natural and social sciences' (Dordrecht, 
1961). 
2 Walter Kaufmann for example, 'Hegel' (New York, 1965) p. 173. 
3 There have recently been signs that this situation is changing. Interest in Hegel's early theological 
writings and in the similarities between Christianity and Communism have contributed. See T. M. 
Knox and R. Kroner 'Hegel's Early Theological Writings' (Chicago, 1948); Hemi Rondet S. J. 
'Hegelianisme et Christianisme' (paris, 1965) ;Jorg Splett 'Die TrinitatslehreG. W. F. Hegels' (Freiburg 
and Munich, 1965). 
IS 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
common currency in English that it has in German,l and although every-
one is aware of the general features and problems of this sphere, Hegel's 
assessment and structuralization of it are very far from being generally 
discussed or recognized. The sphere of 'Nature' however, in that it is re-
garded by Hegel as being distinct from purely logical considerations, and 
as being the immediate presupposition of consciousness, is distinguished 
in a manner that most modern scientists will probably find highly con-
genial. As his treatment of it is almost entirely free from epistemological 
quibbles, and consists of extremely detailed assessments of the whole range 
of the natural sciences, its subject matter, now that it has been placed in its 
historical context, provides an ideal starting point for a reappraisal of the 
whole Hegelian system. Faulty or irrelevant observations and erroneous 
or inaccurate thinking are more easily detected in the natural sciences than 
in either 'Logic' or 'Spirit', and it is to be hoped therefore that this critical 
edition of the 'Philosophy of Nature', by furthering an understanding of 
that part of the 'Encyclopaedia' in which the subject matter itself is least 
open to dispute, will help to bring about a clearer and fuller comprehen-
sion of the structural principles in which Hegelianism as a whole has its 
foundations. What is more, attempts to view the natural sciences as a 
whole are by no means alien to current habits of thought. 2 Collingwood's 
suggestion3 that they might be given unity by being regarded as a 'form 
of thought' dependent upon history, a further 'form of thought', might 
be criticized by pointing out that despite the persistence of uncertainty in 
their details, many features of the natural world that were formerly un-
known or misunderstood no longer have a history, in that they can be 
predicted, manipulated, and exploited with what amounts to an absolute 
precision and efficiency. The movements of Neptune for example, al-
though they are like nearly all other natural phenomena in that they in-
volve time, only have a history on account of the calculations and 
observations which led to their discovery. The spate of books on the 
philosophy of science published during the last decade or S04 might, in 
general, be criticized from an Hegelian standpoint, by pointing out that 
1 A fairly accurate illustration of this is provided by 'Die Welt', one of the most popular of West 
German daily newspapers, which brings out a weekly supplement devoted to 'Die Geistige Welt', 
i.e. education, family life, fashions, history, theatre, music, art, literature etc., as opposed to science, 
commerce and politics. 
2 See for example Otto Neurath, Rudolf Carnap, Charles Morris 'International Encyclopaedia of 
Unified Science' (2 vols. Chicago, 1955). 
3 R. G. Collingwood 'The Idea of Nature' (Oxford, 1945). 
4 Mention might be made of the interesting historical approach to scientific method employed by 
E. H. Madden, 'Theories of Scientific Method' (Seattle, 1960), and the valuable attempts to clarify the 
problems involved in the conceptual foundations, methodology, theories, procedure, explanation etc. 
16 

INTRODUCTION 
there has been too much reluctance to admit the existence of consolidated 
and unproblematical scientific knowledge, too much emphasis upon the 
difficulties involved in verifying the correspondence between knowledge 
and fact, and a general failure to realize that although logical categories 
and psychological phenomena are involved in our knowledge of nature, 
they also constitute distinct levels of reality in so far as they are either simpler 
or more complex than the subject matter of the natural sciences. 
From an Hegelian point of view, these approaches appear to emphasize 
the logical categories involved in the natural sciences and the human 
factors relevant to their development in an insufficiently hierarchical and 
somewhat incongruous manner. They are interesting and important to con-
temporary Hegelianism however, in that they tend to treat the sphere of 
'Nature' as a whole, in that they generally recognize that understanding it 
implies the precise formulation of thought as well as the investigation of 
natural phenomena, and in that they implicitly acknowledge that this 
sphere cannot be assessed without reference to 'Spirit'. In this last respect 
they have much in common with the attempts that are made to humanize 
science by assessing it in the light of ethical, social or political objectives 
or by emphasizing the sociological factors in its historical development. 1 
None of these attitudes is specifically and self-consciously Hegelian. Taken 
as a whole however they do seem to indicate that it is unwise to regard 
the 'Philosophy of Nature' as being entirely irrelevant to current problems 
and contemporary capabilities, and to the present widespread revival of 
interest in Hegel's writings. 
The main difficulty encountered in interpreting the 'Encyclopaedia' has 
its origin in the fact that although it is helpful and even necessary to dis-
tinguish between its structure and its subject matter, these two aspects of 
it also have to be recognized as being ultimately identical. Levels oflogical 
complexity are not the same as levels of complexity in the natural sciences 
or spirit, but the recognition of the principle of levels is essential to any 
precise defmition of the subject matter of these spheres. Hierarchies of 
of modern science to be found in A. Pap: 'An Introduction to the Philosophy of Science' (London, 
1963); S. Korner 'Experience and Theory' (London, 1966); J. O. Wisdom 'Foundations of Inference 
in Natural Science (London, 1952); C. G. Hempel 'Aspects of Scientific Explanation' (New York, 
1965). 
1 B. Glass 'Science and Ethical Values' (London, 1966): H. Margenau 'Ethics and Science' (prince-
ton, 1964); L. Hogben 'Science for the Citizen' (London, 1938): J. D. Bernal 'The Social Function of 
Science' (London, 1939); B. Barker' Science and the Social Order' (London, 1953); H. Boyko 'Science 
and the future of Mankind' (The Hague, 1961); B. Barber and W. Hirsch 'The Sociology of 
Science' (New York, 1962); A. C. Benjamin 'Science, Technology and Human Values' (Columbia, 
1965); G. Degre 'Science as a Social Institution' (New York, 1965); N. E. Fehl 'Science and 
Culture' (Hong Kong, 1965). 
17 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
categories are not the same as hierarchies of natural phenomena, in physics 
and biology for example, or of groups in sociology, but the recognition 
of the principle of hierarchies is essential to any rational interpretation of the 
relationships between logical, physical, biological or sociological phe-
nomena. The three moments of the Notion (universal, particular, singular) 
are not simply identical with the comprehensive unity of knowledge con-
tained within the spheres of 'Logic', 'Nature' and 'Spirit', but the recog-
nition of these spheres, of the differences which distinguish them, and of 
the identity which unites them, is essential to any exposition of the differ-
entiated unity of their subject matters. 
Hegelianism, if it is to be anything but an academic pastime, an exercise 
for historians of philosophy, demands an intimate and up-to-date know-
ledge of the subject matter of the 'Encyclopaedia'. Since it is the masterly 
manner in which it enables one to assess knowledge which constitutes its 
main originality and primary value however, there is always the danger 
that once the importance of its structure has been grasped, it will degener-
ate into scholasticism. It went out of favour because those who professed 
to expound it failed to clarify its structure and master its subject matter. 
If present trends continue, it will come into favour simply because it does 
not confme itself to word analysis and the particularity of knowledge. 
Word and sentence analysis is essential to clear and accurate thinking how-
ever, 1 and the emphasis upon the particularity of knowledge and research 
is basic to many of the most striking of modern accomplishments. It is 
interesting to observe therefore, that word and sentence analysis, as an 
explicitly philosophical discipline, developed as a reaction against the scho-
lasticized Hegelianism of the late nineteenth century, and that the particu-
larization of knowledge and research, as a fundamental habit of thought, 
first came into its own as a reaction against the scholasticized Aristotelian-
ism of the late sixteenth century. Both developments were, in their way, 
justified, word analysis as a criticism of over-structuralized thought, 
Baconianism as a criticism of over-structuralized research. While both 
have, however, helped to cultivate a mental attitude capable of testing, 
investigating and experimenting intelligently and effectively, in a some-
what paradoxical and evidently inadvertent manner, they have also tended 
to further the general acceptance of the somewhat questionable assump-
1 H. Glockner's 'Hegel-Lexikon' (improved ed. 2 vols. Stuttgart, 1957) laid the foundation of a 
systematic analysis of Hegel's vocabulary and use of language. Research of this kind is extremely 
effective in bringing out the radicalism and consistency of Hegel's thinking. For recent publications 
in this vein see W. var Dooren 'Het Totaliteitsbegrip bij Hegel en zijn Voorgangers' (Assen, 1965); 
Josef Simon 'Das Problem der Sprache bei Hegel' (Kohlhammer Verlag, Stuttgart, 1966). 
18 

INTRODUCTION 
tion that it is no longer within the power of man to assess, master and 
control the accomplishments of his genius. 
This is apparent to a certain extent, if nineteenth century thought is 
compared with its twentieth century western counterpart. It is most 
noticeable however if post-Baconian encyclopaedias are compared with 
their mediaeval counterparts. Although the Aristotelian system lacks the 
comprehensive structuralization of the Hegelian, it was so effective in 
indicating the interrelatedness of various branches of enquiry and know-
ledge, that it was not until the early years of the seventeenth century that 
it became irrelevant to progressive encyclopaedic work. Through the 
writings of Aquinas, and in conjunction with the works of Pliny and St. 
Isidore, it came to exercise a profound influence upon mediaeval thought, 
and most of the great Latin encyclopaedias of the middle ages are to some 
extent reflections of it. The most popular of them, the 'De proprietatibus 
rerum' (C.1230) of Bartholomeus Anglicus, was republished in English as 
late as 1582, and the last of their kind, the 'Encyclopaedia, septem tomis 
distincta' of Johann Heinrich Alsted (1588-1638), appeared when Bacon 
and Descartes had already begun to regard knowledge from radically 
original points of view. In some important respects, the attitude of mind 
Aristotelianism helped to establish compares favourably with the state of 
affairs that might be expected to develop from the institutionalization of 
a mature Hegelianism. The 'unified sensibility' of the art which flourished 
when it was still the dominating intellectual influence in Europe has come 
to fascinate literary historians in that it contrasts so sharply with the 
'divided sensibility' of the seventeenth century and the seemingly hope-
less fragmentation of knowledge and outlook encountered today.1 
There is of course no reason why aesthetic considerations should not 
contribute to the current revival of Hegelianism. As it is, however, the 
extraordinary development of the natural sciences which distinguishes the 
present age from all others, it does at least seem likely that our tendency to 
lose ourselves in particularization has its origin in this development, and 
consequently, that too great an emphasis upon the aesthetic wholesomeness 
of Hegelianism might well reduce the outcome of the present revival of 
interest in it to nothing but the establishment of an esoteric cult. The most 
ardent of mediaevalists will have to admit moreover, that even the famous 
'trivium' and 'quadrivium' of the mediaeval educational system are very 
largely irrelevant to our present needs, and that today, mediaeval 
1 E. M. W. Tillyard 'The Elizabethan World Picture' (London, 1943); P. H. Kocher 'Science and 
Religion in Elizabethan England' (Huntingdon Library, 1953); R. S. Westfall 'Science and Religion 
in Seventeenth Century England' (Yale Univ. Press, 1958). 
19 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
encyclopaedias, since the arrangements they provide are clearly arbitrary 
and their subject matter is hopelessly dated, can hardly be regarded as hav-
ing anything but an historical value. It is indeed to be doubted whether 
Petrarch's friend Domenico Bandini (c. 1335-1418), when he began his 
gigantic 'Fons memorabilium universi' with a consideration of God, and 
divided it into five parts in honour of Christ's wounds, was any closer to 
formulating a truly balanced assessment of knowledge than the most 
specialized of modem research students.1 It is often asserted that it was 
Bacon who initiated the wholesale rejection of compilations of this kind. 
It is certainly true that his writings appeared at the beginning of an age in 
which emphasis has been laid, to an ever increasing extent, upon the 
particularity of knowledge and research. It is not often realized however, 
that the failure of most post-Baconian attempts to synthesize the multi-
farious and often startlingly successful results which such an emphasis has 
brought about, is due not only or even mainly to the immense range of 
knowledge now to be assimilated, but to the inadequate or unsatisfactory 
nature of the premises and principles on which they have been founded. 
It is, moreover, frequently forgotten, that although we are justified in re-
garding Bacon as the champion of induction, he never regarded his 
method as being incompatible with the attempt to view knowledge as a 
whole. 2 In the introduction to 'The Great Instauration' (1620) for example, 
he makes it known that he had planned to structuralize research in a man-
ner not so very different from that of his mediaeval predecessors, and the 
words in which he characterizes the social potential and significance of 
such an endeavour might well be taken as summing up the best that is to 
be hoped for from any widespread understanding of a truly encyclo-
paedic 'philosophy of nature'. He writes as follows of his general plan: 
'But to perfect (it) is a thing both above my strength and beyond my ex-
pectation. What I have been able to do is to give it, as I hope, a not 
contemptible start. The destiny of the human race will supply the issue, 
and that issue will perhaps be such as men in the present state of their for-
tunes and of their understandings cannot easily grasp or measure. For what 
is at stake is not merely a mental satisfaction but the very reality of man's 
wellbeing, and all his power of action. Man is the helper and interpreter 
of Nature. He can only act and understand in so far as by working upon 
her or observing her he has come to perceive her order. Beyond this he 
hath neither knowledge nor power. For there is no strength that can break 
1 Robert Collison 'Encyclopaedias: their history throughout the ages' (New York and London, 
1964) pp. 70-72 • 
2 B. Farrington 'Francis Bacon, philosopher of industrial science' (London, 1951). 
20 

INTRODUCTION 
the causal chain. Nature cannot be conquered but by obeying her. Accord-
ingly these twin goals, human science and human power, come in the end 
to one. To be ignorant of causes is to be frustrated in action.' 
The Hegelian system is truly encyclopaedic. If it is to be fully appre-
ciated therefore, it has to be grasped as a whole, and we have Hegel's own 
authority for regarding the 'Encyclopaedia' as the most convenient foun-
dation on which to base the study which this entails. For the purposes of 
criticizing and assessing this work, it will probably be helpful to draw a 
distinction between its structure and its subject matter, although it should 
always be remembered that these two aspects of it, though they may not 
be identical, are very closely interdependent. The 'Philosophy ofNature', 
despite its having been widely ignored by Hegelians and non-Hegelians 
alike, constitutes an integral part of the whole. In that its subject matter 
is less open to dispute than that of the other 'spheres', and in that it is di-
rectly relevant to many contemporary attitudes and problems, it may be 
regarded as one of the best introductions to Hegel's manner of thinking. 
In its structuralization of the natural sciences it has much in common with 
mediaeval scholasticism, and will therefore present a challenge to modern 
thinkers. Many scientists and historians of science will fmd much in its 
subject matter that is interesting and familiar however, and it is to be hoped 
that their recognition of Hegel's mastery in assessing the particularities of 
natural science, will encourage others to look in a new way at his 'Logic' 
and his 'Philosophy of Spirit'. 
b. LEVELS, HIERARCHIES AND SPHERES 
'The universe is a system, whose very essence consists in subordination; 
a scale of beings descending, by insensible degrees, from infmite perfection 
to absolute nothing.'-Soame Jenyns. 
Dr. Johnson's slashing review of 'A Free Enquiry into the Nature and 
Origin of Evil' (London, 1757) by Soame Jenyns (1704-1787), demon-
strates in a strikingly lucid manner the philosophical problems that faced 
a mid-eighteenth century writer attempting to make use of hierarchical 
thinking in dealing with moral or philosophical issues. l It shows very 
clearly, that although such thinking was then widespread among poets, 
theologians and philosophers, it was very far from bridging the gap 
between them and the natural scientists, and that those who still used it in 
1 'The Literary Magazine' 1757: 'The Works of Samuel Johnson' (9 vols. London, 1825) vol. VI, 
pp. 47-76. 
. 
21 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
the grandiose manner of classical antiquity and the middle ages were 
almost entirely ignorant of its practical application. Jenyns however, who 
was a gentleman by birth and profession, a politician by occupation, and a 
philosopher only out of interest, had defmed evil in a manner which might 
well have pleased Hegel had he read him. 1 'These real evils,' he says, 'pro-
ceed from ... subordination, without which no created system can sub-
sist; all subordination implying imperfection, all imperfection evil, and all 
evil some kind of inconvenience or suffering'. Johnson attacks this basic 
concept in a remarkably acute manner by pointing out the futility of at-
tempting to defme the extremes of infmity and nullity, the evident im-
possibility of indicating the relationship between that which is infmite and 
that which is finite, and the lack of any reliable method by which the 
gradations linking infmity with nullity might be enumerated. His criti-
cism reads like a summary of the programme Hegel must have set himself 
when the outlines of his system first became apparent about the turn of the 
century, and he began to concern himself with the significance of spheres, 
hierarchies and levels. Johnson rounds it off by drawing the following 
general conclusions, all of which were to be revised by his German con-
temporary. 'This scale of being I have demonstrated to be raised by pre-
sumptuous imagination, to rest on nothing at the bottom, to lean on 
nothing at the top, and to have vacuities from step to step, through which 
any order of being may sink into nihility without inconvenience, so far as 
we can judge, to the next rank above or below it.' 
Had Johnson been more intimately acquainted with the natural sciences, 
he might not have been quite so outspoken in his rejection of a concept 
which, although it was often used in a clumsy and incongruous manner, 
was by no means irrelevant to the intellectual problems of his day. 
Taking the 'great chain of being' only as it was expounded by contem-
porary poets and philosophers, he may well have been justified in de-
molishing it as he did. He seems however to have been ignorant of its 
origins, since he refers to it as the 'Arabian scale of existence', and he would 
probably have treated it with more respect had he known that it had in 
fact been inherited from the Greeks. Professor Lovejoy has shown that its 
ultimate origin lies in Platonic dualism, in Plato's contrasting the visible 
universe with the ideal world of the demiurge and the eternal forms in the 
'Timaeus', and in his judging politics in the light of absolute justice in the 
'Republic'.2 Both these undertakings involved the formulation of a graded 
1 See the note III p. 330. Hegel took evil to be, 'nothing but the inadequacy of that which is 
to that which should be.' ('Encyclopaedia' § 472, c£ § 23, § 35). 
2 A. O. Lovejoy 'The Great Chain of Being' (Cambridge, Mass., 1936). 
22 

INTRODUCTION 
approximation to an ideal. In Aristotle this concept reappeared in a more 
sophisticated manner as the distinction between matter and form, and it 
was mainly through his writings that Platonic dualism and the great chain 
of being came to dominate the intellectual life of Europe in the later 
middle ages.l During this period it provided the generally recognized 
framework for the assessment of all knowledge, and remnants of its in-
fluence upon education may still be found in the seniority accorded to the 
various faculties in the older universities of Europe. Theology, concerned 
as it is with human knowledge of the being and attributes of God, was 
recognized as of necessity the most comprehensive of all disciplines, and 
professors of it therefore took precedence over all others in university 
functions. Law, Medicine, Literature etc. found their positions beneath it 
in accordance with the relative comprehensiveness of their subject matters.1I 
As Hegel notes,3 the basic question the system posed for philosophers and 
theologians was that of the creation of the world, and of the relationship 
between God and what is created. Between about 1300 and about 1600, 
and largely on account of the use made of Aristotelianism by the Thomists, 
the being and attributes of God and the particularity of knowledge were 
not regarded as presenting theologians and natural scientists with anything 
resembling an irreconcilable conflict. The potential contradiction implicit 
in any comparing of scientific with religious truth, like the actual contra-
diction discovered through the conflict between positive and natural law, 
was overcome by postulating a hierarchy in which one took precedence 
over the other on account of its greater comprehensiveness or wider appli-
cability, and in which separate disciplines could therefore be regarded as 
complementary. As has been noticed, the intellectual harmony resulting 
from this is echoed in the encylopaedias of the time, and is apparent in 
mediaeval humanism and in the 'unified sensibility' of Elizabethan literature. 
In that 'the great chain of being' was used to consolidate a world picture 
based to a very great extent upon Ptolemy and Aristotle, it might have 
been expected to have been fairly conclusively discredited by the Coper-
nican and Baconian revolutions. Professor Lovejoy, who emphasizes the 
otherworldliness of the middle ages, and tends to overlook its humanism, 
naturally regards the fact that hierarchical thinking was most vociferously 
1 w. Jaeger 'Aristotle' (tr. Robinson, Oxford, 1934) points out the persistence of Platonic dualism 
in the Aristotelian system. G. R. G. Mure 'An Introduction to Hegel' (Oxford, 1940) illustrates the 
relevance of Aristotle to an understanding of Hegel; c£ Nicolai Hartmann 'Aristote1es und Hegel' 
(2nd ed. Erfurt, 1933). 
2 H. Rashdall 'Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages' (3 vols. Oxford, 1895 ed. Powicke and 
Emden, 1936). 
3 §§ 246, 247. 
23 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
advocated in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, as being somewhat 
paradoxical.1 He is evidently unaware, that as the sources on which he 
bases his history of the subject are predominantly literary and philoso-
phical, his view is somewhat unbalanced, and he certainly fails to note 
that metaphysically unpretentious hierarchical arrangements of the various 
sciences have never gone out of fashion. In the period which puzzles him, 
the great chain of being was being propounded by men who were very 
largely ignorant of its precise relevance to the natural sciences, and scien-
tists who employed it as a matter of convenience within their particular 
disciplines were no longer prepared or able, as they had been in the middle 
ages, to acknowledge its more general significance.2 
A chasm, as Johnson calls it, had opened between men's conceptions of 
the 'highest being' and of ' positive existence', and as it widened it became 
increasingly obvious that the religious culture of the time was unable to 
bridge it. Attempts were made to tinsel science with a veneer of religiosity, 
but they merely tended to confirm the opinions of those convinced of the 
hopelessness or perversity of all such undertakings. 'The Religious Philo-
sopher ... designed for the conviction of atheists and infidels' (3 vols, tr. 
Chamberlayne, 4th ed. London, 1730), by Bernard Nieuwen~dt (1654-
1718), which was still popular in Hegel's day, enlisted considerable scien-
tific knowledge in the service of its arguments, but its arrangement was 
chaotic, and the doubt it attempted to cast upon the reality of the helio-
centric orbit of the earth can hardly have recommended it to the scien-
tifically enlightened. 'Physico and Astro Theology; or, a demonstration of 
the Being and Attributes of God', by William Derham (1657-1735), had 
reached fifteen editions by 1798, and was scarcely less popular in Germany 
(tr. J. A. Fabricio, Hamburg, 1750), but it was inferior even to Nieu-
wen~dt's work as a responsible and systematic survey of the natural 
sciences, as were the pious 'Lectures on Natural and Experimental Philo-
sophy' (5 vols. London, 1794) by George Adams (1750-1795) instrument-
maker to George III. Jenyns contributed in a light and elegant manner 
with his 'A View of the internal Evidence of the Christian Religion' 
(London, 1776), which gained the distinction of being translated into 
French, and William Paley (1743-1805) produced his by no means en-
tirely contemptible 'Natural Theology; or, evidence of the existence and 
attributes of the Deity; collected from the appearances of nature' (London, 
1802), in which an attempt is made to prove the existence of the Deity 
lOp. cit. p. 142. 
2 A possible exception to this is Heinrich Friedrich Link (1767-1851): see 'Ueber die Leiter der 
Natur' (Rostock and Leipzig, 1794): cf. note III p. 263. 

INTRODUCTION 
from the design traceable in natural phenomena. Paley's work is interesting 
in that, like Hegel's,l it contains an unusual rejection of astronomy as 
the best medium 'through which to prove the agency of an intelligent 
Creator' (ch. XXII), and a concentration upon the human anatomy on 
account of its complexity. 'For my part,' says Paley, 'I take my stand in 
human anatomy.' (ch. XXVII).2 
The natural sciences themselves occasionally showed a certain reluctance 
to discard theologically tinged terminology. C. G. Gillipsie has shown 
for example, how the providentialist view lingered on in British geology 
between 1790 and 1850.3 On the whole however, it was becoming m-
creasingly apparent, during Hegel's lifetime, that science and religion were 
employing ostensibly incompatible means of expression. What is more, 
specialization of interest and the fragmentation of knowledge were already 
well advanced within the natural sciences themselves, and most of the 
great works of scientific synthesis, although by modern standards their 
range is impressive, were already confmed to fairly limited fields of know-
ledge. Towards the close of the eighteenth century, the great chain of 
being was reinterpreted, in the organic sciences, as a temporal progression, 
and may therefore be regarded as having contributed to the development 
of evolutionary theories.4 As attempts have been made, notably by David 
George Ritchie (1853-1903) in his 'Darwin and Hegel, with other philo-
sophical studies' (London, 1893), to present Hegel as the philosopher of 
evolution, the strictly qualified way in which evolution is compatible with 
Hegelianism should perhaps be indicated. In that the evolution of one 
species out of another is regarded as taking place in a period of time, it is 
clear that the temporal sequence of the complex factors involved in this 
development, if it can be relevantly and satisfactorily reconstructed and 
explained, can do nothing but deepen our knowledge of the organic phe-
nomena with which we are concerned as practising geologists, botanists 
and zoologists. The main principle behind the organization of the subject 
matter of the 'Encyclopaedia' is however that of a progression from what 
is more simple to what is more complex. It may well be the case that what 
evolves in a temporal sequence also exhibits a progression of this sort, but 
this is by no means necessarily so, and a temporal sequence of the kind 
1 § 268 Addition. 
2 'There is but one temple in the world and that is the human body. There is nothing holier than 
this noble shape. To bow before men is to render a homage to this revelation in the flesh.' G. F. P. von 
Hardenberg (1772-1801): 'Novalis Gesammelte Werke' (ed. C. Seelig, 4 vols. ZUrich, 1945-6) vol. 
IV, p. 222. 
3 C. G. Gillipsie 'Genesis and Geology' (Cambridge, Mass., 19S1). 
4 Lovejoy op. cit. ch. IX. 
25 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
significant in a biological context is in any case almost entirely irrelevant 
to an understanding of 'Mechanics' or 'Physics'. Although Hegel's rejec-
tion of the philosophical pretentiousness of the evolutionary ideas current 
in the opening decades of the last century is therefore decided and forth-
right, it is cautious and qualified in matters of detail relating to the state 
of knowledge in the various organic sciences. 1 
In their immediate application to the natural sciences, Hegel's levels, 
hierarchies and spheres were designed to meet the criticism that the great 
chain of being provided no reliable method by which the gradations link-
ing its extremities might be enumerated and ranged in a rational sequence. 
The origin of these principles is to be found in the natural science of the 
time, and before proceeding to analyze them and indicate their relevance 
to modern thinking, it may therefore be of interest to illustrate the variety 
of contexts in which they occurred a century and a half ago. Orderly expo-
sitions, in which the subject matter was presented by beginning with its 
basic principles and progressing to more and more complex considera-
tions, are to be found in many eighteenth and early nineteenth century 
scientifIc publications. Most of them were quite devoid of philosophical 
pretentions, and seem simply to have arisen out of the practical needs of 
those who worked them out. Newton's 'Mathematical Principles' (1687, 
ed. Cajori, Berkeley, 1947) provides one of the best examples of this in 
the sphere of mechanics. The book begins with defmitions and laws of 
motion, proceeds to the motion of bodies and the same in resisting me-
diums, and concludes with a 'system of the world', involving the consider-
ation of concrete problems concerning the planets, the moon, comets, etc. 
The fundamentally hierarchical thinking motivating this arrangement is 
explained in the scholium to book I section IX, 'In mathematics we are to 
investigate the quantities of forces with their proportions consequent upon 
any conditions supposed; then, when we enter upon physics, we compare 
those proportions with the phenomena of Nature, that we may know 
what conditions of those forces answer to the several kinds of attractive 
bodies. And this preparation being made, we argue more safely concerning 
the physical species, causes and proportions of the forces.' Although Hegel 
criticizes Newton severely for what he considers to be an unwarranted 
scientific use of the intellectual convenience of hierarchical thinking, he 
1 See § 249 Remark. 'The granitic primitive rocks which constitute the deepest strata, and which 
were formed one after the other, are said to be the first, and to be followed by regenerated granite, 
which has disintegrated and been deposited ... Nothing whatever is made comprehensible by the 
succession of stratifications ..• This whole style of explanation is nothing but a transformation of 
spatial juxtaposition into temporal succession.' (§ 339 Add.). For a survey of the zoological literature 
forming the basis of the exposition in § 370, see the note III p. 366. 
26 

INTRODUCTION 
evidently found much that was acceptable in this general method, since 
he praises a similar publication, 'Traite de mecanique eIementaire' (Paris, 
1801), by L. B. Francoeur (1773-1849), which treats mechanics by pro-
gressing from statics to dynamics and hydrostatics, and concluding with 
an exposition of the complex phenomena of hydrodynamics. 
This kind of exposition is also found in many of the most popular 
schoolbooks of the time devoted to the general subject matter of mechan-
ics and physics. It is basic, for example, to the lay-out of the 'Institutes of 
Natural Philosophy' (London, 1785, 3rd ed. 1802) by William Enfield 
(1741-1707), to the 'Introduction to Natural Philosophy' (London, 1781, 
5th ed. 1805)1 by William Nicholson (1753-1815), and to their German 
equivalent, a work quoted by Hegel on several occasions, 'Grundriss der 
Naturlehre' (Halle, 1787, 6th ed. 1820) by F. A. C. Gren (1760-1798). Nor 
was it confined solely to general works of this kind, although it did of 
course tend to be less in evidence as specialization increased. The famous 
lectures delivered at the Royal Institute in 1802-1803 by Thomas Young 
(1773-1829),2 proceed in the same manner, beginning with mechanics 
and ending with vegetable and animal life, as does the highly accomplished 
and immensely influential 'Systeme des Connaissances chimiques' (I I vols. 
Paris, 1801) by A. F. Fourcroy (1755-1809). It was in fact in the chemistry 
textbooks of the time that the method came into its own. Nearly all of 
them begin with a consideration of first principles, and then proceed to 
consider simple and compound bodies, acids, salts, metals, vegetable and 
animal substances, in that order. 'A System of Chemistry' (4 vok Edin-
burgh, 1802, 4th ed. 1817) by Thomas Thomson (1773-1852), translated 
into German by F. B. Wolff (1766-1845),3 provides a good Anglo-
German example of this. 
Richard Kirwan (1733-1812), in his 'Elements of Mineralogy' (1784, 
3rd ed. 2 vols., London, 1810), vol. I ch. IV, explains the value of this kind 
of hierarchical thinking in the classification of minerals, 'On the most 
general view of an indiscriminate heap of earths and stones, we may 
readily perceive that some have an homogeneous aspect; none of the parts 
of which their volume consists bearing the appearance of being composed 
differently from one another. Others on the contrary visibly involve two 
or more heterogeneous substances, either adhering to, or inhering one in 
the other; these are called aggregates. Lastly, others seem to participate of the 
nature of two (or perhaps more) heterogeneous fossils, without however 
1 Germ. tr. A. F. Ludike 'Einleitung in die Naturlehre' (2 vols. Leipzig, 1787). 
2 'A Course of Lectures on Natural Philosophy' (2 vols., London, 1807). 
3 'System der Chernie' (S vols., Berlin, 18oS-18n). 
27 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
any visible separation of one from the other: these I call derivatit'cs. 
Thus we have three primary divisions of earths or stones.' It was however 
in the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms that the hierarchical thinkin g 
of the early nineteenth century found itself most deeply involved in seem-
ingly unresolvablescientific controversies. Abraham Gottlob Werner (I 749-
I 8 17), by means of his 'Classification der Gebirgsarten' (Dresden, I 787), had 
popularized an arrangement of rocks in which a progression was made 
from 'primitives' such as granite, gneiss and mica, to 'transitions' such as 
slate, chalk and trapp, 'fletz' such as sandstone, basalt and coal, 'alluviums' 
such as sand and brown coal, and volcanic formations. 1 The emphasis he 
laid upon the part played by water in the formation of geological phe-
nomena involved his followers in a protracted controversy with the 
disciples of James Hutton (I726-I797) of Edinburgh however.2 Hutton 
had emphasized the importance of heat, and when Hegel was lecturing at 
Berlin, the rival geological theories were only just beginning to be re-
garded as either compatible or obsolete. In botanical studies, the avowedly 
artificial classification of Linne was challenged, on the continent, by 
A. L. de Jussieu (I748-I836), in his 'Genera plantarum' (Paris, I789). This 
attempt to formulate a natural system did not meet with immediate 
general acceptance however, so that Goethe's attempt at a hierarchical 
interpretation of the plant world3 was regarded as a somewhat hazardous 
undertaking, and in England, purely Linnaean works such as the 'Intro-
duction to Physiological and Systematic Botany' (London, I807, Germ. 
tr. J. A. Schulter, Vienna, I8I9) by Sir James Edward Smith (I759-I828), 
and the 'Botanical Arrangement of all the Vegetables naturally growing 
in Great Britain' (2 vols., London, I776), by William Withering (174I-
I799), were still being re-edited in the I830's. A similar situation prevailed 
in the spheres of comparative anatomy and zoology. As data accumulated 
and new affmities became evident, attempts were made to abandon the 
artificial classification ofLinnes 'Systema naturae'. The hierarchical con-
ceptions of Lamarck and Cuvier were by no means fully satisfactory how-
ever, and their involving development in time, as Hegel notes, tended to 
introduce irrelevant considerations into the uses or assessments that were 
made of them. 4 
Nevertheless, with such a wealth of hierarchical thinking in evidence 
1 For contemporary British adaptations, see Robert Jameson 'System of Mineralogy' (3 vols. 
Edinburgh, 1816); T. Weaver 'Treatise on ... Fossils' (Dublin, 1805). 
2 John Playfair (1748-1819) 'illustrations of the Huttonian Theory' (Edinburgh, 1802, ed. White, 
New York, 1964). 
3 'Die Metamorphose cler Pflall2en' (Gotha, 1790). 
4 Note III p. 366. 
28 

INTRODUCTION 
in the various natural sciences of his day, it is not perhaps surprising that 
Hegel should have realized the general value of it when he came to con-
sider the possibility of structuralizing knowledge in an encyclopaedic 
manner. His acumen appears in the carefully qualified way in which he 
employed the basic concept however, and it is primarily the critical anal-
ysis to which he submitted it that constitutes the relevance of his work to 
modem thinking. 
Johnson's criticism that the scale of being had, 'vacuities from step to 
step, through which any order of being may sink into nihility without 
inconvenience ... to the next above or below it', though it may have been 
difficult to answer with reference to 'Logic' or 'Spirit', was refuted in 
superabundance by the natural sciences of the day. Wherever scientists 
examined natural phenomena, the data they collected forced them to 
recognize evidently stable qualitative differences, in the interpretation and 
exposition of which they frequently found it not only convenient, but 
necessary to postulate a scale or hierarchy involving degrees of complexity. 
It is evident from his first full-scale attempt to work out a systematic 
encyclopaedia, that Hegel had grasped the general importance of this 
procedure at a very early stage. It seems moreover to have been an exami-
nation of the natural sciences and the 'logical' and 'metaphysical' cate-
gories they involved which had impressed the importance of it upon him, 
for whereas this attempt includes a careful and ample exposition of an 
extensive range of categories and natural phenomena, it lacks a section 
on 'Spirit'. 1 
Once the importance of distinguishing degrees of complexity has be-
come apparent however, two kinds of problem present themselves. The 
scientist who is actually investigating natural phenomena frods that al-
though the general structure of his work may not need constant revision, 
the details of it usually do, and that on occasions certain discoveries or 
interpretations are liable to change even the general structure in a quite 
radical manner. Kirwan was an accomplished and respected mineralogist 
for example, but it is doubtful whether many of his twentieth century 
counterparts would find his' primary divisions of earths or stones' very help-
ful in throwing light upon current research. The complexity relationships 
1 This could simply be due to Hegel's having stopped writing it out however, for it also lacks an 
'Organics'. The manuscript, which is in any case incomplete, shows signs of careful revision, and the 
work may originally have been designed for publication. It dates from 1801-2. See 'Jenenser Logik, 
Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie' (ed. G. Lasson, Leipzig, 1923); 'Philosophische Bibliothek' (Felix 
Meiner Verlag, Hamburg, 1967). A critical German edition is in course of preparation (Dr. Kimmerle). 
Hermann Schmitz, 'Hegel als Denker der Individualitat' (Meisenheim, 1957) pp. 122-126 discusses 
the evidence of the syllogistic origins of the dialectic to be found in this work. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
indicated by the natural sciences are, in fact, changing continuously. 
They were revised fairly extensively during Hegel's lifetime, and any 
modern scientist, picking up this book, will have no difficulty in seeing 
the further revision that has taken place since the 1820'S. It is essential 
therefore that a distinction should be made between the subject matter 
and the principles of hierarchical thinking. Many eighteenth century 
writers, to whom the great chain of being was simply a convenient and 
imaginatively satisfying dogma failed to realize this, and applied the doc-
trine to contemporary knowledge as if it were already to be grasped as 
complete in all its details.1 It was this static and metaphysically irrespon-
sible interpretation of it, which would certainly have been less widespread 
had the chasm dividing the natural sciences from theology and philosophy 
been less deep, which eventually brought the whole method of hier-
archical thinking into general discredit. 2 When Schelling and his followers 
made their attempt at bridging this chasm, they also made the mistake of 
failing to formulate the principles of their thought as distinct from the 
subject matter with which they were dealing, and were therefore led into 
interpreting natural phenomena by postulating sequences and connections 
which outraged those engaged in the normal routine of sober and pains-
taking research. Hegel is justified in disassociating himself from the 
Schellingians in that while the subject matter of the 'Encylopaedia' is 
assessed solely on its own merits, it is also referred back to a set of dearly 
defmable and consistently employed principles. If the natural science of 
the day is questioned, this is usually because Hegel thinks that it is over-
looking qualitative differences. He never quarrels with it simply in order 
to make striking observations or indicate novel connections.3 
Having grasped the general significance of distinguishing degrees of 
complexity, and acknowledged the state of continuous change in the 
natural sciences, it is therefore the investigation of the principles involved 
in Hegel's structuralization of knowledge, which presents us with the 
second kind of problem. Hegel had realized, at the latest by the autumn of 
1 Mainly poets, theologians and philosophers of course. A good example of the doctrines being 
used in this form in a theological context is to be found in the well-known 'De Origine Mali' (Dublin 
and London, 1702, tr. E. Law, 2nd ed. 2 vols. London, 1732) by William King (r650-1729), arch-
bishop of Dublin. 'From the supposition of a Scale of Beings, gradually descending from perfection to 
nonentity, and complete in every intermediate rank and degree, we shall soon see the absurdity of 
such questions as these, Why was not man made more perfect? Why are not his faculties equal to 
those of angels? Since this is only asking why he was not placed in a different class of beings, when 
at the same time all other classes are supposed to be full.' (vol. I p. r 3 r). 
2 Lovejoy op. cit. pp. 328-329; c£Josiah Royce (1855-1916) 'The Religious Aspect of Philosophy' 
(Boston, Mass., r885) pp. 248-249. 
3 This should be made abundantly clear by the commentary: see, for example §§ 270, 274-278. 
317-320, 330, 371. 
30 

INTRODUCTION 
1801, that the natural sciences could not be satisfactorily treated merely by 
distinguishing levels of subject matter and ranging them in hierarchies. 
It became apparent to him, that the sequence oflevels formulated on these 
principles did not exhibit a simple and uniform progression. Goethe's 
'Die Metamorphose der Pflanzen' (Gotha, 1790) might be used in order 
to expound botanical phenomena in a rational sequence, and Johann Her-
mann's 'Affmitatum Animalium Tabulam' (Argentorati, 1777) might be 
used to the same purpose in animal physiology and zoology. Botany and 
animal physiology had to be juxtaposed in the overall sequence however 
(§ 349),1 and it was clear that the levels formulated within the botanical 
hierarchy, like those within the zoological hierarchy, had factors in common 
which differed from those justifying the juxtaposing of the most complex 
botanical level and the simplest level of animal physiology. Hegel had 
noticed in fact, that although the formulation and juxtaposing of levels 
might be motivated solely by the principle of increasing degrees of com-
plexity, the qualitative differences initiated by the transitions from one level 
to the next varied very widely in their degree of comprehensiveness. This 
was often most apparent in closely related levels. The transition from 
'Logic' to space for example (§ 254), and that from the point to the line 
(§ 256), both involved a straightforward and evidently valid juxtaposing 
of subject matters, but they differed very widely indeed in the compre-
hensiveness of the qualitative differences they initiated. It was evidently a 
consideration of this which led Hegel to formulate the principle of spheres. 
As a principle, it is as revisable and as intimately involved with the subject 
matter of the 'Encyclopaedia' as are levels and hierarchies, and once its 
significance is grasped, the understanding of the general structure of this 
work and of the 'Philosophy of Nature' is by no means difficult. Spheres 
consist of levels and hierarchies. They also contribute to the formation of 
more comprehensive spheres however, within which they are themselves 
simply levels ranged in hierarchies. Botany is a fairly comprehensive sphere 
of scientific enquiry for example; within the more comprehensive sphere 
of organics however, it constitutes a level in a hierarchy also involving 
geology and zoology. Organics, in its tum, constitutes a level, together 
with mechanics and physics, within the still more comprehensive sphere 
of 'Nature'. The most comprehensive or complex sphere of all is that of 
the 'Encyclopaedia' as a whole, within which the three major spheres of 
'Logic', 'Nature' and 'Spirit' constitute the final hierarchy of complexity 
relationships. 
1 Note III p. 298. 
31 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
It is in the structure of the 'Encyclopaedia' as a whole, and, consequently, 
in the structure of the sphere, that the dialectic had its origin and finds its 
fulfillment. As the theological problems which preoccupied him during 
the 1790'S gave way to the encyclopaedic problems which preoccupied 
him at Jena (1800-1806), Hegel came to regard the Three Persons of the 
Christian Trinity as a theological prefiguration of the three major spheres 
of the 'Encyclopaedia'. 1 Both the dogma and the structure were inter-
preted by him as exhibiting, in their unity, the syllogistic interdependence 
of the universal, the particular and the singular. 2 Within each sphere there-
fore, he attempts to exhibit the levels as progressing from what is general 
to the sphere as a whole, to what is more isolated and particular, and finally 
to what holds within itself both generalities and particularities. This triadic 
pattern or structure, severely regulated as it is by levels, hierarchies and 
spheres, and involving as it does an immense wealth of observation and 
erudition, constitutes the central and all-pervading principle of the'En-
cyclopaedia'. Hegel refers to it, in the course of his expositions, as the 
'Notion', and in these lectures, often invokes it in order to indicate the 
'imperfection' of the natural sciences, 'This idealism, which recognizes the 
Idea throughout the whole of nature, is at the same time realism, for the 
Notion ofliving existence is the Idea as reality, even though in other re-
spects the individuals only correspond to one moment of the Notion. In 
real, sensuous being, philosophy recognizes the Notion in general. One 
must start from the Notion, and even if it should as yet be unable to ex-
haust what is called the 'abundant variety' of nature, and there is still a 
great deal of particularity to be explained, it must be trusted nevertheless. 
The demand that there should be an explanation of this particularity is 
generally vague, and it is no reflection on the Notion that it is not fulfilled. 
With the theories of the empirical physicists the position is quite the 
reverse however, for as their validity depends solely upon singular in-
stances, they are obliged to explain everything. The Notion holds good 
of its own accord however, and singularity will therefore yield itself in 
due course.' (§ 353 Add.). It is indeed impossible to overestimate the im-
portance of this principle in the expositions of the 'Encyclopaedia', 
'Philosophy has to proceed on the basis of the Notion, and even if it 
demonstrates very little, one has to be satisfied. It is an error on the part 
of the philosophy of nature to attempt to assess all phenomena; this is 
done in the fmite sciences, where everything has to be reduced to general 
1 For a recent discussion of this see Claude Bruaire 'Logique et religion chretienne dans la philoso-
phie de Hegel' (paris, 1964) pt. II ch. ii. 
2 Hermann Schmitz 'Hegel als Denker der Individualitat' (Meisenheim. 1957) pp. 90-163. 
32 

INTRODUCTION 
conceptions (hypotheses). In these sciences the empirical element is the 
sole confirmation of the hypothesis, so that everything has to be explained. 
Whatever is known through the Notion is its own explanation and stands 
firm however, so that philosophy need not be disturbed if the explanation 
of each and every phenomenon has not yet been completed.' (§ 270 Add.). 
The 'Encyclopaedia' has two aspects therefore, which, while they have 
to be recognized as being distinct, also have to be recognized as involving 
one another and as being ultimately or ideally identical. It is essential that 
its subject matter should be regarded as being open to constant revision in 
the light of the changing state of knowledge. It is no less essential however 
that this subject matter should be structuralized with reference to the 
principles through which it becomes most fully intelligible, and that these 
principles should be recognized as absolute and changeless. Unless the work 
is regarded in this manner, each of the three main points in Johnson's 
attack will be fully justified; there will be no way of defming the extremes 
of infinity and nullity, it will be impossible to indicate the relationship 
between what is infinite and what is fmite, and there will be no reliable 
method by which the levels linking infinity with nullity might be 
enumerated. 
When he searched the thought of his time for principles that might be 
used in a systematic exposition of knowledge as a whole, Hegel discovered, 
therefore, an ancient and scholasticized metaphysical system needing 
radical revision in order to make it relevant to current intellectual insights, 
a Christianity which had failed to cope with the rapid changes brought 
about by Copernicanism, Baconianism, Rousseauism, and an extensively 
fragmented treatment of the natural sciences. The intellectual climate at 
present is in many respects more favourable to the understanding and ac-
ceptance of his 'Encyclopaedia' than that at the beginning of the last 
century, and it may therefore not be entirely out of place to indicate some 
features of contemporary thinking in the natural sciences which have a 
direct bearing upon it. 
It has already been noticed that the present readiness to regard the prob-
lems presented by the natural sciences as a whole,l to recognize the rele-
vance to natural science of exact formulations of thought as well as orderly 
1 'The large and panoramic systems of idealistic philosophy are, as it were, late branches of a 
deformed scholasticism. Hegelianism is a typical metaphysical system of our age; Thomism is a 
typical scholastic system which is still living in the Catholic church and also attracting some persons 
outside the Catholic church. Both these systems have not so far shown any disposition to logicalize 
empirical science, to form a quasi-addition to their philosophico-re1igious structures.' Otto Neurath, 
Rudolf Carnap, Charles Morris 'International Encyclopaedia of Unified Science' (2 vols. Chicago. 
19S5) vol I p. 7. 
B 
33 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
arrangements of subject matter, and to acknowledge that an aware-
ness of the importance of psychological, social, political, historical 
factors l is essential to any balanced assessment of this sphere, all provide 
ground which many modem thinkers have come to share with Hegel. 
This ground has to be regarded as particularly valuable, fertile and 
interesting, precisely because those who have chosen to till it have been 
very largely unaware of Hegel's having acknowledged the potentiality of 
their labours. 
The most stimulating and encouraging feature of the link-up between 
the 'Philosophy of Nature' and modem thinking about natural science, is 
undoubtedly this general agreement on the broad outlines of the approach 
required for any balanced assessment of the problems presented by natural 
phenomena. The most fascinating features ofit are however the similarities 
in detail which have become apparent of recent years. As might be ex-
pected, two main attitudes have developed in the current treatment of 
levels. R. o. Kapp has emphasized the importance of resolving observa-
tions of complex phenomena into generalizations,2 and J. G. Kemeny, 
after indicating the significance of reducing complex fields of natural 
science to a few fundamental entities has even gone so far as to conclude 
that, 'We could thus picture the scientist as striving to the goal of finding 
the law of nature which would enable him to explain all facts with perfect 
accuracy. '3 The same manner of thinking, although it is carefully qualified, 
appears in an article by P. Oppenheim and H. Putnam, in which it is 
suggested that our view of nature might be given unity by a process of 
'micro-reduction', out of which levels of elementary particles, atoms, 
molecules, cells, multicellular living things and social groups would even-
tually emerge.' However, J. H. Woodger's work at the Middlesex Hos-
pital Medical School in applying the method of the 'Principia Mathe-
matica' to cytological problems,5 has had the interesting philosophical 
result of forcing him to suggest an amplification of Whitehead and 
Russell's work on the theory of relations, in the interest of distinguishing 
1 i.e. the sphere of 'Spirit'. 
2 'I wish to make the bold claim here thzt, in physics, the rule of economy of hypotheses can be so 
expressed and defined thzt it acquires a status far higher than the one usually accorded to it; I wish to 
raise it from a mere rule of procedure to one of the great universal principles to which thewhole of the 
physical world conforms. At this level it would be worded as follows: In physics the minimum assump-
tion always constitutes the true generalisation.' 'Ockam's Razor and the unification of Physical Science' 
('BritishJourna1 for the Philosophy of Science' voL VIII, Feb. 1958, no. 32, pp. 265-280: c£ voL XI 
pp. SS-62, May 1960). 
3 'A Philosopher Looks at Science' (princeton, 1959) pp. 167-173. 
4 H. Feigl and G. Maxwell 'Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science' (3 vols., Minneapolis, 
1962) voL n pp. 3-36, 'Unity of Science as a working hypothesis.' 
5 'The Axiomatic Method in Biology' (Cambridge, 1937). 
34 

INTRODUCTION 
between progressions and levels involved in hierarchies. l Karl Menger has 
also indicated the need for a revision of pure and applied mathematics in 
order to facilitate the treatment of the relationships between quantitative 
and qualitative factors which so frequently become apparent in scientific 
work of all kinds. He suggests that Ockam's razor should be qualified by 
the proposition that, 'Entities must not be reduced to the point of in-
adequacy, i.e. it is vain to try to do with fewer what requires more', and 
that what modern mathematics needs is not a razor but a separator or 
prism for resolving conceptual mixtures with the spectra of their mean-
ings.s M. BungeS and R. B. Braithwaite have both attempted to indicate 
the wider philosophical significance of postulating levels in order to allow 
validity to apparently contradictory or complementary hypotheses con-
cerned with various degrees of complexity or comprehensiveness. 'In 
order that the propositions should form an ascending hierarchy they must, 
of course, cover a wider and wider range of possible experience, so that a 
higher-level hypothesis could be refuted by observations which would 
not refute a hypothesis standing at a lower level. But, provided that there 
is no evidence refuting the highest-level hypothesis, the evidence estab-
lishing it need be no more than that establishing a lower-level hypothesis 
for it to be regarded as providing an explanation for the latter and as 
thereby raising the latter's intellectual status in relation to comparable 
hypotheses for which we can provide no such explanation.''' Bunge has 
also attempted to defme a level as, 'a section of reality characterized by a 
set of interlocked properties and laws, some of which are peculiar to the 
given domain', and to indicate the stability of the ontic levels to which the 
evident fluidity of our knowledge corresponds. This distinction between 
being and knowledge raises an issue which Hegel resolutely refuses to re-
gard as a problem. One might of course ask on what grounds one postu-
lates stable ontic levels if they are not those of our knowledge of them. 
Bunge gives a theoretical answer to this by pointing out that if these levels 
1 'And by a hierarchy I mean any relation which is one-many and such that its converse domain is 
identical with the whole set of terms to which the beginning of the relation stands in some power of 
the relation. This is a purely abstract definition because the notion of heirarchy as used here is not 
one belonging to any particular empirical science. It is a purely set-theoretical notion. At the same time 
it does not occur in those sections of Whitehead and Russell's "Principia Mathematica" which are 
devoted to the theory of relations.' 'Biology and Physics' ('British Journal for the Philosophy of 
Science' vol. XI, Aug. 1960, no. 42 pp. 89-100). 
2 'A Counterpart of Occam's razor in the ontological uses of pure and applied mathematics' 
('Synthese' vol. XII, no. 4, pp. 415-428, Dec. 1960). Cf. W. V. O. Quine 'Mathematical Logic' 
(Harvard, 1951) §§ 28-29. 
3 'The Myth of Simplicity: problems of scientific philosophy' (Englewood, 1963). 
• R. B. Braithwaite 'Scientific Explanation' (Cambridge, 1953) pp. 345-347. Cf. D. Bohm 
'Causality and Chance in Modern Physics' (London, 1957) pp. 164-170. 
3S 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
were not comparatively stable, nothing would be irrelevant to anything 
else and the various sciences would be impossible. Hegel, whose 'Logic' 
and 'Psychology' are directly relevant here, would probably have added 
to this that the difference between being and knowledge assumed by the 
distinction is only partially valid: the subject matter of the natural sciences, 
in that it involves time and constitutes knowledge is, of course, continually 
changing; in that it is also to be assessed in its graded, hierarchical and 
spherical aspect however, a rational interpretation of it will also have to 
recognize its structural stability. 
The principle of hierarchies also occurs widely in modem thinking, al-
though it is frequently employed only in its rather primitive eighteenth 
century form, as a vague progression from what is more simple to what 
is more complex. 1 As it has been formulated by Woodger however, it 
has helped to clarify extremely intricate cytological problems, and, 
through its more recent use in embryology, given rise to the postulation 
of a three-dimensional co-ordinate system, the axes of which are related 
to the idealized planes of morphological symmetry in a developing em-
bryo-an emergence of the triadic structure in rationalized embryology 
which would most certainly have fascinated Hegel.s J. W. Addison's sug-
gestionS that the theories of particular hierarchies that have arisen more 
or less independently in analysis, recursive function theory and pure logic 
might be used to realize Hilbert's concept of a unified science of mathe-
matics,4 could be regarded as providing the counterpart to W oodger' s 
work in the sphere of pure mathematics. R. Harre has pointed out that in 
a true hierarchy the retrogression is asymmetrical. If, for example, (a) a 
chemical explanation is given of a reaction; (b) a valency explanation is 
given of chemistry; and (c) an electronic explanation is given of valency; 
I See, for example, the lay-out in the anthology of articles collected by H. Feigl and W. Sellars. 
'Readings in Philosophical Analysis' (New York, 1943), where a beginning is made with 'Is Existence 
a predicate?' and a conclusion is reached with 'The Freedom of the Will'. 
2 Note III p. 355. See J. R. Gregg and F. T. C. Harris 'Form and Strategy in Science' (Dordrecht 
1964) pp. 234-250. 
3 'The Theory of Hierarchies' in E. Nagel, P. Suppes, A. Tarski 'Logic, Methodology and Philo-
sophy of Science' (Stanford, 1962) pp. 26-37. Cf. S. C. Kleene 'Introduction to Metamathematics' 
(New York and Amsterdam, 1952); G. Asser 'Das Repriisentantenproblem' (,Zeitschrift ffir mathe-
matische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik' vol. I pp. 252-263, 1955); J. W. Addison 'Separ-
ation principles in the hierarchies of classical and effective descriptive set theory' ('Fundamenta 
Mathematicae' vol. 46 pp. 123-135, 1959); E. W. Beth 'The Foundations of Mathematics' (Amster-
dam, 1965) pp. 194-201. 
4 David Hilbert (1862-1943) 'Mathematical Problems' (tr. Newson 'Bulletin of the American 
Mathematical Society' vol. 8 pp. 437-479, 1901-2), 'The question is urged upon us whether mathe-
matics is doomed to the fate of those other sciences that have split up into separate branches, whose 
representatives scarcely understand one another, and whose connection becomes ever more loose. I 
do not believe this nor wish it, ... with the extension of mathematics, its organic character is not 
lost but only manifests itself more clearly.' 

INTRODUCTION 
although (b) is necessarily involved in a full explanation of (a), the con-
verse is not the case. Similarly, although (c) is necessarily involved in a full 
explanation of (b), the converse is not the case. Harre presents this very 
lucidly, and ifhis exposition is borne in mind, a lot oflight will be thrown 
upon the practical and purely scientific value of Hegel's arrangement of 
the subject matter of the 'Philosophy of Nature'.l Theodor Litt has even 
suggested that the whole 'Encyclopaedia' is to be more readily appreciated 
if its levels are considered in the converse order to that in which Hegel 
lectured upon them.s One of the most ambitious and brilliant attempts to 
demonstrate the relevance of hierarchical thinking to contemporary physics 
has been made by Laszlo Tisza.3 He points out that the great triumphs of 
nineteenth century physics lay in the reduction of mechanics, electro-
dynamics, thermodynamics to classical mechanics, and that they are still 
relevant to our thinking in that they exhibit the simplifying and unifying 
power of certain high-level abstractions. Twentieth century develop-
ments have shown however that basic disciplines such as classical mechanics, 
thermodynamics and quantum mechanics are too complex and diverse 
to be compressed within the confmes of a single rigorously built deductive 
system. Tisza proposes therefore that this sphere should be regarded as a 
'cluster' of deductive systems, and that the procedure oflogical differen-
tiation which grasping it will therefore entail should be held in check 
through what he calls 'the logical integration of deductive systems'. This 
involves an investigation of the interrelationships sustaining the compati-
bility or mutual consistency of the various systems recognized. By bearing 
in mind compatibility, controlled inconsistency, supplementary relations 
and the fact that many relationships are, as yet, incompletely understood, 
he manages to work out a tentative grading of gravitational theories, 
mechanics, dynamics, and thermodynamics. 
Now that the uncertainty principle in quantum mechanics seems to have 
been effectively questioned by Alfred Lande,' there would appear to be 
1 R. Harre 'Matter and Method' (London, 1964) pp. 24-31. 
2 'Hegel, Versuch einer kritischen Emeuerung' (Heidelberg, 1953). 
3 'The Conceptual Structure of Physics' ('Reviews of Modem Physics' vol. 35, no. I, pp. 151-185, 
Jan. 1963); R. S. Cohen and W. Wartofsky 'Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science' (2 vols. 
Dordrecht and New York, 1963-1965) vol. I pp. 55-76. 
4 'Why do quantum theorists ignore quantum theory?' ('British Journal for the Philosophy of 
Science' vol. xv pp. 307-313,1965); 'New Foundations of Quantum Mechanics' (Cambridge, 1965), 
'The innovation of this book is to point out that there are serious faults in the purely physical arguments 
which have led to the current dualistic doctrines according to which diffraction and other wavelike 
phenomena of matter force us to accept two contradictory pictures, together with an elaborate 
subjectivist interpretation of atomic events, instead of one unitary reality. The faulty physics consists 
in ignoring an important element of the quantum mechanics of particles, namely the rule for the 
quantized exchange oflinear momentum (Duane's third quantum rule, 1923) established in perfect 
37 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
little point in dealing in detail with the purely scientific origins of the idea 
of complementarity, or with the religious capital which the modern 
counterparts of Nieuwen~dt, Derham, Adams and Paley have attempted 
to extract from it. Although this concept is certainly consistent with 
hierarchical thinking, its valid applicability is one-way, and very largely 
self-evident. It may be said for example, that a physicist's analysis of a stone 
complements a chemist's for a geologist, or that a biologist's account of a 
person complements a psychologist'sfor ajudge, but Mr. Alexanderl was 
perfectly justified in feeling uneasy when he surmised that Messrs. MacKay 
and Coulson2 might be inclined to use the concept in an attempt to make 
him admit the reasonableness of being religious. A true hierarchy is 
asymmetrical, so that whereas an exclusively scientific attitude of mind is 
at least potentially intelligible to predominantly religious thinking, the 
converse is by no means the case. 
The spheres of subject matter recognized by Hegel in the 'Philosophy 
of Nature' simply reflect the natural science of his day, and many of them, 
in their general outlines, might still be regarded as valid. Contemporary 
science fmds no difficulty in recognizing distinct disciplines. Research is con-
tinually bringing to light hitherto unrecognized affmities and connections 
however, and attempts are therefore made to postulate metaphysical prin-
ciples capable of making various disciplines more generally intelligible. 
Very few modern physicists, once they have begun to consider the general 
significance of inter-discipline relationships, have been able to keep to the 
kind of positivism employed so effectively by Tisza, and as most of them 
are not trained metaphysicians, the principles they have formulated have, 
on the whole, been unsatisfactory. Harre tends to accept Collingwood's 
relativistic historicism, 'In every hierarchy of explanatory mechanisms there 
is, at any given historical period, an ultimate or fmal mechanism which, in 
that period, does not call for an explanation. The characteristics of this mech-
anism, or the concepts of what counts for the time being as the ultimate 
explanation, can be expressed in what I shall call the General Conceptual 
System of the period.'3 Ernest Nagel, evidently influenced by the success 
of evolutionary theories. in organics, formulates the principle of 
analogy to the quantum rule for the energy (planck) and for the angular momentum (Sommerfeld-
Wilson). The third quantum rule yields indeed a complete explanation of all the wavelike phenomena 
of matter.' 
1 Peter Alexander 'Complementary Descriptions' ('Mind' vol. 65 pp. 145-165, 1956). 
2 D. M. MacKay 'Science and Faith' ('The Listener' Sept. 1 I, 1952); C. A. Coulson 'Christianity 
in an Age of Science' ('Riddell Memorial Lectures' 1953). 
3 'Matter and Method' (London, 1964) p. 27. 

INTRODUCTION 
'emergence'in order to make the relationships between various spheres of 
physics intelligible. 1 D. Bohm has made much of a similar principle, 
which he calls 'becoming'. 2 It is of course the biologists who are best 
qualified, on account of the nature of the subject matter with which they 
are concerned, to appreciate the metaphysical structure of a sphere. 3 
Bertalanffy has, for example, criticized Russell's noble but only partly 
justifiable championing of the tenet that the understanding of a part does 
not necessarily involve a consideration of the whole,' 'If you take any 
realm of biological phenomena, whether embryonic development, meta-
bolism, activity of the nervous system, biocoenoses etc., it is always so 
that a behaviour of an element is different within the system. from what it 
is in isolation. You cannot sum up the behaviour of the whole from the 
individual parts.'5 It seems likely moreover, that thinking in terms of 
levels, hierarchies and spheres, rather than in terms which necessarily in-
volve simple progressions in time, might throw a lot of light upon the 
value of certain attempts to justify the concept of teleology as it is taken 
to apply to biological development. 6 
The uses made of the principles of levels, hierarchies and spheres by 
contemporary thinkers have not, as yet, been used to throw any light 
upon the origin and significance of Hegel's dialectic. To a very large extent 
therefore, the contemporary views noticed in this chapter have to be re-
garded as revisable and ephemeral, and it is indeed doubtful whether any 
of their proponents would wish to claim that they should be regarded as 
in any way absolute or permanent. Taken as a whole however, they do 
constitute a great advance upon the scientific thinking of the early nine-
teenth century. In that they have not drawn their inspiration from any 
consciously preformulated metaphysic, but have arisen spontaneously out 
of attempts to grasp widely diverse and intricate phenomena, they are of 
great interest to contemporary Hegelianism, not only because they bear 
out the validity of Hegel's criticism of the 'physics' and metaphysics of 
1 'The Structure of Science' (London, I96I) ch. II pp. 336-398. 
2 'Causality and Chance in Modem Physics' (London, I957). 
3 A. B. Novikoff' 'The Concept ofIntegrative Levels and Biology' ('Science' new series volume 
IOI pp. 209-2I5, I945). 
4 In, for example, 'Human knowledge, its scope and limits' (London, I948). 
5 Ludwig von Bertalanffy 'An outline of general system theory' ('The British Journal for the 
Philsophy of Science' vol. I pp. I34-I65, I950). 
6 R. B. Braithwaite 'Scientific Explanation' (Cambridge, I953) ch. X. C£J. H. Woodger op. cit. 
I960, 'In conclusion we may say that biology is concerned with objects whose parts (or some of them) 
exhibit hierarchical order in space and are themselves ordered by hierarchies whose fields are extended 
in time; this type of order being connected with the occurrence in these biological objects of parts 
which are existentially dependent upon one another.' 
39 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
his own day, but because they give such an unmistakable indication of the 
relevance ofhis 'Encyclopaedia' to present problems. 
c. LOGIC, NATURE, SPIRIT 
'Perception would, of course, be held by Hegel to be more or less 
erroneous. Nothing really exists, according to his system, but Spirits. 
Bodies only appear to exist.'-J. M. E. McTaggart. 
The categories of Hegel's 'Logic' have yet to be traced to their origins 
in the history of philosophy and the natural sciences in the way that the 
subject matter of the 'Philosophy of Nature' has now been related to its 
sources. As the general principles of the 'Encyclopaedia' have moreover 
never been enunciated in a lucid, succinct and usable form, and the 
English translations of the 'Logic' leave much to be desired,l the general 
results produced by the impact of the 'Logic' upon British thinkers have 
been somewhat lacking in clarity and coherence, and have therefore had 
the deplorable effect of simply mystifying, irritating and bewildering the 
supposedly uninitiated. This is particularly noticeable in respect of those 
writers who, after reading the 'Logic', have gone on to expound the 
relationship in which they think it stands to 'Nature'. McTaggart's remark 
is by no means the choicest of their utterances.2 S. Alexander invokes the 
condensation of points from the 'complete law of the universe' in order 
to clarify the matter.3 H. S. Macran's investigations into the categories 
immediately preceding 'Nature' led him to regard it as, 'the mere lump 
that the idea is gradually to leaven, the vile corpus on which the idea is to 
demonstrate its truth'. He then proceeds to illustrate his point, 'The oak, 
1 Hegel's first logic (1801/2), and the simplified versions of the subject he prepared for his students 
at Nuremberg (1808/16), have never been translated: see 'Jenenser Logik' (ed. Lasson, Leipzig, 1923), 
'Philosophische Propadeutik' (ed. Rosenkranz, Stuttgart, 1961). His main work on the subject 
'Wissenschaft der Logik' (3 pts. Nuremberg, 1812/16) has been translated in its entirety by W. H. 
Johnston and 1. G. Struthers, 'Hegel's Science of Logic' (2 vols. London, 1929). Parts of it were trans-
lated by J. H. Stirling (1865) and H. S. Macran (1912/29). W. Wallace brought out an English version 
of that part of the 'Encyclopaedia' devoted to the subject, 'The Logic of Hegel' (Oxford, 1873). 
H. Glockner's 'Hegel-Lexikon' (improved ed. 2 vols. Stuttgart, 1957), which appeared in conjunction 
with the 'Samtliche Werke' (22 vols. Stuttgart, 1957), by bringing out the consistency in Hegel's use 
oflanguage, has initiated a new approach in Hegel scholarship. If Anglo-Saxon linguistic analysis had 
given rise, as it should have done, to an English equivalent of Rudolf Eisler's 'Worterbuch der philo-
sophischen Begriffe' (1899, 4th ed. 3 vols. Berlin, 1927-1929) or J. Hoffmeister's 'Worterbuch der 
philosophischen Begriffe' (Hamburg, 1955), there might have been a chance of revising these trans-
lations in a worthwhile manner. 
2 'A Commentary on Hegel's Logic' (Cambridge, 1910), p. 9. 
3 'Hegel's Conception of Nature' ('Mind' vol. XI pp. 495-523,1886) pp. 499-500. 
40 

INTRODUCTION 
for example, with its coherence of parts, differentiation of functions, and 
general unity of aim, as compared, say, with the indifference and coherence 
of clay, is on the way to the absolute identity of the idea, but no more'.l 
William Wallace would even have us believe that 'endless times and 
spaces', writings in organisms, silent images, Lethe, the 'Divine Comedy' 
(in Italian) and Condillac are all relevant to an understanding of the 
transition from 'Logic' to Nature. 2 
Nonsense such as this is of course inexcusable. It cannot be denied how-
ever that certain problems are presented by the 'Logic' and by the relation-
ship in which it stands to 'Nature' and 'Spirit', and before proceeding to 
look in detail at some of the main features of the 'Philosophy of Nature' , 
they should perhaps be noticed. 
As the subject matter of the 'Encyclopaedia' is ranged in order of com-
plexity, we are safe in assuming that the fact that the 'Logic' precedes 
'Nature' in the general lay-out of the work implies that Hegel regarded 
its subject matter as being less complex than that of the natural sciences. 
He thought therefore, that whereas the complexity relationships of cate-
gories might be investigated and fully understood without reference to 
natural phenomena, nature and spirit presuppose categories in the same 
way that geology presupposes chemistry and physics, and the law psy-
chology and biology etc. The 'Logic' is in fact an attempt to establish the 
investigation of the relative complexity of categories, and the ordering of 
the resultant subject matter by means of the principles oflevels, hierarchies 
and spheres, as a distinct discipline. 
This point has been grasped in a fairly lucid manner by a number of 
commentators, who have then proceeded to criticize Hegel for illustrating 
the expositions of the 'Logic' by making copious references to the subject 
matters of 'Nature' and 'Spirit'.a This criticism has its origin in their 
failure to understand the nature of the categories and to distinguish be-
tween the subject matter and the structuralization of the 'Logic'. In 
attempting to reconstruct the fIrst sphere of the 'Encyclopaedia' without 
reference to the 'Nature' and 'Spirit' of Hegel's day and to the develop-
ments that have taken place since, these commentators have indeed shown 
as complete a miscomprehension of the discipline Hegel was attempting 
to establish as those critics who have claimed that the categories are 
1 'Hegel's Doctrine of Formal Logic' (Oxford, I9U) pp. 88-89; cf. his 'Hegel's Logic of World 
and Idea' (Oxford, 1929). 
2 W. Wallace 'Prolegomena to the study of Hegel's Philosophy' (Oxford, 1894) pp. 476-477. 
3 J. M. E. McTaggart 'A Commentary on Hegel's Logic' (Cambridge, I910); W. T. Stace 'The 
Philosophy of Hegel' (Dover Publications, 1955). 
n* 
41 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
nothing but the natural or spiritual phenomena from which they are sup-
posed to be distinct. 1 
The categories of the 'Logic' stand in relation to natural and spiritual 
phenomena in something like the same way as do the principles of the 
dialectic noticed in the previous chapter. They are an integral part of these 
phenomena, and yet, on account of their greater simplicity, universality 
or generality, and on account of the complexity relationships in which 
they stand to one another as categories, they have also to be regarded as 
constituting a distinct sphere and as demanding treatment in a distinct 
discipline. 2 It may not be amiss to establish this point with reference to 
measure, which is fairly typical of the general range of categories assessed 
in the 'Logic'. 3 Hegel illustrates its significance by pointing out that water 
and minerals, when they are chemically analyzed, are found to be qualities 
conditioned by the measures of the quantitative ratios between the matters 
they contain; that the various kinds of plants and animals have certain 
fairly standard measurements which become less important as distin-
guishing features in less complex organisms, ammonites for example 
being both microscopic and as large as cart-wheels; that in Greek social 
ethics all human things, riches, honour and power, as well as joy 
and pain, had their definite measure, the transgression of which was 
regarded as leading to ruin and destruction; and that the category is used 
theologically when, as in the Psalms, God is said to have established the 
bounds of the sea and the land, the rivers and the hills, or when it is said 
that He is the measure of all things. In the slightly more complex category 
of rule or standard, an increase or diminution on a scale of degrees proceeds 
by arithmetical progression, and is only limited by abrupt transitions of a 
qualitative character. Hegel illustrates this category by pointing out that 
an arithmetical progression in numbers of vibrations constitutes a musical 
1 Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg (1802-1872) 'Geschichte der Kategorienlehre' (Berlin, 1846); 
cf. his 'Logische Untersuchungen' (2 vols. Leipzig, 1862) pp. 38-42. A fairly balanced view of the 
matter is however to be found in Andrew Seth (pringle-Pattison) (1856-1931), 'Hegelianism and 
Personality' (Edinburgh and London, 1887) Lecture III, and in an article by George Kent (1842-1892), 
a Norwegian clergyman of English descent; see 'Die Lehre Hegels vom Wesen der Erfahrung und 
ihre Bedeutung fur das Erkennen' (,Christiania Videnskabs-Selskabs Forhandlinger' 1891 no. 5). 
2 The dual nature of all valid universals is brought out extremely well by R. I. Aaron in 'The 
Theory of Universals' (Oxford, 1967); see p. 240, 'We cannot then simply say that a universal is a 
natural recurrence. Any principle of grouping is a universal and we cannot identify principle of 
grouping with natural recurrence. This is an avowal that the question "What is a universal?" cannot 
be answered in one sentence, but needs two. Universals are natural recurrences; universals are principles 
of grouping or classifying.' 
3 §§ 107-111 of the 'Encyclopaedia'; see 'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963) 
pp. 201-206, cf. 'Hegel's Science of Logic' (tr. Johnston and Struthers, 2 vols. London, 1961) 
voL I pp. 345-393. McTaggart op. cit. ch. IV regards Hegel's treatment of the category as being 
invalid. 

INTRODUCTION 
scale consisting of distinct notes; that degrees of oxidation distinguish the 
oxides of certain metals; that although the plucking out of a single hair 
will not make a horse tailless, the continuation of this operation will; 
that, 'in the matter of expenditure, there is a certain latitude within which 
a more or less does not matter; but when measure ... is exceeded on one 
side or the other . . . good economy turns into avarice or prodigality'; 
and that, with regard to the territory and population of a state, 'we must 
not forget, that by continual increase or diminution ... we fmally get to 
a point where, apart from all other circumstances, this quantitative alter-
ation alone necessarily draws with it an alteration in the quality of the 
constitution.' 1 
It will be apparent from this that Hegel regards measure and rule as 
categories simply because a comprehension of anyone of the various 
natural and spiritual phenomena of which they constitute an integral part, 
does not provide a complete understanding of the part they play in com-
prehension as a whole; because they arc, in fact, more general or universal 
than any of the particular instances in which they may be noticed. It will 
also be apparent that measure presupposes, for example, the categories of 
quality and quantity, and is itself the presupposition of rule, that it is in 
fact involved in complexity relationships with other categories. Conse-
quently, it also constitutes a level in the hierarchy of categories expounded 
within the sphere of 'Logic', and, as Hegel shows, is itself a sphere con-
taining levels and a hierarchy. Since the overall structure of the 'Logic' is 
identical with the overall structures of 'Nature' and 'Spirit', there is a 
somewhat loose and vague correspondence between the simplest categor-
ies of the 'Logic', the basic levels of 'Nature', and the most primitive 
stages of 'Spirit' etc., and Hegel occasionally calls attention to this in the 
course of these lectures. 2 
The subject matter of the 'Logic' is, therefore, as revisable as the subject 
matters of 'Nature' and 'Spirit', and must be as completely incompre-
hensible as the natural science and the spiritual activity assessed in the 
'Encyclopaedia' to those who are unaware of its origins. Many of the categ-
ories recognized by Hegel are still in use, some are obsolete however, and 
not a few of the complexity relationships he formulates need revision in the 
light of the developments that have taken place since the work was published. 8 
1 For a recent treatment of this category and a useful bibliographical note on the literature relating 
to it, see A. Pap 'An Introduction to the Philosophy of Science' (London 1963) ch. 8; o.J. G. Kemeny 
'A Philosopher looks at Science' (New York, 1964) ch. 8. 
2 § 254 Remark, § 274 Addition, § 337. 
3 Hegel wrote out three main versions of it. which are by no means identical: see 'Jenenser Logik 
Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie' (ed. G. Lasson, Leipzig. 1923). which dates from 1801-1802. 'The 
43 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Schelling, in the lectures he delivered at the University of Munich in 
1827, was the first to point out that the formulation of the subject matter 
of the Hegel's 'Logic' presupposes the use of intuition, 'Hegel has attempted 
to erect his abstract logic over the philosophy of nature. He has imported 
into it the method of the philosophy of nature however; it is not difficult 
to imagine what had to be perpetrated in order that a method having 
nothing but nature as its content and the perception of nature as its guide 
might be raised into something simply logical; he was forced to reject and 
violate these forms of intuition and yet to proceed on the basis of them, 
and it is therefore by no means difficult to make the perfectly correct ob-
servation, that even in the first step of his logic Hegel presupposes intuition, 
and that without relying upon it, he could make no progress at all.'l The 
point of the initial categories of the 'Logic' is that they should constitute 
the simplest levels of their sphere however, not that they should be without 
presupposition. Within the 'Encyclopaedia' as a whole, the 'Logic' has 
the sphere of 'Spirit' as its antecedent, which implies that certain levels of 
general culture, spiritual insight and philosophical competence are neces-
sary precondition for any precise formulation oflogical categories.2 What 
is more, Hegel never denies that it is intuition that provides the subject 
matter of the 'Encyclopaedia'. He parted ways with Schelling in that he 
realized that a distinction had to be drawn between intuition and rational 
thought, i.e. between subject matter and structuralization, 'We can as-
semble all the separate constituents of the flower, but this will not make 
the flower. Intuition has therefore been reinstated in the philosophy of 
nature, and set above reflection, but this gets us nowhere, because one 
cannot philosophize on the basis of intuition. Intuition has to be sub-
mitted to thought, so that what has been dismembered may be restored 
to simple universality through thought. This contemplated unity is the 
Notion, which contains the determinate differences simply as an im-
manent and self-moving unity. Philosophic universality is not indifferent 
to the determinations; it is the self-fulfilling universality, the diamantine 
identity, which at the same time holds difference within itself'3 
Formal logic constitutes two main levels within the third major hier-
Science of Logic' op. cit. which dates from 1812-1816, and the 'Encyclopaedia' 'Logic' (tr. Wallace) 
op. cit., which was first published in 1817 and revised in 1827 and 1830. Cf. J. B. Baillie 'The Origin 
and Significance of Hegel's Logic' (London, 1901). 
1 'Werke' (ed. Schroter, 12 cols., Munich, 1927-1954) vol. 5 p. 208; cf. his 'Abhandlung tiber die 
Quelle der ewigen Wahrheiten' ('Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin' 17th Jan. 1850), 'Werke' 
vol. 5 p. 765. 
2 See Hegel's 'Phenomenology of Mind' (18°7, tr. Baillie, London, 193 I) ; Jean Hyppolite 'Genese 
et Structure de la Phenomenologie de l'Esprit de Hegel' (paris, 1946). There is a competent survey of 
the main arguments of this work in G. R. G. Mure 'The Philosophy of Hegel' (London, 1965). 
3 §24/1 Addition. 

INTRODUCTION 
archy of the logical sphere, 1 and is therefore part of the subject matter of the 
'Encyclopaedia'. The principles on which the 'Logic' is structuralized 
should therefore be very carefully distinguished from both categories and 
formal logic, and it is the failure to do this which accounts for most of the 
confusion in the attempts that have been made to assess and expound the 
significance of this part of the 'Encyclopaedia'. 2 The principles of levels, 
heirarchies and spheres are in fact employed consistently throughout the 
'Logic' in precisely the same way as they are in the spheres of 'Nature' and 
'Spirit', and with roughly the same amount of success and failure. Vilhelm 
Sjogren (1866-1929), so far as I am aware, was the first to recognize this, 
'The method is so modified therefore, that the object's teleological deter-
minateness becomes a basis for exposition, or, to use Kant's terminology, 
a foundation for the synthesis. As a result of the method as such therefore, 
the form is conceived rationalistically, but as a result of the object of this 
method, empirically. The state of correspondence between these concepts 
is to be recovered by the graded' (i.e. hierarchical) 'sublation of the state 
of opposition in which they stand to one another as the result of the 
object's form. The form of the object is determined by the concept of a 
level, but this concept does not actually determine the form of the sub-
ordinate stratum.'3 
The transition from 'Logic' to 'Nature' is therefore no different from 
any other transition in the 'Encyclopaedia'. Hegel concludes the 'Logic' 
with the Idea, simply because it was the most complex level he was able 
to formulate in this sphere, the category which coincided most fully with 
the principles of the Notion, the fulfillment of the dialect. 'The Idea may be 
described in many ways. It may be called reason (and this is the proper 
philosophical signification of reason); subject-object; the unity of that which 
is of an ideal nature and that which is of a real nature, of the finite and the infinite, 
of soul and body; the possibility which has its actuality in itself; that, the nature 
of which can only be grasped as existent etc. All these descriptions apply, 
1 'Encyclopaedia' §§ I60-I92. C£ H. S. Macran 'Hegel's Doctrine of Formal Logic' (Oxford, 
I912). 
2 Of English commentators on the 'Logic', A. S. Pringle-Pattison (I856-I93I) has come the 
closest to making these essential distinctions; see his 'Hegelianism and Personality' (Edinburgh and 
London, I887) lectures III and IV. 'He (Hegel) presents everything synthetically, though it must first 
have been got analytically by an ordinary process of reflection upon the facts which are the common 
property of every thinker. Thus the notions with which the Logic deals admittedly form part and 
parcel of the apparatus of everyday thought, and the development which Hegel gives them is simply 
their systematic placing.' 
3 'Om den dialektiska metodens stallning i Hegels logik' (Uppsala, I887) p. 23, c£ p. 34. A similar 
but less succinct exposition of the basic principles of the 'Logic' is to be found in Detty Heimann's 
'System und Methode in Hegels Philosophie' (Leipzig, I927), 'Jede Philosophie ein Versuch ist 
nilier an die funktionale Struktur der Vernunft heranzukommen.' (p. 474). 
45 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
since the Idea contains all the relationships of the understanding, but con-
tains them in their infinite self-return and self-identity.'! He begins 'Nature' 
with space,2 simply because it was the least complex level recognized in 
the natural science of his day. The characterization of space as 'sensuous 
insensibility', i.e. as having a predominantly logical aspect, and as 'non-
sensuous sensibility', i.e. as also having a predominantly natural aspect,3 is 
by no means entirely irrelevant to the consideration of the logical ante-
cedent of the three dimensions of classical geometry. 4 The main importance 
of the transition from 'Logic' to 'Nature' is however the major qualitative 
difference it initiates. According to Hegel, the distinguishing feature of 
the sphere concluded by means of the Idea is its universality, the categories 
being involved in but not confmed to natural and spiritual phenomena, 
whereas the distinguishing feature of the sphere initiated by space is its 
particularity, the levels of nature consisting as they do of more or less 
tangible objects. Like all other transitions throughout the 'Encyclopaedia' 
this one is undoubtedly revisable, but it presents no particular difficulties 
once the basic principles of Hegel's system are understood. 
Schelling was the first to concentrate upon the transition from 'Logic' 
to 'Nature' after having, perhaps wilfully, misrepresented the general sig-
nificance of Hegel's work, and so far as I am aware, no one has tackled him 
fairly and squarely on the point, apart from Michelet.5 Like most of those 
who have accepted his misrepresentation and reiterated his criticism, he 
concentrates upon the actual wording of § 244, 'There is nothing in the 
Logic that might change the world. Hegel has to reach actuality. In the 
Idea itself however, there is absolutely no necessity for further movement 
or for becoming anything else ... This expression "let forth" -the Idea 
lets nature forth-is one of the strangest, most ambiguous and also there-
fore one of the least pinnable expressions behind which this philosophy 
withdraws at difficult junctures. Jakob Boehme says: the divine freedom 
vomits itself forth into nature. Hegel says: the divine Idea lets nature forth. 
What are we to understand by this letting forth ?'6 This implied in effect 
1 'Encyclopaedia' § 214. 
2 op. cit. § 254. 
3 op. cit. § 254 Addition. 
4 Note I p. 307. 
5 See his foreword to these lectures. 
6 Munich lectures, 1827 op.cit. p. 223. When Schelling's disciple Herbert Beckers (1806-1889) 
published a translation of Victor Cousin's 'Fragments philosophiques' (Paris, 1833), Schelling wrote 
an introduction to it in which he repeated this criticism of Hegel. See 'Victor Cousin tiber franzosische 
und deutsche Philosophie' (Stuttgart and Ttibingen, 1834); Schelling's 'Werke' op. cit. suppl. vol. 4 
pp. 445-468. Cf. ch. e. 
'Mit Worten lasst sich trefflich streiten.' 

INTRODUCTION 
that the Hegelian system was panlogistic in intention, and that the philo-
sophies of nature and spirit constituted attempts to force subject matter 
that was clearly open to valid non-logical interpretations into a pre-
conceived and somewhat dubiously formulated series oflogical categories. 
The sensitive and revisable relationships indicated and elicited by means 
of the principles of the dialectic, were therefore interpreted by those who 
were often as ignorant of the subject matter as they were of the structure 
of the 'Encyclopaedia', as constituting a rigid deductive system bent on 
laying down the law in domains of knowledge where even specialists 
laboured with humility and formulated theories with diffidence. En-
thusiasts such as Hauptmann,l Hoffmann,2 Jahns and Marx, encouraged 
by the chorus of critics which the general acceptance of such an intepreta-
tion called forth, set about 'revising' Hegelianism by discarding its meta-
physical presuppositions as irrelevancies, and applying their own con-
ceptions of its general significance to those spheres or disciplines of which 
they happened to know something. Although the results of this were often 
ludicrous, they were, on occasions, effective and interesting. They could 
never be regarded as specifically Hegelian however. 
The most deplorable outcome of these bars sinister in Hegelian pedigrees 
has undoubtedly been the aura of finality in which Marxists have been 
encouraged to invest their views on economics, sociology, politics and 
history, as a result of their supposedly Hegelian ancestry. It would be idle 
and ignoble to question the idealism and compassion of Marx, or to deny 
the psychological and political effectiveness of his version of dialectic. It is 
however doubtful whether his writings would have been entirely in-
effective had he never heard of Hegel. Their intellectual influence must 
moreover be criticized from an Hegelian standpoint by pointing out that 
they are relevant to an important but limited sphere of knowledge and 
activity, within which their validity is probably only relative, and that 
1 Moritz Hauptmann (1792-1868), in 'Die Natur der Harmonik und Metrik' (Leipzig, 1853), 
Eng. tr. W. E. Heathcote 'The Nature of Harmony and Metre' (London, 1888), attempted to re-
construct musical harmony dialectically from 'the three directly intelligible intervals' of the octave, the 
fifth and the major third. 
2 Karl Richard Hoffmann (1797-1877) studied at Erlangen and Berlin, and in 1819 began to teach 
medicine in the Prussian capital. He was subsequendy professor of pathology, materia medica and 
hygiene at Landshut and Wtirzburg. In his'Vergleichende Idealpathologie, Ein Versuch, die Krank-
heiten als Rtickfalle der Idee des Lebens auf tiefere normale Lebensstufen darzustellen' (Stuttgart 
1834, 2nd ed. 1839), he suggested that certain human diseases might be regarded as relapses from the 
human to certain animal levels. Thus, scrofula is interpreted as a sinking to the insect level, rickets as a 
sinking to the level of mollusca, and epilepsy as a relapse to the level of oscillatoria. 
3 Ferdinand Jahn (1804-1859) of Meiningen put forward views resembling Hoffmann's in his, 
'Die abnormen Zustande des menschlichen Lebens als Nachbildungen und Wiederholungen normaler 
Zustande des Thierlebens' (Eisenach, 1842). 
47 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
they in no way qualify those who read or act on them for making pro-
nouncements upon knowledge or activity as a whole. Communism has, 
however, often attempted to influence activity and research at levels to 
which the effectiveness or desirability of its economic, social or political 
doctrines is very largely irrelevant. A professing communist is not, of 
course, confmed to having valid views only on economic, social or 
political matters, and he may well be justified in bearing in mind such 
things as biological, aesthetic or religious factors when attempting to 
further his economic, social or political ends. Pursuing these ends does not 
in itself provide any final confirmation of his opinions on anything how-
ever, and he would in fact be better advised to admit that the validity of 
his views on most subjects is probably as uncertain, limited and frag-
mentary as those of anyone else. Communists are not of course the only 
politically-minded people who would do well to bear this in mind. 
Tracing the effect of Schelling's interpretation of Hegel upon the intel-
lectual history of the last century and a quarter would therefore be an 
extremely worthwhile undertaking. An analysis of the misrepresentations 
it has involved, the critics it has inspired 1 and the errors it has perpetuated 
is, for instance, an essential pre-condition for any constructive outcome in 
the present dialogue between Christians and Marxists. 
The 'Philosophy of Nature', like the rest of the 'Encyclopaedia', is there-
fore in a sense dualistic, since a distinction has to be drawn between its 
subject matter and its structure. The principles of this structure having 
been indicated and established, and the relationship in which 'Nature' 
stands to the sphere of 'Logic' clarified, it remains for us to take note of 
some of the main features of Hegel's treatment of the subject matter in 
this part of the 'Encyclopaedia'. The sources from which Hegel drew his 
information on the natural sciences have been indicated in the commen-
tary, and are in no way remarkable. He often refers to the standard works 
and textbooks of his day, and he evidently read the main scientific periodi-
cals in German, French and English. There is some evidence that the bulk 
1 Christian Hermann Weisse (1801-1886) was evidently the first to develop a valid line of criticism 
for himself by presenting Hegelianism as being panlogistic rather than dialectical: see 'Ueber den 
gegenwartigen Standpunkt der philosophischen Wissenschaft' (Leipzig, 1829); 'GrundzUge der 
Metaphysik' (Hamburg, 1835); 'Hegel und das Newtonische Gesetz der Kraftwirkung' (,Zeitschrift 
fiir Philosophie und spekulative Theologie' vol. XIII, pp. 1-36, TUbingen, 1844). The level of criti-
cism to which the 'dialectic' is submitted in K. R. Popper's 'Conjectures and Refutations. The 
Growth of Scientific Knowledge' (London, 1963) ch. IS is evidently unavoidable, and has a pedigree 
going back, so far as I am aware, to 'Der verderbliche Einfluss der Hegelschen Philosophie' (Leipzig 
1852), by 'Antibarbarus Logicus'. Cf. J. E. Erdmann 'A History of Philosophy' (tr. Hough, 3 vols., 
London, 1892-8), vol. II, pp. 686-689 (§ 329, 3); J. B. Baillie 'Hegel's Logic' (London, 1901) 
ch.X. 

INTRODUCTION 
of his reading in the natural sciences and the formation of many of his dis-
tinctive views took place between 1800 and 1815, but he also quotes many 
books and articles published later than this. In the treatment of light for 
example (§ 278 Remark), he refers to the discovery of its polarization in 
18081 but not to the momentous developments in wave theory initiated 
after 1816 by D. F. J. Arago (1786-1853) and A. J. Fresnel (1788-1827). 
In the treatment of rain (§ 286), he refers to Lichtenberg's attack on the 
'Priifung der Theorie des Herrn Deluc vom Regen' (Berlin, 1795) by 
J. D. O. Zylius (1764-1820), as ifit had settled a controversy, whereas, by 
the 1820'S, Lichtenberg's views were no longer regarded as worthy of 
serious consideration. In dealing with the views ofH. A. Goeden (1785-
1826) on disease (§ 371), he evidently has in mind a systematization of 
diseases still based on the 'Synopsis nosologiae methodicae' (Edinburgh, 
1769) by William Cullen (1710-1790), and he fails to see that Goeden's 
later work was in tune with the progressive developments of the 
1820'S. 
His actual mistakes are few and far between, and bearing in mind Croce's 
ignorant and ill-founded criticism2 and the extraordinary reputation of 
this work, they should perhaps be clearly recorded. The motion of any-
thing but a vertically trajected projectile, even if air resistance and the 
motion of the earth are not taken into consideration, is a parabola, and 
never becomes 'simple fall' (§ 266 Addition)3. The mean distance of the 
moon from the earth is not sixty times the earth's diameter (§ 270 Addi-
tion).' Hegel should have realized that the Moon must turn upon its axis 
(§ 279 Remark). At that time fourteen satellites of the planets had been 
defmitely identified (Earth I,Jupiter 4, Saturn 7, Uranus 2), and there was 
some pretty conclusive evidence that those moving around Jupiter and Saturn 
had axial rotations.6 There is therefore no excuse for his having denied the 
existence of satellitic axial rotation. When he says (§ 300 Addition) that 
'The transmission of sound by the earth is remarkable, by putting one's 
ear to the ground for example, it is possible to hear a cannonade taking 
place ten or twenty miles away', he is grossly underestimating the 
1 E. 1. Malus (1775-1812); see 'Bulletin des Sciences de Ia Societe Philomathique de Paris'vol. I 
pp. 266-269 (Dec. 1808). 
2 B. Croce 'What is living and what is dead in the philosophy of Hegel' (1906, tr. Ainslie, London, 
1915) ch. VIII. He blames Hegel for rejecting the natural sciences and yet holding on to their coat-
tails. 'It sometimes seems as if Hegel was not in full possession of his thought' (p. 191). 
3 It should, in all fairness, be noted that the passage in which Hegel makes this statement was 
taken by Michelet from the Jena note-book of 1805/6. 
4 Hegel may have been misled here by the wording of Newton's 'Principia' bk. III prop. iv 
theorem 4. 
S 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1790 p. 427; 1792 p. I; 1797 p. 332. 
49 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
distance. The cannonade at Mainz in 1792 was heard very clearly near 
Einbeck, 165 miles away for example, and in 1809 the cannonading of 
Heligoland was heard near Hanover, 175 miles away. He should not have 
paid attention to the ornithological fictions of Oliver Goldsmith when he 
found them refuted by travellers who had actually heard the birds of the 
Americas singing sweetly (§ 303 Addition).l The facts he gives concerning 
Lorenz Oken (1779-1851) and the theory of the vertebral analogies of the 
skull (§ 354 Addition) are not strictly accurate. He seems to have based his 
views on the subject simply on hearsay, and before making them public, 
should have investigated the matter more carefully. The lizards mentioned 
in § 356 Addition were discovered at Elden (Eleveden) in Suffolk, not 
Eldon, and were fifty, not fifteen feet below the surface of the ground.2 
In quoting what G. H. von Schubert (1780-1860) had to say on the testi-
cles of the male Gadfly (§ 368 Addition) he failed to notice a typographical 
error listed in the 'errata' of the book.3 In the same passage he quotes a 
French source in support of the conclusions J. F. Ackermann (1765-1815) 
had reached as the result of his investigations into the sexual organs of 
hermaphrodites,' and mistranslates 'veramontanum' as 'crista galli'. He 
does at least question this translation however. He is referring to the 
elongated cutaneous eminence on the inner surface of the urethra, which 
occurs where the bulbous part of this tube passes through the prostate. 
In English writings of the time this was known as the caput gallinaginis or 
verumontanum, and to German anatomists as 'der Schnepfenkopf'. 
Hegel may have had in mind the 'Anatomia corporis humani' (Louvain 
1683, Germ. tr. Leipzig, 1704) tab. X by Philipp Verheijen (1648-
1710) however, in which the feature is referred to as the 'crista galli 
gallinacei'. 'Gode' (§ 371 Addition) was not the name of Hans Adolf 
Goeden (1785-1826), and the gentleman did not deserve the drubbing 
Hegel gave him for reviewing the paragraphs on medicine in 
the Heidelberg 'Encyclopaedia' (1817) in a critical manner (§ 371 
Addition).5 
1 See Goldsmith's 'An History of the Earth and Animated Nature' (London, 1774) V pp. 324-325; 
cf. J. R. Moore 'Goldsmith's degenerate song-birds, an eighteenth century fallacy in ornithology' 
('Isis' 1942-43 pp. 324-327). 
2 Alexander Tilloch's 'Philosophical Magazine and Journal' (vol. 48 p. 469, Dec. 1816). The 
original account of this discovery is in the unpublished proceedings of the 'Bath Philosophical 
Society' (1816). 
3 'Ahndungen einer allgemeinen Geschichte des Lebens' (3 vols. Leipzig, 1806, 1807, 1821) 
vol. I p. 185. This volume was published while Hegel was lecturing on the subject at Jena. 
4 'Infantis androgyni historia et ichnographia' Gena, 1805), i.e. also published while Hegel was 
lecturing. 
5 'Critische Bemerkungen ueber Hegel's Begriff vom Wesen der Krankheit und der Heilung' 
('Isis' ed. Oken, Jena, 1819 pp. II27-II38). 
50 

INTRODUCTION 
An apparent howler on Hegel's part will often be found to have a 
highly respectable source in the scientific literature of the time, and to be 
by no means unreasonable once the contemporary state of knowledge and 
research is borne in mind. In § 330 Addition for instance, Hegel says that, 
'Ammonia has a particular peculiarity, for on the one hand it can be 
demonstrated that its base is nitrogen, its other constituent being oxygen, 
but that it also has a metallic base in ammonium'. Since the true nature and 
composition of ammonia were well known by the close of the eighteenth 
centuryl this characterization might appear to be inexcusable. It is almost 
certainly based on a paper by Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829) however.2 
At that time ammonia, potash and soda were taken to be the three alkalies. 
Davy's discovery that the last two were 'metallic oxides' led him to 
postulate a metallic base to ammonia, and to suspect that the gas might also 
contain oxygen.8 
On one occasion at least, political considerations evidently influenced 
what should have been a purely scientific judgement. In § 355 Addition, 
Hegel quotes M. F. X. Bichat (1771-1802) in support of the proposition 
that intelligence has little to do with physical prowess, 'Animals leap with 
the greatest skill from crag to crag, where the very slightest slip would 
send them toppling into the abyss, and move with astonishing precision 
on surfaces scarcely as wide as the extremities of their limbs. Even the 
ungainliest of animals do not stumble so often as man'.4 Hegel then pro-
ceeds to draw the conclusion that physical is necessarily gained at the 
expense of spiritual ability, 'When people acquire spiritual and other 
kinds of aptitudes, and develop a fluent style, ability in music and the fme 
arts, technical skills, the art of fencing etc., the equilibrium is lost. On the 
other hand, cruder and purely bodily exercises such as drill, gymnastics, 
running, climbing, tight-rope walking, jumping and vaulting, preserve 
this equilibrium. Activities such as these are not conducive to aptitudes of 
the first kind however, and as they tend to be devoid of thought, they are 
generally obstacles to mental composure.' There seems to be little justifi-
cation for this view, and Hegel's entertaining it may well be due to the 
suspicion with which physical culture societies were regarded by the 
1 See C. W. Scheele (1742-1786) 'Chemische Abhandlung von der Luft und dem Feuer' (lJppsala 
and Leipzig, 1777, Eng. tr. Kirwan, London, 1780) vol. I p. 196, vol. II p. 75. 
2 'On the Decomposition and Composition of the Fixed Alkalies' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1808). 
3 For a sympathetic exposition of Davy's view on this, see Thomas Thomson (1773-1852) 'A 
System of Chemistry' (5 vols. Edinburgh, 1810) vol. II pp. 4-21; cf. W. Henry (1774-1836) 'Experi-
ments on Ammonia' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1809 p. 130). 
4 'Recherches physiologiques sur 1a Vie et la Mort' (4th ed., ed. Magendie, Paris, 1822) 
P·41• 
51 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Berlin establishment in the decade following the War of Liberation and 
the downfall of Napoleon. 1 
Several of the theories defended or accepted by Hegel were criticized 
at the time and are now very largely defunct. James Hutton (I726-I797) 
for example, in a paper read to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in I784, 
initiated the modern explanation of rain by suggesting that its formation 
must be regulated by the humidity of the air and the causes which pro-
mote mixtures of different aerial currents in the higher atmosphere. 2 
J. A. Deluc (I727-I8I7) contended that the amounts of water discharged by 
the air on certain occasions are too great to be explained from Hutton's 
hypothesis. He objected strongly to the theory that water is dissolved in 
the air, and contended that when water evaporates, it changes into a new 
kind of gas, which cannot be detected hygroscopically, but which can 
change back into water.3 To many meteorologists of the day, this conten-
tion appeared to be confirmed by the synthesis of water from' dephlogis-
ticated' and 'inflammable' air,' and by the decomposition of water by 
means of electric sparks, which was first brought about by the Dutch 
chemist Martin van Marum (I750-I837), working with the great fric-
tional machine in the Teyler Institute at Haarlemin I787. 5 Hegel accepted 
Deluc's view and rejected Hutton's (§ 286). In his assessment of animal 
acids (§ 334 Addition), he makes mention of 'blood acid'. Ifhe has in mind 
the work of Raymund de Vieussens (I64I-I7I6),6 who claimed to have 
discovered an acid in the four ounces of residue left from the evaporation 
of fifty pounds of blood, he was most certainly out of touch with current 
research on the subject, for this discovery was then generally acknow-
ledged to have been putative.7 It is possible however that he is referring to 
the 'acidum sanguinis' prepared by J. J. Winterl (I732-I809), by slowly 
1 In 18Il F. L. Jahn (1778-1852) founded the first German gymnastic club at Hasenheide near 
Berlin. He andJ. C. F. Guths-Muths (1759-1839) developed such clubs as part of a plan for national 
regeneration during the French occupation, and many of his gymnasts enlisted in BlUcher's army. 
Mter the war his movement canle into conflict with the authorities cultivating the Holy Alliance. 
As a result of the Carlsbad decrees (1819) 'curators' such as Hegel's friend C. F. L. Schultz (1781-
1834), were appointed to keep watch on the universities, and all gymnastic clubs and student associa-
tions were banned. 
2 'The theory ofrain' ('Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin.' vol. I p. 41, 1788). 
3 'Idees sur la meteorologie' (2 vols. London, 1786-1787). 
4 Henry Cavendish (1731-1810) 'Experiments on Air' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' Jan. 1784 pp. 
II9-153). 
5 'Verhandelingen uitgegeeven door Teylers Tweede Genootschap' (Haarlem, 1787) Stuk iv p. 144. 
6 'Deux dissertations .•. La premiere touchant l' extraction du sel acide du sang' (Montpellier, 
1698). 
7 J. F. John (1782-1847) 'Handworterbuch der allgemeinen Chemie' (4 vols. Leipzig and Alten-
burg, 1817-1819) vol. I pp. Il5-Il6; J. F. Pierer (1767-1832) 'Anatomisch-physiologisches Real-
worterbuch' vol. I p. 887 (Leipzig and Altenburg, 1816). 
52 

INTRODUCTION 
treating blood and potash in a sealed container without bringing them to 
a red heat. According to Winter! alcohol forms a salt with the residue out 
of which hydrochloric acid precipitates blood acid in the form of a curdled 
cheese. This experiment remained a matter of interest to chemists until the 
1820'S.1 In § 346 Addition Hegel accepts the view that the 'long plumule' 
of the Trapa Natans or the Four-homed Water Caltrops isfoliar in nature. 
This theory had first been put forward by C. L. Willdenow (1765-1812), 
professor of botany at Berlin,2 and was widely regarded as being doubtful 
on account of its necessitating the conclusion that this plant is devoid of 
a radicle. The objections then raised against it have since been confirmed.3 
Many of the scientific views assessed by Hegel in the 'Philosophy of 
Nature', although accepted by him and regarded as being free from radi-
cal controversies by his contempories, are now only of historial interest. 
The manner in which they are presented in this work, excepting of course 
the structuralization to which they are submitted, is therefore of no par-
ticular interest, and simply belongs to the general history of the natural 
sciences. On occasions, Hegel also criticizes the accepted views of his day 
however, and since those who have noticed this have not always been as 
intimately acquainted with the principles of the 'Encyclopaedia' or the 
history of the natural sciences as one might have wished, it may be of 
interest to look in some detail at some of the issues he raises. 
An examination of the axioms on which' pure' mathematics was suppos-
ed to rest at the beginning of the last century, makes it abundantly clear that 
a radical reassessment of them was necessary before the distinction between 
pure and applied mathematics could be drawn with any certainty.4. Hegel 
was certainly justified in arguing therefore (§ 259) that since the mathematics 
of his day involved the presupposition of certain axioms, capable of philo-
sophical assessment, but in fact taken up more or less at random from' con-
crete nature', it was not pure in any rigorous or truly philosophical sense. I> 
Eighteenth century astronomers and physicists had tended to ignore the 
distinction Newton had drawn between the mathematical representation 
1 J. c. Schuster (1777-1839) 'System der dualistischen Chemie des Prof. Jakob Joseph Winterly 
(2 voh. Berlin, 1807) vol. I pp. 398-399. Cf. J. J. Berze1ius (1779-1848) 'Om sammansattningar af 
svafe1haltigen blasyra salter' ('Kungliga Svenska Vetenskaps Akademiens Handlingar' 1820) pp. 
82--99: 'Schweigger'sJourna1' 1820 vol. 30 pp. 1-67. 
1 P. Usteri (1768-1831) 'Annalen der Botanick' (vol. xvii p. 19, 1788). 
3 Agnes Arber 'Water Plants, a study of aquatic angiosperms' (Cambridge, 1920) p. 207. 
4 See G. S. KlUge! (1739-1812) 'Mathematisches Worterbuch' (7 voh. Leipzig, 1803-1836) vol. 
UI pp. 602-613. 
5 See George Boole (1815-1865) 'An Investigation of the Laws of Thought' (London, 1854) for 
the subsequent development of this criticism. Leibniz and J. H. Lambert (1728-1777) had both 
attempted, not very successfully, to develop systems of mathematical logic. 
53 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
of problems and the physical reality of the situations being dealt with. 1 
Hegel had seen the importance of this even at the beginning of his career,2 
and often points out that the failure to bear it in mind was hindering ad-
vances in the mechanics of his day (§ 266). He praises J. L. Lagrange 
(1736-1813) for example, for establishing a clear distinction between the 
purely abstract mode of regarding functions, and their applicability to 
mechanical problems (§ 267).3 It is indeed his intense awareness of the 
difference in quality between predominantly mathemical thinking and the 
various levels of complexity to which it is more or less applicable, which 
constitutes the main value and originality of his treatment of' Mechanics' 
in the 'Encyclopaedia'. It should be remembered however, that in this 
section at least, he criticizes the eighteenth century interpreters of Newton 
rather than Newton himsel£ This is made particularly clear by the most 
important and original exposition of the 'Mechanics', the assessment of 
gravitation in § 269. Even the defmitions and axioms with which Newton 
begins the 'Mathematical Principles', admirable and serviceable though 
they are, are by no means free from difficulties.' What is more, he was not 
primarily concerned with a systematic assessment of his fields of enquiry. 
Despite its many merits therefore, his work cannot be said to promote any 
satisfactory degree of precision in the interrelating of qualitatively distinct 
fields of physical enquiry. Its greatness lies rather, in the clarity and vigour 
with which certain problems are brought within the scope of mathemati-
cal calculation. The concept of force was one of the means he employed to 
this end. Even if we allow that he distinguished between its heuristic value 
and its physical reality however, his use of it in the 'Mathematical Prin-
ciples' in order to relate the various phenomena dealt with to the central 
principle of the law of gravitation, has to be criticized on account of its 
having led so easily to the assumption that these phenomena could be 
exhaustively investigated and fully understood by means of a single 
technique. 5 Hegel recognizes that the law of gravitation embodies the 
most comprehensive generalization the science of his day could make about 
simply material bodies. He also realizes however, that subordinate to it are 
1 C.Isenkrahe 'Das R1ithse1 von der Schwerkraft' (Brunswick, 1879); A. Koyre 'Newtonian Studies' 
(London, 1965). 
2 See his inaugural dissertation 'De Orbitis Planetarum' (Jena, 1801): note I p. 372. 
3 'Theorie des fonctions analytiques' (paris, 1797). This distinction may be regarded as the start-
ing point of the theory of functions as developed by A. L. Cauchy (1789-1857), G. F. B. Riemann 
(1826-1866) and K. Weierstrass (1815-1897). 
"' Notes I pp. 308, 319, 321, 323, 324, 334, 336, 349· 
5 A.Koyre op. cit. p. 163, 'Eighteenth-century thought became reconciled to the ununderstandable 
-with very few exceptions .... Later, the problem was very successfully hidden in the concept of 
the field.' 
54 

INTRODUCTION 
several fields of specific enquiry in which the law itself is not fully apparent. 
This leads him to treat geometry, arithmetic, motion, matter, gravity, fall 
etc. as involving disciplines and studies less complex in subject matter and 
limited in scope than enquiry into the nature of universal gravitation itself. 
Similarly, he takes the solar system to involve still more comprehensive 
generalizations (Kepler's laws) on account of the particularity of its com-
ponent bodies and the complexity of their motions (§ 270). 
The widespread criticism to which the Newtonian calculus was sub-
mitted during the eighteenth century,l and the fact that Newton himself 
admitted that bk. I prop. i thoorem I of the 'Mathematical Principles' 
gives rise to a conic section in general rather than an ellipse in particular,2 
was taken by Hegel to be further evidence of the fact that Kepler's first 
law is essentially more complex than the law of gravitation as such, and 
that the attempt to deduce it from the latter is therefore futile. 8 
Most eighteenth and early nineteenth century text-books attempted to 
explain the perpendicularity of elevation solely by the ordinary laws of 
refraction.' Hegel's criticism of them, so far as I am aware, was entirely 
original. By refusing to accept the purely mechanical 'explanations' of 
his day, and insisting upon what he calls 'the advanced spirituality' of 
refraction, he may not have added anything to scientific knowledge, but 
he did at least contribute towards keeping the way open for the demon-
stration, on the basis of the undulatory theory, that refraction may be more 
satisfactorily explained from the fact that the velocity of light is inversely 
proportional to the refractive index of the medium through which it passes. II 
The most famous sections of this work are concerned with a criticism 
of Newton's 'Opticks', and a defence of Goethe's 'Farbenlehre' (§ 320). 
It was this criticism rather than the implications of Hegel's general manner 
of thinking which gave rise to the friendship between the two men. The 
most worthwhile approach to this subject is undoubtedly that of the 
physicist unblinkered by the presuppositions of his particular field,6 and 
1 Note I p. 351, 
;& op. cit. bk. I sect. ii. 
3 See also the note on 'De Orbitis Planetarum' Gena, 1801) I p. 372. Cf. H. C. Corben and Philip 
Stehle 'Classical Mechanics' (2nd ed. New York md London, 1960) p. 93, 'The most import2llt 
instance of central motion is that under the influence of an inverse square law of force. This law 
comprises both gravitational and electrostatic forces; the electrostatic forces may be either attractive 
or repulsive, whereas gravitational forces are always attractive.' 
4 See for example, Charles Hutton (1737-1823) 'A Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary' 
(2 vols. London, 1795) vol. n p. 347. 
5 § 318; see the commentary. 
6 Hermann von Helmholtz 'Vortrage und Reden' (4th ed. 2 vols. Brunswick, 1896) vol. I pp. 
23-47; Werner Heisenberg 'Wandlungen in den Grundlagen der Naturwissen5chaft' (4th ed. Leip-
zig, 1943) pp. 58-76. 
55 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
from the physicist's point of view, Goethe's basic fault lies in his rejection 
of Newton's proposition, l that the various colours of bodies arise from 
their reflecting most copiously this or that kind of light ray.2 This rejec-
tion forced him to deal with the various appearances of colour as involving 
physiological, physical, chemical and even organic factors, which were 
not only inessential to the treatment of colour as such, but which were not 
to be satisfactorily explained by the physiology, physics, chemistry and 
organics ofhis day, and which were certainly not to be explained simply in 
terms of the opposition between light and darkness. 3 
The great merit of his work in this field is that it consistently exhibits 
colour as an experience involving concrete appearances, although his attempt 
to refute Newton would seem to imply either that he regarded a purely 
physical interpretation of colour as being indefensible and unwarranted, 
or that he considered the 'archetypal phenomenon' to be justified on 
purely physical grounds. As a purely physical explanation of colour how-
ever, Newton's theory would appear to be immensely superior to Goethe's, 
for it still constitutes the broad basis of all modern physical research in the 
fields of light and optics. When Goethe published 'Zur Farbenlehre', 
Young's revival of wave theory had yet to be justified, and Malus' 
'polarization' constituted the very latest discovery in this field. During the 
next fifteen years, while Hegel was teaching in Nuremberg, and lecturing 
at Heidelberg and Berlin, the work done by Biot, Brewster, Arago 
Fraunhofer and Fresnel etc. brought about the virtual completion of the 
geometrical part of wave theory, and prepared the way for Maxwell's 
dynamical interpretation of light. Goethe chose either to ignore these 
developments or to attempt a refutation of them in the light of his 
'archetypal phenomenon'. Hegel justified his attitude. How then are we 
to assess Goethe's influence upon Hegel's treatment of light and colours? 
Goethe's theory appealed to Hegel because it made it comparatively 
easy to work out a hierarchical exposition of colour in which justice could 
be done to both its physical and spiritual significance.' For Hegel, this 
spiritual significance involved not simply the 'psychic' factor mentioned 
by Schopenhauer in his criticism of Goethe,5 but also the 'intelligible' 
factor of a dialectical interpretation, employing the fundamental antithesis 
exhibited by the 'archetypal phenomenon'. Had he accepted Newton's 
1 'Opticks' bk. I pt. 2 prop. 10. 
2 'Zur Farben1ehre' ('Polemischer Teil' ed. Matthaei, Weimar, 1958), §§ 610-677-
3 i.e. the' archetypal phenomenon'. 
4 See his letter to Goethe, Feb. 20, 1821; printed in Goethe's 'Zur Naturwissenschaft 'Oberhaupt' 
vol. I sect. iv pp. 212-214, 1962 ed. 
S 'Goethes Werkc-Hamburier Ausgabe' (3rd ed. 1960) vol. xm pp. 612-613. 
S6 

INTRODUCTION 
theory that white light is a compound of the colours of the spectrum, his 
treatment of colour would have been much more closely juxtaposed to 
his treatment of light, and what is more, much more difficult to interpret 
dialectically. According to Goethe's theory however, it is the various 
circumstances in which light and darkness are combined which give rise 
to colour. These circumstances involve a complexity of physical factors, 
and consequently, as Hegel took light to constitute the simplest level of 
physics (§ 275-278), he did not treat colour until he had worked out the 
dialectical exposition of these further physical levels which he considered 
to be involved in its production. 
Although this approach is rather more sophisticated than Goethe's, 
it reproduces many of his errors. It fails for example, to treat colour as 
such, and while honestly purporting to be an essentially physical doctrine, 
actually misinterprets physical phenomena by bringing psychic and meta-
physical considerations into an assessment of them. However, Hegel was 
undoubtedly convinced that Goethe had refuted Newton on purely 
physical grounds, and was therefore not aware that at this juncture the 
coincidence of the dialectical method and the archetypal phenomenon 
was bogus. It has to be admitted therefore, that in the light of his system and 
knowledge of the facts, he was justified in placing and treating colour as he 
did. Consequently, although the treatment of colour is not intrinsically 
erroneous, it is unsatisfactory, not only because Hegel erred in his 
assessment of the physics of his day, but because he violated (though 
inadvertently) an important principle of his own system, by introducing 
psychic factors at a level which should have been devoted solely to the 
treatment of physical phenomena. 
In that it consistently exhibits colour as an experience involving con-
crete appearances, Goethe's theory is certainly not without its merits 
however, and Hegel often shows that he was aware of its true importance. 
Had he also been aware of Goethe's shortcomings as a physicist, he might 
very easily have anticipated Heinsenberg (loc. cit) by converting the 
apparent contradiction between the Newtonian and Goethean theories 
into an exposition of their complementarity. His system was well adap-
ted to help him do this; in accordance with its principles, Newton's 
theory should have been assessed in the 'Philosophy of Nature' and 
Goethe's presented in the initial stages of the 'Philosophy of Spirit'. 
Bearing in mind the state of knowledge at the time, and the sources 
upon which Hegel draws, it has to be admitted that he gives a perfectly 
competent and plausible exposition of plant anatomy (§ 346). At the tum 
of the century, Sprengel, Mirbel, Treviranus and Link had revived 
57 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
interest in the nature and origin of vessels and in the functions of the 
various tissues, and as a result of their work, these features came to playa 
role in botanical research which was out of all proportion to their real 
significance in the construction of the vascular plant. What is more, plant 
anatomists began to develop a false confidence in the conclusiveness of 
their researches. 1 By sharpening the antithesis between cells and their 
'fluid content' in the cellular tissue, between 'life-vessels' and 'vital-sap' 
in the vascular system, and between spiral-vessels and wood-sap in the 
assimilative system, Hegel seems to be preparing the way for the dis-
covery that the vessels also have their origin in cells.2 
A similar criticism of current views subsequendy borne out by later 
developments is to be found in the remark (§ 353 Addition), dating from 
1805-1806, that, 'The sphenoidal bone has a tendency to dominate the 
centre entirely however, and to completely reduce the skull-bones to a 
surface which lacks a centre of its own.' S. T. von Sommerring (1755-
1830), in the standard anatomical work of the time,3 had suggested that it 
was not a separate bone supporting the bones of the skull, but a mere extension 
of the occipital bone. Many early nineteenth century anatomists accepted 
this new interpretation of it, and spoke either of the 'basilary' (Grundbein) 
or of the 'spheno-occipital bones'.' Hegel, like later anatomists, rejected 
this view. 
On occasions he criticizes current views and has been proved correct for 
reasons other than those he bases his argument on. In § 359 Remark for 
example, he rejects the opinions of medical writers such as the later 
Brunonians, Roschlaub and the followers of Schelling, who had made 
various attempts to explain disease in purely chemical terms. 5 He was 
ready to admit that work of this kind had its value (§ 365), but he objected 
to its being interpreted as providing a full explanation of organic phe-
nomena. He based this objection on his defmition of the Notion of living 
being (§ 337), according to which the unity of the organism is compatible 
with the positing of distinct and transitory (e.g. chemical) moments within 
it. By the sixties of the last century, the founding of microbiology by 
1 R. H. J. Dutrochet (1776-1847) 'Recherches anatomiques et physiologiques' (paris, 1824) p. 8, 
'Que pourrait-on, en effet, attendre de nouveau de l' observation microscopique des organes des 
vegetaux ... ?' 
2 M. J. Schleiden (1804-1881) 'GrundzUge der wissenschaftlichen Botanik' (Leipzig, 1842-1843). 
3 'Vom Baue des menschlichen Korpers' (6 pts. Frankfurt, 1791-1796) 'Knochenlehre' p. 109 
note. 
4 J. F. Meckel (1781-1833) 'Handbuch der menschlichen Anatomie' (4 vols. Halle and Berlin, 
1815-1820) § 528. 
5 C£ B. Hirschel 'Geschichte des Brown'schen Systems und der Erregungstheorie' (Leipzig, 
1846). 
58 

INTRODUCTION 
Pasteur, the discoveries made by Lister and I. Semmelweis (1818-
1865) in the field of antiseptic surgery, and the advances made in medical 
entomology by R. Leuckart (1822-1898) etc. had fully substantiated 
Hegel's position in so far as he had objected on principle to chemical 
interpretations of nervous fevers. However, although this subsequent 
research showed why this objection was justified, it did not bear out his 
reasons for making it, in so far as these reasons were based upon empirical 
data (c£ § 371). 
It is in the transitions from one level to the next, in the actual juxta-
posings of subject matters, that some of the most fascinating features of 
the 'Philosophy of Nature' are to be found. As Laszlo Tisza has shown, 1 
an important part of a scientist's work consists in assessing, examining and 
revising these relationships. Scientific breakthroughs occur when dis-
coveries necessitate the revision of the recognized structure of knowledge, 
the reassessment of complexity relationships. Hegel evidently took 
immense care over formulating this aspect of the principles he employed 
throughout the 'Encyclopaedia'. Although many of the transitions to be 
found in this work were widely recognized at the time and still bear 
directly upon the general state of knowledge, an understanding of not a 
few of them demands an intimate acquaintance with extremely specialized 
and hopelessly dated levels of natural science, and one naturally wonders 
whether the undergraduates at Jena, Heidelberg and Berlin were equipped 
to the extent of being able to see the significance of them. In § 314 Addi-
tion for example, Hegel concludes the exposition of magnetism and 
formulates the transition to crystallography by mentioning the ice-spicu-
la. The point he is making here involves a possible relationship between 
the figuration of a magnetic field, 2 the embryonic aqueous crystalliza-
tion of hail, sleet and snow, 3 and the crystalline structure of metals and 
minerals.4 The ice-spicula is taken to be the most complex expression of 
magnetic figuration and the simplest level of crystallization. The hier-
archical sequence is carefully indicated therefore, but since the knowledge 
1 'The Conceptual Structure of Physics' ('Reviews of Modem Physics' vol. 35, no. I, pp. 151-
185, Jan. 1963). 
2 See Sir Humphry Davy's numerous papers on the chemical action involved in the functioning 
of the voltaic pile in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1807-1810; Michael Faraday on magnetic 'lines of 
force'in 'Experimental Researches in Electricity' (3 vols. London, 1839, 1844, 1855) § 3237. 
3 'Jenenser Realphilosophie' 1803/4 I p. 70; 1805/6 II p. 54. Crystallization was supposed to have 
its origin in an 'invisible germ' or 'constructive force' in water; see J. B. 1. de Rome de l'Isle (1736-
1790) 'Cristallographie' (3 vols. Paris, 1783) vol. I p. 11. 
4 J. J. Bernhardi (1774-1850) 'Ueber das Kristallisationssystem der chemischen Elemente' 
('Schweigger's Journal' 1817 vol. XXI i p. 7). The crystalline structure of metals was fairly well 
confirmed in Hegel's day; note II p. 334. 
59 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
of the time had not been consolidated, the value of the transition is sug-
gested but not laboured. A similarly esoteric but well-founded transi-
tion is that made in § 321 from colour to odorous matter.1 It is often 
the case that well established and widely accepted major transitions from 
one level to another provide the general framework for plausible and 
highly original minor ones. The treatment of sound in §§ 300-302 is a 
good example of this. E. F. F. Chladni (1756-1817), in 'Die Akustik' 
(Leipzig, 1802), had evidently suggested the transition from cohesion to 
sound, and J. W. Ritter (1776-1810), through his 'Fragmente aus dem 
Nachlasse eines jungen Physikers' (2 vols. Heidelberg, 1810), may well 
have influenced the formulation of the transition from sound to heat. 
There is no evidence however that the fascinating hierarchical exposition 
of sound itself had any counterpart in contemporary thinking. 
Enough has been said to make it evident that the 'Philosophy of Nature', 
far from being an arbitrary and irresponsible exposition of partially 
understood subject matter, is a sensitively structuralized, deeply informed 
and infmitely rewarding assessment of the whole range of early nine-
teenth century science. Now that its sources have been indicated and 
explained and its main features clarified, the reader is at liberty to explore 
its details to his heart's content. It is to be hoped that those qualified may 
even be tempted to bring sections of it up to date, and to review its struc-
ture and its subject matter in the light of current knowledge. 
The reader of recent books on the philosophy of science will probably 
be struck by the almost complete absence of epistemological issues in 
Hegel's work. To some extent this is due, as we have noticed, to his 
formulation of the sphere of 'Logic', in which the universal thought 
determinations or categories involved in the comprehension of the 
particularities of natural science are treated as the subject matter of a 
distinct discipline. The subject matter of the 'Philosophy of Nature' is in 
fact 'got analytically by an ordinary process of reflection upon the facts 
which are the common property of every thinker', in precisely the same 
way as the subject matter of 'Logic' and 'Spirit'. It is intuited, and Hegel 
deals shortly with those who presume to call the usefulness, reliability or 
I A. F. Foureroy (1755-1809) suggests that the colour of a dye may be, 'a very subtle body' 
perhaps not less so than the principle of smells': see 'Elements of Natural History and Chemistry' 
(tr. Nicholson, 3 vols. London, 1790) vol. ill p. 96. Working on the analogy of the propagation 
of light and sound, J. G. Steinbuch postulated the existence of 'odorous rays' (Riechstrahlen): see 
'Beitrag zur Physiologie der Sinne' (Nuremberg, 18n) p. 304. The colours of metallic salts, especially 
oxides, were probably considered by Hegel to be further evidence of the validity of this transition. 
John Murray (d. 1820), in his 'A System of Chemistry' (4 vols. Edinburgh, 1819) vol. IV pp. 319-336 
considers colours, aroma and taste in the same sequence as Hegel. Unlike Hegel however, he does 
not distinguish between 'odour' and 'fragrancy'. 
60 

INTRODUCTION 
validity of this procedure in question, 'According to a metaphysics pre-
valent at the moment,l we cannot know things because they are un-
compromisingly exterior to us. It might be worth noticing that even the 
animals, which go out after things, grab, maul, and consume them, are not 
so stupid as these metaphysicians.' (§ 246 Addition).2 Strict attention to the 
principles of the dialectic is therefore regarded by Hegel as providing 
an analysis radical and comprehensive enough to consolidate the data 
provided by the working scientist into subject matter worthy of con-
sideration and treatment within the 'Encyclopaedia'. Intuition may be the 
ultimate source of this subject matter, but the professional know-how of 
the scientist and the principles of rational exposition as employed by the 
philosopher are considered by Hegel as being sufficient safeguards against 
ludicrous misinterpretations of the facts provided by intuition. Looking 
at the history of 'Hegelianism' one might well conclude that in thinking 
this he was utterly and completely wrong. Instead of realizing that the 
'Encyclopaedia' can only become meaningful once the separate discip-
lines it includes have been mastered and the question of further relation-
ships arises, professed Hegelians have taken it to imply that there is a 
short-cut to absolute knowledge via mysticism, obscurantism or the 
sheer humbug apparent in statements such as those quoted at the beginning 
of this chapter. Hegel criticizes this attitude severely in the opening pages of 
these lectures, and it is to be hoped that this book will help to make it 
clear that what he says not only constitutes a defence of his own position, 
but is in itself justified. Considering the merits of his work, it says little 
for the knowledge and ability of those who have professed to interpret it 
that most of the real advances in knowledge pioneered since the publica-
tion of the 'Encyclopaedia' have been brought about by men who have 
made no claim whatever to being Hegelians. What is more, professed 
Hegelians have, on the whole, shown themselves to be somewhat in-
capable, not only of making worthwhile contributions to specific dis-
ciplines and demonstrating the relevance of the 'Encyclopaedia' to the 
specialist, but even of developing a constructive dialogue with their 
philosophical colleagues. The origin of this state of affairs is not difficult 
to trace. Pseudo-Hegelian statements concerning epistemological issues in 
1 i.e. Kant's and Fichte's. 
2 R. B. Braithwaite 'Scientific Explanation' (Cambridge, 1953) p. 4 • A philosophical realist and a 
phenomenalist can perfecdy well agree upon the analysis of a law of mechanics in terms of the 
observable motions of material bodies. They will disagree as to whether or not these observable 
events themselves require analysis in terms of something epistemologically more primitive. But for 
the phenomenalist the two stages in his analysis are distinct; and the realist and he can agree to discuss 
his first stage while agreeing to differ as to whether or not there is a second.' 
61 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
the natural sciences should not, therefore, be confused with Hegel's own 
way of dealing with them, which simply involves the structuralization 
of the data provided by informed commonsense, by means of the prin-
ciples of the dialectic. 
The further point to be remembered in this connection is that the 
psychological factors involved in epistemological problems are, in accor-
dance with the general structure of the 'Encyclopaedia', to be regarded as 
constituting part of the subject matter of 'Spirit'. The level of 'Spirit' 
succeeds that of 'Nature' within the sphere of the 'Encyclopaedia' in that 
its subject matter involves the more complex quality of consciousness. 
The immediate transition from 'Nature' to 'Spirit', corresponding to the 
juxtaposition of the Idea and space in the transition from 'Logic' to 
'N ature', involves death, as the extinction of the physical individual, the 
most complex level of nature, and soul as 'the substance or absolute foun-
dation of all the particularizing and individualizing of spirit'. 1 This is also 
a major transition however, in that it initiates the m~or qualitative change 
from particularity to singularity. Consciousness involves not simply uni-
versal categories or the particular objects of nature, but a combination of 
these categories and these objects in the more complex functioning of 
individuals aware of themselves and their environment. It therefore 
distinguishes 'Spirit' from 'Logic' and 'Nature' in the same way that the 
conclusion of a syllogism is distinguished from and yet dependent upon 
its premises. The broad outlines of Hegel's structuralization of 'Spirit' will 
be noticed in a subsequent chapter, since they throw important light upon 
the significance of his development as a dialectical thinker. At present we 
need only note that the psychological factors involved in epistemological 
problems are either to be considered as constituting part of the subject 
matter of 'Subjective Spirit',11 or as being rooted in imperfect philosophical 
systems.3 Hegel would also have pointed out moreover, that great care 
should be taken to distinguish between the logical and psychological 
aspects of epistemology. In this respect he would, in fact, have agreed 
wholeheartedly with K. R. Popper: 'The initial stage, the act of conceiv-
ing or inventing a theory, seems to me neither to call for logical analysis 
nor to be susceptible of it. The question how it happens that a new idea 
occurs to a man-whether it is a musical theme, a dramatic conflict, or a 
1 §§ 375, 376, 388, 389. 
2 See, for example, the treatment of 'sense-perception', 'the intellect', 'thinking' etc. in §§ 413-
482; 'Hegel's Philosophy of Mind' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1894). The full text of Hegel's treatment of 
these matters has yet to be translated. 
3 'Hegel's Lectures on the History of Philosophy' (3 vols. tr. Haldane, London, 1963). 
62 

INTRODUCTION 
scientific theory-may be of great interest to empirical psychology; but 
it is irrelevant to the logical analysis of scientific knowledge.' 1 
Within the 'Encyclopaedia' therefore, the universality of 'Logic' is 
taken to be the presupposition of the particularity of 'Nature', in pre-
cisely the same manner as 'Nature' is taken to be the presupposition of the 
singularity of 'Spirit'. Hegel indicated the relationship between these 
spheres not by means of panlogism nor yet by means of mystical insight, 
but by investigating their subject matter, ranging it in order of complexity, 
and then submitting it to a dialectical exposition involving the consistent 
use of the principles of levels, hierarchies and spheres. Most of the diffi-
culties raised by his exponents and his critics in respect of this procedure 
have been of their own making, and have simply reflected their own fail-
ure to understand not only the subject matter, but also the principles and 
the general significance of the 'Encyclopaedia'. 
d. DEVELOPMENT 
'It must be reserved to Hegel's admirers to make a driveller of him; an 
adversary will always know that he has to be honoured, for having willed 
something great, and having failed to accomplish it.' -Kierkegaard. 
Hegel did not fmd it easy to communicate, either as a writer, a lecturer 
or in private conversation.2 His works, even at their most lucid, are by 
no means easy reading, and it could indeed be argued that the fIrst com-
plete and tolerably satisfactory printed account of his system as a whole, 
was the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (r827), and that it was not 
until he began his courses at Heidelberg in r8r6 that his full capabilities 
as a teacher began to be recognized. Even towards the end of his life, 
when fame and recognition might well have developed in him something 
more of a capacity for relaxed and easy intercourse, he often tended to 
make an enigmatical impression, even in private conversation. 'One day 
Goethe announced to his daughter-in-law that there would be a guest for 
1 'The Logic of Scientific Discovery' (London, 1959) p. 31. With regard to the many excellent 
works concerned with the logical and psychological aspects of the epistemological issues raised by 
the natural sciences, particular mention might be made of: P. G. Frank 'The Validation of Scientific 
Theories' (New York, 1961); C. G. Hempel 'Aspects of Scientific Explanation' (New York, 1965); 
Stephan Korner 'Experience and Theory' (London, 1966). 
2 His inability to preach effectively may have played a part in his not having entered the church 
after finishing at TUbingen; see K. Rosenkranz 'Hegel's Leben' (Berlin, 1844) pp. 16-17. In his final 
report from the Theological Seminary (20th Sept. 1793) the following comment is made, 'Orationem 
sacram non sine studio e1aboravit, in recitanda non magnus orator visus'. Johannes Hoffmeister 
'Briefe von und an Hegel' (4 vols. Hamburg, 1952-1960) vol. IV p. 87. 
63 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
lunch, but did not tell her his name, which he had never omitted to do 
before, and did not introduce the guest when he arrived. Mute bows on 
both sides. During the meal Goethe said comparatively little, presumably 
in order to give free rein to his very talkative guest, who unfolded his 
thoughts with great logical acumen and in oddly complicated syntax. His 
increasingly animated exposition, with its quite new terminology, its 
intellectually elliptical style of expression and its strange philosophical 
formulae, fmally reduced Goethe to complete silence, though the guest 
did not notice this. The hostess also listened silently, no doubt glancing 
at her papa (as she always called Goethe) in some surprise. When the meal 
had come to an end and their guest departed, Goethe asked his daughter-
in-law: "Well, how do you like him?" "How very strange he is. I can't 
make out whether he's brilliant or crazy. He didn't seem to me to be a 
very clear thinker." Goethe smiled ironically, "Well, well! We have just 
had lunch with a man who is now the most famous of modern philoso-
phers-Georg Friedrich Wilhelm Hegel." '1 
In the last thirty years, the systematic analysis of Hegel's terminology 
and use of language has done much to clarify the meaning of a great deal 
of his work.2 It is now no longer possible to regard his style as muddled 
and wilfully obscure or as expressing purely arbitrary thought-patterns 
which might be employed for any purpose, or which are regulated by 
nothing but the fmal teleology of his system. Once this has been said 
however, it has to be admitted that there is a difference between his mature 
style as it is employed to convey the thought and exposition of the 'En-
cyclopaedia' (1817, 1827, 1830), and the manner in which he expressed 
himself prior to 1806. It was once he had left Jena and taken the job of 
editing a newspaper at Bamberg (1806-1808) that he began to collect 
material for the 'Logic', S and it is from this period onwards that one is 
justified in regarding his thought as settled in its broad outlines, and the 
main features of his style as having been consolidated. The shortened 
versions of the 'Encyclopaedia' he prepared for his pupils while he was 
schoolmastering at Nuremberg (1808-1816)' may have helped him to 
1 October 17, 1827. At Goethe's request, Hegel stayed at Weimar for two days on his return 
from a holiday in Paris. F. von Biedermann 'Goethe's Gesprache' (5 voh. Leipzig, 1909-1911) vol. 
n pp. 476-477; D. Luke and R Pick 'Goethe, Conversations and Encounters' (London, 1966) p. 170. 
2 I p. 141 et seq. 
3 'Wissenschaft der Logik' (3 pts. Nuremberg, 1812-1816). W. R. Beyer has claimed that his work 
as an editor has left its mark upon the abstract and sophisticated terminology of his logical exposi-
tions: see 'Zwischen Phanomenologie und Logik' (Frankfurt-on-Main, 1955) p. 2I9. 
4 'Philosophische Propadeutik' (ed. Rosenkranz, Stuttgart, 1961), cf. Friedrich Heer 'Hegel und 
die Jugend' ('Fraukfurter Hefte' 22 Jaltrgang, Heft 5, pp. 323-332, May 1967). W. R. Beyer, K. 
tanig, K. Goldman have shown that the years spent at Nuremberg were happy and rewarding: see 
'Hegel in Niimberg 1808-1816' (Nuremberg, 1966). 
64 

INTRODUCTION 
develop the conciseness and pithiness of his later phraseology, but they 
did not bring about any radical change in his general manner of expressing 
himself His teaching at Heidelberg (1816-1818) and Berlin (1818-1831) 
involved extensive developments in the exposition of the details of the 
'Encyclopaedia', but none in the revision of its general structure or in the 
purely linguistic features of his lecturing. 
It is therefore the period prior to 1806, and the intellectual ferment 
worked out of his system by the writing of the 'Phenomenology of Spirit' 
(Bamberg, 1807), which present us with the problematical factors in 
Hegel's development. It was not until Wilhelm Dilthey published 'Die 
Jugendgeschichte Hegels' (Berlin, 1905) that any systematic attempt was 
made to map the main features of this early period, and to throw light 
upon what Hegel then wrote by relating it to its historical context. 1 His 
work opened up an extremely fertile field of research, and it is now possible 
to distinguish fairly clearly between the different stages in Hege1' s develop-
ment and to introduce a certain amount of fact into the discussion of the 
basic problems by which they are characterized. Since the general signifi-
cance of the 'Notion' in Hegel's mature expositions and the structuraliza-
tion of the sphere of 'Spirit' are to be more readily understood once the 
general history of his early writings is borne in mind, it will probably be 
of value, before examining these central features of his system, to look in 
some ~etail at the main results of the research initiated by Dilthey.2 
If the 'Encyclopaedia' is accepted, as Hegel evidently intended it to be, 
as the work on the basis of which his philosophy is fmally to be judged, it is 
the first eighteen years of his life (1770-1788) which have to be regarded as 
the most significant in respect of his development, since it was then that he 
1 A. 1. C. Thomsen (1877-1915), who also distinguished himself by his work on Kant, Feuerbach 
and Hobbes and by his Danish translation of Hume's 'Natural History of Religion' ('The Monist' 
XIX, 1909), after working on the Hegel manuscripts in Berlin, produced an excellent but litde-known 
work on the same subject as Dililiey's and at almost the same time: see 'Hegel-udviklingen af hans 
filosofi til 1806' (Copenhagen, 1905). 
2 T. L. Haering 'Hegel, sein Wollen und sein Werk. Eine chronologische Entwicklungsgeschichte 
der Gedanken und der Sprache Hegels' (2 vols. Leipzig and Berlin, 1929-1938); Richard Kroner 
'Von Kant bis Hegel' (2 vols. TUbingen, 1921-1924); J. Hoffmeister 'Goethe und der deutsche 
Idealismus' (Leipzig, 1932); Justus Schwarz 'Hegels philosophische Entwicklung' (Frankfurt-on-
Main, 1938); Hermann Glockner 'Hegel' (2 vols. Stuttgart, 1954-1958). 
G. P. Adams 'The mystical element in Hegel's early theological writings' (Berkeley, 1910), J. G. 
Gray 'Hegel's Hellenic Ideal' (New York, 1941) and T. M. Knox and R. Kroner 'Hegel's Early 
Theological Writings' (Chicago, 1948) are the only works in English concerned wiili this. It should 
not be inferred however that the nineteenth century was entirely ignorant of Hegel's youth. Karl 
Rosenkranz (1805-1879) made a great deal of illuminating material available in 'Hegel's Leben' 
(Berlin, 1844). It has neverilieless been the work of the twentieth century to evaluate this material 
in a systematic assessment of Hegel's views at different periods. Remnants of ilie nineteenth century 
attitude are still to be found in the failure to distinguish between the expositions of the 'Phenomen-
ology' and those ofilie 'Encyclopaedia' when discussing Hegelianism. 
c 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
laid the broad foundations of his encyclopaedic range of knowledge, and 
first displayed the main features of his mature attitude of mind. The 
similarity between the intellectual attitudes of the first and the last twenty 
years of his life is indeed quite remarkable, and needs to be submitted to a 
more careful investigation than is possible here. The move to Berlin, by 
intensifying the extent to which he was aware of his Swabian origins, 
almost certainly played an important part in the development of it. 
Language may well have been a major factor here, for he never lost his 
broad south German accent, and traces of dialect are to be found even in 
his published writings. 1 Even in this work for instance, remote as it is 
from any discussion of purely human differences, he mentions a linguistic 
peculiarity of his fellow-countrymen in order to illustrate a purely 
scientific point.2 Rosenkranz, who had relations in Berlin, and who had 
lived there intermittently since he was eighteen, has the following to say 
about the impression Hegel made in Berlin society, 'In Berlin it was 
certainly the case that much that was attributed to Hegel as an individual 
was merely Swabian in general, and was not regarded as being in any way 
peculiar to him so long as he lived more in the south of Germany. This is 
true of his homely unpretentious manner, his intuitive openness, the 
pointedness of his speech, the straightforward matter-of-factness and 
sincerity of his attitude of mind.'3 It is curious to note how this account 
of him contrasts with that of his visit to Goethe. Although he felt at 
home in Berlin therefore, and although it provided the setting for the 
complete fulfillment of his professional ambitions, it is not surprising to 
fmd him thinking back to his early years while he was working there. 
Some of the topics he discussed with his teachers at the Stuttgart Grammar 
School reappear in these lectures in a scarcely altered form for example,4 
and the shortest and most poignant of his letters shows to what extent his 
earliest family life had left its mark upon him. His mother had died on 
September 2I, 178I, and forty four years later he wrote to his sister 
Christiane from Berlin, 'Today is the anniversary of our mother's death, I 
keep her always in my mind.'6 
1 See the use of the verb 'ausgehen' in § 316 Remark; note II p. 337. 
2 Note II p. 382 § 321 Addition, '(Smell and taste) are very closely related, and are not distinguished 
in Swabia, so that people there only have four senses. A flower is said to have a "nice taste" instead 
of a "nice smell", so that in so far as we also smell with our tongue, the nose tends to be superfluous.' 
3 'Hegel's Leben' op. cit. p. 22. 
4 See his discussion of a meteorological problem with H. D. von Cless (1741-1820) on July 4, 
1785, and the treatment of the same subject in § 287. 
5 Rosenkranz op. cit. p. 4; Johannes Hoffmeister 'Briefe von und an Hegel' (4 vols. Hamburg, 
1952-1950) vol. III no. 497. His mother, Maria Magdalena Louisa Fromme (1741-1781) married his 
father on September 29, 1769. 
66 

INTRODUCTION 
The most important source for our knowledge of him during these early 
years in Stuttgart is the diary he kept,l and there is no mistaking the 
similarity between the general attitude of mind apparent in this document 
and that of the subsequent professor of philosophy. The boy identifies 
himself with the political status quo of the Duchy of Wurtemberg and 
deplores the signs of peasant unrest there in precisely the same way as the 
professor was later to back the Prussian establishment in the enforcement 
of the Carlsbad Decrees. He writes as follows on June 29, 1785, 'Dear oh 
dear! Bad news from Hohenheim. The peasants have started. They are a 
damned lot. They've smashed all the windows in the Duke's castle at 
Scharnhausen.' As in his later years, his intellectual poise is quite undis-
turbed by personal problems or social distractions. On June 27, 1785 
for example, after analyzing the merits of the Toynbee of the day2, he 
notes down the result of a staff meeting at the school, 'The only outcome 
of it bearing upon our conduct was that we were earnestly admonished to 
warn our fellow pupils against getting involved in fooling about in lewd 
and disorderly company. This was with reference to a group of young 
persons of the male sex aged 16 to 17 and of the female aged II to 12, 
which has been in evidence of late; it is commonly known as the randy 
club, the nuts etc.3 The gents take the girls for walks and degrade them-
selves and waste time in a shameless manner.' He gets on well with his 
teachers, somewhat better than he did with his colleagues at Berlin in fact, 
and unlike many adolescents, finds no difficulty in appreciating the various 
merits of the general order into which he has been born. When he left the 
Grammar School in the late summer of 1788 for example, he chose 'The 
sorry state of the arts and sciences under the Turks' as the theme of his 
valedictory oration, in which he attempted to point out how fortunate 
he and his fellow pupils were to have been fostered in a country so ready 
to encourage the acquisition of knowledge and the provision of public 
education.' In an essay written on August 7, 1788 he expresses views 
similar to those soon to be discussed throughout Germany on account of 
the famous series of letters by Schiller.5 He contrasts the culture of 
1 Rosenkranz op. cit. pp. 431-448; Johannes Hoffmeister 'Dokumente zu Hege1s Entwick1ung' 
(Stuttgart, 1936) pp. 6-61. 
2 J. M. Schrockh (1733-1808) 'Lehrbuch der allgemeinen Weltgeschichte' (3rd ed. Berlin and 
Stettin, 1777). 
3 'Doggen-Gesellschaft, Lapplander'. Literally 'mastiff society, Laplanders': see H. Fischer and 
W. Pfleiderer 'Schwabisches Worterbuch' (6 vols. Tiibingen, 1901-1936); F. Grose 'A Provincial 
Glossary' (London, 18I!) p. 95. 
4 Hoffmeister 'Dokumente' pp. 52-54. 
5 'Ueber die Asthetische Erziehung des Menschen', 'Ueber naive und sentimentalische Dichtung' 
('Die Horen' Tiibingen, 1795/6): 'Schillers Werke: Nationalausgabe' (ed. Petersen, 35 vols. Weimar, 
1943-1964) vols. 20 and 21: tr. Wilkinson and Willoughby (Oxford, 1967). 
67 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 011 NATURE 
antiquity, in which, he thinks, there was harmony between man and 
nature, feeling and thought, love and religion, with the fragmented, 
formalized and contradictory attitudes of his own day. He then 
continues, 'Another characteristic of the ancients is that the poets 
had a gift for describing the external phenomena of visible nature 
apparent to the senses, that with which they were intimately ac-
quainted. We on the other hand are better informed about the inner play 
of forces, and generally know more of the causes of things than of how 
they look.' 1 
This love of the balance and accord between content and form in classical 
art was to be expressed again, in a more elaborate manner, forty years 
later, in the Berlin lectures on Aesthetics. Although Schiller strengthened 
and confirmed it, it had its origin therefore in the sunny realism of the 
schoolboy, and it drew its strength not so much from a purely intellectual 
insight, as from a fundamentally resilient and untroubled frame of mind, 
which, although it was deepened and transformed by the intellectual 
turmoil of the years spent at Tiibingen, Bern, Frankfurt and Jena, also 
managed to survive it unscathed. The cultivation of it furthered the 
development of the rare blend of emotion and intellect, abstract 
thought and concrete fact so characteristic of his mature thought. 
During these early years however, it was important mainly in that 
it provided him with the vision and the peace of mind necessary for 
devoting the greater part of his time and energy to the acquisition of an 
enormous fund of miscellaneous knowledge and information. He read 
voraciously, took copiolls notes on whatever interested him,2 and even as a 
boy, attempted to arrange this wealth of subject matter into an encyclo-
paedia.3 If the samples of his extracts and notes published by Hoffmeister 
are representative of his reading as a whole, his general interests at this time 
centred mainly upon psychology, education, Egyptology and philosophy. 
The diary shows however that apart from classical literature,4 mathe-
1 'On some characteristic differences between ancient and modern poets': Hoffmeister 'Doku-
mente' pp. 48-51; cf. W. Rehm 'Griechentum und Goethezeit' (3rd ed. Bern, 1952). 
l Hoffmeister loc. cit. pp. 54-166. 
3 The influence upon him of the Swiss mathematician, aesthetician, educationalist and philosopher 
Johann Georg Sulzer (1720-1779) should be investigated. On March 9 and 10 1787, for example, 
he made copious extracts from Sulzer's 'Kurzer Begriff aller Wissenschaften und andern Theile der 
Gelehrsamkeit, worinjeder nach seinem Innhalt, Nutzen und Vollkommenheit kUrzlich beschrieben 
wird' (2nd ed. Leipzig, 1759): see Hoffmeister 'Dokumente' pp. I09-II5. Sulzer was deeply in-
fluenced by Leibniz and Wolff. On his influence upon the education of his day see R. M. Dahne 
'Joh. Georg Sulzer ... und sein Verhaltnis zu den padagogischen Hauptstromungen seiner Zeit' 
(Konigsee, 1902). 
"Homer, Aristotle, Demosthenes, Isocrates, Cicero, Plautus, Catullus, Tibullus, Virgil, Livy, 
Longinus etc. 
68 

INTRODUCTION 
matics, trigonometry and geometry took up most of his spare time. 1 He 
read Shakespeare in J. J. Eschenburg's edition (12 vols. ZUrich, 1775-1777), 
and occasionally notes down the impression made upon him by mis-
cellaneous reading such as the 'Cours de belles-lettres' (4 vols. Paris, 1747-
1750) by Charles Batteux (1713-1780),2 or the Richardsonian psychologi-
cal novel 'Sophiens Reise von Memel nach Sachsen' (2nd ed. Worms, 
1776), by J. T. Hermes (1738-1821).3 
It was, moreover, in these early years that he first displayed the main 
features of his mature attitude toward religion. The historico-intellectual 
approach of his Berlin 'Lectures on the Philosophy ofReligion',4 is already 
evident in an essay 'On the religion of the Greeks and Romans' which he 
wrote on August 10, 1787,5 and it comes out clearly in the very first 
entry in his diary. 'June 26th 1785. Seminary preacher Regier preached at 
Matins. He read out the Augsburg Confession, and began in fact with the 
introduction to it before actually preaching. Even if I had remembered 
nothing else, my historical knowledge would therefore have been in-
creased.'6 
In October 1788 he began a two year course on philosophy at TUbingen, 
and it was evidently at this time that he made his first acquaintance with 
the work of Kant. Johann Friedrich Flatt (1759-1821) was lecturing in the 
faculty, and in the introductory courses he gave, he was in the habit of 
emphasizing the relevance of Kant to Christian thinking by comparing his 
philosophy with that of Descartes, Malebranche, Locke and Leibniz.7 The 
effect of his teaching upon Hegel is apparent in the criticism Hegel levels 
at Kant in the thesis he wrote for his Master of Philosophy in 1790.8 
Characteristically enough he attempts to overcome Kantian dualism by 
1 Mainly the works of A. G. Kastner (1719-1800) andJ. F. Lorenz (1738-1807). 
2 Tr. K. W. Ramler 'Einleitung in die schonen Wissenschaften' (4 vols. Vienna, 1770). Hegel 
takes particular note of the section on epic poetry (vol. II pp. 15-203). 
3 'I only intended to read a litde of "Sophia's Journey" during the afternoon; I was however 
quite incapable of putting it down until the evening, when 1 went to the concert.' op. cit. January 
I, 1787. 
4 Tr. Spiers and Sanderson (3 vols. London, 1962). 
5 'Uber die Religion der Griechen und Romer' (Hoffmeister, 'Dokumente' pp. 43-48). 
6 Cf. his attitude toward superstition Ouly 9, 1785) and his comments on the Catholic 'Missa, 
quam vocant' (Aug. 7, 1785). Herman Noh! has noticed that, after several changes, his handwriting 
reassumes many of its earliest features in his mature works: 'Hegels theologische Jugendschriften' 
(Tiibingen, 1907) p. 402. 
7 Carl von Weilsacker 'Lehrer und Unterricht an der evange1ischtheologischen Facultat der 
Universitat Tiibingen von der Reformation bis zur Gegenwart' (Tiibingen, 1877) pp. 127-144. 
On Flatt himself see Karl Flatt 'Einige Ziige von dem Bilde des verewigten D. Joh. Fr. Flatt' 
(Tiibingen, 1823). 
8 'De limite officiorum humanorum, seposita animorum immortalitate' (28 pp. Tiibingen 
27.ix.1790). 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
pointing out that despite the distinction drawn between sense and reason, 
both aspects of knowledge are united in a single subject,l and that purely 
moral activity is impossible in that it presupposes psychological phe-
nomena. He also asks whether an acceptance of the absolute imperative 
of moral duty necessarily requires belief in immortality. 
For the next three years Hegel studied theology in the Tiibingen semi-
nary, mainly under Gottlob Christian Storr (1746-1805). It was evidently 
the rigorously logical, dry and somewhat formidable manner in which this 
man marshalled his immense linguistic and historical learning in order to 
defend traditional Lutheranism against what he considered to be the 
pernicious doctrines of the enlightenment, which forced Hegel to spend 
the greater part of the 1790'S thinking over predominantly theological 
pro blems. We know from his later letters to Schelling how thoroughly he 
disapproved of Storr's thought and methods. 2 During his period at 
Tiibingen however, he seems either to have been unwilling to jeopardize 
his career by criticizing his teacher, or uncertain as to how his views were 
to be refuted. In his academic work he simply did what was necessary. 
For his thesis he chose a purely historical subject,3 and merely concen-
trated upon handling his sources with the same scrupulous exactness and 
pedantry as that displayed by Storr in developing dogma out of Biblical 
exegesis. There are no letters dating from this period, and the early 
fragments published by Nohl cannot be precisely dated with any cer-
tainty.4 We do know that Hegel read Rousseau and the Greek tragedies 
at this time however, and that his favourite hobby was botany.5 It was 
not the dons therefore, but his friendships, and especially those with 
Holderlin and Schelling which provided the positive intellectual stimu-
1 'sensus cum ratione sic quasi coaluit, ut vis utraque unum constituat subjectum'. 
2 Hoffmeister 'Briefe' vol. I nos. 6-8 (Dec. 1 794-Jan. 1795): 'How are things in Tiibingen apart 
from this? Until there's someone like Reinhold or Fichte lecturing there, nothing worthwhile will 
come out of the place ... I haven't yet heard of any other attacks upon Kant's doctrine of religion 
apart from Storr's, although it will undoubtedly have to face them. The influence of it is certainly 
not great as yet, and will take time to become fully apparent ... There is no shaking orthodoxy so 
long as the profession of it brings civil advantages by being involved in the whole structure of a 
state ... I feel however that it would be interesting ... to disturb the antlike industry of the theologians 
as much as possible, to make nothing easy for them, to chase them out of every corner and to allow 
them no refuge, until they have nowhere else to turn, and are forced to display their nakedness to 
the light of day.' 
3 'De ecclesiae Wirtembergicae renascentis calamitatibus' (Tiibingen, June, 1793). 
4 Herman Noh! 'Hegels theologische Jugendschriften' (Tiibingen, 1907). For the latest views on 
the chronology of Hegel's early works, see Gisela Schiiler 'Zur Chronologie von Hegels Jugend-
schriften' in 'Hegel-Studien' vol. 2 (ed. Nicolin and Poggeler, Bonn, 1963) pp. 111-159. Cf. Gunnar 
Aspelin 'Hegels Tiibinger Fragment. Eine Psychologisch-Ideengeschichtliche Untersuchung' in 
Lunds Universitets Arsskrift N.F. Avd. I Bd. 28 Nr. 7 (Lund, 1933). 
5 Hoffmeister 'Dokumente' p. 3 I. M. Sartorius shared it with him. 
70 

INTRODUCTION 
lation of these years. 1 H6lderlin had already begun to write 'Hyperion' 
before he left the seminary, Schelling was soon to make his mark as a 
philosopher, and it was the fervent discussions on Hellas, Christianity, 
Plato, Spinoza, Kant, Schiller, Jacobi etc. which took place whenever this 
circle came together, which were the greatest formative influence upon 
Hegel's intellectual development during his student years. 
The Lutheran church in W urtemberg was, throughout the eighteenth 
century, in a somewhat difficult situation. The effect of Pietism upon it 
after 1688 had led to severe internal strains, and by the middle of the 
century it looked as though it might well break apart. In 1777 Christian 
Friedrich von Schnurrer (1742-1822) was appointed principal of the 
Tlibingen seminary, and the teachers he collected about him had as their 
main objective the reconciliation of Pietism with orthodox Lutheranism, 
and the defence of Christian doctrine against the destructive criticism 
levelled against it by the men of the enlightenment. Storr joined the 
faculty in 1786 and Flatt the theological faculty in 1792, and it was these 
two men who formed the nucleus of what is now known as the older 
Tlibingen school. 2 Fichte's anonymous 'Essay towards a Critique of 
all Revelation', 3 which was thought at first to have been by Kant, appeared 
in 1792, and Kant's 'Religion within the bounds of mere reason' in 1793.4 
The Kantian works referred to by Flatt and Storr in the lectures heard by 
Hegel were therefore those that had appeared by 1790.5 They accepted 
Kant's distinction between phenomena and noumena, and used it to 
establish the plausibility of theological propositions. They argued for 
example, that although three persons are not equal to one in the world of 
phenomena, the possibility of their being so as Divine Persons or noumena 
cannot be denied, since, as Kant has shown, we can know nothing of the 
noumenal world except that there everything is in all respects different 
from what prevails in the case of phenomena. They concluded from this that 
theology cannot possibly expect or fear anything from philosophy, and 
1 J. Hoffmeister 'Holderlin und Hegel' (Tiibingen, 1931); cf. Th. Haering 'Holderlin und Hegel 
in Frankfurt' (Tiibingen, 1943): O. Poggeler 'Hegel und die Grieschische Tragodie' ('Hegel-
Studien', Bonn, 1964) pp. 285-305. 
2 C. von Weizsacker op. cit.; H. Hermelink 'Geschichte der evangelischen Kirche in Wiirttem-
berg von der Reformation bis zur Gegenwart' (Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 1949). A ducal commission 
for the reform of the seminary was appointed in March 1792 and its recommendations put into effect 
by decree on May 22, 1794. 
3 'Versuch einer Kritik aller Offenbarung' (Konigsberg, 1792). 
4 'Die Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft' (Konigsberg, 1793) tr. Greene and 
Hudson ed. Silker (New York, 1960). 
S 'Kritik der reinen Vernunft' (Riga, 1781); 'Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten' (2nd ed. 
Riga, 1786); 'Kritik der praktischen Vernunft' (Riga, 1788); 'Kritik der Urteilskraft' (Berlin and 
Liebau, 1790). 
71 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
that the only valid basis it can have is that of supernatural revelation, made 
evident by the Scriptures. They therefore took it to be the task of the 
theologians to establish the historical validity of the Bible, to acknowledge 
it as the sole source and law book of Christianity, and to make use of the 
deductive method in resolving its statements into a systematic exposition 
of Christian dogma. l The strength of their position is undeniable, and for 
two decades at least it enabled them to infuse new life into the Luther-
anism of the Duchy. The reaction against them gave a powerful impetus 
to romanticism however, and their Biblical scholarship was soon to be 
discredited by advances which brought to light the historical and lin-
guistic complexity of the texts from which they had extracted their dog-
ma. To Hegel however, it was not only the rather obvious pedantry and 
spiritual shortsightedness of the manner in which they handled religion 
which was objectionable, but the way in which they managed to travesty 
Kant. In distinguishing between phenomena and noumena, Kant had 
insisted that noumena were not to be divorced from 'their complex, the 
intelligible world', and that the distinction should not be used to give 
plausibility to the extravagances of the imagination. 2 It would of course 
have been difficult to argue that the Scriptures on which Storr and Flatt 
based their arguments were simply to be regarded as extravagances of the 
lOtto Pfleiderer 'The Development of Theology in Germany since Kant' (tr. J. F. Smith, 
London, 1893); J. J. Herzog 'Realencyklopadie fUr protestantische Theologie und Kirche' (3rd ed. 
24 vols. Leipzig, 1896-1913) vol. 20 pp. 148-159. Storr's most important works are: 'Observationes 
quaedam ad comparandam Kantianam disciplinam cum christiana doctrina pertinantes' (1792, tr. 
Siiskind, Tiibingen, 1794), and 'Doctrinae christianae pars theoretica e sacris litteris repetita' (1793, 
tr. C. C. Flatt, Stuttgart, 1803). After he had been discredited in Germany, he was translated into 
English: see 'An Elementary Course of Biblical Theology' (London, 1838 tr. Schmucker in 'Ward's 
Library of Standard Divinity'), 'Expositions of the Epistles of Paul' (tr. R. Johnston, Edinburgh, 1842), 
'On the parables of Christ' (Edinburgh, 1835). 
As an example of his work, see the treatment of the Trinity in the 'Observationes' (Germ. tr. 
p. 7), 'As for the doctrine of the Trinity, the impossibility of giving a positive definition of the 
distinction between Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, is no sufficient reason for denying the distinction 
itself, of which the Bible assures us; for reason, when left to herself, sets before us objects concerning 
which we indeed know that they exist (TO OTt), but concerning whose nature we have no positive 
knowledge. We can only distinguish between them and some false representations, or determine 
what they are not; but of their intrinsic nature, how they are (TO 1tW<;) we have not the slightest 
knowledge'. Cf. Carl Daub (1763-1836) 'Theologumena, sive doctrinae de religione christiana ex 
natura Dei perspecta repetendae capita potiora' (Heidelberg, 1806). Storr evidently published 'Die 
Lehre von der Dreieinigkeit' (1776), but I have been unable to trace the work: see F. G. Siiskind and 
J. F. Flatt 'G. C. Storrs Sonn- und Festtagspredigten' (2 vols. Tiibingen, 1808), vol. II p. 37. 
2 'Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysic' (1783, tr. Mahaffy, London, 1889) §§ 32-35, 'Experi-
ence must therefore contain all the objects for our concepts; but beyond it no concepts have any 
signification, as there is no intuition for their basis. The imagination may perhaps be forgiven for 
occasional extravagance, and for not keeping carefully within the limits of experience, since it at 
least gains life and vigour by such flights, and since it is always easier to moderate its boldness, than 
to stimulate its languor. But the understanding which ought to think can never be forgiven for sub-
stituting extravagance; for we depend upon it alone for assistance to set bounds, when necessary. to 
the extravagance of the imagination.' 
72 

INTRODUCTION 
imagination. Nevertheless, it was equally apparent that, in the light of the 
Kantian position, they could lay no special claim to constituting knowledge 
of the Divine. What, then, were the implications of Kantianism for 
religion? Fichte answered this by concentrating upon Kant's 'Critique of 
Practical Reason' and emphasizing the importance of belief in revelation 
as a factor in the moral development of mankind. He took the possibility 
of revelation to depend upon the moral nature of man and not vice 
versa, and argued that if there is a revelation at all, its content must 
coincide with that of the moral law. 1 Kant expressed his approval of 
Fichte's work, and when he published his own views on the matter, they 
were found to be similar to those of his admirer. 2 
That Hegel appreciated the importance of these developments is 
apparent from his first extensive theological essay 'The Life of Jesus',3 in 
which the significance of Christ's teaching is stated in Kantian terms, 'Act 
on the maxim which you can at the same time will to be a universal law 
among men. This is the fundamental law of morality-the content of all 
legislation and of the sacred books of all nations'. 4 He seems however to 
have sensed the limitations of Kant's treatment of religion at a very early 
stage. His knowledge of the church and of history in general made him 
intensely aware of the individualistic and ahistorical bias in Kantian think-
ing. He realized that religion is not simply rooted in individual moral 
experience, and that the church is not merely a community of mutually 
recognizing moral entities. He appreciated the value of Kantian morality 
as the fulfillment of the divinity in man, but he deplored man's limitation 
of his knowledge of God to morality. He had criticized Flatt's exposition 
of Kant ian morality in that it had seemed to him to belittle the importance 
of psychology. In the very first sentence of 'The Life of Jesus' he acknow-
ledges the need for something more than a Kantian defmition of God, 
'Pure reason, incapable of all bounds, is the Godhead itself-The plan of 
the world in general is therefore ordered in accordance with reason; it is 
by reason that man is taught to know his vocation, an absolute purpose 
1 'Versuch einer Kritik aller Offenbarung' (Konigsberg, 1792): cf. R. Adamson 'Fichte' (Edin-
burgh and London, 1881) pp. 25-35. 
2 'Die Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft' (Konigsberg, 1793) tr. Greene and 
Hudson ed. Silber (New York, 1960): C£ A. Seth 'The Development from Kant to Hegel' (London, 
1882) pp. 89-170, C. C. J. Webb 'Kant's Philosophy of Religion' (Oxford, 1926), F. E. England 
'Kant's Conception of God' (London, 1929). 
3 Noh! op. cit. pp. 73-136. This work was written at Bern between May 9 and July 24, 1795. 
F. Rosenzweig 'Hegel und der Staat' (2 vols. Munich and Berlin, 1920) vol. I p. 17 was one of the 
first to emphasize that Hegel's early interest in Kant was theological and religious rather than theoreti-
cal and philosophical. Cf. Herbert Wacker 'Das Verhaltnis desjungen Hegel zu Kant' (Berlin, 1932), 
Ingtraud Goerland 'Die Kantkritik desjungen Hegel' (Frankfurt, 1966). 
4 op. cit. p. 87. 
c* 
73 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
in his life; it is indeed often obscured, but it has never been extinguished, 
and a faint glimmer of it has always survived, even in darkness.'l 
It was this need which led him to investigate the manner in which 
Christ's life and teaching, the fulftllment of Kant ian morality, have given 
rise to the institutionalization of religion in a church, 2 and to deplore the 
extent to which formalized theology and its ecclesiastical proponents had 
become divorced from the warmth and spontaneity of life, the needs and 
capabilities of humanity, 'If someone has not had this systematic web (of 
casuistry) woven round him from his youth up, if he has come to know 
human nature by other means, by observing the experience of others or 
by following his own feelings, and ifhe now becomes acquainted with the 
system and is supposed to live in accordance with it, he ftnds himself in a 
world bewitched. In a man brought up under the system he can fmd no 
essential features like his own; instead of trying to fmd anything natural 
in him, he would be better to look for it in oriental fairy stories or in our 
chivalry romances. Indeed he would be less in error if he proposed to 
make these poetic fantasies the basis of a system of physics or these pro-
ductions of our own era the basis of a psychology . . . Think of the 
innumerable hypocrites in any church which has a system of this kind. 
They have mastered all the requisite knowledge, acquired the prescribed 
feelings, obeyed the church's decrees. They live and move in church 
activities. We may well raise the question: What strength can be ascribed 
to them if they observe and do all that the church requires and yet remain 
villains and traitors into the bargain? Just as lack of the means to satisfy 
physical needs robs us, as animals, of life, so too, if we are robbed of the 
power to enjoy freedom of mind, our reason dies, and once we are in that 
position we no more feel the lack of it or a longing for it than the dead 
body longs for food and drink ... Our public religion, like many of our 
customs, appeals in these matters, as well as in the fasts and mournings of 
Lent and the fmery and feasting of Easter Day, to rules for feelings, and 
these rules are supposed to be universally valid. This is why there is so 
much hollowness, so much spiritlessness in our usages; feeling has gone 
out of them, even though the rule still prescribes that we should have it. 
Casuistry and monas tical asceticism have been hit by nothing so much 
as by the development of a moral sense in mankind and the better know-
ledge of the human soul.'3 
1 Noh! op. cit. p. 75. 
2 'Die Positivitat der christlichen Religion': Noh! pp. 137-239: extracts tr. Knox and Kroner 
op. cit. pp. 67-181: written at Bern between November 2, 1795 and April 20, 1796. 
3 Knox and Kroner op. cit. pp. 137-139: Noh! op. cit. pp. 206-208. 
74 

INTRODUCTION 
In 'The Spirit of Christianity', which Hegel wrote at Frankfurt during 
the winter of 1798-9,1 the same theme is developed with reference to the 
Jews. Unlike Kierkegaard in 'Fear and Trembling', 2 he deplores Abraham's 
absolute faith in a transcendent God, 'The whole world Abraham regarded 
as simply his opposite; ifhe did not take it to be a nullity, he looked on it 
as sustained by the God who was alien to it. Nothing in nature was sup-
posed to have any part in God; everything was simply under God's 
mastery.'3 He then illustrates the consequences of such an attitude with 
reference to the history of this people, 'The subsequent circumstances of 
the Jewish people up to the mean, abject, wretched circumstances in which 
they still are today, have all of them been simply circumstances and 
elaborations of their original fate. By this fate, an inftnite power which 
they set over against themselves and could never conquer-they have been 
maltreated and will be continually maltreated until they appease it by the 
spirit of beauty and so annul it by reconciliation . . . The great tragedy 
of the Jewish people is no Greek tragedy; it can rouse neither terror nor 
pity, for both of these arise only out of the fate which follows from the 
inevitable slip of a beautiful character; it can arouse horror alone. The 
fate of the Jewish people is the fate of Macbeth, who stepped out of nature 
itself, clung to alien Beings, and so in their service had to trample and slay 
everything holy in human nature, had at last to be forsaken by his gods 
(since these were objects and he their slave) and be dashed to pieces on his 
faith itself.'4 
Christ is regarded as the reconciliation of God and man, the fulfillment 
of the law, 'Over against commands which required a bare service of the 
Lord, a direct slavery, an obedience without joy, without pleasure or 
love ... Jesus set their precise opposite, a human urge and so a human 
need.'5 The signiftcance of the Three Persons of the Trinity as the ftgur-
ation of the atonement of God, Man and Spirit is discussed,6 and after a 
consideration of St. John ch. I the essential spirituality of religion is asserted, 
'Nowhere more than in the communication of the divine is it necessary 
1 'Der Geist des Christentums und sein Schicksal': Nohl op. cit. pp. 241-342; Knox and Kroner 
op. cit. pp. 182-301. 
2 'Frygt og B;even' (Copenhagen, 1843). Kierkegaard regarded this work as a criticism of the 
relationship between religion and philosophy formulated by Hegel. He probably had in mind the 
'Encyclopaedia' § 63 or the 'Philosophy of Right' § 270 however. This work was unknown to 
him. See F. J. BiJleskov Jansen 'Sl2Iren Kierkegaard. V;erker i Udvalg' (4 vols. Copenhagen, 1950) 
vol. IV p. 131. 
3 Knox and Kroner op. cit. p. 187; Nohlop. cit. p. 247. 
4 Knox and Kroner pp. 199-205: Nohl pp. 256-260. 
5 Knox and Kroner p. 206: Nohl p. 262. 
6 Knox and Kroner pp. 257-281: Noh! pp. 306-324; cf. L. W. Grensted 'A Short History of the 
Doctrine of the Atonement' (Manchester, 1920). 
75 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
for the recipient to grasp the communication with the depths of his own 
spirit. Nowhere is it less possible to learn, to assimilate passively, because 
everything expressed about the divine in the language of reflection is eo 
ipso contradictory; and the passive spiritless assimilation of such an 
expression not only leaves the deeper spirit empty but also distracts the 
intellect which assimilates it and for which it is a contradiction.'l The 
resurrection, or the emergence of 'Spirit' from 'Nature', is taken to be the 
necessary preparation for the Feast of Ascension, or the recognition of the 
holding of the particular within the universal by means of the singular, 2 
'Thus any expectation that the actual body associated with the Jesus who 
had been glorified and deified would be raised to divinity on the strength 
of miraculous deeds wrought by him in the flesh is so entirely unfulfilled 
that it rather intensifies all the more the harshness of thus attaching an 
actual body to him. Nevertheless, this harshness is all the greater for us 
than for the members of the first Christian community, the more intel-
lectual we are in comparison with them. They were breathed upon by the 
oriental spirit; the separation of spirit and body was less complete for them; 
they regarded fewer things as objects and so handed fewer things over to 
intellectual treatment. Where we have intellectual cognition of a determi-
nate fact or a historical objectivity, they often see spirit; where we place 
only spirit unalloyed, there they look on spirit as embodied. An instance 
of the latter type of outlook is their way of taking what we call immortal-
ity, and in particular the immortality of the soul. To them it appears as a 
resurrection of the body. Both outlooks are extremes, and the Greek spirit 
lies between them. Our extreme is the outlook of reason which sets a 
soul-something negative in the sight of every intellect-over against the 
intellect's object, the dead body. The early Christian extreme is the out-
look, so to say, of a positive capacity of reason to posit the body as living 
while at the same time it has taken it for dead. Between these extremes is 
the Greek view that body and soul persist together in one living shape.'3 
It was this conclusion which rounded off the theological speculations of 
the 1790'S. For the next seven years Hegel attempted to interpret his 
earlier encyclopaedic interests in the light of it, and it was out of these 
attempts that his mature system was to emerge. On his father's death in 
1 Knox and Kroner p. 256: Nohl p. 306. 
2 Cf. Aquinas 'Summa Theologica' iii pp. 54-56; W. Milligan 'The Resurrection of Our Lord' 
(Edinburgh, 1881), 'The Ascension and Heavenly Priesthood of our Lord' (London, 1892); 
J. W. Schmidt-Japing 'Die Bedeutung der Person Jesu im Denken des jungen Hegel' (Gottingen, 
1924). 
3 Knox and Kroner pp. 297-298: Noh! p. 339. A. T. B. Peperzak 'Le jeune Hegel et la vision 
morale du monde' (The Hague, 1960). 

INTRODUCTION 
January 1799 he inherited enough money! to enable him to think of 
qualifying himself for a university career. He contacted Schelling, and it 
was almost certainly the renewal of their friendship which encouraged him 
to put his views to the test by attempting an assessment of natural pheno-
mena in the light of the general principles he had evolved from his theo-
logical studies. 2 The immediate outcome of this was the 'Dissertatio 
philosophica de Orbitis Planetarum' (Jena, 1801) already noticed. In the 
autumn of 1801 he began lecturing at Jena on Logic and Metaphysics to 
an audience of eleven. Between then and the autumn of 1802, and probably 
as a general preparation for these lectures and with a view to publication, 
he wrote out his first attempt at a comprehensive system. 3 Like the 
dissertation this work shows how clearly the necessity of hierarchical 
thinking was apparent to him at this time. It also has a rather loose 
triadic structure moreover, and contains considerable evidence of an 
attempt to demonstrate the importance of syllogistic thinking in a syste-
matic exposition of its subject matter. 4 Under the heading of 'Logic' 
a progression is made from the simple relations of quality and quantity to 
the more complex relationships of the judgement and the syllogism, and 
finally to defmition, division and cognition. 'Metaphysics' is regarded as 
being more complex than logic in that it involves not only abstract 
categories but also the 'thing-in-itself'. In somewhat Kantian terms 
cognition is then expounded as a system of principles, and this is followed 
by a metaphysics of objectivity, and finally by a metaphysics of subjectivity 
involving the ego and 'absolute spirit'. Under the heading of 'Nature' 
Hegel then deals with a logically contingent subject matter, progressing 
from the aether, appearance and motion, to mechanics, matter and physics. 
There is therefore no organics and no 'Spirit', probably because he still 
felt himself to be unequal to the task of structuralizing these spheres in the 
light of the principles he was attempting to employ. From what is written 
13154 goulds, i.e. £367 in the English currency of the time. 
2 Schelling published his 'System of Transcendental Idealism' in March 1800, and we know that 
Hegel studied it in Frankfurt (Rosenkranz p. 149). Hegel's corresponding speculations are to be 
found in 'Fragment of a System' (Sept. 14, 1800), which is concerned mainly with the problem of 
unifying the opposites which reflective thinking has to acknowledge as separate i.e. the eternal and 
the temporal, God and man, subject and object, etc. It is in his conception of life that he finds the 
key to their union. Knox and Kroner pp. 309-319, Noh! pp. 343-35I. See his letter to Schelling of 
November 2, 1800 ('Briefe' no. 29), and his plan for an encyclopaedia, probably written in the 
early months of 1797: F. Rosenzweig 'Das alteste Systemprogramm des deutschen Idealismus'. 
(Heidelberg Akademie der Wissenschaften: Philosophisch-historische Klasse: 1917 Abh. 5). This 
fragment shows the influence of Plato and HOlderlin, but contains no treatment of' Nature'. 
3 'Jenenser Logik, Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie' (ed. G. Lasson, Leipzig, 1923); 'Philo-
sophische Bibliothek' (Felix Meiner Verlag, Hamburg, 1967). 
4 Hermann Schmitz 'Hegel a1s Denker der Individualitat' (Meisenheim, 1957) pp. 122-126. 
77 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
however, it is evident that he intended to show the significance of the third 
and most comprehensive major sphere in the exposition of the whole. 
In the lectures of 1803-1804 he evidently repeated the work on 'Logic' 
done in 1801-1802, and concentrated upon his exposition of the natural 
sciences, treating this sphere at the four main levels of mechanics, chemism, 
physics and organics. He also made a fairly extensive but clearly in-
complete attempt at working out the levels of consciousness into a philo-
sophy of 'Spirit'. 1 In 1805-18062 he again omitted to revise the 'Logic'. 
Although he also retained the four main levels indicated in the previous 
lectures in his treatment of the natural sciences, he now submitted this 
section to a thorough revision, dealing with it in more detail, and attempt-
ing to give greater precision to its triadic structure. The most interest-
ing feature of these lectures is however the first formulation of the 
broad outlines of the mature philosophy of 'Spirit', progressions being 
made from subjective spirit to politics, and fmally to art, religion and 
philosophy. 
By 1801 therefore, Hegel had decided that in a philosophical encyclo-
paedia a progression would have to be made from simpler to more com-
plex phenomena, that this would involve a broad division of its subject 
matter into logical considerations simpler in content than natural pheno-
mena, nature itself, in the assessment of which logical considerations 
would evidently involve contingency, and still more complex spiritual 
considerations, and that it was the most complex sphere of Spirit which held 
the key to the philosophical exposition of the whole. The broad outline 
of his mature system was therefore already apparent to him, and while 
lecturing and writing at Jena he concentrated upon developing first the 
'Logic', then 'Nature' and finally 'Spirit'. What he evidently lacked at 
this time however, was a central standpoint and principle which would 
enable him to demonstrate the interrelatedness of these three spheres, the 
identity of subject matter and structure in his expositions, the truth of 
'the Greek view that body and soul persist together in one living shape'. 
He came to realize that this would involve the establishment of a tele-
ological standpoint for the assessment of Spirit, and that in that he had not 
yet attempted this, he could not even regard himself as expounding the 
whole sphere of knowledge, since what was necessarily to be conceived of 
1 'Jenenser Realphilosophie I' (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1932); cf. Schmitz op. cit. pp. 
126-133. 
2 'Jenenser Realphilosophie II' (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1931); cf. Schmitz op. cit. pp. 133-138. 
Michelet inserted extracts from these lectures in the edition of the 'Philosophy of Nature' he brought 
outin 1842. 

INTRODUCTION 
as a totality was evidently limited by the imperfect integration of what he 
was bound to regard as constituting the parts of it. 1 
It was the attempt he made to solve this problem in the 'Phenomenology 
of Spirit' (Bamberg, 1807) which concluded his development as a thinker. 
Before proceeding to assess this work however, it may be of value to 
compare the 'Philosophy of Nature' with the corresponding works by 
Schelling and his followers, since it was certainly Schelling who en-
couraged him to develop this sphere of the 'Encyclopaedia' at Jena, and 
although the connection between them at this time is well known, it is, in 
general, imperfectly understood. On July 30, 1814 Hegel wrote as 
follows to H. E. G. Paulus (1761-1851), professor of philosophy and 
theology at Heidelberg, 2 'You know that I have concerned myself 
extensively, not only with classical literature, but also with mathematics, 
and of late with higher analysis, differential calculus, physics, natural 
history, chemistry, in order to be able to deal with the charlatanry of 
physiophilosophy, which philosophizes without knowledge, by means of 
imagination, and which treats empty conceits and even absurdities as 
thoughts. This might at least serve to recommend me in a negative 
manner.' The same tone prevails in the opening pages of these lectures. It 
is indeed probable that Hegel had become aware of the worthlessness of 
much of Schelling's speculation as early as the summer of 1800, when he 
was studying his 'System of Transcendental Idealism'3 at Frankfurt, and 
that he only co-operated with him in the early years at Jena in order to 
facilitate his initiation into university teaching. It must at least most 
certainly be emphasized, that it is only in its superficial features that the 
'Philosophy of Nature' resembles the corresponding Schellingian writings. 
Like these works, it communicates an attempt to assess the natural sciences, 
but there the similarity ends. The dissertation of 1801, Hegel's first 
published work on this subject, has most of the main features of his 
mature attitude to natural science, and as has been noticed, his first com-
prehensive treatment of this sphere (1801-1802), in that it is preceded by a 
logic and a metaphysic, emphasizes the importance of strictly hierarchical 
thinking, was evidently meant to be succeeded by a philosophy of spirit, 
and makes minimal use of such favourite Schellingian concepts as polarity, 
magnetism, galvanism etc., also bears a very close resemblance to his 
1 w. van Dooren 'Het Totaliteitsbegrip bij Hegel en zijn Voorgangers' (Assen, 1965). On the 
development of Hegel's views at Jena see K. Rosenkranz 'Hegel's Leben' (Berlin, 1844) pp. 178-198; 
H. Glockner 'Hegel' (2 vols. Stuttgart, 1954-1958) vol. II ch. 6. 
2 Hoffmeister 'Briefe' vol. II no. 235. 
3 'System des transcendentalen Idealismus' (Tiibingen, March 1800). 
79 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
mature work. 1 It may be said quite confidently therefore, that the diatribe 
with which these lectures begin is not simply a matter of the pot calling 
the kettle black. The sober and meticulous structuralization of the accom-
plishments of the natural sciences which distinguishes Hegel's work is 
indeed a far cry from the spirit which swept Herder, the spiritual pro-
genitor of the Schellingians, as he sailed from Riga in the early summer of 
1769. 'It was on the ship therefore that! became a philosopher-a philosopher 
however who had as yet barely learnt how to philosophize from nature 
without books and instruments. lEI had been able to do this, under a mast, 
on the wide ocean, what a standpoint it would have been for philoso-
phizing upon the sky, sun, stars, moon, air, wind, sea, rain, current, fish 
and the depths of the sea, for discovering first-hand the physical nature 
of it all! Philosopher of nature, that should be your standpoint with the 
youth whom you instruct. Stand by him on the wide sea and show him 
facts and realities, use no words in explaining them, but let him grasp it 
all of his own accord.'2 
Herder's attitude, as pictured here, had a great influence upon the young 
Schelling's intuitive approach toward the natural sciences, and for two 
decades at least it looked as though this brand of realistic romanticism 
might revolutionize scientific thought. Hegel, like Goethe, evidently 
appreciated the living wholeness of the insights it fostered3 and saw the 
value of it as a corrective to the subjectivism endemic to the age, but his 
awareness of its defects was evidently well known, even before the 
publication of the 'Phenomenology'.4 The brilliance of the rhetoric it 
inspired gave rise to an enthusiasm which it was often unable to sustain 
through the labours of painstaking research. On occasions, the vision was 
maintained, but found to be irrelevant to the details that had to be dealt 
with. Irresponsible and fantastic theories were therefore promulgated, 
cautious, sober and systematic research flouted. The collapse of the 
scientific method seemed possible, chaos seemed imminent. There was 
however no denying the brilliance of many who propounded the new 
doctrine. In Wordsworth, N ovalis, Oehlenschlager and Kellgren the 
romantic view of nature brought forth exquisite poetry and nothing more, 
1 'Jenenser Logik' etc. op. cit. 
2 'Journal meiner Reise im Jahre 1769' (ed. Gillies, Oxford, 1947). For the germ of the idea of a 
somewhat more systematic philosophy of nature, see his 'Vom Erkennen und Empfinden der men-
schlichen Seele' (Riga, 1778), in 'Herders Sammtliche Werke' (ed. B. Suphan, 33 vols. Berlin, 
1877-1913) vol. 8 pp. 165-333. 
3 § 246 Addition; O. Pogge1er 'Hege1s Kritik der Romantik' (Bonn, 1956). 
4 See his early characterization of intuitive thinking as 'the darkness in which all cats are grey' 
(sic). H. Steffens 'Was ich erlebte' (10 vols. Breslau, 1840-1844) vol. IV p. 312. 
80 

INTRODUCTION 
but in the addresses of Schelling and Steffens the audience was urged in a 
new and exciting manner to throw itself into the precise investigation of 
natural phenomena. In the autumn of 1 S02 Steffens began his famous lec-
tures in Copenhagen. 1 'Reason, the well-spring in which freedom and 
necessity are inseparably mingled, is that which is most central to us. It is 
the divinity by which each is united with all, the growing toward that 
which is sublime, the noble shoot that awakens us, the ray of eternal 
clarity that rouses us, the deep motivating principle of all our higher 
desires. It was with our very existence that a divinity gave us the ordering 
principle involved within the organization of a whole interacting ever-
lastingly with all its parts. To raise that shoot, to cause it to grow, is the 
constant wish of every nobler nature. He feels in his heart that this is the 
immovable point around which everything moves, the changeless amid all 
change-the source of everything known.'2 
Schelling influenced natural scientists as Hegel never did.3 As the 
result of the enthusiasms stimulated by his teaching, J. J. Wagner and 
J. F. Fries attempted to reduce all the laws of the natural sciences to 
mathematics, J. E. von Berger developed pantheistic views out of his work 
as an astronomer, J. W. Ritter and H. C. 0rsted made important dis-
coveries relating to electricity and magnetism, F. B. von Baader distin-
guished himself as a mineralogist, H. F. Link and C. G. Nees von Esenbeck 
made their names as botanists, G. H. von Schubert published reliable works 
on botany, zoology and natural history in general, and a whole host of 
doctors, K. G. Carus, K. A. Eschenmayer, K. R. Hoffmann, A. F. Marcus, 
A. Roeschlaub, J. P. V. Troxler, K. J. A. Windischmann etc. propounded 
more or less eccentric views on medical matters. Oken's popularization of 
science by means of his periodical 'Isis', and his founding of the 'Associa-
tion of German Naturalists and Physicians' in IS22, should also be put 
to the credit of the Schellingians. His work had a direct influence upon 
British affairs through the encyclopaedic ambitions of Coleridge and the 
founding of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 
IS31.' 
English readers, who are probably acquainted with the translation of 
1 Grundtvigianism, which, apart from Marxism, is the only truly popular and socially effective 
movement to have arisen out of German romanticism, owes much to these lectures. 
2 'Indledning til philosophiske Foreh:sninger' (Copenhagen, 1803) pp. 183-184. 
3 Heinrich Knittermeyer 'Schelling und die Romantische Schule' (Munich, 1929). 
4 'To give a stronger impulse and a more systematic direction to scientific inquiry, to obtain a 
greater degree of science, and a removal of those disadvantages which impede its progress, and to 
promote the intercourse of the cultivators of science with one another and with foreign philosophers.' 
-w. V. Harcourt (1789-1871). 
SI 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Oken's main work on the philosophy of nature,l will probably be sur-
prised to learn that many Schellingians produced rdiable scientific works 
later in life. By 1815 the essentially sterile nature of Schelling's early 
views had been acknowledged by most working scientists, although some 
of his disciples continued to speak well of them as late as the 1850'S. Hegd, 
as we have noticed, had taken an independent attitude to the natural 
sciences from the very beginning of his public career. However, since his 
'Philosophy of Nature' was not designed primarily in order to revolutionize 
scientific research, since it was too abstruse to capture the imagination 
easily, and since the scientists who acknowledged their debt to him 
remained very minor figures,2 his work tended to be lumped together 
with Schelling's, and to fall with it into the disrepute with which all 
subsequent evaluations of it have had to contend. 
Kant's warning that noumena should not be divorced from 'their 
complex, the intelligible world' is heeded in Hegel's early work at Jena. 
He acknowledges the importance of formulating levels, hierarchies and 
spheres as clearly and precisely as possible, and of so demonstrating the 
Notion, the essential structure of knowledge. He notices the seductiveness 
of mysticism, of closing one's eyes, which is particularly pernicious in that 
it is not entirely valueless, 'There is indeed a turbid something which is not 
quite feeling or science, it is a speculative feeling or the Idea, and although 
it is unable to free itself from phantasy and feeling, it is also no longer 
merely one or the other of these. I have in mind mysticism, or rather the 
oriental as well as the Jacob-Boehmian attempts to demonstrate the Idea ... 
The lucid element is the universal, the Notion, which, in its all-exhibiting 
revelation, is as deep as it is extensive.'3 Although his encyclopaedic work 
at this time is fragmentary, and although his dissatisfaction with it is 
apparent in his constant revision, there is, nevertheless, a very clear 
affmity between his Jena lectures and the mature 'Encyclopaedia'. How 
then are we to explain the 'Phenomenology', which, to a Kantian, can 
hardly appear as anything better than a nightmare? It is true that the work 
has a rather loose triadic structure, and that a general progression is made 
from basic subject matter such as sense certainty, perception, understand-
1 'Elements of Physiophilosophy by Lorenz Oken' (tr. A. Tulk, London, 1847). The book is a 
shocking assemblage of ludicrous thoughts and inane observations. § 3593, from the section on psy-
chology, provides a fair example of its verbiage: 'Gazing upon a Snail one believes that he finds the 
prophesying goddess sitting upon the tripod. What majesty is in a creeping Snail, what reflection, 
what earnestness; what timidity, and yet at the same time what confidence! Surely a Snail is an 
exalted symbol of mind slumbering deeply within itself.' 
2 L. D. von Henning (1791-1866), G. F. Pohl (1788-1849). 
3 Hoffmeister 'Dokumente' pp. 338-339. 
82 

INTRODUCTION 
ing etc. to clearly complex considerations such as morality, religion and 
absolute knowledge. Natural science is considered after scepticism and 
the 'unhappy consciousness' however, and is the immediate antecedent of 
pleasure and necessity, the law of the heart and virtue etc.1 What are we 
to make of this? It can hardly be argued that this sequence corresponds to 
anything in heaven, earth, or the waters under the earth. A scientist might 
well object to having the general nature and relatedness of the natural 
sciences travestied and caricatured in this manner, in what is evidently a 
Bottom's dream, especially when he is also told that these intellectual 
antics are being perpetrated in the name of an absolute philosophy, 
transcending at some amazingly high level his rather more pedestrian 
accomplishments. After reading the reference to a botanical matter in the 
preface,2 Goethe wrote as follows to his friend T. J. Seebeck (1770-1831), 
'To say anything more monstrous is indeed not possible. It seems to me 
quite unworthy of a rational man to want to annihilate the eternal 
reality of nature by means of a miserable sophistical joke ... When a 
distinguished thinker manages to contradict and obliterate an idea by 
means of ingenious and mutually self-nullifying words and phrases, one 
knows not what to say'. 3 
There is indeed no commoner evidence of the complete misinterpreta-
tion of Hegelianism than that provided by those who, though evidently 
ignorant of both the origin and the import of the 'Phenomenology', 
persist in proclaiming its merits. They would be better advised to admit 
that they know not what they say. Most of the ridicule to which these 
would-be Hegelians have been justly submitted has its origin in a very 
healthy awareness of what is ostensibly ludicrous in this work, and in the 
shrewd suspicion that those claiming to have found a bottom to it are 
themselves somniloquent. 
During the winter of 1801/2, as we have seen, Hegel lectured on Logic, 
Metaphysics and Nature, and had evidently planned to develop a philo-
sophy of' Spirit'. In the summer of 1802 he gave notice of a forthcoming 
1 'The Phenomenology of Mind' (tr. J. B. Baillie, London, 1931) pp. 241-412. 
2 Goethe quotes the following (op. cit. p. 68), 'The bud disappears when the blossom breaks 
through, and we might say that the former is refuted by the latter; in the same way when the fruit 
comes, the blossom may be explained to be a false form of the plant's existence, for the fruit appears 
as its true nature in place of the blossom. These stages are not merely differentiated; they supplant 
one another as being incompatible with one another. But the ceaseless activity of their own inherent 
nature makes them at the same time moments of an organic unity, where they not merely do not 
contradict one another, but where one is as necessary as the other; and this equal necessity of all 
moments constitutes alone and thereby the life of the whole.' Seebeck evidently managed to clarify 
the matter somewhat: see Goethe's letter of January IS, 1813: 'Werke' IV Abtheilung 23 Band 
(Weimar, 1900). 
3 November 28,1812: see Goethe's 'Werke' IV Abtheilung 23 Band (Weimar, 1900). 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
text-book, to accompany his lectures, entitled 'Logic and Metaphysics, or 
Systema reflexionis et rationis'.l This failed to appear, although it was 
repeatedly advertized by him. Finally, in the winter of 1805/6 his friend 
Friedrich Immanuel Niethammer (1766-1848) arranged for such a work 
to be published by J. A. Goebhard (d. 1813) of Bamberg. There can be 
little doubt that Hegel originally intended this to be the first edition of his 
'Encyclopaedia', and that the lectures of 1805/6 give a fairly clear idea of 
the initial plan and general foundation of it. The 'Logic' of 1801/2 was evi-
dently to constitute the basis of the first part, the 'Nature' of 1803/6 that 
of the second part, and the 'Spirit' of 1805/6 that of the third part.2 
Printing began in February 1806, and he had arranged to have half the 
manuscript in the printer's hands by Easter. He soon found however, not 
only that he was quite unable to work his material out systematically, but 
that he was getting hopelessly behind schedule. By the August of 1806 he 
had sent offbarely half the work,s and it was evidently at that time that 
he first decided to call it not a 'System of Sciences' but a 'Phenomenology'.4 
The second half of the book was written in the incredibly short period of 
two months (Aug.-Oct. 1806). The preface was completed by the new 
year, and sent to the publisher on January 16, 1807. 
These circumstances explain a great deal. The obscurity of Hegel's 
style evidently has its origin in the rapidity with which he wrote. The 
excessive unevenness in the execution of the work and its somewhat 
enigmatical character is presumably the result of his having been forced to 
change his conception of it while he was actually writing. It is valuable 
therefore, not as a systematic exposition of levels, hierarchies and spheres, 
1 The circumstances under which the 'Phenomenology' was conceived and written were only 
made known thirty years ago: see Theodor Haering 'Die Entstehungsgeschichte der Phanomenologie 
des Geistes', in B. Wigersma 'Verhandlungen des dritten Hegelkongresses' (Tilbingen and Haarlem, 
1934); 'Phanomenologie des Geistes' (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1937), introduction. 
2 Otto Poggeler 'Zur Deutung der Phanomenologie des Geistes' in 'Hegel-Studien' vol. I pp. 
255-294 (Bonn, 1961) p. 279. Poggeler corrects some of the details in Haering's reconstruction of the 
events leading up to the publication of the work. He shows for example that Hegel had begun to 
write it by the early summer of 1805, i.e. before the contract with Goebhard had been signed. See 
H. Schmitz 'Die Vorbereitung von Hegels Phanomenologie des Geistes in seiner "Jenenser Logik" , 
(,Zeitschrift fur philosophische Forschung'. 14, 1960. 16-39). 
3 Baillie's translation pp. 131-412. 
4 See his lecture notice for 1806/7 published August 1806, 'logicum et metaphysicam sive philo-
sophiam speculativam praemissa phaenomenologia, ex libro suo "System der Wissenschaften" 
proxime prodituro, Parte prima'. J. H. Lambert (1728-1777), in his' Neues Organon, oder Gedanken 
ilber die Erforschung und Bezeichnung des Wahren, und dessen Unterscheidung vom Irrthum und 
Schein' (2 vols. Leipzig, 1764) pt. IV had defined 'phenomenology' as the, 'theory of appearance 
and of its influence upon the correctness and incorrectness of human knowledge'. Kant, in the 
'Metaphysischen Anfangsgrilnde der Naturwissenschaft' (1786) pt. IV, regards it as being the mode 
in which motion makes its appearance. Hegel subsequently used it to describe a sphere of subjective 
spirit ('Encyclopaedia' §§ 413-439). 

INTRODUCTION 
as is the 'Encyclopaedia', but as a broad and somewhat rough survey of 
certain spiritual phenomena. In that the natural sciences, like psychological, 
epistemological, historical, ethical, social, moral and religious phenomena, 
are the object of thought, there is no reason why they should not be 
brought within this survey. In the 'Phenomenology' Hegel is not however 
attempting to do justice to the precise interrelatedness of the subject matter 
of 'Logic', 'Nature' and 'Spirit'. He is concerned primarily, if not ex-
clusively, with various modes of consciousness, and the extent to which they 
approximate to the standpoint from which 'Spirit' might be structuralized. 
It has to be admitted however that his account of this standpoint is woe-
fully inadequate, 1 and in that this work has led so many unacquainted 
with both the structure and the subject matter of the 'Encyclopaedia' to 
interpret Hegelianism as a philosophical game, devoid of rules, and best 
played blindfold in a state of blissful ignorance, its influence is to be 
deplored.2 
Hegel therefore concluded his development by preparing the way for 
rounding off the exposition of the 'Encyclopaedia' by a full-scale struc-
turalization of 'Spirit'.3 It was not until the Berlin period however that 
he found the time and the opportunity to show what this entailed. Tracing 
his development is important, in that it enables one to place his early 
works in perspective, and in that it helps one to see how easily what he 
was attempting to communicate in his mature works, can be misunder-
stood or even completely overlooked by those who are unaware of its 
ongm. 
e. THE NOTION 
'There is surely a peece of Divinity in us, something that was before 
the Elements, and owes no homage unto the Sun.' -Sir Thomas Browne. 
1 Baillie's translation pp. 789-808. 
2 There are competent surveys of the main arguments of the 'Phenomenology' in J. N. Findlay 
'Hegel, a Re-examination' (London, 1958) and G. R. G. Mure 'The Philosophy of Hegel' (London, 
1965). Since the war, the French have published works designed to make it more intelligible, see, 
Jean Hyppolite 'Genese et Structure de la Phenomenologie' (paris, 1946), Alexandre Kojeve 'Intro-
duction a la Lecture de Hegel' (Gallimard, 1947). See also: G. StLhler 'Die Dialektik in Hegels 
"Phiinomenologie des Geistes'" (Berlin, 1964), J. Loewenberg 'Hegel's Phenomenology' (La Salle, 
1965). R. K. Maurer, in 'Hegel und das Ende der Geschichte' (Stuttgart, 1965) has the merit of 
investigating the apparent historicity of the work. L. Flam, in 'De Bewustwording Beschouwingen 
bij de "Fenomenologie van de Geest'" (Brussels, 1966) concentrates upon its moral, social and politi-
cal aspects. The real significance of the work is not widely recognized. 
3 Otto Poggeler op. cit. 'Hegel-Studien' (Bonn, 1961) pp. 282-283, 'In opposition to the usual 
interpretation of the Hegelian text, I should like to propose the following: that the actual science of 
Spirit is not the Logic, but the philosophy of Spirit.' This is undoubtedly justified, and is now widely 
accepted. For a classical exposition of the former view see Jean Hyppolite 'Logique et Existence. 
Essai sur la logique de Hegel' (paris, 1953). 
85 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
It is perhaps rather curious that although most continental scholars are 
now agreed as to the general nature of the various stages in Hegel's 
development, they still hold widely different opinions as to what constitutes 
the basic motivation of this development and the central feature of his 
mature thought. Despite his careful analysis of Spinoza,l and the forthright 
manner in which oriental pantheism of the Hindu or Spinozistic kind is 
rejected as inadequate to the full capabilities of philosophy in the final 
sections of the 'Encyclopaedia', 2 even the nineteenth century assertion 
that his thought is pantheistic in tone, is still repeated by some of them.3 
Theodor Steinbiichel4 came closer to the truth of the matter when he saw 
the basic problem of Hegel's philosophy as an attempt to establish the 
relationship between the universal and !he particular, and characterized it 
as being panentheistic in intention i.e. as an attempt to demonstrate not 
simply that God is everything, nor yet that He transcends everything, but 
that while He is indeed transcendent, everything is in Him. 5 Hermann 
Schmitz has concentrated upon the nature of the dialectic as being central 
to Hegel's thinking,6 and attempted to show that it has its origin in the 
syllogism and the total incompatibility of subject and predicate found in 
the infmite judgement. 7 More recently, J6rg Splett has attempted to show 
how the logicalization of the Christian Trinity throws light upon both the 
ultimate 'telos' and the ubiquitous structuralization of Hegel's work.s 
Although the value of such approaches is not to be denied, it seems 
likely that the most valuable contribution to the solution of this problem 
made in the last decade has come from Otto P6ggeler, who has suggested 
that the central principle of Hegelianism is to be found neither in the 
1 See the references collected in Glockner's 'Hegel-Lexikon', which show that Hegel's pre-
dominant attitude was appreciative but critical. See especially the 'History of Philosophy' pt. III 
sect. ii ch. I div. A. 
2 § 573. 
3 For one of the earliest assertions of this kind see F. C. Baur (1792-1860) 'Die christliche Lehre 
von der Dreieinigkeit' (3 vols. Tiibingen, 1841-1843) vol. III p. 91I. 
4 'Das Grundproblem der Hegelschen Philosophie' (Bonn, 1933). 
5 R. C. Whittmore 'Hegel as Panentheist' (New Orleans, 1960); Erik Schmidt 'Hegels Lehre 
von Gott' (Giitersloh, 1952); K. C. F. Krause (1781-1832) first made this point: see J. E. Erdmann 
'A History of Philosophy' (3 vols. London, 1807-1899) vol. II pp. 669-679. Goethe expresses the 
idea very neatly: 
'Denn alles Drangen, alles Ringen 
1st ewige Ruh' in Gott dem Herm.' 
6 'Hegel als Denker der Individualitat' (Meisenheim, 1957). 
7 'The mind is no elephant', 'A lion is no table' etc., propositions which are correct but absurd: 
'Encyclopaedia' § 173. Schmitz links these somewhat abstract considerations with the concept of 
alienation as it is characterized in the 'Phenomenology' (B, IV, b, 3) under the heading of the unhappy 
consciousness. 
8 'Die Trinitatslehre G. W. F. Hegels' (Munich, 1965); c£ J. Hessen 'Hegels Trinitatslehre. 
Zugleich eine Einfiihrung in sein System' (Freiburg, 1922). 
86 

INTRODUCTION 
'Logic' nor in any of the particular levels of 'Spirit', but in 'Spirit' regarded 
as a whole. This suggestion, if it is not simply taken to imply the vague 
and somewhat dangerous truism that spirit as such has certain powers of 
synthesis, would appear to lead us to the very centre of the problem. 
Properly considered, it enables us to draw together the valuable but 
fragmentary insights of various interpreters, and to establish a vantage 
point from which the whole lay-out of the Hegelian system may be pro-
fitably viewed and accurately assessed. 1 
It is evident from the Jena writings, that so long as Hegel was unable to 
establish the nodal point in the hierarchy of knowledge which could 
provide him with the broad framework for the structuralization of 'Spirit', 
he had difficulty in dealing with this sphere. This was a particularly serious 
obstacle to the whole development of his thought, for since 'Spirit' 
constitutes the most complex of the three major levels of knowledge, it is 
also from this nodal point that the entire 'Encyclopaedia' must derive its 
unity. Hegel realized moreover, that since the fmallevels of 'Spirit' would 
have to be exhibited as concluding the whole cycle of knowledge, they 
would also have to be exhibited as initiating it, that is to say, as con-
stituting the immediate presuppositions of the simplest categories of the 
'Logic'. As a result of the various attempts he made at working out an 
'Encyclopaedia', he became intensely aware of the fact that a mere 
enumeration of levels of complexity was unlikely ever to yield the nodal 
point he required. In the 'Phenomenology of Spirit' therefore, he set out 
to establish its features and general significance by what amounted to a 
process of elimination. Taking the general complexity of 'Spirit' as 
distinct from the comparative simplicity of 'Nature' and 'Logic' as his 
point of departure, he attempted to show the relative inadequacy of various 
spiritual phenomena to the fulfillment of what was required. As is well 
known, this led him to the defmition of what he calls 'Absolute Know-
ledge'. It has to be admitted however, that partly on account of the rapidity 
with which he was forced to write this work, and partly on account of the 
imperfection of his preliminary assessments, this level is poorly defmed, 
and the general significance of it inadequately expressed. One might 
reasonably have expected of him that he would have given a more 
explicit and rounded account of it in the 'Encyclopaedia', but it can hardly 
be said that he managed to do SO.2 
The final levels of the hierarchy of 'Spirit' are therefore central to any 
1 'Zur Deutung der Phanomenologie des Geistes' in 'Hegel-Studien' vol. I pp. 255-294 (Bonn, 
1961). 
2 §§ 572-577-

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
understanding of the overall significance of Hegel's work. Before pro-
ceeding to examine this crucial section of the 'Encyclopaedia' in some de-
tail however, it may be of value to make a few general remarks about the 
method he employs in developing his system, since the principles elicited 
at this final level of it are intimately involved in the structure of the whole. 
It has, firstly, to be remembered, that when he presents a phenomenon 
as concluding and rounding off a sphere, he has to exhibit it not only as the 
most complex level of that particular hierarchy, but as including within 
itself and having as its presupposition all the simpler levels constituting the 
qualitative unity of which it is the culmination. In the 'Philosophy of 
Nature', as throughout the whole of the 'Encyclopaedia', he brings 
immense erudition, great intellectual acumen and not a little ingenuity to 
bear upon the task of indicating phenomena capable of fulfilling these 
requirements. If, therefore, we are not intimately acquainted with early 
nineteenth century knowledge, it will often be difficult for us to appreciate 
the significance of his work. If we do manage to overcome this handicap 
however, we shall soon discover that the judgements involved in the 
selections he makes are never unworthy of serious consideration. Able and 
accomplished though they invariably are however, they are necessarily 
based upon the subject matter available to him, and even the major 
transitions of the 'Encyclopaedia' are therefore open to revision. It is 
not often realized however, that even a level as important as the 'Absolute 
Idea' fmds its particular place in the system and concludes the 'Logic' 
simply because it was the most complex category Hegel was able to 
intuite from the subject matter available to him. Consequently, although 
he does his best to show why he regards it as presupposing and including 
all the abstract universals by which it is preceded, he does not rule out the 
possibility of its being revised or redefmed by subsequent thinkers.l 
The rounding off of the sphere of 'Nature' provides us with a closely 
analagous example. Since Hegel regards death as presupposing all the 
stages of development and complexity in the animal organism, the most 
complex of all natural phenomena, he presents it here as the most complex 
of all particularities, and consequently as the immediate presupposition of 
consciousness or 'Spirit', in which singularity involves both universals and 
particularities. The formulation of this transition is by no means inapposite 
to current experience and knowledge, and may still quite reasonably be 
regarded as having its value. Although we may even be convinced that 
there is no reason why it should not be regarded as proof against any 
1 'Encyclopaedia' §§ 236-244. 
88 

INTRODUCTION 
further revision however, it would he unwise of us to regard the formu-
lation of it as fmal, even if only for the very general reason that the manner 
in which knowledge enables a philosopher to illustrate the structure of the 
'Encyclopaedia' is perpetually changing.1 
We have already noticed that it is sections of the 'Encyclopaedia' such 
as these, in which transitions are made from one sphere to another, which 
tend to be the most controversial. In that they simply involve progressions 
in degree of complexity, they should of course present us with little diffi-
culty once we have an elementary idea of the basic structure of the work. 
In that they also have to be regarded as concluding and initiating quali-
tative differences varying widely in degree of comprehensiveness however, 
they will quite obviously always be the focal points of legitimate and 
valuable differences of opinion. Nor is this so only in the case of major 
transitions such as those from 'Logic' to 'Nature' and from 'Nature' to 
'Spirit'. The whole range of subject matter surveyed within the 'Encyclo-
paedia', down to its most minute details, must be regarded as being open to 
discussion, reinterpretation and revision of this kind. Once this has been 
said however, it should be added that this infmite revisability in no way 
affects the structure of the work. A modern physicist for example, although 
he will certainly differ from Hegel in his interpretation of the subject 
matter of his particular discipline, will have little difficulty in discovering 
the merits of his structuralization of it. 
We have no direct evidence of the method Hegel employed in assimi-
lating and arranging his material. When he was writing the 'Encyclo-
paedia' and preparing the lectures he based upon it however, it seems as 
though he made a preliminary survey of his subject matter, ranging it in 
general order of complexity, and then looked through it for the nodal 
points which might be presented as the concluding and initiating levels of 
the various spheres. A certain amount of evidence in support of this view 
may be adduced from the 'Philosophy of Nature'. In the treatment of 
Sound for example,2 the major transitions demarkating the sphere as a 
whole were evidently suggested by the science of the day. The brilliant 
exposition of acoustic phenomena worked out between these nodal 
points is entirely original however, and is evidently the outcome of 
nothing but Hegel's thorough grasp of the subject matter, and the 
principles common to the 'Encyclopaedia' as a whole. 
Before examining the manner in which these principles are combined in 
the final levels of 'Spirit', we should perhaps take careful note of their 
1 §§ 375-376. 
2 §§ 300-302. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
precise nature. We have already noticed that it is very easy to misassess 
and misunderstand the ubiquitous levels, hierarchies and spheres of the 
Hegelian system, in that they have a dual nature. This is also true of the 
Idea, the Notion and the dialectic, the principles which derive their 
significance from the fmal 'telos' of the system. They are all to be regarded 
as principles, and as being distinct from their subject matter, on account of 
their being identical throughout the 'Encyclopaedia' and constituting the 
general structure of 'Logic', 'Nature' and 'Spirit'. In that they are also com-
pletely devoid of identity however, constituting as they do an integral 
part of an endlessly varied and varying subject matter, they are also to be 
regarded as perpetually changing and infmitely revisable. They may be 
said therefore to be mere theoretical abstractions in so far as they are lacking 
in subject matter, and to be utterly unthinkable in so far as any attempt is 
made to deny their purely structural nature. One might say, that although 
they have to be recognized, they also have to be illustrated, and that both 
the recognition and the illustration must be very largely meaningless in 
so far as it is supposed that one may be separated from the other. They are 
universal and changeless in that they are always relevant to an under-
standing of any kind of subject matter. They are particular and changing 
in that they are always strictly irrelevant to the actual acquisition of know-
ledge. Although Hegel often speaks of them in a striking and memorable 
manner, he is never very explicit in his treatment of them, and never goes 
out of his way to explain them. The following passage is typical of his 
utterances on the subject, 'As thoughts invade the limitless multiformity 
of nature, its richness is impoverished, its springtimes die and there is a 
fading in the play of its colours. That which in nature was noisy with life, 
falls silent in the quietude of thought; its warm abundance, which shaped 
itself into a thousand intriguing wonders, withers into arid forms and 
shapeless generalities, which resemble a dull northern fog.'! 
Since the principles of the 'Encyclopaedia', as principles, are changeless 
abstractions, the apparent movement in the work, from one subject matter 
to another, motivated as it is simply by the need to illustrate the basic 
structure, is merely the result of Hegel's having had to communicate by 
means of the printed word and lecture in a manner acceptable to under-
graduates. Theodor Litt has therefore done great service to a more 
1 § 246 Addition. C£ the famous passage in the preface to the 'Philosophy of Right', 'When 
philosophy paints its grey in grey, then has a shape of life grown old. By philosophy's grey in grey 
it cannot be rejuvenated but only understood. The owl of Minerva spreads its wings only with the 
falling of the dusk.' 
'Grau, teurer Freund, ist alle Theorie, 
Und grUn des Lebens goldner Baum.' 

INTRODUCTION 
general understanding of Hegelianism by pointing out that the subject 
matter of the 'Encyclopaedia' may, with rather more profit, be considered 
in the converse order to that in which it is presented. l Since Hegel chose to 
deal with the levels in order of increasing complexity, progressions are 
made which certainly give his expositions the appearance of being 
teleological. A close examination of them will make it evident however 
that their apparently teleological nature is merely the result of his having 
been unable to talk intelligibly about everything at once. The main 
purpose of his work is not to progress to a certain end, but to exhibit the 
form of the 'Encyclopaedia' as a whole by eliciting the structure of its 
various spheres. In so far as it is helpful or necessary to think in terms of 
ends however, the various hierarchies might perhaps be said to display an 
immanent teleology. 
The sphere of' Spirit' is like every other in the 'Encyclopaedia' in that the 
significance of the level which rounds it off can only be fully understood 
with reference to the hierarchy by which it is preceded. In this case Hegel 
formulates a progression from what would now be called psychology 
('Subjective Spirit'), to the law, ethics, the social sciences and history, and 
finally to aesthetics, religion and philosophy.2 The principles involved in 
this exposition are in no way peculiar to it, so that the structure that 
emerges from them has no particular features and significance of its own. 
Although it can hardly be claimed that there is a widespread appreciation 
of the value of this structure, many have been intrigued by the subject 
matter of the sphere, with the result that Hegel's expositions of the law, 
conscience, constitutions, war, world history, painting, music, poetry, 
Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism, Plato, Aristotle, Bacon, Jacob Boehme 
etc. etc. etc. are undoubtedly the best known and most widely discussed 
features of his work. This is not the place to embark upon the fascinating 
procedure of investigating the sources, judgements and assessments which 
gave rise to the actual levels, hierarchies and spheres formulated here. Since 
the fmal section of spirit contains the key to the understanding of the 
whole 'Encyclopaedia' however, it is essential that it should be carefully 
examined, its significance firmly grasped, and the general implications of 
it clearly presented. 
Hegel formulates this level in §§ 572-577 of the 'Encyclopaedia' and 
1 'Hegel, Versuch einer kritischen Erneuerung' (Heidelberg, 1953). 
2 'Philosophy of Mind' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1894). The 'Philosophy of Subjective Spirit has 
not yet been translated in its entirety. 'Philosophy of Right' (tr. Knox, Oxford, 1962); 'Philosophy 
of History' (tr. Sibree, Dover Pub!., 1956); 'Philosophy of Fine Art' (tr. Osmaston, London, 1916); 
'Philosophy of Religion' (tr. Spiers and Sanderson, London, 1895); 'History of Philosophy' 
(tr. Haldane, London, 1892). 
91 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
calls it, quite simply, 'Philosophy'. He does not make it easy for us to grasp 
its significance however. The lectures on 'Philosophy', which should have 
clarified the general meaning of it do not in fact do so, since they treat 
their subject historically, not speculatively, and despite their vague triadic 
structure cannot therefore be regarded as a completely integral part of the 
'Encyclopaedia'. When attempting to expound the central principle of 
Hegelianism therefore, we are left with these jejune paragraphs, the 
enigmatic utterances concluding the 'Phenomenology', and a genial refer-
ence to 'Hamlet' at the end of the 'Lectures on the History of Philosophy'.l 
Despite their limitations however, these sources, if they are carefully 
considered in their context, do not provide an entirely inadequate basis for 
the task in hand. The paragraphs in the 'Encyclopaedia' are the most 
satisfactory, and from these it is quite evident that Hegel's thought at this 
juncture is essentially syllogistic. An examination of them will make it 
apparent that the major spheres of 'Logic', 'Nature' and 'Spirit' are here 
interpreted as the qualitative unities of universality, particularity and 
singularity, and are regarded by Hegel as constituting the premises and 
conclusions of a wholly triadic and syllogistic exposition. The ultimate 
origins of these entities are, at this level, admittedly remote, but since the 
attempt is being made simply to exhibit their combination while main-
taining their distinctness, and since their formulation has already been 
submitted to a thoroughgoing and rigorous analysis, this is by no means a 
procedure which, in this section of the 'Encyclopaedia', is entirely inappro-
priate. It is pointed out that there are three possible ways of regarding or 
demonstrating their combination. In the first instance, 'Logic' may be 
regarded as being combined with 'Spirit' through the mediation of 
'Nature'. If this general proposition is illustrated by a particular case, it 
might for example be stated that the category of measure is known to me on 
account of its occurring in a chemical combination (§ 575). In the second 
instance, 'Nature' is combined with 'Logic' through the mediation of 
'Spirit'. A particular case of this would be the occurrence of a chemical 
combination, known to me and so giving rise to the formulation of the 
category of measure (§ 576). In the third instance, the syllogism, 'is the Idea 
of philosophy, which has self-knowing reason, the absolutely-universal, for 
its middle term: a middle which divides itself into Spirit and Nature, making 
the former its presupposition, as the process of the subjective activity of the 
Idea, and the latter its universal extreme, as the process of the implicit, 
objective being of the Idea'. In the particular instance of this case, my 
lOp. cit. vol. III p. 547. 
92 

INTRODUCTION 
subjective recognition of measure, and the occurrence of it in chemical 
combinations, are regarded as the premises of the universality of it as a 
category (§ 577). 
In these three syllogisms therefore, Hegel attempts to exhibit the 
universal principles involved in the three possible ways of regarding know-
ledge. As the German text is explicit enough on the point, it must be the 
inaccuracy of Wallace's translation of§ 5741 which has led British thinkers 
to regard the 'Logic' as such as constituting the middle term of this fmal 
syllogism. Hegel makes no mention whatever of the 'logical system' fabri-
cated by Wallace. What he actually says is that, 'This Notion of philosophy 
is the self-thinking Idea, the truth aware of itself (§ 236). It is that which is 
logical, in the sense that it is universality verified within concrete content 
as in its actuality.' The point he is evidently making here is that levels, 
hierarchies and spheres, the components of the Idea, like the categories 
of the 'Logic', are universal in that they are not to be confmed to particular 
instances or subjective thinking. As a confirmation of the correctness of 
Poggeler's thesis that it is 'Spirit' and not 'Logic' which constitutes the 
focal point of the 'Encyclopaedia', it should be noted moreover that it is 
not the Absolute Idea of the 'Logic', 2 but the self-thinking Idea of Spirit 
which is presented by Hegel as exhibiting the unity of the whole cycle of 
knowledge. 
When he refers to them as 'that which is logical', Hegel shows that he 
regards these central principles formulated in the fmallevels of 'Spirit' as 
differing very little, if at all, from purely logical categories. On account of 
their extreme abstraction and generality they are indeed well suited to be 
regarded as the immediate antecedent of pure Being, the most elemen-
tary category of the 'Logic'. On the other hand, since it is the intellectual 
manipulation of them which gives rise to the unity of the whole 'En-
cyclopaedia', he is also clearly justified in regarding them as the most 
complex of all spiritual phenomena. Taken as a whole therefore, this may 
well be regarded as the most satisfactory of the three major transitions he 
formulates. 
What then is the part played by the Idea, the Notion and the dialectic 
in Hegel's thinking? The Idea is, one might say, the fulfillment of all the 
levels, hierarchies and spheres formulated throughout the 'Encyclopaedia'. 
It is therefore also the coincidence of the subject matter of the work with its 
central principle. 'The Idea is what is true in and for itself, it is the absolute 
1 'The Philosophy of Mind' op. cit. p. 196. 
2 'Encyclopaedia' §§ 236-244. 
93 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
unity of the Notion and objectivity. The ideal nature of its content is merely 
the way in which the Notion exhibits itself in the form of external 
existence, and, by keeping this shape in its power through enclosing it 
within its ideality, maintains itself within it.'! It is therefore a unity in 
precisely the same manner as the syllogism is, that is to say by being the 
fulfillment of its premises in a conclusion. In the case of the Idea however, 
'Logic', 'Nature' and 'Spirit' constitute the component parts. It fmd its 
complete fulfillment in the final levels of 'Spirit', but it is also evident 
wherever the subject matter of the 'Encyclopaedia' coincides with its 
apparently teleological triadicity, 'The eternal life of nature consists firstly 
in the Idea displaying itself in each sphere to whatever extent finitude 
makes possible, just as every drop of water yields an image of the sun. 
Secondly, it consists in the dialectic of the Notion, which breaks through 
the limitation of this sphere, and since it only fmds partial satisfaction in 
such an inadequate element, necessarily passes over into a higher stage.'2 
Within the sphere of nature, the phenomenon corresponding to the 
Absolute Idea of the 'Logic' and the self-thinking Idea of 'Spirit' is life, 
'As the union of the Notion with exteriorized existence, in which the 
Notion maintains itself, life constitutes the Idea ... Life is not merely the 
resolution of the opposition between the Notion and reality, but of 
oppositions in general. Life has being where inner and outer, cause and 
effect, end and means, subjectivity and objectivity etc., are one and the 
same.'3 Nature in general, on account of its materiality, tends to be 
regarded as falling short of this however, 'The ancients grasped matter in 
general as non-ens, and nature has also been regarded as the Idea's falling 
short of itself, for in this external shape the Idea is inadequate to itself." 
In a much quoted passage Hegel expands upon this with reference to the 
system as a whole, 'Nature has yielded itself as the Idea in the form of 
otherness. Since the Idea is therefore the negative of itself, or external to 
itself, nature is not merely external relative to this Idea (and to the subjec-
tive existence of the same, spirit), but is embodied as nature in the determi-
nation of externality.'5 The animal, as the most complex of natural 
phenomena and the initiator of' Spirit' is regarded by him as the existent 
Idea, 'In so far as the animal's members are simply moments of its form, 
and are perpetually negating their independence, and withdrawing into a 
unity which is the reality of the Notion, and is for the Notion, the animal 
1 'Encyclopaedia' § 2I3. 
2 § 252 Addition. 
3 § 337 Addition. 
4 § 248 Remark. 
s § 247. 
94 

INTRODUCTION 
is the existent Idea. If a fmger is cut off, a process of chemical decomposition 
sets in, and it is no longer a fmger. The unity which is produced has being 
for the implicit unity of the animal. This implicit unity is the soul or 
Notion, which is present in the body in so far as the body constitutes the 
process ofidealization.'l As such it initiates the idealization of nature, 'The 
animal organism is the microcosm, the centre of nature which has become 
for itsel£ Within it, the whole of inorganic nature has recapitulated itself, 
and is idealized, and it is this that has to be demonstrated by the more 
detailed exposition ofit.'2 Reflective and finally dialectical thinking are the 
means by which this is subsequently achieved. 
The extent to which fmitude makes it possible for the Idea to display 
itself in each sphere of the 'Encyclopaedia' is of course limited. Conse-
quently, despite the immanence of Hegel's teleology and the care with 
which the various levels, hierarchies and spheres are formulated, there is 
nearly always some sort of dispartity between the Idea as such and the 
particular sphere being expounded. The ultimate coincidence has to be 
postulated and borne in mind, and the general framework of one's 
exposition is clearly regulated by the need to formulate levels, range them in 
hierarchies and round them off' within spheres, but the identity of subject 
matter and structure will, more often than not, be a matter of theory 
rather than accomplishment and practice. To the extent that the philo-
sopher is therefore obliged to recognize a difference between the actual 
form of rationalized knowledge and the ideal in the light of which it is to 
be regarded as rational, Hegel refers not to the Idea, but to the Notion. He 
explains this concept as follows, 'The Notion as Notion contains the follow-
ing three moments or functional parts. The first is universality-meaning 
that is is in free equality with itself in its specific character. The second is 
particularity-that is, the specific character in which the universal continues 
in serene equality with itsel£ The third is singularity-meaning the 
reflection-into-self of the specific characters of universality and par-
ticularity;-which negative self-unity has complete and original determinate-
ness, without any loss of self-identity or universality.'3 Since the subject 
matter of a sphere such as 'Nature' does not yield a reflection of the 
triadic structure of the 'Idea' in the course of any piecemeal examination 
of it, the Notion is therefore invoked in order to substantiate its triadic 
division into the universality of the 'Mechanics', the particularity of the 
'Physics' and the singularity of 'Organics', 'This division follows from the 
1 § 350 Addition. 
2 § 352 Addition. 
3 'Encyclopaedia' §§ 160-165. 
9S 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
standpoint of the Notion as it is grasped in its totality, and displays the 
diremption of the Notion in its determinations. As it exhibits its determi-
nations in this diremption, and yet only allows them independence as 
moments, it realizes itself in this, and so posits itself as Idea. The Notion 
not only exhibits its moments and expresses itself in its differences 
however, but also leads these apparently independent stages back into 
their ideality and unity. By leading them back into itself, it in fact turns 
them for the first time into the concrete Notion, the Idea, and truth.'l 
Precisely the same procedure is adopted in the structuralization of all the 
subsidiary spheres of 'Nature', and, indeed, of the 'Encyclopaedia' as a 
whole. On occasions however Hegel recognizes that he is met halfway by 
the subject matter itself, 'Magnetism is one of the determinations which 
inevitably became prominent when the Notion began to be aware of 
itself in determinate nature, and grasped the Idea of a philosophy of nature. 
This came about because the magnet exhibits the nature of the Notion, 
both in a simple straightforward way, and in its developed form as 
syllogism (§ 181). Its poles are the sensibly existent ends of a real line 
such as a rod, or a dimensionally more extended body. Their reality as 
poles is of an ideal nature however; it is not sensibly mechanistic, for the 
poles are simply indivisible. The point of indifference, which constitutes 
their substantial existence, is their unity as determinations of the Notion, 
and consequently it is from this unity alone that they derive their sig-
nificance and their existence.'2 
No feature of the Hegelian system is better known or less understood 
than the dialectic. In a famous conversation, recorded by Eckermann, 
Goethe tackled Hegel on the subject during the latter's visit to Weimar 
on October 18, 1827.3 'Hegel is here; Goethe has a very high esteem for 
him personally, though he does not greatly relish some of the fruits of 
his philosophy, and this evening he gave a tea party in his honour. In the 
course of the conversation, the nature of the dialectic was discussed.' 
'Basically,' said Hegel, 'it is nothing more than the regulated and 
methodical cultivation of the spirit of contradiction, which is a gift 
common to everyone, and particularly valuable for distinguishing the 
true from the false.' 
'But let us hope,' interposed Goethe, 'that such intellectual arts and 
skills are not too much misused for the purpose of turning falsehood into 
truth and truth into falsehood !' 
1 § 252 Addition. 
2 § 312 Remark. 
3 F. von Biedermann 'Goethe's Gesprache' (5 vols. Leipzig, 1909-19II) vol. III pp. 477-478. 
96 

INTRODUCTION 
'That does sometimes happen,' replied Hegel, 'but only with people 
who are spiritually sick.' 
'Well,' said Goethe, 'I personally recommend the study of nature as 
preventive of that disease. For in nature we are dealing with something 
which is infmitely and eternally true, and which immediately rejects as 
inadequate everyone who does not show complete integrity and honesty 
in the way he observes and treats his subject. And I am certain that the 
study of nature would be a wholesome remedy for many a dialectical 
sufferer.' 
The dialectic derives its significance and validity solely and exclusively 
from the triadicity of the self-thinking Idea. It has its ultimate origin 
therefore in the threefold division of knowledge, and it is applicable to 
the various spheres of the 'Encyclopaedia' only in so far as the attempt is 
being made to elicit a reflection of the Idea from them 'to whatever 
extent their fmitude makes possible'. As Hegel presented his work, it 
appears as a triadic progression, within each sphere, from what is implicit 
or universal, to what is for itself or particular, and finally to what is 
in-and-for-itself or singular. It might just as well have been presented in 
the converse sequence however, and this might in fact have been a more 
satisfactory manner of procedure, since it is from the fmal triad that the 
whole pattern derives its significance. The great advantage of the method 
Hegel adopted is however that whereas it makes it difficult to see the 
significance of the triads while following only the details of his work, 
once the fmallevels of , Spirit' are under consideration, the generalizations 
one is forced to make are fully qualified and substantiated, and, conse-
quently, the validity of the overall exposition is so much the more 
apparent than it would have been had a beginning been made with these 
extreme abstractions. 
It should be remembered that the Idea, the Notion and the dialectic, 
like the level, the hierarchy and the sphere, are principles, dual in nature, 
essentially distinct from their subject matter, but also constituting an 
integral part of it. Practically considered, they imply therefore that the 
exposition of a philosophical encyclopaedia involves three distinct 
disciplines. Firstly, the subject matter has to be intuited and understood 
for its own sake in precisely the same way as it is by the ordinary non-
philosophical specialist. Secondly, the qualitative differences so often over-
looked in the usual treatment of this subject matter have to be elicited 
and formulated as a system oflevels, hierarchies and spheres. Here, as we 
have noticed, Hegel's work has much more in common with that of our 
contemporaries than it had with the predominantly alphabetical system-
D 
97 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
atizations being developed in his own day. Thirdly, these principles, as 
elicited from their subject matter, have to be demonstrated as contributing 
to the defmition and fulfillment of the 'self-thinking Idea' by being sub-
mitted to a dialectical interpretation. Although this third requirement 
does not justify any distortion or misrepresentation of the subject matter 
of the 'Encyclopaedia', it does invalidate the claims of all imperfect 
thinking to fmal philosophical validity, in that it demands that the structure 
of each sphere should be regarded as the fulfillment of its subject matter, 
and not vice versa.1 
It will, perhaps, have become apparent, that the central problems faced 
by Hegel in his attempt to structuralize 'Spirit', bear a close resemblance 
to those in which a theologian becomes involved when he attempts to 
make intelligible remarks about the being and attributes of God. Hegel 
recognized the similarity, and in both the 'Phenomenology' and the 
'Encyclopaedia' there is an immediate juxtapositioning of the theological 
and philosophical disciplines. Religious considerations, as we have seen, 
played an important part in his development, and largely on account of 
the effect they had upon Kierkegaard and Feuerbach, his mature views on 
religion have exercised a profound influence upon modem theology, and 
have helped, directly or indirectly, to form many of the current opinions 
on the subject. The manner in which his philosophical system was re-
garded by churchmen and theologians was by no means a matter of 
indifference to him moreover, and towards the end of his life, in a review 
of a book by Goschel, he makes it evident that he was then willing, and 
even pleased, to have it regarded as a restatement in philosophical terms, 
of the truths of Christianity. 2 This is not the place to enter upon a critical 
analysis of the famous 'Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion', but the 
relevance of the central principle of this work to current theology, and an 
indication of the manner in which religion is assessed within the 'Encyclo-
paedia', may, perhaps, form a fitting conclusion to this chapter. 
Viewed from the standpoint of his mature system, the main develop-
ment in Hege1's thinking during the 1790'S was the shift from an interest 
1 An examination of Hegelianism in the light of Hans Vaihinger's theory o(fictionalism would be a 
stimulating undertaking, and might do much to establish a general recognition of the value and 
validity of the central principles of the 'Encyclopaedia'. See 'Die Philosophie des Ais-Ob. System der 
theoretischen, praktisclten und religiosen Fiktionen der Menscltheit auf Grund eines idealistischen 
Positivismus' (Berlin, 19II). 'The Philosophy of "As If'" (tr. C. K. Ogden, New York, 1924). 
2 Karl Friedrich GOsclte1 (1784-1861) 'Aphorismen tiber Niclttwissen und absolutes Wissen im 
VerhaItnisse zur christliclten Glaubenserkenntnis' (Berlin, 1829). The review appeared in the official 
organ of orthodox Hegelianism, 'Jahrbticlter fUr wissenschaftliclte Kritik' 1829 nos. 99-102, 105-106. 
'Vermischte Schriften aus der Berliner Zeit' (ed. Glockner. Stuttgart. 1958) vol. 20 pp. 276--313. 
98 

INTRODUCTION 
in the ethical and theological implications of Kant' s thought to preoccupation 
with the encyclopaedic potentials of Schelling's. The basic judgement 
motivating this change seems to have been that whereas ethical, social 
and religious matters must necessarily fall within the purview of an 
encyclopaedic interest, the converse is not the case. This judgement 
reappears in the mature exposition of 'Spirit', in which, as we have seen, 
philosophy and not religion is regarded as constituting the closest approxi-
mation to the 'Logic'. This simply implies that Hegel regarded philoso-
phers as more fitted for expounding the significance of the major transition 
from 'Spirit' to 'Logic' than theologians. He evidently thought that 
although theology and philosophy are concerned with very similar subject 
matters, that of the former being God and man's relationship to God, and 
that of the latter being knowledge and man's ability to acquire and master 
it, it would be unreasonable to expect a theologian to make a contribution 
to philosophy unless he were able to distinguish between the two disci-
plines. He concluded therefore, that the essential difference between a 
theologian and a philosophical encyclopaedist is that whereas the latter 
is obliged to concern himself with religion, the former is by no means 
obliged to expound his world-view encyclopaedically. He makes this 
difference quite clear on several occasions. In the review just mentioned 
for example, he quotes with approval Goschel's remark that, 'Spirit 
searches all things, including the depths of the Godhead. '1 In the peroration 
to his inaugural lecture given at Berlin on October 22, 1818 he develops 
the same theme, 'I make bold to wish and hope that I shall succeed in 
winning and deserving your confidence along the way that we have 
before us. To begin with, however, I can ask nothing of you but this, 
that you should bring with you confidence in science, belief in reason, 
confidence and belief in yourselves. The spirit of truth, faith in the power 
of thought, is essential to the study of philosophy; man should honour 
himself, and regard himself as worthy of the highest. He cannot overvalue 
the greatness and power of thought. The closed essence of the universe 
harbours no force capable of resisting the spirit of knowledge, to whose 
eyes it must disclose and reveal itself, and for whose delight it must lay 
forth its riches and its depths.'2 Remarks such as these naturally brought 
Fichte's fate upon him, and for a while at least, he was suspected of 
atheism by the Prussian government. In 1821 for example, when the 
king by an order in cabinet made a minister responsible for seeing that 
1 'Denn der Geist erforschet aile Dinge, auch die Tiefen der Gottheit'. op.cit. p. 157. 
2 Franz Wiedmann 'G. W. F. Hegel in Selbstzeugnissen und Bilddokumenten' (Hamburg, 
1965) p. 69. 
99 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
the Okenian philosophy of nature and 'similar doctrines leading to 
atheism' were not promulgated in the universities of Prussia, Hegel felt 
himself to be threatened. 1 Glockner has noticed however, that despite 
the treatment of mediaeval scholasticism in the lectures on the 'History 
of Philosophy', and despite his lifelong profession of staunch Lutheranism, 
it is the speculative theological systems of the middle ages, writings such 
as the 'Summa contra gentiles' and the 'Summa theologica' of St. Thomas 
Aquinas, which provide the closest approximation to the interpretation 
of religion found in his works.2 
The key to this interpetation is his assessment of the doctrine of the 
Christian Trinity as this dogma has been accepted throughout the Western 
Church since r054.3 As the triadic syllogistic unity of the self-thinking 
Idea is regarded by him as constituting the most complex level of'Spirit', 
the fullest and completest formulation of the central principle of philo-
sophy, so the Trinitarian doctrine of the co-equality of the Three Divine 
Persons in one Substance is regarded by him as constituting the most 
complex level of 'Religion', the fullest and completest formulation of the 
central principle of theology. The philosophical principle, once the 
significance of it is grasped, implies the attitude to its subject matter made 
explicit in the 'Encyclopaedia'. The theological doctrine, once put into 
practice, implies the life and activity of the Christian community. To force 
the encyclopaedic labours demanded by a recognition of the significance 
of the Idea upon a Christian community would be to kill it. To reduce 
philosophy solely to the life and activity of the Christian community 
would be to stifle it. Properly understood therefore, the disciplines of 
theology and philosophy are complementary. Philosophy derives its full 
stature, depth, nobility and certainty from the spiritual life of a whole-
some Christian community. This community, in its turn, may rest 
assured of nothing but respect and confirmation from any fully valid 
philosophy. 
As might have been expected, the expression of views such as these 
involved Hegel in several bitter controversies, which he would probably 
have been better advised to have avoided. Despite the appreciation he 
1 Letter to Neithammer June 9, 1821: 'Briefe' (ed. Hoffmeister no. 390, vol. II pp. 269-273). Cf. 
Friedrich Heer 'Hegel und die Jugend' (,Frankfurter Hefte' 22 Jahrgung, Heft 5, May 1967 pp. 323-
332); R. Garaudy 'Gott ist tot' (Berlin, 1965). 
2 Hermann Glockner 'Hegel' (2 vols. Stuttgart, 1958) vol. II pp. 562-567. 
3 On the 'Filioque' addition to the Creed and the doctrine of Double Procession see]. N. D. Kelly 
'Early Christian Creeds' (London, 1964), H. B. Swete 'On the History of the Doctrnie of the Proces-
sion of the Holy Spirit' (Cambridge, 1876). See the important analysis of the 'Divine Triangle' in 
J. Hoffmeister 'Dokumente zu Hegels Entwicklung' (Stuttgart, 1936) pp. 303-306. 
roo 

INTRODUCTION 
shows of the part played by feeling and aesthetic experience in religion 
for example,l he managed to make an enemy of Schleiermacher, and 
despite the astonishing insight into many of the non-Christian religions 
displayed in his lectures, he tended, when not actually speaking from the 
cathedra, to hold unswervingly to the Lutheranism and the uncompro-
mising intellectualism of his youth. 2 This may have been due in part to 
what he had suffered under the tutelage of Storr, and there can be little 
doubt, that despite the general principles of his system and his realistic 
and accurate knowledge of mankind, he hoped that he would not remain 
the sole expositor and proponent of the 'self-thinking Idea'. 
To what extent is his treatment of theology and his assessment of 
Christianity relevant to current scholarship and the present state of 
affairs? If, for the sake of brevity and convenience, we may take this 
question to touch principally upon the central doctrine of the Trinity, 
the following observations may prove to be acceptable as an answer 
to it. 
Largely on account of his having read a work by Tholuck,3 Hegel took 
a great interest in the non- and pre-Christian origins of Trinitarian 
theology. Tholuck had indicated the occurrence of the divine triad in 
Arabic, Parsee and pagan Greek thought, and in his lectures on religion 
Hegel paid particular attention to the corresponding Hindu doctrine of 
the trimurti.4 Recent scholarship has tended to conftrm the view that the 
conception of the triadicity of the Deity was not derived solely from the 
New Testament or even from the Judaeo-Christian tradition.5 What is 
more, the church has not been very successful in controlling the inter-
pretation of the dogma at a popular level. It was not until 1334 that the 
observance of the Sunday following Whitsun as a feast in celebration of 
the Trinity was universally enjoined by the Pope,6 and it can hardly be 
claimed that the festival enjoys the popularity it deserves. It captured the 
popular imagination in England largely on account of its having been 
1 'Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion' op. cit. p. 3. 
2 Anton GUnther (1783-1863) attempted to interpret Roman Catholic sacramentalism in terms of 
Hegelianism. All his works were condemned by the Index in 1857, and he submitted to the decision. 
3 'Encyclopaedia' introd. 2nd ed. F. A. G. Tholuck (1799-1877) 'Die spekulative Trinitatslehre des 
spateren Orients' (Berlin, 1826). 
4 op. cit. vol. II pp. II-30. 
S Hermann Usener (1834-1905) 'Dreiheit' ('Rheinisches Museum fllr Philologie' N.F. vol. 58, 
1903); the article by K. E. Kirk in A. E. J. Rawlinson 'Essays on the Trinity' (London, 1928); J. R. 
lliingworth 'The Doctrine of the Trinity' (London, 1907); A. R. Johnson 'The One and the Many 
in the Israelite conception of God' (Cardiff, 1942); A. W. Wainwright 'The Trinity in the New 
Testament' (London, 1962). 
6 P. Browe 'Zur Geschichte des Dreifaltigkeitsfestes' ('Archiv fur Liturgiewissenschaft' i, pp. 65-
81, 1950). 
101 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
the day on which St. Thomas a Becket was consecrated bishop in II62,1 
and many curious perversions of Trinitarian theology have flourished 
here.2 Nor has the situation been any different in Germany,S or on the 
continent at large.4 Hegel is therefore undoubtedly justified in refusing 
to regard Trinitarian thought of the popular kind as exclusively Christian, 
or as in any way adequate to an expression of the central truth of 
Christianity. 
Hegel takes the culminating embodiment of the Christian acknowledge-
ment of the Trinity to be the life of the Christian community. Ii This was 
by no means an original interpretation of the dogma. Daniel Waterland 
(1683-1743) for example, propounded it in the course of his attempt to 
make Trinitarian thinking intelligible to the Socinians, Deists and Ariani-
zers of his day, 'If religious practice in any measure depends upon a 
previous knowledge of God (as undoubtedly it does) then certainly, for 
the like reason, the perfection of that practice depends upon the perfection 
of such knowledge ... If God be Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the duties 
owing to God, will be duties owing under that trine distinction; which 
must be paid accordingly: and whoever leaves out any of the three out 
of his idea of God, comes so far short of knowing God perfectly, and of 
serving him in proportion of the manifestations made of him . . . The 
belief of the doctrine of the Trinity (supposing it true) is no slight or 
insignificant theory, no barren notion or speculation; since it has a direct 
influence upon the dispositions of our minds, and upon our happiness 
hereafter. I make not this an argument of the truth of the doctrine ... 
but of the importance of it . . . And I add, that if it may have such in-
fluence upon us, in creating proper dispositions, that comes to the same 
1 See Margery Brews' Valentine letter to John Paston (Feb. 1477), 'No more to yowe at this 
tyme, but the Holy Trinite hafe yowe in kepyng.' 'The Paston Letters' (ed. Gairdner, 3 vols. West-
minster, 1900) vol. III p. 170. 
2 See 'The Castle of Perseverance' (c. 1425) which opens with speeches by the infernal Trinity of 
Mundus (the world), Belyal (the devil) and Caro (the flesh). 'The Macro Plays' (ed. Furnivall and 
Pollard, E.E.T.S. Extra Series no. XCL, London, 1904). 
3 German folk-lore relating to the Trinity, some of it from Swabia, is surveyed by E. Hoffmann-
Krayer and H. Bachtold-Staubli in 'Handworterbuch des deutschen Aberglaubens' (10 vols. Berlin 
and Leipzig, 1927-1942) vol. II pp. 430-435. 
4 Usener, op. cit., has no very high opinion of the ultimate origin of popular triadic thinking, 'It 
can be confirmed that even today there are peoples who have developed no numerical concept 
greater than two, and that there are others for whom their highest number, three, means the same as 
many.' St. Antoninus (1389-1459), in his 'Summa Theologica' (ed. Ballerini, Verona, 1740) inveighs 
against the pictorial representation of the Trinity as a three-headed body as 'monstrum in verum 
natura'. Urban VIII had similar pictures burnt on August II, 1628: c£ J. Molanus (1553-1585) 
'Oratio de Agnis Dei' (Louvain, 1771) p. 486, 'Bullarium Benedicti XIV' (1768) vol. I p. 345b. 
5 'Philosophy of Religion' pt. III c.iii, 'The Idea in the element of the Church or Spiritual Com-
munity; the kingdom of the Spirit.' 
102 

INTRODUCTION 
as to say, that it raises and improves our virtues, and all virtue is practical.'! 
This interpretation has become particularly popular among English 
theologians since Professor Hodgson endorsed it in the Croall Lectures 
of 194.2-1943. He expresses it as follows, 'This doctrine had its origin not 
in philosophical speculation, but in the fidelity of the Christian community 
to the revelation it had received ... The doctrine of the Trinity, the 
distinctively Christian doctrine of God, gives its character to the dis-
tinctively Christian way of worshipping and serving God; it guides our 
paths by giving us the pattern unity for individual and social life; it 
illuminates and deepens our hope of immortality; it enables us to see 
God and man in their right proportion as Creator and created.'2 More 
recently, John Wren-Lewis has also emphasized that, 'the doctrine is no 
abstract theologians' puzzle but a practical and concrete design for 
living.'3 
The Church defines dogma for the purpose of transmission, not ex-
planation, the whole spirit of which procedure is therefore essentially 
negative, an avowal that no attempt should be made to explain what is 
essentially inexplicable." It must certainly be admitted that despite the 
brilliance and acumen with which St. Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas 
have developed the psychological theory of the Trinity,5 Hegel is, in the 
main, correct when he characterizes expositions of this kind as exercises 
in thought, the validity of which tends to be confined to its theological 
context, and the persuasiveness of which tends to depend upon the 
reader's sharing in its presuppositions, many of which remain rationally 
unsubstantiated.6 F. C. Baur (1792-1860), taking this insight as his point 
of departure, surveyed and the whole history of orthodox Trinitarian 
doctrine in a magnificently detailed and perceptive manner, showing 
that it could hardly be regarded as in any sense philosophically or even 
theologically consistent. 7 English theology provides no exception to this. 
1 'The Importance of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity asserted in reply to some late pamphlets' 
(London, 1734) ch. II pp. 35-77: Collected Works (10 vols. Oxford, 1823). 
2 'The Doctrine of the Trinity' (London, 1943) p. 193. 
3 'Modern Philosophy and the doctrine of the Trinity' ('The Philosophical Quarterly' vol. 5, 
1955, pp. 214-224). 
4 J. R. Illingworth 'The Doctrine of the Trinity apologetically considered' (London, 1907). 
5 Officially, the predominant theory in the West, according to which the two processes of the 
Divine Life are compared to the analogical processes of human self-knowledge and self-love. The 
Son is generated as the act of thinking on the part of the Father, the Holy Ghost proceeds from the 
mutual love of the Father and the Son. St. Augustine 'The Trinity' (tr. McKenna, Washington, 1963); 
St. Thomas 'The Summa Theologica' (tr. English Dominicans, 20 vols. London, 19II-1925) vol. 2 
PP·I-207· 
6 'History of Philosophy' pt. 2 sect. ii. 
7 'Die christliche Lehre von der Dreieinigkeit und Menschwerdung Gottes in ihrer geschichtlichen 
Entwicklung' (3 vols. Tlibingen, 1841-1843): on Hegel, vol. III pp. 886-933. 
103 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
R. C. Moberly manages, It IS true, to introduce some philosophical 
consistency into the consideration of the doctrine, 1 but his work has not 
been influential, and most modern English theologians would probably 
agree with Claude Welch when he says that, 'Whatever may be concluded 
about other doctrines, the doctrine of the Trinity has rightly been con-
sidered to be wholly a doctrine of revelation, as regards both its historical 
basis and its role in systematic theology.'2 Consequently, although a 
student of classical Greek, a philosopher and a modem scientist would all 
have to qualify their acceptance of the interpretation put upon 'homo-
ousin' and 'hypostasis' at Nicaea and Constantinople, it is essential that the 
Christian theologian should not do so, since for him this interpretation 
embodies a truth concerning the 'Three Persons in one Substance' which 
is of absolute importance. S 
Hegel singles out Jacob Boehme, with his theory of the Supreme Spirit 
before the creation, the seven nature spirits, and the regeneration of man 
through Christ, as typical of thinkers steeped in the truths of Christianity, 
attempting to give truth a speculative form, but failing to do so in any 
very satisfactory manner on account of their only being able to think in 
terms of sensuous images. As we have seen, he regards the principles of 
his 'Encyclopaedia' as the only means by which Boehme's handicaps may 
be completely overcome.4 
Hegel's assessment of religion is therefore of great general interest, 
since it not only provides a means by which constructive dialogues might 
be opened up between the various religions, but also one by which 
theologians might communicate meaningfully with other specialists. The 
institutionalized and self-conscious use of the general philosophical princi-
ples of his system within predominantly religious contexts might well 
prove to be a mixed blessing however, since it would at least have a 
tendency to stultify the spontaneity and human idiosyncrasy which are as 
1 'Atonement and Personality' (London, 1901) ch. vm. 
2 'The Trinity in Contemporary Theology' (London, 1953) p. 243; cf. C. C. Richardson 'The 
Doctrine of the Trinity' (New York, 1958). 
3 At the Council of Nicaea (325) and possibly also at that of Constantinople (381), the dogma of 
the Trinity was defined in its basic outlines in order to counteract certain heresies. The real distinction 
of the Three Divine Persons was affirmed against Sabellianism, and a recognition of their co-equality 
and co-eternity maintained in the face of Arianism and Macedonianism. Jules Lebreton 'Histoire du 
Dogme de la Trinit6' (8th ed. 2 vols. Paris, 1927-1928); G. L. Prestige 'God in Patristic Thought' 
(London, 1952); J. N. D. Kelly 'Early Christian Creeds' (London, 1964). 
4 'History of Philosophy' pt. 3 sect. i, B: cf. G. W. Allen's article on Boehme in the 'Encyclo-
paedia of Religion and Ethics' vol. II pp. 778-784 (ed. Hastings, Edinburgh, 1909). Alexandre Koyre, 
'La philosophie de Jacob Boehme' (paris, 1929) does not think that Boehme can be regarded as pro-
pounding any sort of system. 
104 

INTRODUCTION 
essential to the life of a Christian community as they are to the work of 
an artist. 
f THE IDEA OF NATURE 
'If theory had to depend entirely upon experience, there would never 
be any.'-Novalis. 
Since there never has been any general appreciation of the 'Encyclo-
paedia', it can hardly be regarded as very surprising that the application 
of its principles to an assessment of the natural sciences should have in-
volved Hegel in a criticism of several widely accepted ways of thinking. 
We have already noticed the value of his attempts to indicate the impor-
tance of the qualitative differences he regarded as being unjustifiably 
overlooked by the natural scientists of his day. These lectures also contain 
explicit as well as implied criticisms of several vaguer and more general 
attitudes to natural phenomena however, and since it might be argued 
with some justice that several of these are still flourishing, it may be of 
interest to take note of them. 
Although the relevance of astronomy to theological or philosophical 
considerations is somewhat difficult to defme with any precision, it is, 
quite understandably, felt to be of very considerable importance. Like 
Paley, Hegel tended to belittle the intellectual content of this feeling, and 
to concentrate solely upon an analysis of the actual subject matter of the 
discipline. He then came to the conclusion, that whereas stellar astronomy 
might reasonably be regarded as presupposing the subject matter of 
mathematical and fmite mechanics (§§ 254-267), it could not reasonably 
be regarded as involving anything as complex as the solar system or 
physics (§ 268-273), let alone organic phenomena. Subsequent develop-
ments have made it impossible for us to regard it in quite this manner, but 
the general significance of the assessment would still appear to be relevant 
to our emotional if not to our purely intellectual manner of regarding 
stellar phenomena. 'The host of stars ... should not be put on a level with 
the solar system, which for us is the primary knowable system of real 
rationality within the heavens. The stars may be admired for their repose, 
but in worth they are not to be regarded as the equals of the concrete 
individual body. The content of space explodes into an infinite number of 
matters; this can delight the eye, but it is only the first breaking forth 
of matter, and this eruption of light is as unworthy of wonder as an 
eruption on the skin or a swarm of flies. The tranquillity of these stars 
means more to the heart, for the contemplation of their peace and sim-
D* 
W5 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
plicity calms the passions. Their world is not so interesting from a philoso-
phical point of view as it is to the sentiments however. As a plurality 
within immeasurable spaces it is of no significance to reason; it is exter-
nality, emptiness, negative infmity. Reason knows itself to be above this, 
for the wonder is merely negative, an uplifting of the mind which 
remains strictly limited.'l 
The assessment on the basis of which the planets are regarded as the 
most complex phenomena of the solar system2 and the Earth as the most 
complex of the planets, is similar to this in that it is also likely to give rise 
to emotional rather than intellectual objections. 'The planet is the veritable 
prius, the subjectivity in which these differences are merely moments of 
an ideal nature, and in which life ftrst has determinate being. The Sun is 
subservient to the planets, just as the Sun, Moon, comets and stars in 
general, are merely aspects of the Earth. The Sun therefore has neither 
engendered nor thrown off the planets; the whole solar system is an 
entirety, for the Sun and the planets are engendered reciprocally ... It is 
the property of the Earth or of organic being to digest the completely 
universal astral powers which appear to have independence as heavenly 
bodies, and to bring them under the sway of individuality, so that these 
gigantic members reduce themselves to moments. Quality, in its totality, 
is individuality, as the infmite form which is one with itself. If there is 
any talk of pride of place, it must be this our Earth which we regard as 
supreme. If one reflects quantitatively, one can certainly let the Earth 
sink away beneath one as, 'a drop in the ocean of infmitude'; size, how-
ever, is a very external determination. We now come to stand upon the 
Earth therefore, which is not only our physical, but also our spiritual 
home.'3 
The assessment on the basis of which animation and sentience are 
regarded as initiating a sphere which is 'higher" than that of physics or 
inorganic nature is closely analogous, in that it also involves a rejection of 
durability or size and an acceptance of complexity as the deciding factor 
in the dialectical progression. This transition is particularly interesting 
and valuable in that it presupposes the acceptance of the view that life 
is the culmination of inorganic nature, and the avoidance of the homely 
1 § 268 Addition. 
2 § 270. 
:I § 280 Addition. 
4 Hegel does use this adjective to convey the concept; see § 312 Remark, 'Nature is the Idea in the 
element of extrinsicality, and like the understanding, it holds fast to the dispersed moments of the 
Notion and so expresses their reality. In higher things however, it unites the different forms of the 
Notion into the highest concretion of unity.' 
106 

INTRODUCTION 
but blind alley opened up by the opinion that inorganic subsistence is 
the ultimate outcome of all life. 'The sentience of individuality is to the 
same extent immediately exclusive however, and maintains a state of 
tension with an inorganic nature to which it is opposed as to its external 
condition and material . . . The basic division, or expulsion of the Sun 
and everything else, constitutes the precise standpoint of animation. The 
Idea of life is in itself this unconscious creativeness, it is an expansion of 
nature, which in animation has returned into its truth. For the individual 
however, inorganic nature is a presupposition with which it is confronted, 
and it is this which gives rise to the fmitude ofliving being. The individual 
is for itself, but as the organic being has this negativity within itself, the 
connection here is absolute, indivisible, internal, and essential. Externality 
is determined only as having being for organic being; organic being is 
that which maintains itself in opposition to it'.l Similarly, since con-
sciousness or 'Spirit' is regarded as being the most complex outcome of 
organic existence, the entire sphere of 'Nature' is, in the structure of the 
whole 'Encyclopaedia', to be regarded as the antecedent or presupposition 
of it. 'This is the transition from natural being into spirit; nature has found 
its consummation in living being, and has made its peace by shifting into 
a higher sphere. Spirit has therefore issued forth from nature. The purpose 
of nature is to extinguish itself, and to break. through its rind of immediate 
and sensuous being, to consume itself like a Phoenix in order to emerge 
from this externality rejuvenated as spirit'.2 
In that the application of the principles of the 'Encyclopaedia' to the 
natural sciences has given rise to the formulation of transitions such as 
these, the work might be regarded as constituting a counter-Copernican 
revolution in the general history of European thought. Advances in our 
knowledge of astronomical space since the sixteenth century, and in our 
awareness of the extent of geological time since the nineteenth, have 
certainly made it appear reasonable to ridicule the idea that organic 
existence and consciousness might be regarded as the culmination of 
nature. What is more, if we are thinking solely in terms of size and dura-
tion, of the extent of space and time, there would appear to be little point 
in arguing that this is not a ridiculous idea. To say that Hegelianism has 
countered Copernicanism is therefore merely to say that a view of the 
universe in which the Earth is not regarded as the centre is compatible 
with a view of knowledge in which not only the Earth, but also organic 
1 § 357 and Addition. 
2 § 376 Addition. 
107 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
life and consciousness are regarded as more complex and therefore of 
more significance and importance than stars and galaxies etc.t If it is 
borne in mind that it is impossible for anyone regarding natural phenom-
ena to deny the consciousness involved in his consideration of them, and 
that the quality of this awareness must imply that any meaningful inter-
pretation of nature necessarily involves a consideration not only of size 
and extent but also of relative complexity, the emotional and intellectual 
disturbances set up by an attempt to see or deny the full significance of 
relative space and time, will tend to disappear. 
The logical categories involved in these disturbances are dealt with by 
Hegel in §§ 94-104 of the 'Encyclopaedia'. Infmity for example, is 
presented as having determinate being and limit as its immediate ante-
cedents and being-for-self as its immediate sequent, infmite progression 
as having quantum and number as its immediate antecedents and quanti-
tative ratio and measure as its immediate sequents. These transitions, like 
the rest of the 'Encyclopaedia', imply therefore, that any consideration 
of experience as a whole involves not simply reference to nature, the 
content of space and time, but also an investigation of the relative com-
plexity of categories and of the general significance of' Spirit'. The extent 
to which popular opinion would tend to question their validity is there-
fore the extent to which it habitually regards knowledge in a purely 
piecemeal manner, and so necessarily fails in any attempt it makes to treat 
it as a whole. 
Hegel regards the subject matter of the 'Philosophy of Nature' as being 
the confirmed and consolidated content of the data provided by the natural 
sciences. He shows very little interest in the procedure of weighing and 
evaluating the relative merits of various theories, and only refers to it in 
order to indicate his reasons for regarding and assessing the subject matter 
as he does. He is by no means blind to the necessary imperfection of all 
empirical knowledge, and he recognizes that it needs constant revision, 
but he never fails to object to the framing of hypotheses in so far as he 
regards these imperfect productions of 'Spirit' as giving rise to distorted 
interpretations of natural phenomena. He is even reluctant to admit that 
they may be employed profitably in a heuristic manner in order to 
facilitate research, and he always insists that they can serve no further 
purpose once the knowledge they relate to has been confirmed and 
consolidated. It is this attitude which gives rise to his invective against 
1 C£ J. w. Oliver 'Kant's Copernican Analogy; an examination of a re-examination' ('Kant-
Studien' vol. 55 sect. 4 pp. 505-5Il, 1964). 
108 

lNTRODUCTlON 
the proliferation of forces, the postulation of bundles of light rays, atoms, 
pores, the latency of heat, Newton's theory of colours etc. He objects 
to these concepts primarily for scientific reasons, that is to say, because he 
regards them as having no foundation in the subject matter they are 
meant to make intelligible. Thinking which is given to this kind of 
fictionalizing, which fails to recognize the significance of formulating 
levels, hierarchies and spheres, and which relies upon various more or 
less invalid or inappropriate models in order to communicate its inter-
pretations of natural phenomena, is characterized by him as the under-
standing. 'If the thought-determinations are vitiated by a rigid antithesis, 
i.e. if they are only of a finite nature, they are not adequate to the absolute-
ness of truth, which is both in and for itself, and truth is therefore unable 
to enter into thought. Thought of this kind, which can bring forth only 
limited determinations, and which has no other means of procedure, is 
what in the stricter sense of the word is termed understanding. The finitude 
of these thought-determinations is, moreover, to be grasped in a double 
manner. In one respect they are simply subjective, and the antithesis of an 
objective clings permanently to them. In the other, their content is always 
restricted, so that they persist in antithesis to one another and still more to 
the Absolute.'! 
The merits and demerits of the standpoints he takes on account of this 
attitude toward hypotheses have been fully treated in the conunentary. 
He regards it as the prerogative of any informed and thinking person to 
call in question the concepts of specialists if he suspects them of being 
purely hypothetical, 'The professionals only allow validity to the peculiar 
idiom of certain theories etc., they completely overlook what others say, 
and treat it as if it had not been said. People of this kind often want to 
form a closed circle, to be in exclusive possession of science, and to extir-
pate other forms of judgement; jurists are an example of this. The law 
is for everyone however, and so is colour. A closed circle such as this 
develops certain intellectual habits, which have a straitening effect. If one 
is not automatized by these habits one is supposed to be uninitiated, for 
only the club members are supposed to understand the matter. This is 
not a false supposition, for as one does not employ the metaphysical 
category of the understanding according to which they consider the matter 
ought to be regarded, one certainly does not understand what they under-
stand. Philosophers are usually cold shouldered, although it is in fact their 
task to criticize these categories.'2 
1 'Encyclopaedia' § 25. 
2 § 320 Addition. Cf. § 276 Remark, § 286 Addition, § 298 Remark. 
I09 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Hegel often characterizes the concepts of the understanding as the 
products of 'reflection'. His criticism of the philosophy of reflection first 
became widely known on account of his early Jena writings, which were 
published when the nature and extent of his differences with Schelling 
were still very largely unrecognized. At that time it was mainly directed 
at what he regarded as the artificial Kantian and Fichtean distinction 
between the thinking subject and the thing-in-itself.1 He realized later 
that his attitude tended to involve an unwarranted simplification of the 
views of these thinkers. Nevertheless, to talk of the determinations and 
philosophy of 'reflection' became a convenient way of characterizing an 
attitude of mind which simply reflected the subject matter of knowledge 
piecemeal instead of assessing it rationally, and it was for this reason that 
the word became part of his technical vocabulary.2 As it is used in the 
'Encyclopaedia' therefore, it refers to the tacit or self-conscious recognition 
of a distinction between the subject matter of this work and knowledge. 
The use of it therefore implies a precise indication of the origin of the 
particular concepts of the understanding being criticized. The predominant 
categories involved in reflective thinking are analyzed and assessed in the 
'Logic' under the heading of 'Essence'. 'The standpoint of essence is, in 
general, that of reflection. The word "reflection" has its origin in optics, 
where it refers to light, in its rectilinear progression, impinging upon a 
mirroring surface and being thrown back from it. We have here a duality, 
the being of an immediacy, and secondly, a mediated or posited factor. 
Now it is precisely a duality such as this which occurs when we reflect, or, 
as we also say, think back upon an object, since we are then attempting to 
comprehend it as mediated, not as it is in its immediacy. The task or aim 
of philosophy is often taken to be the ascertainment of the essence of 
things, and this is merely regarded as meaning that instead ofleaving them 
in their immediacy, they have to be shown to be mediated by or grounded 
in something else. In this case, the immediate being of things is conceived 
of as a rind or curtain behind which essence is concealed.'3 Reflective is 
also sharply distinguished from dialectical thinking, 'In its proper deter-
minateness, dialectic is however the true and peculiar nature of the deter-
minations of the understanding, of things, and of the finite in general. 
Reflection differs from it mainly because it transcends isolated deter-
minateness and its relatedness by positing this determinateness in relation-
1 Herman Glockner 'Hegel' (2 vo!s. Stuttgart, 1958) vo!' II pp. 187-191. 
2 See the various shades of meaning attached to it listed in Glockner's 'Hegel-Lexikon' (2 vols. 
Stuttgart, 1957). 
3 'Encyclopaedia' § II2 Addition. 
lIO 

INTRODUCTION 
ship while maintaining the validity of its isolation. Dialectic transcends 
in an immanent manner however, so that the one-sidedness and limitedness 
of the determinations of the understanding shows itself in its true light 
as the negation of these determinations. All that is finite is self-sublating. 
That which is dialectical therefore constitutes the moving spirit of scientific 
progress, the only principle by means of which immanent connection and 
necessity may enter the content of science; the true as opposed to the 
external sublation of that which is finite lies therefore in the dialectic in 
general.'l 
Although he recognizes therefore, that consciousness or 'Spirit' in 
general has the power to sel£..consciously synthesize 'Logic' and 'Nature', 
Hegel distinguishes very carefully between the various attitudes to the 
subject matter of the natural sciences which this power has given rise to. 
He points out that not all levels of 'Spirit' are capable of assessing it with 
equal validity and rationality, 'The natural unity of thought and in-
tuition found in a child or an animal is no more than feeling, it is not 
spirituality. Man must have eaten of the tree of the knowledge of good and 
evil, he must have gone through the labour and activity of thought in 
order to be what he is, i.e. the subjugator of the separation of what is his, 
from nature.'2 As has already been noticed, consciousness is regarded by 
him as becoming capable of assessing nature rationally once it has grasped 
the significance of the Idea and the Notion, 'Nature is implicitly a living 
whole; more closely considered, the movement through its different 
stages consists of the Idea positing itself as what it is implicitly, i.e. the Idea 
passes into itselfby proceeding out of its immediacy and externality, which 
is death. It does this primarily in order to take on living being, but also in 
order to transcend this determinateness, in which it is merely life, and to 
bring itself forth into the existence of spirit, which constitutes the truth 
and ultimate purpose of nature, and the true actuality of the Idea.'3 
This is not the place to enter upon a detailed analysis of the careful 
expositions of various attitudes to the subject matter of the natural sciences 
given in the lectures on 'Subjective Spirit', 'Aesthetics', 'Religion' etc. As 
has been noticed, most of the epistemological issues raised in current 
philosophies of science would have been regarded by Hegel as constituting 
the subject matter of psychology rather than that of 'Nature'. His analyses 
of the attitude of various peoples and of the artist to 'nature', and of the 
theologian to the 'Creation' need not detain us here. Since, however, the 
1 'Encyclopaedia' § 81 Remark. 
z § 246 Addition. 
3 § 251. 
III 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
lectures on the 'History of Philosophy'! contain detailed criticism and 
assessments of the philosophies of nature he considers as approximating 
most closely to his own, some indication of the relevant contents of this 
work may provide a fitting conclusion to this chapter. 
Naturally enough, he takes the threefold division of the subject matter 
of the 'Encyclopaedia' and the interpretation of this in the light of the 
self-thinking Idea as being, in principle, the ultimate accomplishment of 
philosophy. In these lectures therefore, he attempts to show the extent to 
which the philosophers of the past have formulated systems approximating 
to this ideal. In doing this it was not however convenient for him simply 
to adopt the general procedure of the 'Encyclopaedia', for if he had 
lectured in a purely speculative manner, his audiences would have found 
his expositions somewhat bewildering. They would have involved the 
analysis of the various philosophical systems without reference to their 
historical contexts, and would probably also have necessitated their being 
dismembered, for very few of them are wholly consistent in merit and 
principle. He therefore decided to give the subject an historical framework, 
and to allow his criticism of the various philosophies to arise out of a 
simply chronological method of presentation. The result is highly satisfy-
ing, the uncomplicated historical sequence of the subject matter being 
readily intelligible, and the criticisms deriving point and crispness from 
their speculative origin. It is however somewhat misleading, and many 
critics have, understandably but quite mistakenly, taken the work to 
imply that Hegel regarded the world historical process as finding its final 
culmination in the Berlin lecture rooms of 18 I 8-183 I. 
A perusal of this work soon makes it apparent that it is the philosophical 
systems of ancient Greece which Hegel regards as approximating most 
closely to his own. Thus, the subject matter of his own 'Logic' is seen as 
being anticipated and prefigured in the Greek attempts to defme the nous. 
Thales is therefore praised as the first true philosopher of nature in that 
he attempted to present water as the principle of all things. Heraclitus's 
formulation of the universal principle of flux from being and non-being 
is, of course, singled out for special appreciation. It is however the 
'Metaphysics' of Aristotle which Hegel regards as constituting the closest 
approximation to the 'Logic'. Similarly, the various Greek attempts to 
defme the significance of the elements etc., are regarded as prefigurations 
of the 'Philosophy of Nature'. Once again it is the relevant Aristotelian 
work, the 'Physics', which receives the most exhaustive treatment. Hegel 
1 (3 vols. tr. Haldane and Simson. London. 1963). 
II2 

INTRODUCTION 
praises it for presenting nature as determined by the conceptions of end 
and necessity, but criticizes it, as he does the whole Aristotelian system, 
for allowing 'the different parts to fall into a series of independently 
determined conceptions', and failing to exhibit the nous as permeating all 
empirical manifestation.l Greek anticipations of the 'Philosophy of 
Spirit' are found in the treatment of the soul by Leucippus and Democritus, 
Plato's 'Republic', Aristotle's psychology, ethics and politics, and in the 
ethical doctrines of the Stoics and Epicureans etc. 
It is in the juxtaposing of Bacon and Boehme in his consideration of 
the intellectual history of the early seventeenth century, that Hegel 
indicates the most interesting anticipation of his 'Philosophy of Nature' in 
modern philosophy.2 The Lord Chancellor of England and the shoemaker 
of Garlitz are presented as formulating the two fundamental principles of 
any final philosophy of nature, i.e. the understanding of its subject matter 
and the appreciation of its structure. He characterizes the central signi-
ficance of Bacon's work as follows: 'He did not merely bring forth 
opinions and sentiments, he did not merely express himself regarding the 
sciences dogmatically, as a fme gentleman might, but he went into the 
matter closely, and established a method in respect of scientific knowledge 
. . . He set forth the general principles of procedure in an empirical 
philosophy. The spirit of his philosophy is to take experience as the true 
and only source of knowledge, and then to regulate the thought con-
cerning it. Knowledge from experience stands in opposition to knowledge 
arising from the speculative Notion, and the opposition is apprehended 
in so acute a manner that the knowledge proceeding from the Notion 
is ashamed of the knowledge from experience, just as this again takes up a 
position of antagonism to the knowledge through the Notion ... The 
Notion is an essential matter, but as such its fmite side is just as essential ... 
This particularity must be worked out on its own account; we must 
become acquainted with empirical nature, both with the physical and 
the human. The merit of modem times is to have accomplished or 
furthered these ends; it was in the highest degree umatisfactory when the 
ancients attempted the work.' The corresponding appreciation of Boehme 
is one of the most fascinatingly perceptive expositions of the whole work. 
The crux of it is as follows: 'Boehme's chief, and one may even say, his 
only thought-the thought that permeates all his works-is that of 
perceiving the holy Trinity in everything, and recognizing everything as 
lOp. cit. vo1. II p. 156; cf. pp. 153-179. 
2 op. cit. vol. III pp. 170-216. 
113 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
its revelation and manifestation, so that it is the universal principle in 
which and through which everything exists; in such a way, moreover, 
that all things have this divine Trinity in themselves, not as a Trinity 
pertaining to the ordinary conception, but as the real Trinity of the 
absolute Idea. Everything that exists is, according to Boehme, this three-
fold alone, and this three-fold is everything. To him the universe is thus 
one divine life and revelation of God in all thingS.' 
For Hegel, as we have seen, the Idea of Nature involves a combination 
of the Baconian and the Boehmian attitudes to natural phenomena. 
Despite the searching criticism of Newtonian mechanics and optics con-
tained in these lectures, the basic inspiration of the work may therefore 
be regarded as differing little, if at all, from that of the 'Principia 
Mathematica' . 
g. CRITICS 
'Cantate serenissimae 
Triumphum philosophiae.' 
-Robert Burton 'Philosophaster.' 
The fate of these lectures in the hands of their critics has been somewhat 
singular. There can be very few works of this importance that have 
remained so completely unappreciated for so long. When Michelet 
finally published them in full in 1842, most of the purely scientific 
material they deal with was already ten to forty years out of date, and 
even the specialists were no longer completely familiar with the details 
of it. The general public had known of the broad outlines of the work 
since 1817, but only from the condensed paragraphs and remarks of the 
published 'Encyclopaedia', and taken by themselves, these abstruse and 
highly technical passages were necessarily unintelligible to those ac-
quainted with neither the natural sciences nor the general principles of 
Hegelianism. During the 1830'S there were therefore complete and radical 
misunderstandings of the work; F. C. Sibbem (1785-1872) for example, 
Kierkegaard's tutor at Copenhagen, published acute but wholly irrelevant 
criticisms of what he considered to be Hegel's views on certain natural 
phenomena. 
The situation did not change appreciably once the full text had appeared, 
for despite the care with which it had been prepared, the explanatory 
comments with which it was accompanied were quite inadequate to the 
II4 

INTRODUCTION 
needs of the day. No one was both willing and able to undertake the 
daunting task of explaining it in detail and relating its principles to the 
state of current knowledge. As time passed and the undertaking became 
more difficult, scientists and philosophers therefore tended to class it with 
the corresponding Schellingian writings, and to regard it as obsolete. 
Michelet, Rosenkranz and Vera, despite the courage and persistence with 
which they attempted to expound the merits of it, had neither the know-
ledge nor the ability to save it from sinking into the oblivion in which it 
has remained ever since. The structure forced upon our university 
education by the need for specialists has tended to seal its fate. Professional 
philosophers are not required to be as well acquainted with the natural 
sciences as they should be, and very few of them indeed ever acquire a 
working knowledge of the details and minutiae of the histories of these 
disciplines. What is more, natural scientists, since Whewell, have not been 
in the habit of reading Hegel, and have ceased even to dream of taking all 
scientific knowledge as their province. Since this state of affairs is widely 
recognized, few will be surprised to learn that apart from some valuable 
dissertations on special aspects of the work which have appeared in 
Germany in the last decade or so, worthwhile criticism of it is extremely 
rare. 
In order to throw the maximum amount of light upon the nature of 
Hegel's expositions, criticisms of them should, in the normal course of 
events, be presented in a rational sequence. In this case however it will be 
more fitting simply to arrange the relevant publications in chronological 
order. This list contains everything relevant with which I am acquainted, 
it does not however pretend to be exhaustive. 
I800-I83 I 
During Hegel's lifetime, neither his followers nor his opponents paid 
much attention to the work. 
W. T. Krug 
'Briefe iiber die Wissenschaftslehre' (Leipzig, 
W. T. Krug 
W. T. Krug 
H. A. Goeden 
1800). 
'Briefe iiber den neuesten Idealism' (Leipzig, 1801). 
'Entwurf eines neuen Organons der Philosophie' 
(Meissen and Liibben, 1801). 
'Critische Bemerkungen ueber Hegels Begriff 
vom Wesen der Krankheit und der Heilung.' 
(Oken's 'Isis' pp. II27-II38, lena, 1819). 
IIS 

F. W. J. Schelling 
Huelsemann 
C. H. Weisse 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
'Munich Lectures 1827': 'Werke' (ed. Schroter, 
12 vols. Munich, 1927-1954) vol. 5 pp. 196-234. 
'Ueber die Hegelsche Lehre oder absolutes Wissen 
und moderner Pantheismus' (Leipzig, 1829). 
'Ueber den gegenwartigen Standpunkt der philo-
sophischen Wissenschaft' (Leipzig, 1829). 
18 32-1860 
The predominant attitude of this period was critical. Specialists such as 
Wilde and Schleiden called the soundness of Hegel's knowledge of the 
natural sciences in question, and philosophers such as Schelling, Weisse 
and Borelius raised problems regarding the general principles of his 
system. Michelet and Rosenkranz, who were alone in defending the value 
of the 'Philosophy of Nature' among the philosophers, also failed to 
interest the natural scientists in it. 
C. F. Goeschel 
'Hegel und seine Zeit. Mit Riicksicht auf Gothe' 
C. H. Bachmann 
F. W. J. Schelling 
C. H. Bachmann 
C. H. Weisse 
C. 1. Michelet 
C. 1. Miche1et 
F. C. Sibbern 
C. 1. Michelet 
J. C. F. Rosenkranz 
F. W. J. Schelling 
J. Schaller 
(Berlin, 1832). 
'Ueber Hegels System' (Leipzig, 1833). 
Introduction to H. Beckers 'Victor Cousin iiber 
franzosische und deutsche Philosophie' (Stuttgart 
and Tiibingen, 1834); 'Werke' suppl. vol. 4 pp. 
445-468. 
'Anti-Hegel' (Jena, 1835). 
'Grundziige der Metaphysik' (Hamburg, 1835). 
'Geschichte der letzten Systeme der Philosophie in 
Deutschland von Kant bis Hegel' (2 pts. Berlin, 
1837). 
'Zugestandnisse der neuesten Physik in Bezug auf 
Gothe's Farbenlehre' ('Hallische Jahrbiicher fiir 
deutsche Wissenschaft und Kunst' ed. Ruge and 
Echtermeyer nos. 305-307, Dec. 1838). 
'Bemaerkninger og Unders0gelser, fornemmelig 
betreffende Hegels Philosophie, betragtet i Forhold 
til vor Tid.' (Copenhagen, 1838) pp. 17-21. 
'Schelling und Hegel' (Berlin, 1839). 
'Kritische Erlauterungen des Hegel'schen Systems' 
(Konigsberg, 1840). 
'Erste Vorlesung in Berlin. 15 November, 1841' 
(Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 1841). 
'Geschichte der Naturphilosophie' (2 vols. Leipzig 
and Halle, 1841-1846). 
u6 

J. Salat 
C. F. E. Trahndorff 
G. A. Gabler 
C. L. Michelet 
E. F. Vogel 
E. Wilde 
K. G. Reuschle 
J. C. F. Rosenkranz 
M. J. Schleiden 
C. H. Weisse 
K. P. Fischer 
C. L. W. Heyder 
A.J. Matter 
F. A. Trendelenburg 
C. L. Menzzer 
J. B. Stallo 
J. C. F. Rosenkranz 
F. Rehm 
J. C. F. Rosenkranz 
F. W. J. Schelling 
J. J. Borelius 
S. Ribbing 
INTRODUCTION 
'Schelling und Hegel' (Heidelberg, 1842). 
'Schelling und Hegel, oder das System Hegels als 
letztes Resultat des Grundirrthums in allem bisheri-
gen Philosophiren erwiesen' (Berlin, 1842). 
'Die Hegelsche Philosophie' (Berlin, 1843). 
'Entwickelungsgeschichte der neuesten deutschen 
Philosophie' (Berlin, 1843). 
'Schelling oder Hegel oder Keiner von Beiden?' 
(Leipzig, 1843). 
'Geschichte der Optik' (2 pts. Berlin, 1843) II 
pp. 153-218. 
'Die Naturphilosophie und die Physik' (jahrbucher 
der Gegenwart' 1843-1844). 
'Ueber Schelling und Hegel' (Konigsberg, 1843). 
'Schelling's und Hegel's Verhaltniss zur Natur-
wissenschaft' (Leipzig, 1844). 
'Hegel und das Newtonische Gesetz der Kraft-
wirkung' ('Zeitschrift fur Philosophie und spekula-
tive Theologie' vol. XIII pp. 1-3, Tubingen, 1844). 
'Speculative Charakteristik und Kritik des Hegel'-
schen Systems' (Erlangen, 1845) pt. IV pp. 332-372. 
'Kritische Darstellung ... der Aristotelischen und 
Hegel'schen Dialektik' (Erlangen, 1845). 
'Schelling ou la Philoiophie de la Nature' (paris, 
1845). 
'Geschichte der Kategorienlehre' (Berlin, 1846). 
'Die Naturphilosophie und der Hegelianismus' 
('Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung' Oct. 1847). 
'General Principles of the philosophy of Nature ... 
embracing the philosophical systems of Schelling 
and Hegel' (Boston, 1848). 
'Studien' (5 pts. Berlin, 1839-1848) pt. 5. 
'Gothe und Hegel. Eine historische Parallele' (Oels, 
1849). 
'System der Wissenschaft' (Konigsberg, 1850) pp. 
158-362. 
'Abhandlung uber die QueUe der ewigen Wahr-
heiten' 
('Gesammtsitzung 
der Akademie 
der 
Wissenschaften zu Berlin' 17 Jan. 1850); 'Werke' 
vol. 5. 
'I hvad afseende ar Hegel pantheist' (Uppsala, 
1851). 
'Eristiska Blad I' (Uppsala, 1852). 
II7 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OJ:! NATURE 
J. C. F. Rosenkranz 
H. Schwarz 
F. Dorguth 
A. Vera 
A. Vera 
F. C. B. Dahl 
W. Whewell 
'Meine Reform der Hegelschen Philosophie' 
(Konigsberg, 1852). 
'Versuch einer Philosophie der Mathematik ver-
bunden mit einer Kritik der Ausstellungen Hegel's 
tiber den Zweck und die Natur der hoheren 
Analysis' (Halle, 1853). 
'Das Licht der wahrhaften kosmischen dem Irr-
lichte der Hegel'schen Dialektik gegeniiber' (Mag-
deburg, 1854). 
'Introduction a la philo sophie de Hegel' (Paris and 
Strassburg, 1855). 
'An Inquiry into speculative and experimental 
science, with special reference to Mr. Calderwood 
and Professor Ferrier's recent publications, and to 
Hegel's doctrine' (London, 1856). 
'Om Naturbegrebets Grundmomenter' (Copen-
hagen, 1859). 
'On the Philosophy of Discovery' (London, 1860) 
ch XXlVii. 
1861-1900 
Various more or less unsuccessful attempts were made to show the 
relevance or irrelevance of Hegelianism to the natural sciences. Vera's 
translation had little effect upon either philosophers or working scientists. 
F. A. Trendelenburg 
A. Vera 
J. C. F. Rosenkranz 
W. R. Smith 
J. C. F. Rosenkranz 
F. Chlebik 
C. 1. Michelet 
'Logische Untersuchungen' (2 vols. Leipzig, 1862). 
'Philo sophie de la Nature, de Hegel, traduite pour 
la premiere fois et accompagnee d'une introduction 
et el'un commentaire perpetuel' (3 vols. Paris, 
1863-1866). 
'Hegel's N aturphilosophie und die Bearbeitung der-
selben durch den Italienischen Philosophen A. Vera' 
(Berlin, 1868). 
'Hegel and the metaphysics of the fluxional cal-
culus' ('Transactions of the Royal Society of Edin-
burgh' vol. XXV pp. 491-5II, 1869). 
'Erlauterungen zu Hegels Encyclopadie der philo-
sophischen Wissenschaften' (Leipzig, 1870). 
'Kraft und Stoff, oder der Dynamismus der Atome 
aus Hegel'schen Pramissen abgeleitet' (Berlin, 
1873). 
'Hegel und der Empirismus' (Berlin, 1873). 
lIB 

J. H. Stirling 
C. L. Michelet 
F. Engels 
C. L. Michelet 
S. Alexander 
C. L. Michelet 
G. J. P. J. Bolland 
G. Kent 
D. G. Ritchie 
J. M. E. McTaggart 
INTRODUCTION 
'Whewell and Hegel and Hegel and Mr. W. R. 
Smith, a vindication in a physio-mathematical 
regard' (London, 1873). 
'Das System der Philosophie als exacter Wissen-
schaft' (5 vols. Berlin, 1876). 
'Dialektik und Natur' (written 1872-1882; ed. 
Riazonov, 1927; tr. and ed. C. Dutt, preface and 
notes J. B. S. Haldane, London, 1940). 
'Herbert Spencer's System der Philosophie und sein 
Verhaltniss zur deutschen Philosophie' ('Berlin 
Philosophische Gesellschaft' 1882). 
'Hegel's Conception of Nature' ('Mind' 1886 pp. 
495-523). 
'Historisch-kritische Darstellung der dialektischen 
Methode Hege1's' (Leipzig, 1888). 
'Het objectiveerend standpunkt van natuuropvat-
ting en zijn eenzijdigheid' ('Theol. Tijdschrift', 
1889). 
'Die Lehre Hegels vom Wesen der Erfahrung und 
ihre Bedeutung fur das Erkennen' ('Christiania 
Videnskabs-Forhandlinger' 1891 no. 5). 
'Darwin and Hegel, with other philosophical 
studies' (London, 1893). 
'Studies in Hegelian Dialectic' (Cambridge, 1896). 
1901-1930 
The isolated and fragmentary attempts to relate Hegelianism to current 
scientific developments continued, and there was an emergence of the 
first truly historical approach to Hegel's views. 
A. Bullinger 
'Hegels Naturphilosophie in vollem Recht gegenu-
Anon. 
G.J. P.J. Bolland 
J. Clay 
B. Croce 
G. J. P. J. Bolland 
O. D. Chwolson 
ber ihren Kritikastern' (Munich, 1903). 
'Hegel not Haeckel; or, "The riddle of the universe 
solved'" (Birmingham and Dublin, 1906). 
'Hegel's Encyklopadie' (Leyden, 1906). 
'Natuurphilosophie en atomistiek' ('Tijdschrift voor 
Wijsbegeerte' 1907). 
'What is living and what is dead of the philosophy 
ofHege1' (Bari, 1907, tr. D. Ainslie, London, 1915). 
'De Natuur. Proeve van centraliteit der weten-
schap' (Leyden, 1908). 
'Hegel, Haeckel, Kossuth, und das zwolfte Gebot' 
(Brunswick, 1908). 
119 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 011 NATURE 
o. Closs 
o. Closs 
G. J. P. J. Bolland 
J. Fischer 
G. W. Cunningham 
M. Kelly 
A. K. Phalen 
H. W. Ph. E. v. d. Bergh 
van Eysinga 
C. Siegel 
C. Siegel 
R. Weimar 
G. J. P. J. Bolland 
J. d' Aulnis de Bourouill 
J. v. d. Bergh van 
Eysinge-Elias 
H. L. Vernhout 
F. Sedlak. 
J. Hessing 
J. M. E. McTaggart 
B. Wigersma 
R. Honegger 
'Kepler und Newton und das Problem der 
Gravitation in der Kantischen, Schellingschen 
und Hegelschen Naturphilosophie' (Heidelberg, 
1908). 
'Das Problem der Gravitation in Schellings und 
Hegels Jenaer Zeit' (Heidelberg, 1908). 
'Zuivere rede' (Leyden, 1909). 
'Die Hegelsche Logik und der Goethesche Faust' 
('Archivfiir Philosophie' vol. 22, sect. i, no. 3, 1909). 
'Thought and Reality in Hegel's System' (New 
York, 1910). 
'Hegel's Charlatanism Exposed' (London, 19II). 
'Das Erkenntnisproblem in Hegels Philosophie' 
(Dissertation, Uppsala, 1912). 
'Beschouwingen over de anorganische natuur' 
('Tijdschrift voor Wijsbegeerte' 1913). 
'Geschichte der deutschen Naturphilosophie' (Leip-
zig, 1913). 
'Goethe und die spekulative Naturphilosophie' 
('Kantstudien' 19, 1914 pp. 488-496). 
'Hegel und die "ganz" moderne Naturwissen-
schaft' ('Hegel Archiv' ed. G. Lasson, Leipzig, 
1914) pp. 48-55. 
'De Boeken der spreuken' (Leyden, 1915). 
'De logica van Hegel en zijn bewijs van de valwet 
der lichamen.' ('Akademie van Wetenschappen-
Medelingen', 1915). 
'De logica van Hegel en zijn bewijs van de valwet 
der lichamen' ('Tijdschrift voor Wijsbegeerte', 
1915). 
'Natuurleer en zuivere rede in het systeem van 
Hegel en Bolland' ('Tijdschrift voor Wijsbegeerte', 
1917). 
'Pure Thought and the Riddle of the Universe' 
(London, 1919). 
'Het verb and van natuurwetenschappen en wijs-
begeerte.' ('Tijdschrift voor Wijsbegeerte' 1921). 
'The Nature of Existence' (2 vols. Cambridge, 
1921- 1927). 
'De denkwijze der natuurwetenschap' ('De Idee', 
1924). 
'Goethe und Hegel' ('Jahrbuch der Goethe-
Gesellschaft' vol. XI pp. 38-111, Weimar, 1925). 
120 

G. F. Hemens 
N. Hartmann 
INTRODUCTION 
'Relativity and the Hegelian Philosophy' (2 pts. 
Twickenham, 1928). 
'Die Philosophie des deutschen Idealismus' (2 pts. 
Berlin, 1923-1929), pt. II pp. 282-295. 
SINCE 1930 
The general cultural background of Hegel's work has become more fully 
understood, and there have been interesting attempts to assess the value 
of some of the details of the 'Mechanics', but there has been no attempt 
to place the subject matter as a whole in its historical context, and very 
little appreciation of the general principles of Hegelianism in their re-
lation to the natural sciences. 
R. Berthelot 
'Science et philosophie chez Goethe' (Paris, 1932). 
J. Artzt 
'Der Substanzbegriff bei Kant und Hegel' (Disser-
N. Hartmann 
J. Schubert 
H. Falkenheim 
C. Schilling 
H. Franz 
J. Hessing 
W. von Baeyer 
W. Bauchert 
G. R. G. Mure 
L. Hoyack 
B. Wigersma 
R. G. Collingwood 
E. E. Harris 
M. Heidegger 
N. Altwicker 
tation, Freiburg-im-Breisgau, 1933). 
'Aristoteles und Hegel' (2nd ed. Erfurt, 1933). 
'Goethe und Hegel' (Leipzig, 1933). 
'Goethe und Hegel' (Tiibingen, 1934). 
'Natur und Wahrheit' (Munich, 1934). 
'Von Herder bis Hegel' (Frankfurt-on-Main, 1938). 
'De natuur' (A series of articles in 'De Idee' 
1938- 1942). 
'Seele, Leben, Zeit und Begriff in Hegels Philoso-
phie' (Wiirzburg, 1939). 
'Begriff und Gestalt bei Hegel' (Dissertation, Kiel, 
1940). 
'Introduction to Hegel' (Oxford, 1940). 
'Eenige belangrijke gezichtspunkten uit de natuur-
philosophie van Hegel' ('Uitzicht' IV, 1943). 
'Natuurphilosophie; de geometrische, mechanische 
en astronomische kategorieen' (Bussum, 1943). 
'The Idea of Nature' (Oxford, 1945) pt. II, iii. 
'The Philosophy of Nature in Hegel's System' 
('The Review of Metaphysics' Dec. 1949, vol. III 
pp. 213-228). 
'Holzwege: Hegels Begriff der Erfahrung' (Frank-
furt-on-Main, 1950). 
'Der Begriff der Zeit im philosophischen System 
Hegels' (Dissertation, Frankfurt-on-Main, 1951). 
121 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
H. Kobligk 
T. Litt 
P. P. Wiener 
J. N. Findlay 
H. Braun 
Soviet Academy of 
Sciences 
M.Behm 
K. R. Popper 
K. H. Volkmann-Schliick 
Anon. 
'Denken und Zeit, Beitrage zu einer Interpretation 
des Hegelschen Zeitbegriffes' (Dissertation, Kiel, 
1952). 
'Hegel. Versuch einer kritischen Erneuerung' 
(Heidelberg, 1953). 
'Readings in the Philosophy of Science' (New York, 
1953) pp. 366-387. 
'Hegel: a Re-examination' (London, 1958) ch. 9. 
'Realitat und Reflexion. Studien zu Hegels Philo-
sophie der Natur' (Dissertation, Heidelberg, 1960). 
'Geschichte der Philosophie' (Moscow, 1957; 
Germ. tr. 5 vols. Berlin, 1960-1963) vol. II pp. 
87-90. 
'Hegels spekulative Deutung der Infmitesimalrech-
nung' (Dissertation, Cologne, 1963). 
'Conjectures and Refutations' (London, 1963) 
Ch.15. 
'Die Entausserung der Idee zur Natur' ('Hegel-
Studien', Bonn, 1964). 
'Abriss der Geschichte der Philosophie' (Moscow, 
1960, Germ. tr. Wietz Verlag, Berlin, 1966) pp. 
252-255. 
h. TEXT AND SOURCES 
'Nullus est liber tam malus, ut non aliqua parte prosit'. 
-Pliny. 
The text of the 'Philosophy of Nature' translated here is that prepared 
by K. L. Michelet and published in 1842 as volume VII pt. i of the eighteen 
volume Berlin edition of Hegel's complete works, issued between 1832 
and 1845. Hermann Glockner reproduced this text, without altering it, 
as volume 9 of the 'Samtliche Werke' (26 vols. Stuttgart, 1927-1940), and 
it is the fourth printing of this edition (1965) which has been used for the 
translation. 
The foundations of Michelet's work are the three editions of the 
'Encyclopaedia' that appeared at Heidelberg in Hegel's lifetime (1817, 
1827, 1830). They differ widely in many important respects, and no less 
than 3600 significant alterations first appeared in 1830. The critical edition 
of the 'Encyclopaedia' prepared by Nicolin and Poggeler (1959) has 
therefore been used in order to check on Michelet's handling of his 
122 

INTROD UCTION 
printed sources.1 Those remnants of the 1817 text reproduced in 1830 
have been distinguished from the rest of the work,2 and where the 1959 
text has not been found acceptable, the reasons for deviating from it have 
been indicated in the commentary. 
The 'Additions' were put together by Michelet from various manu-
script sources, only one of which, the Jena lecture notes of 1805-1806, 
has since been published. 3 The passages in his text originating from this 
manuscript have been indicated, and any difficulties which the two ver-
sions give rise to have been discussed in the commentary. Most of the 
material from which these 'additions' were formed consisted of lecture 
notes from the Berlin period (1819-1830). Only one of the manuscripts 
has been traced,4 and a perusal of it has not necessitated any revision of 
Michelet's work. 
Apart from the removal of errors, the most important result of this 
textual analysis is the light it throws· upon Hegel's response or lack of 
response to the changing state of the natural sciences. It is to be hoped 
therefore, that English readers will now be able to assess this aspect of 
his work with greater certainty than has been possible hitherto. The 
forthcoming German edition will also indicate the various sources and 
dates of the component parts of Michelet's text.5 The four major com-
ponents are distinguished in the translation as follows: 
i. passages dating from 1817, reproduced in 1830: 
ii. passages first printed in either 1827 or 1830: 
111. lecture material from the Berlin period 1819-183°: 
IV. lecture material from the Jena period of 1805-1806. 
ERRATA 
in the German text (Glockner's edition Stuttgart, 1965) 
Page 2, line 2 
Substitute a comma for the full stop after genie13en. 
1 F. Nicolin and O. Poggeler 'Hegels EnzykIopadie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im 
Grundrisse (1830)'. (Hamburg, 1959). 
2 The 1827 'Encyclopaedia' has never been reprinted. The 1817 edition has however been repro-
duced in volume 6 of the 'Samtliche Werke' (ed. Glockner, 26 vols. Stuttgart, 1927-1940). 
3 J. Hoffmeister 'Jenenser Realphilosophie II' (Leipzig, 193 I). Michelet knew nothing of the 
earlier manuscripts of 1801-1802: see 'Jenenser Logik, Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie' (ed. G. 
Lasson, Leipzig, 1923) and 1803-1804: see 'Jenenser Realphilosophie I' (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 
1932). 
4 The notes taken down by K. G. von Griesheim (1798-1854) during the winter of 1823-1824. 
A microfilm of them has been supplied by the'Staatsbibliothek der Stiftung Preussischer Kulturbesitz', 
1 Berlin 33, Archivstrasse 12-14: see 'Handschriftenabteilung' Ms. germ. quo 542. 
5 Heinz Heimsoeth 'Die Hegel-Ausgabe der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft' ('Kant-
Studien' 51 pp. 506-511, 1959-1960): F. Nicolin 'Die neue Hegel-Gesarntausgabe. Voraussetzungen 
und Zieie' ('Hegei-Studien' I pp. 295-313, 1961), 'Philologische Aufgaben der Hegeiforschung' 
('Heidelberger Hegel-Tage' ed. Gadamer, Bonn, 1964 pp. 327-337). 
123 

Page 13, line I 
Page 24, " 9 
Page 35, " 24 
Page 40, " 25 
Page 52, " 
I 
Page 52, " 18 
Page 57, " 24 
Page 72, " 18 
Page 88, " 7 
Page 88, " II 
Page 102, " 5 
Page 102, " 6 
Page II2, " 16 
Page 123, " 30 
Page 131, " 32 
Page 143, " 19 
Page 143, " 31 
Page 145, " 
I 
Page 145, " 13 
Page 145, " 13 
Page 145, " 14 
Page 145, " 15 
Page 145, " 15 
Page 145, " 16 
Page 145, " 31 
Page 146, " 26 
Page 147, " 16 
Page 147, " 21 
Page 147, " 32 
Page 148, " 6 
Page 152 , 
" 4 
Page 152, " 5 
Page 153, " 6 
Page 157, " 6 
Page 170 , 
" 9 
Page 175, " 
I 
Page 176, " 7 
Page 176, " 12 
Page 183, " 8 
Page 183, " 9 
Page 187, " 3 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
For einer read feiner. 
For 2 read 3. 
For ~at read ~aben. 
For ift read finb. (?) 
For borgefteut read borgefteUt. 
Insert ift after etuig. 
For bua~ read bt)a~. 
For nief)tige read 9'llef)tige. 
Insert ift after 3uriicfgegangen. 
For ber read aUer. 
For um ebenfo read er ein um fo. 
For ift, inbem fie read ift fie also 
For @efef)inbigfeit read @efef)tuinbigfeit. 
Insert ift after gut. 
For 9Raaue read 9RaUe. 
For bon read an. 
For auef) read aw. 
For tuerben read tuotben. 
For 6~~aten read 6~~are. 
For aUflofen read aUfloft. 
For >8etuegungen read >8etuegung. 
For i~nen read i~r. 
For ~aben read ~at. 
For betuegen read betuegt. 
Delete the comma after 'l)afet)n naef). 
For ffiotation read ~utation. 
For ~o~ere~ 3nfief)fet)n read .\)o~ere~ in fief)· 
For ba biefe~ nut read e~ ift nut. 
For alfo feine Shaft ~at read ieine Straft aljo jein ~ega­
tibe~ ~at. 
For fef)on read teUs. 
Substitute a semicolon for the comma after ibentiief). 
For Oualitatiben; read Oualitatiben,. 
For tuelc~et bor~er read ber bOt~et. 
For eine read reine. 
For ein eanbete read eine anbete. 
For bie Stometen read biefe Stot~et. 
For mtmof~~are read 2uft. 
Insert jf!ro3eues after aUgemeinen. 
For jf!aracelfu~ read bie mlten. 
For aUe irbifef)en Stot~er befte~en read ber irbiief)e 
Stot~et befte~e. 
Delete the comma after 6tanb~unlt. 
124 

Page 190, line 16 
Page 192, " 33 
Page 206, " 13 
Page 207, " 29 
Page 227, " 7 
Page 229, " 7 
Page 231, " 7 
Page 236, " 3 
Page 246, " 14 
Page 249, " 
10 
Page 249, " 13 
Page 249, " 26 
Page 265, " 16 
Page 266, " 23 
Page 268, " 26 
Page 278, " 17 
Page 278, " 20 
Page 281, " 32 
Page 282, " 17 
Page 292, " 2 
Page 292, " 16 
Page 292, " 17 
Page 296, " 
I 
Page 306, " 28 
Page 308, " 26 
Page 313, " 
18 
Page 319, " II 
Page 333, " 18 
Page 334, " 32 
Page 335, " 
I 
Page 335, " 2 
Page 335, " 3 
Page 335, " 4 
Page 335, " 5 
Page 335, " 5 
Page 335, " 6 
Page 335, " 7 
Page 342, " 30 
Page 346, " 22 
Page 347, " 33 
INTRODUCTION 
For quantite read quantiU. 
For brobuciren read t;lrobuciren. 
Insert a full stop after auf. 
For feinen read i~ren. 
For @eftalteten read geftalteten. 
Insert Michelet's note on p. 231 before ,@egen'. (C£ 
1827 ed. p. 281 lines 3-4). 
Delete Michelet's note. 
For ift read finb. (?) 
For anfef)iigt read anfd)liigt. 
Insert a full stop after Witb. 
For ~ne @laite read eine @leite. 
For fortge~en read fortge~t. 
For ~iinne read ~iirme. 
For gefe~t read gefe~t. 
For lift read ift. 
For attra~irt read ange50gen. 
For bie aUent~a1ben ber gan3e magneti!3mw ift read 
ba!3 aUent~alben a1!3 bie!3 @an5e ift. 
For magnet~mu!l\ read magnet. 
For biefe1be maue read ba!3fe1be ~olumen. 
For magnet~mu!3 read ;ton be!3 magnet!3. 
For @ebUben read @ebUbe. 
For fie ba finb read e!l\ ba ift. 
For bie ~liief)en beHe1ben iic~ bie 'molecules integrantes' 
read biefen fief) bie mo1efil1e. 
For anerfennenb read anerfennt. 
For Traitede read Traite de. 
For CDAB read CDAB. 
Insert a full stop after ge~oben. 
For inb n read inbem. 
For fann read ~at. 
Insert ~at after ge5eigt. 
For bon read mit. 
For ~ierin read ~ierum. 
Insert e!3 ift after fonbetn. 
Insert ber before a1!3. 
Delete the comma after 58eiber. 
Delete fteUt. 
For bar read barfteUt. 
Insert 1 before the note. 
For be!3 read feine!3. 
For $wma read $ri!3ma!3. 
125 

Page 348, line 12 
Page 348, " 17 
Page 348, " 24 
Page 349, " 2 
Page 352, " 12 
Page 355, " 30 
Page 356, " 17 
Page 356, " 18 
Page 356, " 19 
Page 361, " 8 
Page 375, " 24 
Page 382, " 8 
Page 389, " 29 
Page 401, " 19 
Page 421, " 3I 
Page 426, " 23 
Page 426, " 25 
Page 433, " 19 
Page 434, " 19 
Page 437, " 13 
Page 442, " 21 
Page 442, " 28 
Page 442, " 32 
Page 443, " 6 
Page 459, " 34 
Page 463, " 31 
Page 463, " 31 
Page 468, " 8 
Page 468, " 19 
Page 471, " 6 
Page 479, " 33 
Page 483, " 27 
Page 484, " 20 
Page 487, " 5 
Page 495, " 25 
Page 500, " 18 
Page 514, " 29 
Page 516, " 4 
Page 524, " 7 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
For in read an. 
Insert ift after f d)roiiqeften. 
For niimlid) read nun. 
Insert inegath.1e, als bas after roa~t~aft. 
For l:Jft)d)ologifd)en read l:J~t)fiologifd)en. 
For ii etlid) read iiuf3etlid). 
For ~etallsgetteten read .\)etau~gettetne. 
Delete bet. 
For obet read in bet. 
Insert fic~ ag after 3uetft. 
For j 
read jebet. 
For A read A. 
For ie read bie. 
Insert a semicolon after ibentifd), and a comma after 
!rali. 
For finbet man read finbe id). 
For bien eine geit lang read 
e~ eine geitlang 
(6d)roefelbatt)t). 
For 'lJas etfte ~etbtennlid)e read 'lJas eigentlid) mtenn-
Hd)e. 
Insert a full stop after 6i~. 
For finb read ift. 
For e~mag read e~ema!s. 
For et read es. 
For .\)iitte unb !rtt)ftaUifationread.\)iitte (!rtt)ftaUifation). 
For ein WCittelgefd)mad read WCittel, @efd)mad. 
For l:J~t)fifd)en !rotl:Jet read ~~t)fifd)en. 
Insert 1 before ~us. 
Insert ~at after et~alten. 
Insert ift after gegenilbetgetteten. 
For unge~eute read ill:Jl:Jige. 
For ftumme read ftuml:Jfe. 
For beftimmtet read beftimmte. 
For fid) ein3e!n finben read ein3elnet finb. 
For 'lJiefet l:Jetiobifd)e ~ed)fel ttitt read 'lJieie l:Jetio~ 
bifd)en ~ed)fel tteten. 
For betroanbelt read inbibibualifieti. 
For bUbeten, roo read bHbeten . .\)iet,. 
For m t read mit. 
Insert einfame before WCenfd). 
Insert inverted commas after entfl:Jtinge. 
Substitute a full stop for the comma after tteiben. 
For et, feinen and umbUbe read fie, i~ten and umbilben. 
126 

Page 543, " 20 
Page 546, " 25 
Page 552, " 30 
Page 561, " 28 
Page 564, " 29 
Page 564, " 30 
Page 568, " 29 
Page 571, " 29 
Page 575, " 10 
Page 578, " 6 
Page 579, " 20 
Page 585, " 24 
Page 589, " 26 
Page 590, " 9 
Page 593, " 8 
Page 599, " 5 
Page 600, " 25 
Page 601, " 
I 
Page 603, " 8 & 12 
Page 603, " 18 
Page 604, " 16 
Page 604, " 17 
Page 606, " 7 
Page 612, " 30 
Page 615, " 4 
Page 617, " 6 
Page 647, " 20 
Page 647, " 21 
Page 648, " 24 
Page 666, " 4 
Page 666, " 6 
Page 666, " 15 
Page 673, " 9 
Page 673, " 12 
Page 673, " 16 
Page 675, " 3 
Page 675, " 4 
Page 675, " 5 
Page 675, " 28 
Page 680, " 2 
Page 697, " 
2 
Page 697, " 3 
Page 706, " 24 
INTRODUCTION 
Insert a full stop after iioet. 
For m!ut3e1 read m!uqelung. 
Insert teine before e!iftitenbe. 
For igne~ read eigene~. 
For ~eftimmtl)eit read >8eftimmtl)eiten. 
For beroreitet read berOteiten. 
For tyrucf)tfnotem read tytucf)tooben~. 
For betbaute read unbetbaute. 
For tyeurigen read tyeuer~. 
For iioet bie aoftracte read bet aoftracten. 
For finb read ift. 
For untetoringt read untetoricf)t. 
For ift read finb. (?) 
For innete~ read 3nnete~. 
For feiner read feiner. 
Insert ~ulfieten unb before ~3ittem. 
For iJRagen read iJRiigen. 
Insert l before tmblicf). 
Delete the quotation marks. 
For fogleicf) read 3ugleicf). 
For t1.1ei{3 read t1.1eicf). 
For >81utlauf read >81utumlauf. 
For ift read t1.1itb. 
Insert 1 after gel)t;. 
For ~uf read auf. 
For 3uriicfnimmt read 3ufammennimmt. 
For friegt aw read 3ei9t in. 
Delete l)etaw. 
Insert al~ 3t1.1edmii{3ig before ba~. 
For oefriebigte read oeftimmte. 
Delete the brackets. 
For t1.1i read t1.1ie. 
Delete t1.1elcf)e,. 
For ift: jebocf) read ift,. 
Delete l)ietmit. 
Delete bie{3,. 
For 3u untetfcf)eiben, um read unterfcf)eibenb, unb. 
Delete 3U fet)n. 
For iiorigen read Ueorigen. 
For fin read finb, etc. down the page. 
Delete bot. 
For bie ®attung read fie. 
For 6ucce{3ion read tylu{3. 
127 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Oil NATURE 
SOURCES 
Although several of his Berlin colleagues attended them, Hegel's 
lectures were designed primarily for undergraduates. In his treatment of 
the natural sciences he was therefore obliged to give some indication of the 
relevant literature. The greatest difficulty encountered by a modem reader 
when attempting to follow his expositions originates in the fact that he 
often gives no indication of his sources once he enters upon matters of 
detail. The present commentary should, to some considerable extent, help 
to overcome this obstacle to a full appreciation of his work. The main 
sources of his more general views are always mentioned however, and 
since many modem readers will probably be in the position of his own 
undergraduates with regard to their general knowledge of the natural 
sciences of the day, it may be of value to list the works actually referred 
to in the text. 
Where the edition used is known, it has been indicated, where it is not, 
the first edition has been listed. Works referred to by the writers Hegel is 
quoting have been included, and where there is a clear reference to a 
specific book or article, although he omits to actually mention it, this 
has also been identified and listed. 
It may be of general interest to note that the works quoted most fre-
quently would not usually be regarded as being in any way 'philoso-
phical', and that most of the philosophical works mentioned are fairly 
severely criticized for what Hegel regards as their pretentiousness, in-
accuracy or incompetence. 
I. Kant 
S. Clarke 
J. F. Lorenz 
Aristotle 
I. Newton 
I. Kant 
I. Newton 
I: Mechanics 
'Kritik der reinen Vernunft' (Riga, 1781). 
'A collection of papers, which passed between the 
late learned Mr Leibniz and Dr Clarke' (London, 
1717). 
'Euclid's Elemente' (3rd edition ed. Mollweide, 
Halle, 1809). 
'Metaphysics.' 
'Physics.' 
'Optice' (2nd ed. London, 1719). 
'Metaphysische Anfangsgriinde der Naturwissen-
schaft' (Riga, 1786). 
'Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica' 
(London, 1687). 
128 

R. Descartes 
L. B. Francoeur 
J. L. Lagrange 
G. Galilei 
W. Herschel 
I. Kant 
W. Herschel 
G. M. Sommer 
J. Kepler 
J. Kepler 
T. Brahe 
N. Copernicus 
P. S. Laplace 
J. F. M. A. Voltaire 
T. Brahe 
A. F. Fourcroy 
Plato 
W. Herschel 
Light: 
J. A. F. Allix 
I. Newton 
L. Euler 
E 
INTRODUCTION 
'Principia philosophiae' (Amsterdam, 1644). 
'Traite elementaire de Mecanique, adopte dans 
l'instruction publique' (Paris, 1801). 
'Theorie des fonctions analytiques' (Paris, 1797). 
'Discorsi e dimostrazioni matematiche' (Leyden, 
1638). 
'Astronomical Observations relating to the Con-
struction of the Heavens' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 
1811, pp. 269-336). 
'Allgemeine Naturgeschichte des Himmels' (Konigs-
berg and Leipzig, 1755). 
'On the Construction of the Heavens' ('Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' vol. 75 p. 213, 1785). 
'Ueber den Bau des Himmels' (Konigsberg, 1791). 
'Astronomia nova' (Prague, 1609). 
'Harmonica Mundi' (Linz, 1619). 
'Astronomiae Instauratae Progymnasmata' (2 vols. 
Prague, 1602-1603). 
'De revolutionibus orbium coelestium' (Nuremberg, 
1543). 
'Exposition du systeme du monde' (2 vols. Paris, 
1796). 
Elemens de la Philosophie de Newton mis a la portee 
de tout Ie monde' (Amsterdam, 1738). 'Defense du 
Newtonianisme' (Paris, 1739). 
'De Mundi Aetherei recentionbus Phaenomenis' 
(Uraniborg, 1588). 
'Systeme des COJUlaissances Chimiques' (10 vols. 
Paris, 1800). 
'Timaeus' 36. 
'Account of a Comet' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc,' 1781 
P·492). 
II: Physics 
'Theorie de l'univers ou de la cause primitive du 
mouvement et de ses principaux effets' (Paris, 1818). 
'Optice: sive de reflexionibus, refractionibus, in-
flexionibus et coloribus lucis' (Editio secunda, 
Londini, 1719). 
'Opuscula varii argumenti: Nova Theoria Lucis et 
Colorum' (Berlin, 1746). 
129 

G. M. Sommer 
J. W. Goethe 
E. T. Malus 
E. T. Malus 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
'Ueber den Bau des Himmels' (Konigsberg, 1791): 
cf. 'The Scientific Papers of Sir William Herschel' 
(ed. Dreyer, 2 vols. London, 1912) vol. I p. 479. 
'Zur Naturwissenschaft iiberhaupt' vol. I (Stuttgart 
and Tiibingen, 1817). 
'Sur une propriete de la lumiere refiechie par les 
corps diaphanes' ('Bulletin des Sciences de la Societe 
Philomathique de Paris' Dec. 1808). 
'Theorie de la Double Refraction de la lumiere dans 
les Substances Cristallisees' (Paris, 1810). 
Bodies of the Solar System: 
J. L. Heim 
'Ueber die Aehnlichkeit der ehemaligen Erd-Ober-
fikhe mit der gegenwartigen des Mondes' ('Zachs 
Monatliche Correspondenz zur Beforderung der 
P. S. Laplace 
J. Kepler 
I. Newton 
F. W. J. Schelling 
The Elements: 
J. B. Biot 
Meteorology: 
Aristotle 
F. A. K. Gren 
H. B. de Saussure 
J. A. Deluc 
J. D. o. Zylius 
G. C. Lichtenberg 
J. W. Ritter 
Erd- und Himmels- Kunde' 1802 pp. 528-542). 
'Exposition du systeme du monde' (2 vols. Paris, 
1796). 
'Harmonice Mundi' (Linz, 1619). 
'Optice' 0p. cit. 
'Betrachtungen iiber die besondere Bildung und die 
inneren Verhaltnisse unseres Planetensystems' 
('Werke' 1st suppl. vol. pp. 502-560). 
'Traite de physique experimentale et mathematique' 
(4 vols. Paris, 1816). 
'The Physics' 
'Grundriss der Naturlehre zum Gebrauch akade-
mischer Vorlesungen' (4th ed. Halle, 1801). 
'Essais sur l'Hygrometrie' (Neuchatel, 1783). 
'Idees sur la meteorologie' (2 vols. London, 1786-
1787). 
'Priifung der Theorie des Herrn Deluc vom Regen' 
(Berlin, 1795). 
'Vertheidigung des Hygrometers und der Luc'schen 
Theorie vom Regen' (Gottingen, 1800). 
'Beytrage zur nahem Kenntniss des Galvanismus' 
(4 vols. Jena, 1800-1805). 
130 

A. von Humboldt and 
1. J. Gay-Lussac 
J. A. F. Allix 
W. E. Parry 
J. W. Goethe 
T. Livy 
J. B. Biot 
Specific Gravity: 
I. Kant 
J. W. Goethe 
Cohesion: 
F. W. J. Schelling 
F. A. K. Gren 
F. W. J. Schelling 
H. Steffens 
Sound: 
E. F. Chladni 
J. W. Ritter 
J. B. Biot 
G. Tartini 
Pythagoras 
G.J. Vogler 
INTRODUCTION 
'Experiences sur les moyens eudiometriques et sur la 
proportion des principes constituants de l' atmo-
sphere'. ('Gilberts Annalen der Physik' vol. xx 
pp. 38-95, Halle, 1805). 
'Theorie de l'univers' (Paris, 1818). 
'Journals of the First, Second and Third Voyages for 
the discovery of a North-West Passage' (5 vols. 
London, 1828). 
'Zur Naturwissenschaft iiberhaupt' vol. II (Stuttgart 
and Tiibingen, 1823). 
'The History'. 
'Relation ... d'un meteore observe a l'Aigle' (Paris, 
1803). 
'Metaphysische Anfangsgriinde der Naturwissen-
schaft' (Riga, 1786). 
'Zur Naturwissenschaft iiberhaupt' vol. II (Stuttgart 
and Tiibingen, 1823). 
'System der gesammten Philosophie und der Natur-
philo sophie insbesondere' (manuscript from I804, 
'Werke' suppl. vol. 2 pp. 252-258). 
'Grundriss der Naturlehre' (4th ed. Halle, 1801). 
'Darstellung meines Systems der Philo sophie' ('Zeit-
schrift fiir spekulative Physik' vol. II sect. ii, Jena 
and Leipzig, 1801). 
'Beitrage zur innern Naturgeschichte der Erde' (pt. I, 
Freiberg, 1801). 
'Die Akustik' (Leipzig, 1802). 
'Fragmente aus dem Nachlasse eines jungen Physi-
kers' (2 vols. Heidelberg, 1810). 
'Traite de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816). 
'Trattato di musica secondo la vera scienza dell' ar-
monia' (Padua, 1754). 
Aristotle 'Metaphysics' (Oxford, 1924) vol. I pp. 
145-150. 
See: H. Spies 'Abt Vogler und die von ihm 1805 
simpliflZierte Orgel von St. Peter in Salzburg' 
(Mainz, 1932). 
131 

Heat: 
J. B. Spix and 
K. F. P. Martius 
B. Thompson 
M. A. Pictet 
A. Fothergill 
Magnetism: 
J. N. MlIIller 
J. B. Richter 
A. von Humboldt 
J. B. Spix and 
K. F. P. Martius 
A. Brugmans 
J. H. van Swinden 
W. E. Parry 
P. Erman 
Crystallography: 
A. G. Werner 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
'Reise in Brasilien aufBefehl Sr. Majestat Maximilien 
Joseph I Konigs von Baiern in den Jahren 1817 bis 
1820 gemacht' (3 pts. Munich, 1823, 1828, 1831). 
'An Inquiry concerning the Source of the Heat which 
is excited by Friction' ('Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society' 1798 pt. I pp. 80-102). 
'Essais de physique' (Geneva, 1790). 
'On the origin and formation of ice islands' ('Memoirs 
of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences' 
vol. III pt. i pp. 69-81, Cambridge, Mass., 1809: 
reviewed in 'Gottingsche gelehrte Anzeigen' vol. III 
1817, pp. 1801-1808). 
'Ober die Entstehung der Warme durch Reibung 
nebst Folgerungen fiir die Theorie beyder Phano-
mene' ('Neue Zeitschrift fiir speculative Physik' 
Tiibingen, 1802 vol. I pt. iii pp. 1-66). 
'Ueber die bis jetzt sicherste Reinigungsmethode des 
Kobalts and Nickels' (Gehlen's 'Neues allgemeines 
Journal der Chernie' vol. XX, pp. 61-72, Berlin, 
1804). 
'On the Magnetic Polarity of a Mountain of Ser-
pentine' (Nicholson's 'Journal of Natural Philosophy' 
vol. I pp. 97-101, June, 1797). 
'Reise in Brasilien' vol. I (Munich, 1823). 
'Tentarnina philosophica de materia magnetica 
ejusque actione in ferrum et magnetem' (Franeker, 
1765). 
'Tentarnina Theoriae mathematicae de phaenomenis 
magneticis' in 'Commentatii de Rebus in Scientia 
Naturali et Medicina gestis' (44 vols. Leipzig, 1752-
1798) vol. XIX p. 458 (1772). 
'Journal of a Voyage for the discovery of the north-
west Passage' (London, 1821). 
'Umrisse zu den physischen Verhaltnissen des von 
Herrn Professor 0rsted entdeckten elektro-chemi-
schen Magnetismus' (Berlin, 1821). 
'Von den ausserlichen Kennzeichen der Fossilien' 
(Leipzig, 1774). 
132 

R.-J. Hauy 
INTRODUCTION 
'Essai d'une Theorie sur la Structure des Crystaux' 
Paris, 1784). 
Transparency and Refraction: 
C. F. L. Schultz 
'Ober physiologe Farbenerscheinungen, insbesondere 
das phosphorische Augenlicht, als Quelle derselben, 
betreffend' (1821, Goethe's 'Zur Naturwissenschaft' 
J. W. Goethe 
J. B. Biot 
R. Descartes 
F. A. K. Gren 
J. W. Goethe 
Colour: 
I. Newton 
J. W. Goethe 
J. T. Mayer 
J. B. Biot 
L. D. von Henning 
T. Pownall 
C. F. L. Schultz 
F. W. J. Schelling 
Electricity: 
C. L. Berthollet 
J. B. Biot 
R.-J. Hauy 
G. F. Pohl 
J. S. T. Gehler 
pt. II, 1823). 
'Zur Farbenlehre' (2 vols, Tiibingen, 1810). 
'Traite de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816). 
'Discours de la methode' (Dioptrics) (Leyden, 1637). 
'Grundriss der Naturlehre' (4th ed. Halle, 1801). 
'Zur Naturwissenschaft' vol. I (1817). 
'Optice' (2nd ed. London, 1719). 
'Zur Farbenlehre' (2 vols. Tiibingen, 1810). 
'Commentatio de apparentiis objectorum terrestrium 
a refractione lucis in atmosphaera nostra pendentibur' 
'Commentatio de Polaritate Luminis' ('Commenta-
tiones Societatis Regiae Scientarum Gottingensis' 
vols. I and II, Gottingen, 1811, 1813). 
'Traite de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816). 
'Einleitung zu offentlichen Vorlesungen iiber Goethes 
Farbenlehre, gehalten an der Koniglichen Universitat 
zu Berlin' (Berlin, 1822). 
'Inquiries into Coloured Light' (Tilloch's 'philoso-
phical Magazine' vol. XII pp. 42-49 and 107-1I2, 
1802). 
Ober physiologe Farbenerscheinungen' (1821, Goethe's 
'Zur Naturwissenschaft' pt. II, 1823). 
'Die vier edlen Metalle' (1802): 'Werke' 1st suppl. 
vol. pp. 565-574. 
'Essai de Statique Chimique' (2 vols. Paris, 1803). 
'Traite de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816). 
'Traite de mineralogie' (4 vols. Paris, 1801). 
Review of Gehler's Dictionary. ('Jahrbiicher fur 
wissenschaftliche Kritik' (Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 
1829). 
'Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. III (Leipzig, 1827). 
133 

H. C. 0rsted 
F. W. J. Schelling 
Plato 
Chemistry: 
W.E. Parry 
H. C. 0rsted 
J. W. Ritter 
J. J. Winterl 
Archimedes 
J. d'Arcet 
J. B. Trommsdorff 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
'Experimenta circa effectum conflictus electrici in 
acum magneticam' (Copenhagen, 1820). 
'Allgemeine Deduction des dynamischen Processes 
oder der Categorieen der Physik' ('Zeitschrift fur 
spekulative Physik' vol. I, Jena and Leipzig, 1800). 
'Timaeus' 45b2-46a2: 
Journal of a Voyage' (London, 1821). 
'Experimenta circa effectum' etc. (Copenhagen, 1820). 
'Galvanische Beobachtungen wmrend der Sonnen-
fmsterniss vom II Februar 1804' ('Voigt's Magazin 
fur den neuesten Zustand der Naturkunde' vol. VII 
pp. 175-179). 
'Prolusiones ad chemiam saeculi decimi noni' (Budae, 
1800). 
'Accessiones novae ad prolusionem suam primam et 
secondam' (Budae, 1803). 
See: M. V. Pollio 'De Architectura' (tr. A. Rode, 
2 vols. Leipzig, 1796). 
'Experiences sur quelques alIi ages metalliques' (Jour-
nal de Medecine' vol. XLIII pp. 552-561,June, 1775). 
'Systematisches Handbuch der gesammten Chemie' 
(2nd ed. Erfurt, 1805-1820) vol. IV (1812). 
1. B. G. de Morveau 
'Essai sur l' analyse et la recomposition des deux 
alcalis fixes' ('Memoires de L'Institut National' 1802 
vol. III pp. 321-336). 
H. Steffens 
A. L. Lavoisier 
Galvanism: 
G. F. PoW 
J. B. Biot 
J. J. Berzelius 
J. B. Trommsdorff 
F. W. J. Schelling 
H. Steffens 
'Gnmdzuge der philosophischen Naturwissenschaft' 
(Berlin, 1806). 
'Sur la Calcination des Metaux dans les vaisseaux 
fermes' ('Observations sur la Physique' 1774, vol. IV 
pp. 448-452). 
'Der Process der galvanischen Kette' (Leipzig, 1826). 
'Traite de Physique' (4 vols. Paris, 1816). 
'Essai sur la theorie des proportions chimiques' 
(Paris, 1819). 
'Systematisches Handbuch der gesammten Chemie' 
(2nd ed. 8 vols. Erfurt, 1805-1820). 
'Die vier edlen Metalle' ('Neue Zeitschrift fiir specu-
lative Physik' vol. I sect. 3, Tubingen, 1802). 
'Beitrage zur innern Naturgeschichte der Erde' (pt. i 
Freiberg, 1801). 
134 

J. W. Ritter 
A. von Humboldt 
J. S. C. Schweigger 
W. H. W oHaston 
H. Davy 
1. Galvani 
A. Volta 
G. Aldini 
J. W. Ritter 
J. W. Ritter 
Chemical Processes: 
J. Schuster 
H. Steffens 
C. 1. Berthollet 
J. B. Richter 
1. B. G. de Morveau 
W. H. W oHaston 
J. J. Berzelius 
INTRODUCTION 
'Das Elektrische System der Korper' (Leipzig, 1805). 
'Versuche iiber die gereizte Muskel-und Nervenfaser' 
(2 vols. Posen and Berlin, 1796). 
'Galvanische Combinationen' (Gehlen's Journal fiir 
die Chemie, Physik und Mineralogie' vol. VII pp. 
537-578; vol. IX pp. 316-331; pp. 701-706). 
'Experiments on the chemical production and agency 
of electricity' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1801 pp. 427-
434). 
Six papers on galvanism published in 'Nicholson's 
Journal' 1801-1802: 'Collected Works' (ed. Davy, 
9 vols. London, 1838-1840) vol. II pp. 139-18I. 
'De Viribus Electricitatis in Motu Musculari Com-
mentarius' ('Comment. Bonon.' VII, 1791). 
Letters in Gren's 'Neues Journal der Physik' 1796 
vol. III p. 479; 1797 vol. IV pp. 107, 473. 
'Essai Theorique et Experimental sur Ie Galvanisme' 
(2 vols. Paris, 1804). 
'Physische-Chemische Abhandlungen' (3 vols. Leip-
zig, 1806). 
'Versuche zum Erweise, dass auch bey der gewohn-
lichen Electricitat, in chemischer Hinsicht, die positive 
die oxygenee, die negative die hydrogenee sey' 
(Gilbert's 'Annalen der Physik' vol. IX pp. 1-17.) 
'System der dualistischen Chemie' (2 vols. Berlin, 
1807). 
'Grundziige der philosophischen Naturwissenschaft' 
(Berlin, 1806). 
'Essai de Statique Chimique' (2 vols. Paris, 1803). 
'Anfangsgriinde der Stochyometrie oder Messkunst 
chymischer Elemente' (3 vols. Breslau and Hirschberg, 
1792- 1794). 
'Affinite' ('Encyclopedie Methodique' vol. I pt. I 
pp. 535-613, 1786). 
'On the elementary particles of certain crystals' 
('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 104 pp. 51-63, 1813). 
'An attempt to determine the definite and simple 
proportions, in which the constituent parts of Un-
organic Substances are united with each other' 
('Philosophical Magazine' vols. 41-43, 1813-1814). 
135 

J. Dalton 
J. S. C. Schweigger 
H. Davy 
Geology: 
A. G. Werner 
J. Hutton 
J. G. Ebel 
J. F. M. A. Voltaire 
A. von Humboldt 
A. G. Werner 
A. G. Werner 
H. Steffens 
J. 1. Heim 
K. G. von Raumer 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
'A New System of Chemical Philosophy' (pts. I and 
II, Manchester, 1808, 1810). 
'Ueber einige noch unerklarte chemische Erscheinun-
gen' (Journal fur Chemie und Physik' 1812, v, 49; 
1814, xiv, 497; 1823, ix, 231). 
'On some chemical agencies of electricity' ('Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1807 pp. I-56). 
III: Organics 
'Von den ausserlichen Kennzeichen der Fossilien' 
(Leipzig, 1774). 
'Theory of the Earth' (2 vols. Edinburgh, 1795). 
'Ueber den Bau der Erde' (2 vols. ZUrich, 1808). 
'Dissertation . . . sur les changemens arrives dans 
notre globe' (Boulogne, 1746). 
'Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial 
Regions of the New Continent' (tr. H. M. Williams, 
6 vols. London, 1818-1826). 
'Classification der Gebirgsarten' (Dresden, 1787). 
'Neue Theorie von der Entstehung der Gange' 
(Freiberg, 1791). 
'Geognostische-geologische Aufsatze' (Hamburg, 
1810). 
F. W. H. von Trebra 
'Geologische Beschreibung des Thiiringer Wald-
gebiirgs' (3 pts. Meiningen, 1796-1812). 
'Geognostische Versuche' (Berlin, 1815). 
'Erfahrungen vom Innern der Gebirge' (Leipzig, 
1786). 
H. Steffens 
J. B. Spix and 
K. F. P. Martius 
Embryology: 
A. von Chamisso 
C. A. Rudolphi 
A. von Humboldt 
Botany: 
K. H. Schultz 
J. W. Goethe 
'Grundzuge der Philosophischen Naturwissenschaft' 
(Berlin, 1806). 
'Reise in Brasilien' pt. I (Munich, 1823). 
'De Salpa' (Berlin, 1819). 
'Anatomie der Pflanzen' (Berlin, 1807). 
'Versuche uber die gereizte Muskel-und Nervenfaser' 
(2 vols. Posen and Berlin, 1796). 
'Die Natur der lebendigen Pflanze' pt. I (Berlin, 1823). 
'Zur Morphologie' vol. I (Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 
1817). 

F. W. J. Schelling 
C. 1. Willdenow 
G. R. Treviranus 
C. W. Hufeland 
A. P. de Candolle 
S. Hermbstadt 
F. Fontana 
F. K. Medicus 
H. F. Link 
C. A. Rudolphi 
J. W. Goethe 
C. F. B. de Mirbel 
A. W. Roth 
L. M. A. Dupetit-
Thouars 
G. A. Agricola 
T. Barnes 
A. Mandirola 
F. J. Schelver 
H. F. Autenrieth 
K. Linnaeus 
E* 
INTRODUCTION 
'Ideen zu einer Philosophie der Natur' (Leipzig, 1797), 
'Grundriss der Krauterkunde' (6th edition ed. Link. 
Berlin, 1821). 
'Biologie, oder Philo sophie der lebenden Natur fiir 
Naturforscher und Aerzte' (6 vols. Gottingen, 1802-
1822). 
'Ueber die Bewegungen des Hedysarum gyrans' 
(Voigt's 'Magazin fiir das Neueste aus cler Physik 
und Naturgeschichte' Gotha, 1790, vol. VI pt. iii 
PP·5-27). 
'Experiences relative a l'influence de la lumiere sur 
quelques vegetaux' (Journal de Physique' vol. 52 
p. 124). 
'Ober die Fahigkeit der lebenden Pflanzen im Winter 
Warme zu erzeugen' ('Der GeselIschaft Naturfor-
schender Freunde zu Berlin' vol. II pp. 316-319, 
Berlin, 1808). 
Letter describing experiments concerning the genera-
tion of heat by plants. (Harles and Ritter 'Neues 
Journal der auslandischen medizinisch-chirurgischen 
Litteratur' vol. V pt. ii pp. 45-68, Erlangen, 1806). 
'Pflanzen-physiologische Abhandlungen' (Leipzig, 
1803). 
'Grundlehren der Anatomie und Physiologie der 
Pflanzen' (Gottingen, 1807). 
'Anatomie der Pflanzen' (Berlin, 1807). 
'Versuch die Metamorphose der Pflanzen zu erk-
laren' (Gotha, 1790). 
'Histoire naturelIe, generale et particuliere des 
plantes' vol. I (Paris, 1802). 
'Catalecta Botanica' (Leipzig, 1797). 
'Essais sur la Vegetation' (Paris, 1809). 
'Neu- und nie erhorter . . . Versuch der universal 
Vermehrung alIer Baume' (Regensburg, 1716). 
'A New Method of propagating fruit-trees and 
flowering shrubs' (London, 1758). 
'Manuale di giardinieri' (Vicenza, 1652). 
'Kritik der Lehre von den Geschlechtern der Pflanzen' 
(Heidelberg, 1812: supplements, Karlsruhe, 1814, 
1823). 
'De Discrimine Sexuali' (Tiibingen, 1821). 
'Fragmenta methodi naturalis' (Halle, 1747). 
137 

A. L. de Jussieu 
K. P. J. Sprengel 
L.Oken 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
'Genera plantarum' (Paris, I7S9). 
'Anleitung zur Kenntniss der Gewachse' (Halle, IS02). 
'Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie' (3 vols. Jena, IS09-
ISIl). 
K. F. A. von Schreiber Review of two works by Amici: 'Memoria ... de 
'Microscopj catadiottrici' (Modena, ISIS), 'Osser-
vazioni sulla circolazioni' (Modena, ISIS). ('Jahr-
bacher der Literature' vol. V pp. 203-215, Vienna, 
IS19). 
B. Corti 
G. A. Amici 
K. F. P. Martius 
L. C. Treviranus 
K. H. Schultz 
J. F. C. Meyer 
N.-T. de Saussure 
J. B. van Helmont 
H. 1. Duhamel 
J. C. C. Schrader 
E. Peine 
J. G. Kolreuter 
J. G. Gleditsch 
'Osservazioni microscopiche sulla Tremella' (Lucca, 
1774). 
'Lettera sulla circolazione del fluido scoperta in varie 
piante' (Modena, 1775). 
'Osservazioni sulla circolazione del succhio nella 
Chara' (,Memoire della Societa Italiana della Scienza' 
XIII, Fisica, pp. IS3-204, Modena, IS20). 
'Uber den Bau und die Natur der Charen' ('Nova 
Acta Physico Medica Academiae Caesareae Leopol-
dino-Carolinae naturae curio sorum' vol. IX pp. ISI-
214, Erlangen, ISIS). 
'Beobachtungen aber die Bewegung des komigen 
Wesens in einigen Conferven und einer Chara' 
('Beitrage zur Naturkunde' ed. F. Weber and D. M. 
H. Mohr, vol. II pp. 126-141, Kiel, ISIO). 
'Ueber den Kreislauf des Saftes im Schollkraut und in 
mehreren andem Pflanzen' (Berlin, IS22). 
'Naturgetreue Darstellung der Entwikkelung, Aus-
bildung, und des Wachstums der Pflanzen' (Leipzig, 
IS0S). 
'Recherches chimiques sur la vegetation' (Paris, IS04). 
'Ortus medicinae' (Amsterdam, 1652). 
'De la physique des arbres' (2 vols. Paris, 175S). 
'Zwei Preisschriften aber ... Getreidearten' (Berlin, 
IS00). 
'Hortulanus, der Bosische Garten in Leipzig' (ed. 
Wehmann, Leipzig, 1723). 
'Vorlaufige Nachricht von einigen das Geschlecht der 
Pflanzen betreffenden Versuchen und Beobachtungen' 
(Leipzig, 1761-1766). 
'Essai d'une fecondation artificielle fait sur l'espece 
de palmier qu' on nomme, Palma Dactylifera folio 
flabelliformi'. ('Histoire de l' Academie Royale des 
138 

L. Spallanzani 
J. Pontedera 
J. Bauhin 
Pliny the Elder 
INTRODUCTION 
Sciences et Belles Lettres' Berlin, 1749, pub. 1751 
pp. 103-108). 
'Dissertazioni de fisica animale e vegetabile' (Modena, 
1780). 
'Anthologia sive de floris natura libri tres' (Padua, 
1720). 
'Historia plantarum Universalis' (Yverdon, 1619, 
1650, 1651). 
'Naturalis Historia' 
Animal and human physiology: 
Aristotle 
'De Anima' 
G. R. Treviranus 
'Biologie' (6 vols. Gottingen, 1802-1822). 
J. H. Autenreith 
'Handbuch der empirischen menschlichen Physio-
J. W. Goethe 
L. Oken 
A.-B. Richerand 
M. F. X. Bichat 
P. Erman 
K. H. Schultz 
logie' (3 vols. Tiibingen, 1801-1802). 
'Zur Morphologie' (2 vols. Tiibingen, 1817-1823). 
'Dber die Bedeutung der Schadelknochen' Oena, 
1807). 
'Nouveaux elemens de physiologie' (Paris, 1801). 
'Recherches physiologiques sur la vie et la mort' 
(4th ed. ed. Magendie, Paris, 1822). 
'Einige Bemerkungen iiber Muskular-Contraction' 
('Gilberts Annalen der Physik' vol. 40 pp. 1-30, 
Leipzig, 1812). 
'Die Natur der lebendigen pflanze' pt. I (Berlin, 
1823). 
S. T. von Sommerring 
'Yom Baue des menschlichen Korpers' (5 vols. 
A. Haller 
J. J. C. Legallois 
Dr Wilkinson 
Assimilative Processes: 
C. F. L. Schultz 
F. W. J. Schelling 
Frankfurt-on-Main, 1791-1796). 
'Elementa physiologiae corporis humani' (8 vols. 
Lausanne, 1757-1766). 
'Experiences sur Ie principe de la vie' (Paris, 1812). 
'Le Moniteur Universel' Nov. 8th 1811 pp. 1189-
1190. 
'Account of some lizards found in Suffolk' ('Tilloch's 
Philosophical Magazine' vol. 48 p. 469, Dec. 1816). 
'Ueber physiologe Gesichts und Farben Erscheinun-
gen' ('Schweiggers Journal fUr Chemie und Physik' 
vol. XVI pp. 121-157, Nuremberg, 1816). 
'Erster Entwurf eines Systems der Naturphilosophie' 
Oena, 1799). 
139 

I. P. V. Troxler 
L. Oken 
Aristotle 
J. R. Forster 
J. W. Goethe 
G. R. Treviranus 
M. F. X. Bichat 
J. H. Autenrieth 
L. Spallanzani 
W. Bligh 
Pierce Smith 
L. Spallanzani 
A. F. Fourcroy and 
L. N. Vauquelin 
J. F. Blumenbach 
Sex-relationship: 
G. H. von Schubert 
J. F. Ackermann 
Zoology: 
Aristotle 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
'Ideen der Grundlage zur Nosologie und Therapie' 
(jena, 1803) 
'Grundriss der Theorie der Medicin' (Vienna, 1805). 
'Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie' (3 vols. Jena, 1800-
1811). 
'The Physics'. 
'Observations made during a voyage round the 
World' (London, 1778). 
'Zur Farbenlehre' (2 vols. Tiibingen, 1810). 
'Biologie' (6 vols. G6ttingen, 1802-1822). 
'Recherches physiologiques' (4th ed. Paris, 1822). 
'Handbuch der . . . Physiologie' (3 vols. Tiibingen, 
1801-1802). 
'Dissertazioni di fisica animale e vegetabile' (2 vols. 
Modena, 1780). 
'A Voyage to the South Sea' (London, 1790). 
Account of his work in Naples by P. Scheel in 
'Nordisches Archiv fiir Naturkunde, Arzneywissen-
schaft und Chirurgie' vol. III pt. ii pp. 130-136 
(Copenhagen, 1803). 
'Experiences sur la digestion de l'homme et de dif-
ferentes especes d'animaux' (Geneva, 1783). 
'Experiences sur les excremens des poules, compares 
ala nourriture qu' elles prennent' (' Annales de Chimie' 
1779 vol. 29 pp. 1-26). 'Sur Ie guano' ('Tilloch's 
Philosophical Journal' 1806 pp. 112-115). 
'Analyse du chyle de cheval' (Thomson's 'Annals of 
Philosophy' II, 1813 pp. 223-225). 
'Ueber den Bildungstrieb und das Zeugungsgeschaft' 
(G6ttingen, 1781). 
'Ahndungen einer allgemeinen Geschichte des Lebens' 
(3 vols. Leipzig, 1806, 1807, 1821). 
'Infantis androgyni historia et ichnographia' (lena, 
1805). 
'Historia animalium'. 
'De generatione animalium'. 
'De partibus animalium'. 
G. L. C. F. D. Cuvier 
'Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles de Quad-
rupedes' (Paris, 1812). 
G. R. Treviranus 
'Biologie' (6 vols. G6ttingen, 1802-1822). 
140 

INTRODUCTION 
V. Coiter 
Appendix 'De quadrupedum sceletia' to G. Fallopio's 
'Lectiones de partibus similaribus corporis humani' 
(Nuremberg, 1575). 
P. Camper 
'Naturgeschichte des Orang-Utang' (Amsterdam, 
1782, tr. Herbell, Diisseldorf, 1791). 
G. L. C. F. D. Cuvier 
'Le Regne Animal distribue d'apres son Organisation' 
(4 vols. Paris, 1817). 
J. B. Lamarck 
'Philosophie zoologique' (2 vols. Paris, 1809). 
Medical Science: 
H. A. Goeden 
J. Pichler 
J. Brown 
J. H. Autenrieth 
'Critische Bemerkungen ueber Hegel's Begriff vom 
Wesen der Krankheit und der Heilung' (Oken's 'Isis', 
Jena, 1819 pp. II27-II38). 
'Darstellungsversuch der im Markgrafthum Mahren 
gegen Mitte December 1805 ausgebrochenen und 
bis halben Juni 1806 gewahrten Epidemie' (Briinn, 
1807). 
'Elementa medicinae' (Edinburgh, 1780). 
'Handbuch der . . . Physiologie' (3 vols. Tiibingen, 
1801-1802). 
i. TERMINOLOGY 
'It is in fact part of the fulfillment of a people's culture that it should be 
able to express everything in its own language. The concepts we denote by 
means of foreign words seem to be somewhat alien to us, to be no im-
mediate part of what is ours.' -Hegel. 
With the help of the following publications: Hermann Glockner 
'Hegel-Lexikon' (improv. ed. 2 vols. Stuttgart, 1957), Rudolf Eisler 
'Worterbuch der philosophischen Begriffe' (1899, 4th ed. 3 vols. Berlin, 
1927-1929) and Johannes Hoffmeister 'Worterbuch der philosophischen 
Begriffe' (2nd ed. Hamburg, 1955), it is now possible for the German 
texts of Hegel's work to be submitted to systematic terminological and 
linguistic analysis.l This is however out of the question with the existing 
lOne of the most striking examples of the value of such analysis is provided by Leonhard von 
Renthe-Fink, 'Geschichdichkeit. Ihr terminologischer und begriffiicher Ursprung bei Hegel, Haym, 
Dilthey und Yorck' ('Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Gottingen. Philologisch-
Historische Klasse. Dritte Folge, Nr. 59 pp. 1-153, Gottingen, 1964), whose historical-philological 
approach throws a great deal of light upon a concept central to much nineteenth and twentieth 
century thinking. For more general studies of the significance of language in the development of the 
Hegelian system see Henri Lauener 'Die Sprache in der Philosophie Hegels, mit besonderer BerUck-
sichtigung der Asthetik' (Bern, 1962) and Josef Simon 'Das Problem der Sprache bei Hegel' (Kohl-
hammer Verlag, Stuttgart, 1966). Simon provides a fascinating study of a many-sided problem. He 
tends however to over emphasize the importance of his central theme, and like Lauener's, his work is 
curiously devoid of any reference to Hegel's use of the terminology of the natural sciences. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
English translations of them, most of which are highly unsatisfactory, and 
quite inadequate to the purposes of exact scholarship. In this translation, 
some attempt has been made to reproduce the subtlety and consistency 
with which Hegel employs his philosophical terminology. It has to be 
admitted however, that a completely satisfactory rendering of this aspect 
of his language cannot be forthcoming until more of his works have been 
translated in the light of recent German scholarship, and extensive cross-
referencing has become possible. 
For the classical High German of Hegel's day (Upper-Saxon), J. C. 
Ade1ung 'Grammatisch-kritisches Worterbuch der Hochdeutschen Mun-
dart mit bestandiger Vergleichung der iibrigen Mundarten, besonders 
aber der Oberdeutschen' (ed. D. W. Soltau and F. X. Schonberger, 4 pts. 
Vienna, 1807-1808) is to be highly recommended, and should be on the 
desk of anyone undertaking Hegel translation. It should be supplemented 
by reference to ]. and W. Grimm 'Deutsches Worterbuch' (16 vols. 
Leipzig, 1854-1954) and A. Gotze 'Triibners Deutsches Worterbuch' (ed. 
W. Mitzka, 8 vols. Berlin, 1939-1956), both of which are firmly based on 
historical principles and give copious references to their sources. F. 
Kluge's 'Etymologisches Worterbuch der Deutschen Sprache' (15th 
edition ed. W. Mitzka, Berlin, 1963), is by no means exhaustive in range, 
but is invaluable in that the frequent revisions of it make available up-to-
date information on matters of etymological research. Hegel occasionally 
uses Swabian words and expressions, all of which find exhaustive treatment 
in H. Fischer and W. pfleiderer 'Schwabisches Worterbuch' (6 vols. 
Tiibingen, 1904-1936). The non-German words he uses will be found in 
J. C. A. Heyse 'Allgemeines verdeutschendes und erklarendes Fremd-
worterbuch mit Bezeichnung der Aussprache und Betonung der Worter 
nebst genauer Angabe ihrer Abstammung und Bildung' (2 pts. Olden-
burg, 1804, ed. G. Heyse and W. Wittich, 14th ed. Hanover, 1870). 
The most satisfactory German-English dictionary for Hegel translation 
is that by Newton Ivory Lucas, 'A Dictionary of the English and German 
and German and English Languages adapted to the present state of litera-
ture, science, commerce and arts' (4 pts. Bremen and London, 1854-1868). 
See also J. L. Hilpert's excellent 'Dictionary of the English and German, 
and the German and English Language' (2 vols. Karlsruhe, 1828). These 
earlier works should be supplemented by reference to the great late-
nineteenth century compilations: 'Muret-Sanders: Enzyklopadisches 
Englisch-Deutsches und Deutsch-Englisches Worterbuch' (4 pts. ed. 
Sanders, Schmidt, Stoffel, Berlin, 1905-1906), and F. Fliigel, I. Schmidt, 
G. Tanger 'A Dictionary of the English and German Languages for home 
142 

INTRODUCTION 
and school' (7th ed. 2 pts. London, 1903). The 'Shorter Oxford English 
Dictionary' (Ed. c. T. Onions, 3rd ed. Oxford, 1964) is a good companion 
volume to these works. 
The German terminology relating to the subject matter of the 'Mech-
anics' and 'Physics' cannot be handled with any precision and certainty 
unless there is constant access to the following works: S. Klugel 'Mathe-
matisches Worterbuch' (7 vols. Leipzig, 1803-1836), J. S. T. Gehler 
'Physikalisches Worterbuch' (ed. Brandes, Muncke etc. II vols. Leipzig, 
182S-184S), both of which contain exhaustive bibliographies. They should 
be supplemented by reference to the extensive 'Encyklopadie der Mathe-
matischen Wissenschaften mit Einschluss ihrer Anwendungen' (ed. 
W. F. Meyer etc. 6 vols. Leipzig, 1898-1934), remembering of course 
that this work is not primarily historical in purpose. The English works 
corresponding to these are: C. Hutton 'A Philosophical and Mathematical 
Dictionary' (2nd ed. 2 vols. London, 181S) and S. Vince 'A Complete 
System of Astronomy' (2nd ed. 3 vols. London, 1814-1823). They are 
not so accurate and exhaustive as their German counterparts however, 
and their bibliographical references are much scantier. They should there-
fore be supplemented by reference to the general encyclopaedias of the 
time such as E. Chambers 'Cyclopaedia; or, an Univeral Dictionary of 
Arts and Sciences' (lOth ed. S vols. London, 1779-1791), and the 'En-
cyclopaedia Britannica' (6th ed. 26 vols. Edinburgh, 1823-1824). John 
Harris's 'Lexicon Technicum: or, an universal English Dictionary of 
Arts and Sciences: explaining not only the terms of art, but the arts 
themselves' (sth ed. 2 vols. London, 1736) will be found to be handy and 
useful in this connection, in that it will often fill in the historical back-
ground to a subject or problem. G. Schilling's 'Encyclopadie der gesamm-
ten musikalischen Wissenschaften' (6 vols. Stuttgart, 1834-1838) is 
indispensable if the musical terminology of the time is to be translated 
correctly. 
The chemists of Hegel's day had some difficulty in translating current 
literature satisfactorily. J. R. Partington's defmitive 'History of Chemistry' 
(vols. 3 and 4, London, 1962-1964) is therefore essential to any satisfactory 
handling of the complicated and inconsistent terminology of the time. 
The most valuable German work on the subject is by M. H. Klaproth and 
F. Wolff'Chemisches Worterbuch' and 'Supplemente zu dem chemischen 
Worterbuche' (9 vols. Berlin, 1807-1819). It may often be profitably 
supplemented by reference to J. F. John 'Handworterbuch der allgemeinen 
Chemie' (4 vols. Leipzig and Altenburg 1817-1819), which has the advan-
tage of being a closely printed and pocketable work. Thomas Thomson's 
143 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
'A System of Chemistry' (3rd ed. 5 vols. Edinburgh, 1807) was translated 
into German by F. Wolff, 'System der Chemie' (5 vols. Berlin, 1805-
18n), and these two works provide an excellent source for the Anglo-
German chemical terminology of the day. See also A. and C. R. Aikin 
'A Dictionary of Chemistry and Mineralogy with an account of the pro-
cesses employed in many of the most important chemical manufactures. 
To which are added a description of chemical apparatus, and various useful 
tables of weights and measures, chemical instruments etc. etc.' (2 vok 
London, 1807); Andrew Ure 'Dictionary of Chemistry' (2nd ed. London, 
1824). 
German geological terminology was explained on historical principles 
by H. Veith in his 'Deutsches Bergworterbuch' (Breslau, 1870). A useful 
English companion volume to this is D. Page 'Handbook of Geological 
Terms' (Edinburgh, 1865). These works should be supplemented by 
reference to H. Steffens 'Handbuch der oryktognosie' (4 vols. Halle, 
18n-1824), which provides a useful survey of the geological literature of 
the time, and C. Hintze 'Handbuch der Mineralogie' (7 vols. Leipzig, 
1897-1933), which provides an exhaustive geographical and to some extent 
historical survey of the subject matter of mineralogy. ]. Challinor's 'A 
Dictionary of Geology' (Cardiff, 1961) is to be highly recommended for 
the attempt it makes to relate terms to their historical contexts. The 
following dictionaries may profitably be consulted, though they have to 
be used with caution on account of their being either non-historical or not 
interlingual: A. Cissarz and W. R. Jones 'German-English Geological 
Terminology' (London, 1931), W.]. Arkell and S. 1. Tomkeieff'English 
Rock Terms' (Oxford, 1953), C. M. Rice 'Dictionary of Geological Terms' 
(Michigan, 1955), A. A. G. Schieferdecker 'Geological Nomenclature' 
(Gorinchem, 1959),J. V. Howell and]. M. Weller 'Glossary of Geology 
and Related Sciences' (2nd ed. Washington, 1960). 
The 'Grundriss der Krauterkunde' (Berlin, 1792, 7th edition ed. H. F. 
Link, 4 pts. Berlin, 183 1-1833) by C. L. Willdenow is indispensable for an 
understanding of Hegel's botanical terminology. The book was very 
popular on account of the admirably lucid manner in which its subject-
matter is presented, and is especially valuable since a large part of it is 
devoted to the definition of botanical terms, and it is frequently referred 
to by Hegel: see the English version of it 'The Principles of Botany, and 
of vegetable Physiology' (2nd ed. Edinburgh, 18n). Thomas Green's 'The 
Universal Herbal; or, botanical, medical and agricultural Dictionary' 
(2nd ed. 2 vols. London, 1824) provides a very useful companion volume 
to it, since it also includes a section devoted to the definition of terms. 
144 

INTRODUCTION 
B. D. Jackson's 'A Glossary of Botanic Terms with their derivation and 
accent' (London, 1960) is not quite so satisfactory on historical matters as 
might have been wished, but the work is so exhaustive in range and has 
come to play so important a part in the standardization of English botanical 
terminology, that its guidance has been heeded throughout the whole of 
the section on botany. Its inter-linguistics might profitably be supple-
mented by reference to E. Artschwager 'Dictionary of Botanical Equiva-
lents' (Baltimore, 1925) and W. T. Stearn 'Botanical Latin' (London, 1966), 
and its historical aspect by reference to Thomas Mawe and John Aber-
crombie 'The Universal Gardener and Botanist; or, a general dictionary of 
gardening and botany' (2nd ed. London, 1797). 
The physiological and medical (but not nosological) terminology of 
Hegel's day cannot be treated with any comprehensiveness or precision 
unless the student has J. F. Pierer's 'Anatomisches-physiologisches Real-
worterbuch' (8 vols. Leipzig and Altenburg, 1816-1829) on his desk. The 
work has the inestimable merit of having been written for the medical 
practitioner of the day, and yet of including an historical treatment of its 
subject matter which carries detailed bibliographies of all the relevant 
literature published since classical antiquity. Several corresponding 
anatomical works might be mentioned: see J. F. Meckel 'Handbuch der 
menschlichen Anatomie' (4 vols. Halle and Berlin, 1815-1820), S. T. 
Sommerring 'Yom Baue des menschlichen Korpers' (5 pts. Frankfurt-on-
Main, 1791-1796, ed. Wagner etc. 8 vols. Leipzig, 1839-1845). Useful 
British equivalents to these works are: R. Morris and J. Kendrick 'The 
Edinburgh Medical and Physical Dictionary' (2 vols. Edinburgh, 1807) 
and G. Motherby 'A New Medical Dictionary; or, general repository of 
physic. Containing an explanation of the terms relating to anatomy, 
physiology, physic, surgery, materia medica, chemistry etc. etc. etc.' 
(3rd ed. London, 1791). I. and W. D. Henderson 'A Dictionary of Bio-
logical Terms' (8th edition ed. Kenneth, London, 1966), E. C. Jaeger 'A 
Source-book of biological names and terms' (Springfield, Illinois, 3rd ed. 
1959) and P. Grey 'The Encyclopaedia of the Biological Sciences' (New 
York, 1960) are works which might profitably be consulted in this con-
nection. 
The 'Handbuch der Zoologie' (2 vols. Nuremberg, 1820) by G. A. 
Goldfuss provides a useful account of contemporary zoological knowledge 
and terminology. The zoological literature of the time is exhaustively 
surveyed by F. W. Assmann in his 'Quellenkunde der vergleichenden 
Anatomie' (Brunswick, 1847). Any detailed study of the zoological 
knowledge and terminology of the period must, of course, involve 
145 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
constant reference to C. D. Sherborn 'Index Animalium sive index 
nominum quae ab A.D.MDCCLVIII generibus et speciebus animalium 
imposita sunt' (13 vols. Cambridge and London, 1902-1932), and S. A. 
Neave 'Nomenclator Zoologicus' (4 vols. London, 1939-1940). 
Specialized terminology such as that in the sections on crystallography 
(§ 315) and colour (§ 320), which can only be mastered by reading the 
sources on which Hegel is basing his exposition of the subject matter, has 
been discussed in the commentary. In conclusion, it should perhaps be 
noted, that Hegel employs the terminology of the natural sciences with 
what amounts to complete accuracy, precision and consistency. A know-
ledge of the subject matter of these disciplines is of course essential if there 
is to be any full appreciation of the significance of his work. The same is 
also true of his philosophical terminology, although as has been noted, the 
low standard of English translations oHis works, and the extent to which 
his system is misunderstood, have hitherto made it difficult to demonstrate 
this in the English-speaking world. 
DEFINITIONS 
Hegel was fully aware of the necessity of clarifying the significance of 
the words he used, and of the difficulties involved in providing truly 
meaningful definitions of them. Present preoccupation with considerations 
of this kind might give rise to an interestingly new approach to Hegelian 
studies once this is more generally realized. Many of the philosophical 
terms used recurrently throughout the 'Encyclopaedia' are treated as 
categories in the 'Logic', and this work therefore provides us with a very 
valuable series of detailed dialectical d~finitions. If its subject matter is to 
be fully intelligible however, it requires extensive historical and linguistic 
as well as philosophical analysis. In the following glossary, those terms 
most likely to cause difficulty to the modem reader have therefore been 
related to their origins, counterparts and cognate forms in Classical, 
German and English usage, as well as to the relevant expositions in the 
first part of the 'Encyclopaedia'. 
Actuality: ~irfnd)feit (Latin: actualitas). Aristotle's distinction between poten-
tiality and actuality ('Metaphysics' IX 6 ff) accounts for the wide currency of 
the term in the later Middle Ages. Meister Eckhart (c. 1260-1327) first translated 
'actualitas' as 'werkelicheit'. Adelung takes it to signify effectiveness and 
operativeness as opposed to mere possibility. Hegel defines it ('Encyclopaedia' 
146 

INTRODUCTION 
§§ 142-159) as, 'the unity, become immediate, of essence with existence, or of 
inward with outward.' 
Cf. H. H. Milman's account ofThomism in the 'History of Latin Christianity' 
(6 vols. London, 1854-1855, 3rd ed. 9 vols. London, 1864) XIV iii, vol. 9 p. 136, 
'Universals are real only in God, and but seemingly, in potentiality rather than 
actuality; they are subjective in the intelligence of man; they result objectively 
in things.' 
I. 266, 26 'These are lines which should be reserved to mathematical 
determination, but which have been transformed into physical actuali-
ties.' 
II. 12, 32 '(The being of light is) actuality as a transparent possibility.' 
III. 106, 22 'The vocal faculty comes closest to thought, for in the voice 
pure subjectivity becomes objective, not as the particular actuality of a 
condition or sensation, but in the abstract element of space and time.' 
Being: lSein (Greek €tvat, Latin esse). Eisler defInes it as,'the supreme and most 
general concept, which, taken in its broadest signilicance, includes everything 
susceptible, in any manner, of being thought.' Hegel's defInition is in substantial 
agreement with this ('Encyclopaedia' §§ 84-IIO). C£ Aristotle 'Metaphysics' 
VII I, 1028a; St. Thomas 'Summa de veritate' I i, 'Summa theologiae' II quo 
94 a2; E. Coreth S. J. 'Das dialektische Sein in Hegels Logik' (Vienna, 1952), 
Laszlo Erdei 'Der Anfang der Erkenntnis. Kritische Analyse des ersten Kapitels 
der Hegelschen Logik' (Budapest, 1964); H. Beck 'Der Akt-Charakter des 
Seins. Eine spekulative Weiterfiihrung der Seinslehre Thomas V. Aquins aus 
einer Anregung durch das dialektische Prinzip Hegels' (Munich, 1965). 
In English non-Hegelian philosophical writings the term only occurs in 
connection with the distinction between matter and mind: see Locke 'Human 
Understanding' 1690, III v 5, 'Species of Actions which were only the Creatures 
of their own Understandings; Beings that had no other existence but in their 
own Minds.': Mill 'Logic' I iii 2.62, 'Being is ... applied impartially to matter 
and to mind .... A Being is that which excites feelings, and which possesses 
attributes. ' 
I. 199, 16 'God is that in which spirit and nature are one, and in which 
intelligence at the same time has both being and shape.' 
II. 85,23 '(Heat) is a being which is at the same time show, or a show 
which is still being. 
III. 107, 30 'Living existence has being, and preserves itself only as this 
reproductiveness, not as mere being.' 
Being-in-self: 3n~iidHein (Latin, in se esse). This term has its origin in the Aris-
totelian definition of substance as that which, as the sustainer of characteristics, is 
147 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
absolutely independent and cannot be a predicate ('Metaphysics' VII 3, 1029 a 8), 
and which is therefore to be distinguished from accidence ('Metaphysics' V 30). 
It is therefore to be regarded as the opposite of 'in alio esse.' The terms 'inseity' 
and 'aseity' might form useful additions to English philosophical terminology: 
see Joseph Geyser (1869-1948) 'Das philosophische Gottesproblem' (Bonn, 1899). 
Hegel never defines the term with any precision, but he deals with closely 
related categories in §§ 84-98 of the 'Encyclopaedia.' 
1. 242, 35 'It can also be said that gravity is the being-in-self of matter.' 
1. 263, 12 'The particular bodies (planets) are however those which simul-
taneously stand as much in the determination of self-externality, as they do 
in that of being-in-sel£' 
II. 81, 22 'The being-in-self which reveals itself in sound, is itself mater-
ialized.' 
III. 140, 15 'Time is internal quivering, the negativity of being-in-self.' 
Body: SfotlJet (Latin corpus). The word first occurred in German in the medical 
literature of the thirteenth century. By the eighteenth century however, it had 
come to be almost synonymous with 'thing', and Hegel's defmition ofit is there-
fore to be found in §§ 125-130 of the 'Encyclopaedia.' Adelung notes that, 'In 
its widest significance it refers to anything consisting of matter as opposed to 
anything spiritual. It is in this sense in particular that it is used in the sciences, 
when things of this kind are simply to be defmed as consisting of matter.' 
C£ Ralph Cudworth's preface to 'The true intellectual system of the universe' 
(London, 1678), 'The onely Principles of Bodies, are Magnitude, Figure, Site, 
Motion, and Rest.' 
I. 225, I 'Relative space is something much higher however, for it is the 
determinate space of any given material body.' 
II. 221, I 'If one wants to say what a body is, one's description of it will 
only be complete once the whole cycle of its changes has been presented: 
Coherence: (to~iiten3 (Latin cohaerentia). The categories relating explicitly to 
coherence are dealt with in §§ 135-141 of the 'Encyclopaedia', the natural 
phenomena in which it is most in evidence in §§ 295-307. Hegel does not refer 
to coherence in this sense as .8ufammen~ang or .8ufammen~ang~ftaft. See 
Thomas Hobbes 'Decameron physiologicum: or, ten dialogues of natural 
philosophy' (London, 1678) IX 108, 'For then not only the points of Contact 
will be many (which makes the coherence stronger),. 
II. 63, 7 'The coherence of matter with itselfis (i) purely quantitative. It is 
ordinary cohesion, which is the strength of consistence in resisting weight.' 
n. 82,25 'As the specific and internally coherent body repulses force, it 
also yields inwardly to it.' 

INTRODUCTION 
Collaterality: inebeneinanbet (Latin col and later-, latus): situated or placed side 
by side with one another; running side by side, parallel; in geometry and 
crystallography the term is applied to two faces having a common edge. Eisler 
(II p. 585) defmes it as, 'the concept of a relative positioning «()tbnungsltJeife), 
necessary in intuition, and universally construable.' The consideration of con-
tinuous and discrete magnitude in § 100 of the 'Encyclopaedia' provides a 
relevant analysis of the natural phenomena and methods of explanation treated 
in §§ 254 and 339. 
See Berkeley's 'A New Theory of Vision' (Dublin, 1709) § 85, 'In neither of 
these two ways do microscopes contribute to the improvement of sight; for 
when we look through a microscope, we neither see more visible points nor 
are the collateral points more distinct than when we look with the naked eye, 
at objects placed in a due distance.' 
I. 223, 4 'Space constitutes collaterality of a completely ideal nature.' 
III. 21, 27 'This whole style of explanation is nothing but a trans-
formation of collaterality into temporal succession. 
Composition: .8uiammenfe~ung (Latin compositio). Hegel considers this concept 
in its logical or universal significance in § 135 of the 'Encyclopaedia', and is 
often critical of the use made of it in the natural sciences. See Charles Hutton 
'A course of Mathematics' (2 vols. London, 1807) II p. 137, 'Composition of 
forces, is the uniting of two or more forces into one.' 
I. 237, 29 'It is said of matter that: (a) it is composite.' 
II. 19, 39 'If one wants to imagine light, one has to discard all determina-
tions relating to composition etc.' 
III. 152,4 'The animal is the absolute self-identity of animation however, 
it is not a mere composition.' 
The word has also been used, on several occasions, to translate 'befte~en/. 
II. 35, 19 'The ancients certainly asserted that everything is composed 
of these four elements.' 
II. 187,4 'They suppose water to be composed of oxygen and hydrogen.' 
Cf. II. 215, 3 'Categories such as composition (.8ufammenie~ung) and 
subsistence (58efte~en), on the strength of which bodies are supposed to be 
formed from such substances.' 
Condition: 58ebingung (Latin conditio). Hegel defmes the term in § 146, 'By the 
Condition of a thing we mean first, an existence, in short an immediate, and 
secondly the vocation of this immediate to be suspended and subserve the 
actualiZing of something else.' It first occurred in German in legal contexts, and 
first became current in its purely logical sense through the writings of Leibnit:l; 
149 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
and W 01££ The scholastic proposition, 'posita conditione ponitur conditionatum, 
sublato conditionato tollitur conditio' was well known in Hegel's day, and gave 
rise to a general recognition of the fact that the condition and the conditioned 
are correlative. Cf. Mill's 'Logic' I, 388; III, 5, § 3. 
III.136, 4 'An inorganic nature to which it is opposed as to its external 
condition and material.' 
The word has also been used to translate .8uftanb (Latin modus). C. A. 
Crusius (1715-1775) 'Entwurf der notwendigen Vemunft-Wahrheiten' (Leipzig, 
1745) § 25 observed that, 'The condition of a thing is its actuality, regarded as 
occurring together with certain detenninations pertaining to it.' Adelung 
(IV. 1775) defmes the condition of a thing as, 'the disposition of its essence and 
of that in it which is variable'. Goethe is certainly not averse to using the word, 
but in a letter to B. G. Niebuhr dated November 23, 1812, he denounces it as 
being literally senseless, in that its meaning implies a permanent state, whereas 
everything is in fact transitory. Hegel uses it to imply transitoriness: 
1I.49, 16 'Heat and cold are here merely accessory conditions which do 
not belong to the determination of the process itself.' C£ T. H. Huxley 
'Physiography: an introduction to the study of nature' (1877) p. 104, 
'The three conditions of a solid, a liquid and a gas ... are physical states 
dependent mainly on Temperature.' 
Conditionality: mebingt'£jdt, i.e. the quality of being conditional. Richard Baxter 
(1615-1691), in 'Plain scripture-proof of. .. baptism' (1651) p. 92 uses the word, 
'Let others plead for its causality; I plead but for its conditionality.' When 
Hegel used it in Gennan however, it had only recently been coined. 
1.256, 4 'Since fall, in its freedom, still contains conditionality.' 
11.56, 18 'As is the case everywhere in the sphere of fmitude and condi-
tionality, this sphere of conditioned individuality is the most difficult to 
separate from the further context of the concrete object.' 
Connection, Connectedness: .8ufammen'£jang (Latin connexio). Hegel uses the 
word in the usual manner to mean the condition of being related to something 
else by a bond of interdependence, causality, coherence, or the like. It had been 
current in German since the seventeenth century. Adelung defines it as, 'that 
condition in which the separable parts of a thing are bound together with one 
another'. The general vagueness of its use in scientific contexts is brought out 
well by Neil Amott (1788-1874) in his 'Elements of physics or natural philo-
sophy' (1833 ed.) II i, 129, when he speaks of, 'The connexion of temperature 
with the rise of fevers and other pestilences.' 
In the translation, 'connection' has been used for the somewhat less complex 
phenomena referred to by Hegel. 
ISO 

INTRODUCTION 
11.48, IS 'The Earth would not have a process ifit lacked this connection 
with the Sun.' 
III. 128, 7 'The soul is present in the body in a general way, it does not 
merely conform to the specific connectedness of the corp orality.' 
III. 128, 30 'The development of the voice together with the coming of 
puberty ... is an example of such a connection.' 
III. 146, 7 'In so far as need is a connectedness with the universal 
mechanism .... , instinct is merely an internal stimulation.' 
Consistence: gujammen'f)alt (Latin con and sistere to stand). Thomas Thomson 
(1773-1852), in his 'System of Chemistry' (3rd ed. 1807) II 542, uses the word 
in the same way as Hegel, to mean material coherence and permanence of form, 
'It forms cubic crystals without consistence, and resembling a jelly.' 
II. 63, 8 'The coherence of matter with itself is (i) purely quantitative. It 
is ordinary cohesion, which is the strength of consistence in resisting 
weight.' 
Corporality: SfOr1Jerlid)e. The word is not common in German as a noun. Hegel 
uses it in order to convey precisely the same meaning as that attaching to its 
English equivalent, i.e. 'The quality of consisting of matter; material or corporal 
existence; materiality.' See J. Chandler's translation of J. B. van Helmont's 
'Oriatrike, or Physik refined' (London, 1662) p. 150, 'A Mathematical cor-
porality or bodiliness.' 
II. 220, 19 'Corporality which subsists as being indifferent is posited as a 
mere moment.' 
III. 128, 7 'The soul is present in the body in a general way, it does not 
merely conform to the specific connectedness of the corp orality.' 
Corporeality: Sfor,):Jerlid)feit. The quality or state of being corporeal; bodily 
form or nature: see Hegel's 'Encyclopaedia' §§ 125-130; Aristotle's 'Meta-
physics' VII 2; Robert Southey 'Sir Thomas More' (1831) I 333, 'And assume 
corporeality as easily as form.' 
I. 245, 16 'Inertia, impact, pressure, draw, fall etc., the determinations 
of ordinary mechanics, belong to the sphere of fmite corporeality.' 
II. 121, 8 'The primary determination of shaped corporeality is its self-
identical selfhood.' 
Determinate: ~eftimmte (Latin determinatus). Luther used the word to mean, 
'identifying exactly by giving particulars': see his translation of I Chronicles 
lSI 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
VI 65, 'Stebte, bie fie mit namen beftim~ten.' It was not until the eighteenth 
century however, that this usage became widespread: see Christian Wolff 
(1679-1754) 'Vemiinftige Gedanken von Gott' (1736) § 286, who speaks of 
'determining the difference between things'. Natural scientists were said to 
'determine' a rock, a plant, an animal, by means ofits characteristics: c£ Francis 
Bacon 'Sylva sylvarum; or a naturall historie' (1626) § 602, 'plants are all figurate 
and determinate, which inanimate bodies are not.' In German philosophical 
usage the word became 5ynonymous with 'defmed' and was very popular about 
the tum of the century: see J. H. Campe 'Worterbuch der Deutschen Sprache' 
vol. I (Brunswick, 1807); Schoppe 'Mitteilungen der schlesischen Gesellschaft 
fUr Volkskunde' vol. 18 p. 78. 
Hegel attaches the usual significance to the word, taking it to mean definitely 
bounded or limited, in time, space, extent, position, character, or nature; 
definite, fixed; clearly defined or individualized; distinct, as opposed to vague, 
undefined, or indefinite. 
1. 203, 6 'This contemplated unity is the Notion, which contains the 
determinate differences simply as an immanent and self-moving unity.' 
1. 243, 2 'Where the centre lies is determined by means of the weighted 
matter of which it is the centre; in so far as it is mass, it is determined, and 
therefore its tendency, which is consequently a determinate positing of the 
centre.' 
Determinate being: ilafein. Hegel defines this categoryL n §§ 89-95 of the 'En-
cyclopaedia', where he quotes Spinoza's 'omnis determinatio est negatio' 
('Correspondence' letter 59) in support of the proposition that the foundation 
of all determinateness is negation, an exclusion of other characteristics. He takes 
it to be quite distinct from existence (op. cit. §§ 123, 124), mainly on account 
of the latter's presupposing a ground and not mere being. In doing so he was 
probably influenced by Kant. who regarded determinate being as a category of 
modality, and as such as the opposite of not-being. 
The word was first used in philosophical German by Christian Wolff (1679-
1754), in order to translate 'existentia': see his 'Vemiinftige Gedanken von Gott' 
(1720) § 226, ,ba~et fiub (fut~finbungen not~lUenbig, fOlUo~l in m:nfe~ung i~te~ 
ilafei~, ~ in m:nfe~ung i~tet 58efd.Jaffen~eit \)on Q$ott.' Cf. 'Zeitschrift fur 
deutsche Wortforschung' 3,338; 8,156; H. Schulz and O. Basler 'Deutsches 
Fremdworterbuch' vol. I p. 187 (Strassburg and Berlin, 1913); Adelung I col. 
1408. 
1. 209, 23 'Life is the highest to which nature drives in its determinate 
being.' 
II. 123, 11 'The individual form which has pervaded its matter as a totality, 
has thereby posited its manifestation however, and so advances to this 
ideality of determinate being.' 
152 

INTRODUCTION 
III. 70, 8 'The stem comes between leaf and root as the first diremption, 
for here we are considering plants with a developed determinate being.' 
Determinateness: 58ej'timmt~eit. The quality of being determinate; definiteness, 
distinctness, preciseness. Adelung takes it to involve, 'precise definition by the 
giving of all necessary characteristics.' The word became current in English on 
account of the translation of German philosophical works: see B. Bosanquet's 
translation ofR. H. Lotze's 'Metaphysic' (1884) p. 31, 'Each of their marks ... 
has been limited to a completely individual determinateness.' 
n. 134,4 '(When the crystal) is in fact only active as immaterial deter-
minateness.' 
III. 197, 6 'These circumstances are of an elemental or climatic nature, 
they also reside and have their origin in the elemental determinateness of 
the organism.' 
Determination: 58eftimmung (Latin determinatio). Hegel uses the word in 
precisely the same manner as does Kant in his earliest writings (1747-1770), i.e. 
as the equivalent of'determinatio', and as signifying any determining character-
istic of things and concepts. C£ Sir Kenelm Digby (1603-1665) 'Two treatisies, 
in one of which the nature of bodies, in the other the nature of man's soule, is 
looked into' (1645) I. 87, 'To be a Quality is nothing else but to be the determi-
nation or modification of the thing whose quality it is.' 
1. 263, II 'The particular bodies (planets) are however those which simul-
taneously stand as much in the determination of self-externality, as they 
do in that of being-in-sel£' 
III. 109, 6 'The developed determinations of the Notion exist in the subject, 
and are displayed there by this whole (of shape).' 
Determinedness: 58eftimmtjein. The German word, like Johnston and Struthers' 
translation of it, is absent from the standard dictionaries. Hegel uses it in order 
to refer to the specific being of determinateness. 
1. 219, 29 'It is this unity of qualitative determinedness and of gravity, 
which produces itself in life.' 
1. 282, 23 'It is in the nature of this sphere (Mechanics) that this externality 
of determinedness should constitute the peculiar determinateness of 
matter.' 
n. 90, 19 'By starting from the specific determinedness of material being-
in-self, we have considered the cohesive aspect of the generation of heat.' 
IS3 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 011 NATURE 
11.92, 39 'As primary subjectivity, (specific gravity) was simple abstract 
determinedness.' 
Difference: Untetfd)ieb (Latin differentia). Hegel defmes what he understands by 
difference, and the sub-categories he takes it to involve, in §§ II6-120 of the 
'Encyclopaedia.' His use of the word shows that the meaning he attaches to it is 
entirely orthodox. He employs it to refer to the condition, quality or fact of 
being different, or not the same in quality or essence; to indicate dissimilarity, 
distinction or diversity. It may be worth noting that its original and basic 
meaning in German was, 'that whereby something, such as a room is divided or 
separated into two different parts or things' (Adelung), and that it was only 
under the influence of the Latin words 'discernere' and 'distinguere' that it came 
to take on its modern meaning. Cf. Descartes 'Principia philosophia (1644) I, 60, 
'Distinctio triplex est: realis, modalis et rationis' : Kant 'Die falsche Spitzfmdigkeit 
der vier syllogistichen Figuren' (1762) § 6, ,~~ i~t gan3 \t)a~ anbete~, 'Ilinge 
boneinanbet untetf d)eib en, unb ben Untetf d)ieb bet 'Ilinge etfennen. 'Ila£! 
{e~tete ift nut butd) Udeilen mogUd).' 
II. 17, 29 'Weighted matter is divisible into masses, since it is concrete, 
quantitative being-for-self; but in the quite abstract ideality of light there 
is no such difference.' 
III. 59,5 '(The simple basic life of the plant) is spiritual, a fleeting breath 
of forms, which does not attain to qualitative and fundamental difference.' 
Differentiation: 'Iliffeten3 (Greek Sw/Jopa Latin differentia). The action of 
differentiating, or condition of being differentiated; any state in which like 
things are also unlike or something homogeneous is also heterogeneous. See 
Herbert Spencer 'Principles of Psychology' 1855 (1870) I i, iii 49, 'In the rudi-
mentary nervous system, there is no such structural differentiation.' 
I. 217,28 'The Idea, as nature, has ... the determination of particularity, 
in which reality is posited with an immanent determinateness of form and 
its own existent differentiation.' 
II. 204,25 'It is however acid and alkali which constitutes the specific dif-
ferentiation, as opposition.' 
III. 93,15 'With regard to sexual difference, it has to be pointed out that 
the differentiation reached by the plant ... is only present as a determin-
ation analogous to that of the sexual relationship.' 
Hegel occasionally coins words which would appear to be almost 
entirely synonymous, e.g. 
I. 243, 33 'This fmitude of matter is the differentiated being of motion 
and of matter as such.' (Untetfd)iebenfein). 
154 

INTRODUCTION 
I. 258, 4 'The other moment, which is the differentiation of place within 
itself.' (~iffetentf ein). 
The different units involved in differentiation are referred to by Hegel 
not as ,~iffetentiare' (differentials) but as ,~iffetentet'. 
II. 109, 28 'It has been said that all electrical activity is magnetism, and 
that magnetism is the force which is fundamental to the differentials.' 
II. II4, 29 'As shape is the equilibrium of differentials, it also has to 
display these differentiations within itself.' 
III. 174, 12 'As the different sexes constitute the sex-drive as differentials, 
there must be a dUJerence in their formation.' 
Existence: Q;7,;iften5 (Latin exsistere to stand out). In his treatment of this category 
in the 'Encyclopaedia', Hegel shows that he recognizes the significance of its 
etymological origins, 'The phrase "Existence" (derived from existere) suggests 
the fact of having proceeded from something. Existence is Being which has 
proceeded from the ground, and been reinstated by annulling its intermediation.' 
(§ 123 Addition). 
The word was introduced into German by V. L. von Seckendorf (1626-1692), 
see 'Der Christenstaat' (1685) 2. II. For its subsequent history see the article 
'Determinate being'. There is little evidence of its having been employed self-
consciously in its literal meaning in English. When it is used to mean 'having 
place in the domain of reality, having objective being' however, this does at 
least carry the vague implication of an ideality or subjectivity which might be 
regarded as a rough approximation to Hegel's related category of 'ground.' See 
Robert South (1634-1716) 'Sermons Preached on Several Occasions' (1737 ed.) 
Iii 45, 'To conceive the world ... to have existed from eternity.' 
I. 266, 18 'Bodies which have a semi-independent existence, with their 
centre partly in themselves, and partly in another.' 
II. 71,24 'A phenomenon such as this (sound), in which a being-in-self 
assumes physical existence, holds no surprises for us.' 
III. 92, 28 'If this negation of the plant's coming out of itself is now 
to attain existence . .. this idea matrix of the plant becomes isolated.' 
Extrinsicality: ~ufleteinanbet (Latin extrinsecus, on the outside). The etymology 
of the Latin word does not quite coincide with the origin of Hegel's coinage. 
The word itself may be regarded as capturing his meaning quite well however, 
and is more convenient that an Anglo-Saxon monstrosity such as 'outside-one-
anotherness'. See Thomas Blundeville (fl.. 1561) 'Exercises' (1594) III, ix 292, 
'These two circles having respect to a materiall Spheare, are said to be extrinsicall 
or outward.' 
I. 223, 4 'It is on account of its being self-externality, that space 
ISS 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 011 NATURE 
constitutes collaterality of a completely ideal nature; as this extrinsicality is 
still completely abstract, space is simply continuous, and is devoid of any 
determinate difference.' 
II. 69, 2 'The negating of the extrinsic subsistence of the material parts is 
itself negated as the reinstating of their juxtaposition and their cohesion.' 
II. 100,4 'Nature is the Idea in the element of extrinsicality, and like the 
understanding, it holds fast to the dispersed moments of the Notion and so 
expresses their reality.' 
III. 151, 30 'The soul is omnipresent within the body however, and the 
extrinsicality of bones, nerves and veins is of no significance to its ideality.' 
Figuration, Formation: @eftaltung (Latin figuratio). Hegel assesses the categories 
closely related to figuration in §§ 127-128 of the 'Encyclopaedia.' He uses the 
word in a fairly orthodox manner, to refer to the action or process of forming 
into a figure, the determining of a certain form, the resulting form or shape, 
contour or outline. He fails to distinguish between its relevance to inorganic 
and organic phenomena however. English usage often demands that it should be 
rendered by 'formation' in organic contexts. On the complex problems relating 
to the word at the beginning of the last century see F. Weinhandl 'Zum Gestalt-
problem bei Aristoteles, Kant und Goethe' ('Beitrage zur Philosophie des 
deutschen Idealismus' vol. IV sect. 2, 1927). C£ Henry Pemberton (1694-1771) 
'View of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy' (1728) 8, 'The figuration and the motion 
of bodies strike our sense more immediately than most of their other properties.' 
II. 92, 22 'Whereas the figurations of space, the point, line and surface, 
were merely the negations of space however, they are now described by 
form within a matter which it alone determines.' 
II. 113,21 'All figuration contains magnetism, for it is a complete limita-
tion in space posited by the immanent drive of its overseer, which is form.' 
111.47, IS 'It is in this way that the process of formation, and of the re-
production of the single individual, coincides with the process of the genus.' 
III. 131, 17 'The process offormation.' 
For itself: ~ilr fid). This term has its origin in everyday German usage, in which 
it occurs in such phrases as 'to live by oneself' (filr fid) leben), 'to remain single' 
(filr fid) bleiben) 'to speak to oneself' (filr fid) Hmd)en), i.e. with the meaning of 
alone, without relationships, withdrawn from company: see Adelung II col. 359. 
In general German philosophical usage it is used to refer to ipseity as opposed to 
being-for-other, and to the inwardness or subjectivity of essence as opposed to its 
objectivation: see Eisler I p. 451. It is of more general significance in Hegel's 
system, since it also refers to the second stage in the dialectical interpretation of a 
sphere: see 'Encyclopaedia' § 95. 

INTRODUCTION 
II. 27, 22 'The independence of this being-for-self is rigid in so far as it is 
still immobile.' 
11.101,35 'Each pole (of the magnet) posits the other and excludes it from 
itself; the terms of the syllogism can only exist in the connection, they 
cannot exist for themselves.' 
III. 210, 20 'In that its activities become universal, animation endows 
itself with a universality which is for itsel£' 
Form: iYotm (Greek fLOPc/>~' Latin forma). C£ the defmition of 'Shape'. Hegel 
defines form, in conjunction with content, in §§ 133-134 of the 'Encyclopaedia', 
where it is presented as a sub-category of appearance. The distinction between 
matter and form, as employed by the scholastics, was very largely determined 
by Aristotle's 'Metaphysics' (Bk. VII 7-10), in which form is presented as the 
essential determinant principle of a thing, that which makes matter into a 
determinate species or kind of being. It was in this Aristotelian and scholastic 
sense that the word was first used in German by Konrad von Wiirzburg (d. 1287). 
A detailed investigation of contemporary usage merely tends to blur the 
distinction between form and shape (@eftalt): see F. Schiller 'On the Aesthetic 
Education of Man' (tr. and ed. Wilkinson and Willoughby, Oxford, 1967) pp. 
308-309. Hegel distinguishes sharply and consistently between the two, and in 
the main accepts Adelung's definition (II 246), according to which a form may 
be regarded as that by means of which a body acquires its shape. 
11.34,33 'As crystallization, this third term (a salt) also has shape however, 
so that it is not just a simple abstract unity of chemical elements, but indi-
vidual unity of form.' 
II. 121,25 'Shape, as the pure form, by which matter is completely deter-
mined and pervaded, is merely self-identical in matter, and dominates it 
throughout.' 
III. II3, 12 'Now although each system is the developed whole, and as 
such contains moments of the other systems, the single form of the 
N orion remains predominant in each of them.' 
Formation: @ebilb (Latin formatio). This is an old word in German, which was 
revived during the eighteenth century by Klopstock, Herder and Voss. It often 
implied somewhat less substantiality than form (iYotm) or shape (@eftalt): see 
Schiller 'Das Lied von der Glocke' (1799) line 63: 
,m!ie ein @ebilb aus ~immels~o~n ... 
6ie~t et hie 3ungftau bOt fid) fte~n.' 
Goethe 'Faust' II line 6277, 
,trntf!ie~e bem trntftanbnen 
3n bet @ebiIbe {asgebunbne 9ieid)e!' 
157 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
'Productive of some disgusting formation in their children.' ('The Medical and 
Physical Journal' vol. III p. 501, 1800) provides an example of a corresponding 
contemporary English usage. 
I. 215, 10 'This contingency is particularly prevalent in the realm of 
concrete individual formations.' 
I. 216, 10 'Nature never fails to blur essential limits with intermediate and 
defective formations.' 
II. 123,23 'In so far as the punctiform self of individuality is unhindered 
in its internal formativeness (58ilbnet), it has nothing further within this 
dark material being which is alien to it.' 
Ideality: ,3bealitiit (from Greek lola). The Greek word is derived from lo€'iv, 
to see. In philosophical contexts it is used to refer to a state of being which is in 
conformity with the character of an ideal, i.e. which is typical, which serves as 
a pattern, or which is regarded as perfect. Its literal meaning therefore carries 
the important implication that comparison is not only essential to exact defInition, 
but also an integral part of all cognition. Hegel develops the more general 
signifIcance of this in §§ 213-215 of the 'Encyclopaedia.' His redefInition of 
the category was evidently needed. At the beginning of the eighteenth century 
the word was usually employed with precision: see John Norris (I657-I7II) 
'Practical discourses upon several divine subjects' 1691-1698 (I7II) III p. 153; 
'The natural existence of things is founded upon their Ideal existence; if things 
had not fIrst existed in Idea, they could never have existed in Nature'; C. F. 
Nicolai (I733-I8II) 'Briefe, die neueste Literatur betreffend' IX p. 56 (1761), 
,~omet tletmeibet mit allet 60tgfaIt bas fittHd)e ,3beal.' Once it had been 
introduced into aesthetics however, it tended to lose this general clarity of 
meaning: see C. M. Wieland (1733-1813), 'Teutscher Merkur' IV p. 62 (1772), 
who criticizes the extreme looseness of the contemporary usage. 
III. !O2, I 'Organic individuality exists as subjectivity in so far as the exter-
nality proper to shape is idealized into members.' 
III. 104,4 'The animal's vocal faculty is bound up with this, for as the actual 
ideality of soul, animal subjectivity dominates the abstract ideality of time 
and space.' 
Immediate: unmittelbat (Latin, immediatus). This word fIrst occurred in German 
in juridical contexts. Certain political units within the Empire, such as the free 
Imperial cities, were immediately subject to the Emperor, others were only 
subject to him through the mediation of, for example, the Electors. In the 
eighteenth century this was still one of its best-known uses: see J. L. Frisch 
'Teutsch-Lateinisches Worterbuch' (2 pts. Berlin, 1741) 666b. During the 
sixteenth century it was first widely employed in religious contexts (e.g. ,bie 
unmittelbate ~iilfe &otte5'), and it is with regard to these and closely related 
158 

INTRODUCTION 
philosophical matters, that Hegel gives it its most extensive treatment in the 
'Encyclopaedia' (§§ 61-78). In these lectures however, he uses it in a perfectly 
general manner to refer to anything devoid of an intermediary or intervening 
medium. It is therefore usually the phenomena selected to illustrate the initial 
level of a sphere, which are said to be 'immediate', or to: exhibit 'immediacy'. 
I. 211, 26 'Immediacy is the other form of otherness, and consists of what 
is different subsisting abstractly by itsel£' 
11.15,14 'This body (the sun) is the primordial and uncreated light, it is 
immediate, and does not arise from the conditions of fmite existence.' 
II. 81, 15 'In its own immediacy however, this alternation (of sound) is 
consequently the negation of materially specific subsistence.' 
II. 92, 4 'The real dissolution of immediacy is accompanied by the recipro-
cal indifference of specified material beings, and it is this moment which 
is posited in heat.' 
Implicit: an fid) (Greek Ka8' atiT6, Latin in se). The precise meaning given to 
this phrase by Hegel should not be confused with the various senses in which it 
is used by other writers: c£ Aristotle 'Metaphysics' Bk. V, 18, 1022a; Kant 
'Critique of Pure Reason' 1st ed. p. 386; Grimm 'Deutsches Worterbuch' I col. 
287; H. Eggers 'Deutscher Wortschatz' (12th ed. Stuttgart, 1961) I and 10. 
Christian Wolff (1679-1754) was the first to introduce it into German as a 
translation of the Greek. 
Hegel attempts to present the initial level of each sphere as being 'implicit', 
and so as containing the 'potential' of the being-for-self of its second level, and 
of the 'being-in-and-for-self' of its third level. The progression in complexity 
involved in this pattern is open to criticism through an understanding of the 
subject matter he is dealing with. The triadicity in which the concept of implicit-
ness plays such a basic part, is only open to valid criticism through an examina-
tion of the Hegelian system as a whole. 
I. 221, 5 'Mechanics treats of. .. matter in the freedom of its implicit 
Notion, i.e. the absolute mechanics of free motion.' 
II. 221,23 'Iron is always implicitly iron, but it is also only implicitly so, 
for its mode of existence changes.' 
III. 173, 6 'This is not merely implicit sentience, but a sentience which 
is existent and animated.' 
Independent: felbftiinbig. The meaning of the German word is occasionally 
coloured by the fact that in the sixteenth century ,6eThftanb' was used to render 
the Latin 'persona': L. Diefenbach 'Glossarium latino-germanicum' (Frankfurt-
on-Main, 1857) 430. There seems to be no peculiarity in Hegel's use of it 
however. In accordance with the ordinary philosophical usage of his day (cf. 
159 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
Adelung), he employs it simply to refer to states in which something does not 
depend upon something else for its existence, validity, efficiency, operation, 
or some other attribute; to anything which is not contingent on or conditioned 
by anything else. John Playfair (1748-1819) 'Outlines of Natural Philosophy' 
1816 vol. II p. 323, 'This is quite independent of the figure of the Earth, and 
would be the same though the Earth were truly spherical.' 
I. 266, 36 'It is in the so-called explanation of uniformly accelerated and 
retarded motion by means of an alternating decrease and increase in the 
magnitude of the centripetal and centrifugal forces, that the confusion 
caused by the postulation of such independent forces is greatest.' 
II. 72, 18 'In this case, the tremor is forced by each on the other, rather 
than being independent.' 
III. 103, 10 'In so far as the animal's members are simply moments of its 
form, and are perpetually negating their independence, and withdrawing 
into a unity which is the reality of the Notion, and is for the Notion, the 
animal is the existent Idea.' 
Indiffirence: @leicggiiltigteit. Hegel does use this word simply to mean the fact 
of making no difference: 
III. 140, 18 'The arrangement is more or less a matter of indifference, the 
main point being that the senses in their rationality constitute a totality.' 
More often than not however, he employs it to convey further shades of 
meaning, some of which were better understood in eighteenth century 
English and German than they are today. In the following context for 
example, its adjectival form is synonymous with 'neutral'. 
11.34,5 'Rigidity, which is the lunar principle, is no longer indifferent 
being-for-self, but as an element entering into relation with something 
other than itself, i.e. individuality, it is the full process of active 
and restless being-for-self, and is therefore liberated negativity, or 
flre.' 
The most misleading examples of his use of it are however those in 
which it might appear to mean the indetermination of a body to rest or 
motion: Henry Pemberton (1694-1771) 'View of Sir Isaac Newton's 
Philosophy' (1728) p. 29, 'All bodies have such an indifference to rest, or 
motion, that if once at rest they remain so.' C£ D. Lardner (1793-1859) 
'Pneumatics' (1831) Hydrostatics VII p. 124. When reading Hegel, it has 
often to be remembered that various currencies circulating within the 
Empire were said to ,gleicg gelten', i.e. be in a state of parity, and that this 
gave the German word a further meaning, which he frequently has in 
mind, but which is absent from its English equivalent. 
160 

INTRODUCTION 
I. 244, 21 'In accordance with the temporal determination in which 
indifferent spatial subsistence is sublated, (the body) is transitory.' 
See Adelung's strictures on the looseness of contemporary usage (II, 
714-715), and the Berlinjoke recorded by H. Schrader in 'Bilderschmuck 
der deutschen Sprache' (Berlin, 1901) p. 482. 
Intro-reflection: mefle!iou-tu..fidJ. This term is not to be related too closely to 
the 'reflection' involved in psychological phenomena and epistemological 
problems. When employing it, Hegel evidently has in mind the standard usage 
of his day (Adelung III, 1018), according to which reflection is, 'The action by 
which one body is thrown back by another, especially in catoptrics, when 
light-rays are thrown back from a smooth surface.' He might therefore have 
defined intro-reflection as, 'the reciprocal activity by means of which distinguish-
able factors constitute a unity.' 
I. 261, II 'In the syllogism which contains the Idea of gravity, this Idea is 
the Notion disclosing itselfin external reality in the particularity of bodies, 
and at the same time, in the ideality and intro-reflection of these bodies, 
displaying its integration into itself in motion.' 
II. 160, II 'Physical being has withdrawn into itselffrom touch and from 
determinate being lacking all quality; it is intro-reflected, and is in its 
otherness.' 
III. 107,9 'As an intra-reflected unity of various singularities, the animal 
exists as a spontaneously self-producing end, and is a movement which 
returns into its particular individuality.' 
III. 137,2 'In this external relation, the animal organism is immediately 
intro-reflected. ' 
Intuition: m:uidJauuug (Latin intuitio). Throughout the whole exposition ofhis 
system, Hegel makes an implicit acknowledgement of the fact that it is in-
tuition which provides the subject matter of knowledge. He distinguishes sharply 
between intuition and dialectical thinking however ('Encyclopaedia' § 246). 
The part played by intuition in the development of his system needs a more 
thoroughgoing analysis than it has received hitherto. In many respects his 
attitude toward intuited knowledge bears a much closer resemblance to that of 
the empiricists than is often realized. C£ John Locke 'An Essay Concerning 
Human Understanding' Bk. IV ch. 2 § i ('Works' 10 vols. London, 1823 II 
p. po), 'For if we will reflect on our ways of thinking, we shall find that 
sometimes the mind perceives the agreement or disagreement of two ideas 
immediately by themselves, without the intervention of any other: and this, 
I think, we may call intuitive knowledge .... Thus the mind perceives, that 
F 
161 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
white is not black, that a circle is not a triangle, that three are more than two, 
and equal to one and two.' 
I. 203, I 'Intuition has therefore been reinstated in the philosophy of 
nature, and set above reflection, but this gets us nowhere, because one 
cannot philosophize on the basis of intuition.' 
ITL 27,26 'Even for the intuition, the variety of the species occurs in precise 
accordance with Notional distinction.' 
Juxtaposition: ~uf3eteinanbetfein. The categories involving this state most ex-
plicitlyare assessed in §§ 86-111 of the 'Encyclopaedia'. The condition of 'being 
outside one another' is not described with perfect accuracy by Juxtaposition', 
which usually implies that two or more things are side by side, but no other 
English word enables one to maintain Hegel's distinctions between this con-
aition, collaterality and extrinsicality. Cf. Joseph Glanvill (1636-1680) 'Scepsis 
scientifica, or confest ignorance the way to science' (1665) vii 37, 'Parts that are 
united by a meer juxta-position.' 
I. 223, 19 'Space is merely the possibility, not the positedness of juxta-
position and what is negative, and is therefore simply continuous.' 
II. 64, 23 'Qualitative coherence is therefore a specific mode of juxta po-
sition, i.e. a determination of space.' 
Material being: IDlaterieUe (Latin materialitas). Hegel uses this word to refer to 
that which constitutes the 'matter' of something as opposed to its formality. 
The meaning he attaches to it is therefore precisely the same as one of the mean-
ings covered by the English word 'materiality' (German IDlaterialitiit). Cf. 
Jeremy Taylor (1613-1667) 'Ductor dubitantium' (1660) II ii Rule 2, 'If blood 
be taken in its own materiality when the beast is dead. . .' 
II. 92. 10 'Selfhood ... maintains itselfin the extemality which is subject 
to it, and as the freely determining totality of this material being, consti-
tutes free individuality.' 
IT. II9, 36 'Consequently, the sense of hearing coincides with this special-
ization, in which infinite form is related to material being.' 
II. 123,23 'In so far as the punctiform self of individuality is unhindered 
in its internal formativeness, it has nothing further within this dark material 
being which is alien to it.' 
Mediation: ~ennittelung (Latin mediatio). The wider significance of this term 
is discussed in §§ 65 et seq. of the 'Encyclopaedia'. Cf. H. Niel 'De la mediation 
dans la philosophie de Hegel' (paris, 1945). In this treatment of the natural 
sciences Hegel uses it in a great variety of contexts, not all of which have a 
predominantly philosophical as well as a scientific significance. Cf. Richard 
Kirwan (1733-1812) 'Elements of Mineralogy' (2nd ed. 1794-1796) II p. 269, 
'By the mediation of nickel it will unite to Bismuth.' 
162 

INTRODUCTION 
11.185, I 'The bodies which enter into (the real process) are mediated by 
a third term which is not identical with them.' 
Ill. 68, 10 'In plants, and especially in the lower forms, there is no 
mediation by means of opposition; opposition gives rise to no conjunc-
tion, nutrition is a transformation which is devoid of process.' 
III. 173, 2 'The genus is present in the individual ... as an urge to ... 
integrate itself through union with this other, and by means of this 
mediation to bring the genus into existence by linking itself into it.' 
Multiplicity: 9Rannigfaltigfeit (Latin multiplicitas). Adelung (III 61-62) defines 
it as 'that condition in which things exhibit difference in plurality: multiplicity 
of flowers, colours, animals etc.' In Biblical contexts the English equivalents of 
the German word are 'manifoldness' or 'many things': Ephesians III. 10; James 
III. 2. C£ 'Encyclopaedia' §§ U6-120. 
I. 219, 9 'We see gravity revealed for the first time as the being-for-self 
which submits multiplicity to its rule.' 
II. 72, 9 'Vibration is also present in friction, for while it lasts, a multi-
plicity is posited in unity.' 
III. 47, 33 'All organic being differentiates itself within itself, and main-
tains the unity of multiplicity.' 
Hegel sometimes emphasizes the unity of a plurality by using the word 
,9Rannigfaltige'. This might have been rendered by 'manifoldness'. Since the 
contexts usually make his meaning clear however, it has been thought advisable 
to avoid the use of this clumsy synonym. 
I. 210, 23 'The organic body is still a whole composed of a multiplicity 
of mutually external members.' 
II. 101,6 'Sensuous comprehension merely binds together multiplicity in 
an external manner.' 
The English word has occasionally been used to cover further shades of 
meaning: 
11.61,24 'The determination of the form is still a specific mode of the 
spatial interrelation of its elemental multiplicity.' 
(,i~te~ ~ielfad)en 
aufeinanbet'). 
11.92,20 'The shape ... is absolute centrality, which unlike gravity. no 
longer has multiplicity merely external to it.' (,bie ~ielen'). 
Object: @egenfianb (Latin objectum). This term first appeared in German as a 
translation of the Latin in 1625. although it was not widely used in philosophical 
contexts until the early eighteenth century: see J. C. Gottsched (1700-1766) 
'Erste Griinde der gesammten Weltweisheit' (1734) Theoretischer Theil §32.Q, 
163 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
,3ebe witfenbe Utjaef)e muf} etwas !:lOt fief) ~aben, batein fie widet •.• biejes 
nennet man bas Dbject obet ben @egenftanb.' Henry Home (1696-1782) 
'Elements of Criticism' (1762) 'Everything we perceive or are conscious of, 
whether a being or a quality, ... is with respect to the percipient termed an 
object.' 
Towards the close of the seventeenth century the word was used in devo-
tional contexts to mean trust and support in dealing with inner temptation and 
external affliction: see Q. Kuhlmann (1651-1689) 'Kiihlpsalter' (1684/5) nos. 
70, 79. In the Swabian dialect of Hegel's day it was also synonymous with 
impediment, opposition, obstacle, resistance (H. Fischer 'Schwabisches Worterbuch' 
(1911) vol. III. 180). At that time, this meaning had almost fallen out of use in 
High German however, and its survival was deplored by lexicographers, since 
it tended to give rise to misunderstandings (Adelung II 486). 
For Hegel's most extensive treatment of the term see the 'Encyclopaedia' 
§§ 193-212. The bearing of its various meanings upon his contextural use of 
it might, perhaps, be profitably investigated. 
1. 204, 38 'If subjective truth is the correspondence between sensuous 
representation and the object, objective truth is the correspondence of the 
object, of the fact, with itself, so that its reality is in conformity with its 
Notion.' 
III. 104,28 'Although this awareness is punctiform, it is infinitely deter-
minable, and as it has itself as its object, the subject of which is the ego=ego 
of sentience, it maintains the lucidity of its simplicity.' 
Of an ideal nature: ibeeU: Of a real nature: teeU. Hegel's use of either of these terms 
implies reference to the other. 
Between 1741 and 1796 there were many instances in German of ,ibeal' 
being used to mean 'mental, conceived solely through thought': see Hans 
Schulz 'Deutsches Fremdworterbuch' (Strassburg, 1913) vol. I p. 280. Schelling 
seems to have coined the word ,ibeeU' to cover this meaning, and his mintage 
is now common currency (Trabner vol. IV). He did so in the course of grappling 
with the Fichtean problem of the relationship between the ego and the non-ego: 
see 'System des transcendentalen Idealismus' (1800) p. 76 ('Werke' vol. II 
p. 385), 'Now the bounds (dividing the ego from the non-ego) must however be 
both of a real and of an ideal nature. They are of a real nature in that they are in-
dependent of the ego, since the ego is not actually limited in any other way: 
they are oj an ideal nature in that they are dependent upon the ego, since the ego 
only posits itself through perception as that which is limited. Both statements, 
that the bounds are of a real nature and that they are simply of an ideal nature, 
may be deduced from self-consciousness.' 
Hegel evidently found this Schellingian terminology convenient. He did not 
however, confme his use of it to contexts relating to epistemological and 
164 

INTRODUCTION 
psychological problems ('Encyclopaedia' § 96). By saying that a phenomenon 
is 'of an ideal nature' he usually means that it is to be regarded as homogeneously 
unified. 
I. 223, 5 'It is on account of its being self-externality, that space consti-
tutes collaterality of a completely ideal nature.' 
II. 81,29 'This internal disturbance of the body within itself contains not 
only the ideal nature of a sublation of matter, but also the real sublation of 
it by heat.' 
III. 212, 12 'It is in this way that the Idea exists in the independent subject, 
which as an organ of the Notion, fmds everything to be fluid and of an 
ideal nature, i.e. it thinks, appropriates to itself all that is spatial and tem-
poral, and so contains universality, i.e. itself' 
By saying that it is of a real nature, he implies that a phenomenon, on account 
of its reality, is distinct from and yet an aspect of a homogeneous unity. 
I. 238, 29 'Even this thought implies vaguely that the effect of force is a 
sensuous event of a real nature however, that there is no difference 
between the content and expression of force, and that precisely this force has 
the real nature of its expression in the relationship between the ideal nature 
of the moments of space and time.' 
II. 99, 32 'It is true that all shape of a real nature which is not merely 
brittle involves this principle of determination' (magnetism). 
III. 148, 16 'The real nature of the process is primarily a process with the 
elements, for in the first instance external being itself is universal.' 
Opposition: @egenfa~ (Greek avrt8€u,s, Latin oppositio). The general significance 
of opposition is discussed in § II9 of the 'Encyclopaedia' (c£ Aristotle 'Meta-
physics' V, 18). Like Aristotle ('Physics' I, S), Hegel also recognizes that it 
occurs in natural phenomena in a philosophically unimportant manner. C£ Sir 
Balthazar Gerbier (IS91 ?-1667) 'Counsel and Advise to all Builders' (London, 
1663) p. 10, 'The Nature of Aire being to ascend, and when it meets with a 
sudden opposition it spreads.' The German word was probably coined by the 
natural scientists and lawyers of the later Middle Ages. It is fIrst recorded, as a 
translation of the Latin, by Johannes Frisius (IS0S-IS6S): see 'Dictionarium 
Latino-germanicum' (ZUrich, IS41) 614b. 
I. 192, 12 'The initial opposition we encounter is to be regarded as acci-
dental and superficial.' 
II. 157, 39 'It is in this way that this universal element becomes a particu-
lar moment, separated from the whole; and the other moment is the 
antithesis. ' 
II. 161,26 'The metallicism ... is a base or extremity which may only 
be brought into active opposition by an external agent.' 
165 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
III. II, 3 'Life is not merely the resolution of the opposition between 
the Notion and reality, but of oppositions in general.' 
Otherness: \2(nbet~fein (Latin alteritas). Eisler (vol. I p. 48) distinguishes between 
alterity (\2(nbet~eit) and otherness (\2(nbet~fein), but we have Coleridge's 
authority for regarding them as synonymous in English: 'Blackwood's Maga-
zine' vol. X p. 249 (1821), 'Outness is but the feeling of otherness (alterity), 
redered intuitive, or alterity visually represented.' C£ the 'Encyclopaedia' 
§ 91. 
The distinction out of which Hegel's use of this word arises bears a very close 
resemblance to that motivating his use of 'of an ideal nature' and 'of a real 
nature' (cf.). In its most general form it involves the recognition of the com-
prehensive difference between the universals of the 'Logic' and the particularities 
of 'Nature'. 
I. 205, 7 'Nature has yielded itself as the Idea in the form of otherness.' 
C£ Alexander Gill (1597-1642) 'The Sacred Philosophie of the Holy Scrip-
ture' (1635) I. 83, 'Absolute perfection, ... without othernesse or change.' 
Henry More (1614-1687) 'A Platonicall Song of the Soul' (1642) Ii; 
'Psyche! from thee they spring, 
o life of Time, and all Alterity.' 
He does not confine its use solely to this context however. 
II. 160, 12 'Physical being has withdrawn into itselffrom touch and from 
determinate being lacking all quality; it is intro-reflected, and is in its 
otherness.' 
III. 132,22 'The otherness or externality of the organism is the untram-
melled being of shape, the quiescence opposed to the process.' C£ Thomas 
Stanley (1625-1678) 'The History of Philosophy' (4 vols. 1655-1662) 1701 
ed. 377.2, 'The Maker of all things took union, and Division, and Iden-
tity, and Alterity, and Station, and Motion to compleat the soul.' 
Particularity: ~efonbet~eit (Latin particularitas). On the three moments of the 
Notion (universality, particularity, singularity) see the 'Encyclopaedia' §§ 163-
165. Hegel does use ,~atticulatitat': 
II. 144, 27 'Another Englishman has in fact maintained that black is 
composed of all the colours. This obliterates the particularity of colour.' 
In cases such as this he simply has in mind 'The quality of being particular as 
opposed to general.' C£ Isaac Watts (1674-1748) 'Logick' (1725) I iv § 4, 'Any 
common name whatever is made proper by terms of particularity added to it.' 
166 

INTRODUCTION 
Adelung refers to ~efonbet~eit as, 'a word which some have recently dared' 
to put into currency. Hegel evidently made use of it in order to emphasize the 
strict technicality of the meaning it derives from the structure of the 'Notion'. 
I. 217, 26 'The Idea, as nature, has ... the determination of particularity, 
in which reality is posited with an immanent determinateness of form and 
its own existent differentiation.' 
I. 277, 26 'It is the dependent heavenly bodies which constitute the 
aspect of particularity; this is why they fall apart and differentiate them-
selves, for in nature particularity exists as duality, and not as unity, as 
it does in spirit.' 
Plurality: ~iel~eit (Latin pluralitas). The wider significance of this category is 
analyzed in § 98 of the 'Encyclopaedia'. A consideration of this assessment and 
treatment of it might possibly open up an enlightening dialogue with those 
intimately acquainted with the original inspiration of the pluralism and logical 
atomism etc. which flourished during the first half of this century: see Eisler II 
p. 469, m p. 422; G. J. Warnock 'English Philosophy since 1900' (London, 
1958). 
In everyday German usage, as in English, 'plurality' is distinguished from 
'multitude' (smenge) in that it is more abstract, and in that it tends to imply 
slightly more of an emphasis upon its component entities; unlike 'multiplicity' 
(smannigfaltigfeit) however, it does not have the further connotation of an 
emphasis upon difference. C£ Adelung IV 1203; J. R. nIingworth 'Divine 
Immanence' (1904) vii 86/2, 'The fact that there is plurality, triune plurality 
in God.' 
I. 261, 23 'Difference is posited therefore, and plurality is no longer inde-
terminate as with the stars.' 
III. 9, 26 'In nature, animation certainly disperses into the indeterminate 
plurality of living beings.' 
Posit: fe~en (Greek .,.,O/vaL). Despite the use Fichte and Schelling made of it in 
dealing with epistemological problems, Hegel does not usually employ this 
word to mean 'postulate'. The meaning he attaches to it is closely related to its 
significance in those contexts where it is employed in the sense of bringing 
something into a specific place (Adelung IV. 65), see Genesis I. 17. ,Unb @ott 
feite (mdytet) an bie ~efte be~ tlimmel~/, or of setting a goal or boundaries, 
see Deuteronomy XXXII. 8, ,~a bet ~net~odyfte (fie) ~etteilte .•• feite 
et Me @ten~en bet ~olfet.' The whole structure of the 'Encyclopaedia' has 
therefore to be borne in mind if the junctures at which he. uses the word are 
to be interpreted correctly. 
1. 216,23 'Nature is implicitly a living whole; more closely considered, the. 
167 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
movement through its series of stages consists of the Idea positing itself as 
what it is implicitly.' 
II. 25,6 'Light is active identity, and posits the identification of every-
thing.' 
. III. 105, 26 'This positing of itself as the pure and proper negativity of 
various specific places etc., is an extremely important distinguishing faculty 
(of the animal).' 
The assessment of space as being the initial level of nature, and as having 
logical considerations as a whole as its immediate presupposition, throws light 
upon the exact meaning Hegel attaches to 'positedness' (@efe~tfein). 
I. 209, 8 'Its (nature's) distinctive characteristic is its positedness, its nega-
tivity.' 
I. 223, 19 'On account of its lack of difference, space is merely the 
possibility, not the positedness of juxtaposition.' 
Presupposition: ~orau~fe~ung (Latin praesuppositio). Hegel's system might 
profitably be regarded as a thoroughgoing and consistent analysis of all pre-
suppositions. The progressions in complexity basic to the arrangement of its 
subject matter, when regarded retrogressively, are seen to involve the attempt 
to establish the precise interrelatedness of the presuppositions made in specialized 
thought, research and activity: see Theodor Litt 'Hegel. Versuch einer kritischen 
Erneuerung' (Heidelberg, 1953); c£ E. Hussed 'Logische Untersuchungen' 
(1900-1901) vol. II p. 19; A. Meinong 'Uber Moglichkeit und Wahrschein-
lichkeit' (1915) p. 450 et seq. 
II. 188, 13 'Consequendy, the real totality of this course becomes a cycle 
of particular processes, each of which has the other as its presupposition.' 
III. 15,6 'The first moment of particularization is that the organism con-
verts itself into its own presupposition, and so assumes the mode of im-
mediacy, in which it confronts itself with its condition and outer subsistence.' 
Purpose: .awed (Greek -d)"os, Latin finis, causa finalis). This category is dealt 
with in some detail in §§ 204-212 of the 'Encyclopaedia'. In the 'Philosophy 
of Nature' Hegel calls attention to it in various contexts, none of which presents 
any great difficulty in respect of interpretation. 
I. 212, 28 'The view that natural things are useful is true in that it denies 
that they are absolute purpose in and for themselves.' 
II. 114, 6 'This in the first instance of the purposiveness of nature 
itsel£' 
III. 145,20 'Instinct is supposed to be shrouded in mystery and difficult to 
grasp, but the root of this difficulty is merely that purpose can only be 
grasped as the inner Notion.' 
168 

INTRODUCTION 
Reality: 9tealWit (Latin realitas). This category is assessed in § 91 of the 'Encyclo-
paedia', and a distinction is drawn between two occurrences of it: 
(i) 'We speak, for example, of the reality of a plan or a purpose, meaning 
thereby that they are no longer inner and subjective, but have passed into 
being-there-and-then.' C£ 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (3rd ed., 1797) vol. XVIII 
79/1, 'Numberless absurdities, such as, that ..• forms or sensible qualities are real 
things independent of their subject and the sentient beings who perceive them.' 
I. 217,26 'The Idea, as nature, has ... the determination of particularity, 
in which reality is posited with an immanent determinateness.' 
I. 258, 16 'The self-positing of matter within the determinations of its 
moments is necessary to material reality.' 
II. 25, 7 'Light is active identity, and posits the identification of every-
thing. As this identity is still entirely abstract however, there is as yet no 
real identity of things.' 
(ii) 'The word "reality" is however used in another acceptation to mean that 
something behaves conformably to its essential characteristic or notion.' C£ 
Locke 'Essay on Human Understanding' II XXX § 2, 'Our simple ideas are 
all real, all agree to the Reality of things.' 
II. 14,40 'After having developed the Notion of light, the question of its 
reality naturally presents itself.' 
II. 215, 33 'On being abandoned as a middle term, they (water and air) 
become the means by which the real extremes of the syllogism assume the 
existence of their original differentiation.' 
III. 166, 12 'The mechanical drive, as an instinct, constitutes the third 
moment; it is the unity of the ideal nature of the theoretical process, and 
of the real process of digestion.' 
Relatedness: ~er~alten. The German word can mean behaviour, deportment, 
conduct, demeanour, bearing. In its verbal form it has been used in mathematical 
contexts since the seventeenth century. Hege1' s use of it in mechanics, physics 
and the organic sciences, though not unique, is unusual. He employs it to refer 
to a relationship, one factor of which tends to be predominant or to take the 
initiative. His practice therefore provides an interesting adaption of the accepted 
usage of his day: see Adelung IV 1056-1057, who takes the word to signify, 
'The free determination of our own activity in relation to the things external 
to us, the aggregate of numerous concurrent actions of this kind, isolated actions 
being unable to constitute a relatedness.' 
II. 62, II 'We have seen that pressure and impact constitute a purely 
mechanical relatedness.' 
III. 51, 1 'As the plant has not yet attained to this selfhood however, it 
lacks the inwardness which would be free of external relatedness.' 
F* 
169 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
III. 104, 36 'The animal, like the plant, treats externality as something 
which is of an ideal nature, ... (this) is a relatedness which makes no 
demands.' 
Relation: 58e3ie~ung (Latin relatio). This word first appeared in German 
chancery jargon in 1671. Its origin was evidently still well-known in Hegel's 
day, for in 1813 J. H. Campe (1746-1818) noted that a recently coined adjectival 
form ofit (6e3iigHcf)-relative to), 'smells very strongly of chancery': 'W6rter-
buch' (Brunswick, 1813). 
Hegel uses it in a perfectly straightforward manner to refer to any connection, 
correspondence, or association, which can be conceived as naturally existing 
between things. In accordance with normal usage, he takes a relation to be less 
complex than a relationship. C£ Robert Jameson (1774-1854) 'Treatise on the 
external characters of minerals' (3rd ed. 1817) p. 173, 'The nucleus increases on 
its part, always preserving the same relation with the entire crystal.' 
I. 221, II 'When this is not an external relation, it gives rise to self-motiva-
ted matter, i.e. to the absolute unity of matter and motion.' 
II. 33,24 'Here (in the Earth) the subjective principle of individuality, 
which is an infmite self-relation, is still exterior to the universal indi-
viduality which is not yet reflected into itself, i.e. to the stimulating and 
animating principle of light.' 
III. 30, 34 'Some lodes yield precious metals, others base metals, and here 
there are significant relations which are indicative of a higher connection.' 
Relationship: }8et£jiUtnif3 (Latin proportio, relatio). Hegel uses the word to refer 
to connections more complex than 'relations'. In German, as in English, it is 
widely used with reference to human affairs. Adelung carefully notes its various 
shades of meaning and adds, 'often however, it is also nothing more than the 
factotum of the classroom philosophers, who employ it in the purveyance of 
turgid and confused concepts.' 
I. 238, 18 'Velocity ... is a quantitative relationship, simply between 
space and time'. 
II. 68, 32 'In form, every particle has its particular place, and is the preser-
ver of this particular relationship.' 
III. 193, 8 'In the two relationships considered above, the self-mediation of 
the genus with itself is the process of its diremption into individuals.' 
Self: 6elOft. The ultimate German origin of this word, as used by Hegel, was 
the pietistic literature of the late seventeenth century, in which it tended to carry 
the connotation of selftshness and egocentricity. During the eighteenth century 
it entered German philosophical writing as a synonym for' ego'. Hegel's use of it 
with reference to inanimate phenomena was probably influenced by its forming 
170 

INTRODUCTION 
a constituent element in the structure of ,fel6ftiinbig
l (independent), and by his 
intense awareness of the complexity relationships implicit in all natural entities. 
This usage appears to be peculiar to him. 
The German pietists borrowed the word from English, in which its early 
philosophical usage shows the influence of Cartesianism and Hobbism. See 
Locke 'Human Understanding' (1690) IT :xxvii § 17, 'Self is that conscious 
thinking thing, whatever Substance, made up of Spiritual, or Material, Simple, 
or Compounded, it matters not, which is sensible, or conscious of Pleasure 
and Pain ... and so is concern'd for it self, as far as that consciousness 
extends.' 
I. 245, 14 'The positing of this sublation begins already in the selfless body'. 
II. 68, 17 'Elasticity is retreat into self for the subsequently immediate 
re-establishment of sel£' 
III. 104, 17 'The animal's self is of an ideal nature, it is not effused and 
immersed in materiality, but is merely active and present within it.' 
Selfhood (6elbftifd)feit) made its appearance in English through John Ellistone's 
translations of Boehme's works: see 'The epistles of Jacob Behmen' (1649) X 8, 
'A child's naturall understanding of selfehood' (6el6~eit). Hegel simply uses 
the word to generalize the concept of' self' . 
II. 25,13 'Light is still entirely abstract selfhood, and is therefore the not-
self, the free self-identity which is devoid of all opposition within itsel£' 
II. 165, 3 'Nevertheless, although this selfhood is at the same time an 
abstract reality, it is an intrinsically differentiated light,-electrical relation-
ship.' 
III. 48, 3 'The plant has not yet advanced to this internal difference how-
ever; if it had, the unifying point of selfhood and the organic crystal 
would already constitute the two aspects of its life.' 
Self-externality: mufletfid)fein. The categories predominating in this condition 
are dealt with in §§ 137-141 of the 'Encyclopaedia'. If the treatment of a 
phenomenon demands a distinction between its internal and external character-
istics, and yet the appearance ofit, 'shows nothing that is not in the essence, and 
in the essence there is nothing but what is manifested', it may be said to be 
self-external. 
I. 224, I I 'The further requirement is that the intuition of space shall 
correspond to the thought of pure self-externality.' 
II. 88,24 'Heat ... as an existent negative ... ,is its self-externality and 
self-positedness within another.' 
III. 2II, 7 'The last self-externality of nature is sublated, so that the 
Notion, which in nature merely has implicit being, has become for itself.' 
171 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Shape: @eftalt. C£ the definition of ,~otm/. Hegel takes shape to be the external 
form or contour of things, i.e. that quality of a material object or geometrical 
figure which depends on constant relations of position and proportionate 
distance among all the points composing its outline or its external surface. Cf. 
Adelung II 633-634, who observes that the word has its origin in ,fteUen' (to 
place), and so derives its literal meaning from the manner in which the parts 
of anything are disposed. The shades of meaning current in early nineteenth 
century usage are extremely complicated. Schiller, for example, gives the 
following account of the relationship between form and shape as he understood 
it, 'The word shape is used in both a figurative and literal sense to express, in a 
general concept, the object of that which has a tendency to take form. It is a 
concept which includes all the formal qualities of things, as well as their relations 
to the faculties of thinking.' ('On the Aesthetic Education of Man' letter xv, 2.) 
II. 92, 13 'The transition now has to be made to real individuality or 
shape, the moments of which have been seen in that which preceded.' 
11.121,25 'Shape, as the pure form, by which matter is completely deter-
mined and pervaded, is merely self-identical in matter, and dominates it 
throughout.' 
III. 46, 9 'On the other hand, living being is also the shape which has 
substantial form dwelling within it.' 
Singularity: ~n3eln'fJeit (Latin singularitas). C£ J. H. Campe 'Worterbuch der 
Deutschen Sprache' (1807) I. 887. On the three moments of the Notion (univer-
sality, particularity, singularity) see the 'Encyclopaedia' §§ 163-165. Since Hegel 
makes the attempt to present the most complex levels of each sphere as singu-
larities, he is perpetually attempting to show that singularity as such includes 
the less complex levels of universality and particularity, 'The third (moment 
of the Notion) is singularity-meaning the reflection-into-self of the specific 
characters of universality and particularity; which negative self-unity has 
complete and original determinateness, without any loss to its self-identity or 
universality.' (op. cit. § 163). C£ Theophilus Gale (1628-1678) , The Court of 
the Gentiles' (1669-1676) lip. 4, 'His Universal Ideas ... he makes to be the ... 
great Exemplar and image of all singulars.' 
I. 237, 4 'Place is spatial and therefore indifferent singularity.' 
III. 42, 25 'The first has the form of singularity, the second that of 
universality.' 
Sublate: auf'fJeoen (Latin tollere). The double sense in which Hegel uses this 
word is explained in § 96 of the 'Encyclopaedia', 'We mean by it (i) to clear 
away, or annul: thus, we say, a law or a regulation is set aside: (ii) to keep or 
preserve: in which sense we use it when we say: something is well put by.' The 
Latin equivalent has the same double meaning as the German word. 
172 

INTRODUCTION 
Prior to the publication of J. H. Stirling's 'The Secret of Hegel' in 1865, 
sublation was used in English simply to mean removal or denial: Michael Hawke 
'Killing is murder and no murder' (1657) p. 46, 'Tiberius was sub1ated by 
poison'; Sir William Hamilton ( 1805-1865) 'Lectures on Logic.l 837-1838' (1866) 
xvii, 1 331, 'When of two opposite predicates the one is posited or affIrmed, the 
other is sub1ated or denied.' 
I. 242, 9 'It is essential to distinguish gravity from mere attraction, which is 
simply the general sublation of juxtaposition, and yields nothing but 
continuity.' 
II. 163, 16 'Taste is the third particularity of the body, and as the result of 
its neutrality, it has sublated this relationship to the element once again, 
and drawn itself away from it.' 
Ill. 212, 3 'The other side, which is death, constitutes the sublation of the 
singular, and is therefore the proceeding forth of the genus, of spirit.' 
Subsistence: ~efte~en (Latin subsistentia). The condition or quality of inhering 
or residing in something: see Thomas Spencer 'The art oflogick' (1628) p. 50, 
'The forme is not the difference it selfe: for, a forme is a subsistence in an 
unitie.' This meaning was part of the normal German usage of Hegel's day. 
Adelung (I, 926b) defines the word as meaning, 'Having its essence in something, 
as when the happiness of the soul is said to subsist in activity.' That which 
subsists was usually regarded as being more permanent than that constituted 
by it. Cf. ,6d)on~eit t1etge~t, ~ugenb befte~t.' In its verbal form the word is 
usually most conveniently translated into English by means of 'consist'. 
The second major sphere of the 'Logic' ('Encyclopaedia' §§ II2-159), i.e. 
that concerned with 'Essence' or the hierarchy of categories exhibiting pairs 
of correlatives, may be regarded as constituting an extended analysis of sub-
sistence in general. 
I. 242, 15 'In the sphere of the primary immediacy of nature, the self-external 
being of continuity is still posited as subsistent however.' 
II. 67, 1 'That which is material has its indifferent and specific subsistence 
as its place.' 
III. 137,27 'The theoretical process is the free disinterested process of sen-
sation, which also allows for the subsistence of the external being.' 
Substance: 6ubftan3 (Greek VrroKl€/L€vov, 
v7T6uTUULS, Latin substantia). Since 
scientific research is continually revising our interpretations of complexity 
relationships, no precise philosophical defmition of substance is of any per-
manent interest, and Hegel never attempts to give one. He sometimes appears 
to emphasize the necessary revisability of all defmitions of it by taking the 
word to be synonymous with ,6toW, which can mean 'stuff' as well as matter, 
substance, element etc. 
173 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
He is aware of its convenience as a heuristic concept however: see 'Encyclo-
paedia', §§ 126-128. C£ Locke 'Human Understanding' II xxiii § 2, 'The idea 
. . . to which we give the general name Substance, being nothing, but the 
supposed ... support of those Qualities ... which we imagine cannot subsist, 
sine re substante, without something to support them.' C£ Henry Home (1696-
1782) 'Elements of Criticism' (1774) II app. 507, 'A being with respect to its 
properties or attributes is termed a subject, or substratum. Every substratum of 
visible qualities, is termed substance.' 
II. 11,25 'In the first sphere the determinations are still distinguished from 
the substance, they are not material determinations; substance as such is 
still shut up within itself and unmanifest.' 
II. 214, 32 'Animal and vegetable substances belong moreover to quite 
another natural order.' 
II. 215, 22 'In this connection it is most surprising to fmd the four 
chemical elements of oxygen etc., regarded substances.' (6toffe). 
III. 121, 21 'As the substance which is common to all the parts, the blood 
is the irritable principle uniting them all in an inner unity.' 
Thing: ~ing (Greek xpfjp.a, 7Tpiiyp.a; Latin res, ens). In the 'Logic' ('Encyclo-
paedia' §§ 123-130) Hegel defines thing as presupposing existence and as the 
immediate antecedent of matter and form. His conception of it therefore 
corresponds fairly closely to that prevailing in normal English usage, according 
to which it is, 'that which has separate or individual existence, as distinct on 
the one hand from the totality of being, on the other from attributes or qualities'. 
See Coleridge 'Biographia Literaria' (1817) xii I 267, 'An infinite independent 
thing is no less a contradiction than an infinite circle or a sideless triangle.' 
I. 196, 31 'Aristotle had already noticed this notion of purpose in nature, 
and he called the activity the nature oj a thing.' 
I. 200, 17 'Theoretical consciousness, because of its onesided assumption 
that the natural things over against us are persistent and impenetrable, 
creates a difficulty which is refuted point-blank. by the practical approach, 
which displays the absolutely idealistic belief that individual things are 
nothing in themselves.' 
Totality: ~otalitat (Latin totalitas). It becomes evident from the contexts in 
which Hegel uses this word, that he regards the plurality so immediately ap-
parent in all knowledge and experience, as deriving various degrees of unity 
from qualitative differences and similarities. He was therefore evidently of the 
opinion, that it is only the appreciation of the interdependence of this plurality 
and unity which can give rise to meaningful defmitions of totalities. Any 
complete understanding of the overall totality he claimed for his system must 
174 

INTRODUCTION 
therefore be founded upon an analysis of §§ 84-86 of the 'Encyclopaedia'. 
W. van Dooren 'Het Totaliteitsbegrip bij Hegel en zijn Voorgangers' (Assen, 
1965). Cf. the definition of being; C. M. Ingleby (1823-1886) 'Introduction to 
Metaphysics' {I 869) II ii 171, 'I remark, obiter, that Totality is plurality in unity.' 
I. 206, 25 'God is subjectivity, activity, infmite actuosity, within which 
the other is only momentary, and remains implicit within the unity of 
the Idea, because it is itself this totality of the Idea.' 
I. 219,22 'Organic being, which is an individuality existing for itself and 
developing itself into its differences within itself, constitutes totality as 
found in nature. It determinations are at the same time concrete totalities, 
not merely specific properties, and remain qualitatively determined with 
regard to one another.' 
II. 181, 7 'Philosophically systematic consideration differs from an 
empirical approach in that it presents the stages of determinations, and not 
the stages of the concrete existences of nature as totalities.' 
II. 190, 35 '(In the philosophical consideration of chemistry) we have to 
regard the process in its totality, and the way in which it divides bodies 
into classes, and defmes them as the potentially fixed stages of its course." 
Undifferentiation: 
3nbifferen~. Cf. the definition of' differentiation'. Herbert 
Spencer 'First Principles' (1862) I iv 26, 'That undifferentiated substance of 
consciousness which is conditioned anew in every thought.' 
11.39,2 'Air is already the negativity of particularity, although this is not 
apparent because it is still posited in the shape of undifferentiated same-
ness.' (ununterfdJiebenen). 
II. 124, 9 'Powdered glass for example, and water whipped into foam, are 
opaque. Their mechanical undifferentiation and homogeneity are re-
moved and interrupted, and brought into the form of individualized 
being-for-self, while they were formerly a mechanical continuum.' 
II. 157,40 'Transparent being is also undifferentiated, although as it has 
this characteristic on account of its form, this lack of differentiation is 
opposed to the dead and dark undifferentiation we have here.' 
III. 142, 29 'The cause of this aberration lay in the fundamental error of 
first defming the Absolute as the absolute undifferentiation of subjective 
and objective being, and then supposing that all determination is merely 
quantitative difference.' 
Unity:(:fin~eit (Greek ",ova" Latin unitas). Hege1's insistence upon the impor-
tance of including both unity and plurality in any meaningful definition of a 
totality (cf.) probably accounts for the fact that he rarely refers to anything but a 
relative unity: see Aristotle 'Metaphysics' Bk. V ch. vi. Although he recognizes 
175 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
that the unit (bie ~lW) basic to arithmetic is in some respects no ordinary unity 
(§ 259 Rem.), he would therefore have disagreed with Locke's statement 
('Human Understanding' II vi § I) that, 'Amongst all the Ideas we have ... 
there is none more simple than that of Unity, or One.' C£ the 'Encyclopaedia' 
§§ 96-97· 
I. 210,31 'One should not allow oneself to be deceived by the appearance 
of extrinsicality; one should remember that the mutual externality consti-
tutes only a single unity.' 
I. 229, 3 I 'Time, as the negative unity of self-externality, is also purely 
abstract and of an ideal nature.' 
II. 170, 39 'Through form, the crystal has certainly brought back the 
difference of material being-for-self into a unity.' 
III. 103, 14 'The unity which is produced has being for the implicit unity 
of the animal. This implicit unity is the soul or Notion, which is present 
in the body in so far as the body constitutes the process of idealization.' 
Universality: ~rrgemein1Jeit (Latin universalitas). On the three moments of the 
Notion (universality, particularity, singularity) see the 'Encyclopaedia' §§ 163-
165. Hegel emphasizes their interdependence, 'But the universal of the notion is 
not a mere sum of features common to several things, confronted by a particular 
which enjoys an existence of its own. It is, on the contrary, self-particularizing 
or self-specifying, and with undimmed clearness fmds itself at home in its 
antithesis.' C£ Theodor Litt 'Das Allgemeine im Aufbau der geisteswissen-
schaftlichen Erkenntnis' (1941): Thomas Hobbes 'Human nature' (1650) V. 50, 
'The appellations that be universal, and common to many things, are not always 
given to all the particulars.' Logic, in that its subject matter is involved in but 
not confined to natural and spiritual phenomena, exhibits the characteristic of 
universality in its purest form. 
I. 197, I 'Physics ... does aim at comprehending that which is universal 
in nature as it presents itself in a determinate form, i.e. forces, laws, genera.' 
I. 201, 4 'The empirical view of nature has this category of universality 
in common with the philosophy of nature.' 
III. 42, 7 'The universal is existent, and the organic unit is the power 
which controls and consumes this negation of itself, this external being.' 
Variety: }Betid)iebenljeit (Greek JT€POT'T]>, Latin varietas, diversitas). In German, 
this word is first recorded, in its adjectival form, in 1678, and Lessing was the 
first to use it as a noun. Hegel defmes it as follows ('Encyclopaedia' § 117), 'In 
variety the different things are each individually what they are, and unaffected 
by the relation in which they stand to each other. This relation is therefore 
external to them.' Adelung (IV. 117) confirms the orthodoxy of this definition, 
176 

INTRODUCTION 
'the property by which a certain thing differs from others', and Triibner notes 
that the word implies 'opposition, difference and multiplicity'. 
H. 25,24 'Dark matter ... has material reality, and within itselffalls apart 
into a duality of ... corporeal variety ... , and the opposition as such.' 
H. 43, 8 'Consideration of this field (of the elements) suffers from a 
basic defect, which has its origin in the fixed conception of a substantial 
and unalterable variety of elements.' 
III. 27, 26 'Nature ... does not ... indicate necessity through the transi-
tion of various stratifications into one another ... merely by means of a 
gradual diminution however, for even for the intuition, the variety of the 
species occurs in precise accordance with Notional distinction.' 
Whole: @anhe (Greek 8,\ov, Latin totum). In § 135 of the 'Encyclopaedia', Hegel 
emphasizes the interdependence of the whole and the parts, 'The notion of the 
whole is to contain parts: but if the whole is taken and made what its notion 
implies, i.e. if it is divided, it at once ceases to be a whole. Things there are, 
no doubt, which correspond to this relation: but for that very reason they are 
low and untrue existences.' Cf. Aristotle 'Metaphysics' Bk. V. 26; Leibnitz 'Die 
philosophischen Schriften' (ed. C. J. Gerhardt, 7 vols. 1875-1890) vol. VII 
p. 544; Christian Wolff 'Philosophia prima sive ontologia' (1736) § 341; Isaac 
Watts 'Logick' (1725) I vi § 7, 'All Parts have a Reference to some Whole.' 
I. 270, 37 'This is the origin of the mathematical conception of the paral-
lelogram of forces in fmite mechanics, in which the space traversed is 
presented as the diagonal, which is therefore posited as part of a whole or 
function, and so susceptible to mathematical treatment.' 
H. 181, 36 'This is the position of the chemical process within the whole.' 
III. 41, 3 'Although it is a life of parts, it is ceaselessly dissolving itself 
within itself, and brings forth nothing but the whole.' 
177 


FOREWORD 
by 
+ 
KARL LUDWIG MICHELET 
+ 'To philosophize about nature is to create nature.' As I now finish the 
task allotted me by the Hegel Society of editing this priceless relic from 
the wealth of material Hegel has left us, it is only fitting that I should 
begin by quoting the man who really planned the revival of the philo-
s sophy of nature. It is with the consummate energy of enthusiasm, and the 
supreme confidence of thinking cognition, that this sentence expresses the 
point of view which the divine twins of modem science held four de-
cades ago, and which they defended triumphandy against the philosophy 
of reflection and everything associated with it. Their friendship developed 
10 in early youth, and gathered strength in their public activity at Jena, 
+ and the publication of the 'Critical Journal of Philosophy'. It was this 
friendship which won the ground on which Hegel was able to erect the 
sciences into a structure which is unsurpassable in its comprehensiveness, 
and which has its like only in the writings of Aristotle. If the sunny day of 
15 victorious truth now rises into the heavens of science after that bright and 
glorious dawn with which the century began, we shall enjoy in these 
lectures on the philosophy of nature one of the choicest fruits to have ripened 
from the garland of blossoms then in bud. 
One could regard this statement of Schelling's as presumptuous, and 
20 take it as evidence of the self-deification with which philosophy is so 
often charged at present. The poet says that it is the concern of philosophy 
'to think again the great thoughts of the creation' however, and if we 
express the thought in this way. it seems to be less outrageous. What in 
fact can be our object in philosophizing about nature, if it is not to re-
25 produce its intelligible essence or generative ideas by thinking them forth 
from our spiritual inwardness? In this connection I should like to draw 
attention to the end of these lectures, where Hegel brings out the creative 
activity of spirit in nature in a similar way. 
It is generally asserted however, that as experience is the only basis of 
30 scientific cognition, and most certainly the only basis of natural science, 
179 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Oil NATURE 
the whole business of a philosophy of nature, which is the comprehen-
sion of nature through thoughts, is idle and utopian. One cannot deny 
of course that the philosophy of nature would never be able to think about 
nature unless it could draw upon experience, but experiences are in no way 
conducive to the discovery of ideas, unless these ideas flow from an inner s 
source. It can be seen only too often, that the continuous and unorderly 
accumulation of empirical data, instead of furthering our knowledge of 
nature, merely gives rise to further confusions and contradictions. Con-
sequently, when the attempt is made to introduce a systematic consis-
tency into natural science, this is said to be a useless and impossible task, 10 
and even the empirical scientists themselves will admit that it is doomed to 
failure. Yet this continual hoarding of fresh discoveries must be motivated 
by the fundamental assumption that there is a final result to be reached, 
and that at some time or another there will be a breakthrough from the 
phenomena to the essence of nature. As an excuse for the perpetual post-
IS 
ponement of tIns, it is always pointed out that everything has not yet been 
discovered, -as if the goal which research of this kind has before it were 
not being continually shifted into the distance, for there is no end to what 
may be discovered. It is not surprising therefore, that when a philosophy of 
nature also enters the field, and attempts, as it must, to present the idea of 20 
the whole, it is passed by with a shrug of the shoulders, and a com-
miserating smile. 
We can say therefore, that natural science still fmds itself with the fol-
lowing difficulty: 'If we concern ourselves with understanding, noting 
particularities, exact observation, and distinguishing one thing from an-
25 
other, we shall tend to regard whatever arises from an idea and leads back 
into it, as to some extent a burden to us. We shall be at home in our 
labyrinths in our own way, and will not feel the need for a line of enquiry 
that might lead us more rapidly throughout the whole. If we are able 
to survey wider areas of science however, the danger is that we shall be 
tempted to despise detail, and to force that which depends for its life upon 30 
separation, into a stifling universality.' If we now enquire into the attempts + 
that have hitherto been made to break out of this difficult situation, a 
balanced and all-round understanding will seem to be even more of an 
impossibility. 
35 
The so-called philosophers of nature have certainly attempted to think 
over a great deal of empirical material. They have however been only too 
ready to apply the rigidly worked out schemata which were given cur-
rency by Eschenmayer under the name of potencies, in order to ravage and + 
obliterate the bright abundance and infinite multifariousness of nature, 40 
180 

FOREWORD 
and transform it into the drabbest of uniformities. Their turbid mixture of 
thought and empiricism was all the rage forty years ago, and one can 
hardly blame the empirical physicists for the forthright way in which they 
+ have rejected it. Our worthy friend Link passed judgement upon it, and 
5 we quote him with approbation, 'There is very little research to be done 
if one is prepared to accept the pronouncements of certain physiophilos-
ophers. They tell us for example that a plant is the product of light, 
earth, and attraction. According to Kieser, the plant in its integrity is the 
+ organic magnet, and shows this both in its entirety and in its parts. One 
10 runs across the holy triad of undiffcrentiation in differentiation every-
where. Nature has never been so abused. Speculation of this kind can 
offer us nothing but vague relationships and superficialities; it never 
touches the inexhaustible profusion of actuality, and instead of interpret-
ing the actual world, offers us hieroglyphics.' This philosophy of nature 
15 certainly applied the principle of creating nature through thought in a 
most unfortunate manner, for the figments of cognition it dealt with 
were merely the products of an eccentric imagination. 
Can we say however that empiricism has helped to close the gap which 
divides it from philosophy? If we note some of the views now being 
20 expressed by natural scientists, we shall have good reason to believe that 
Hegel's polemic against the atomistic and materialistic interpretations of 
+ nature is beginning to take effect. 'Resonant matter' has already been dis-
carded, and even Newton's theory of colour has not remained unques-
tioned, although the wave-theory which is replacing it seems to be even 
+ more materialistic. It has even been said quite recently that electricity is 
merely a direction, which sounds idealistic enough. These developments 
should not be overrated however, for if atoms are transformed in a cheap 
way into molecules, physicists will still swear by them, as they will by 
pores, caloric and its latency, magnetic fluid and many of the other odd 
30 names given to artificial concepts of the understanding. These names are 
also figments of cognition, and are in no way superior to the schemata of 
the philosophers of nature. 
I have heard it objected that Hegel was tilting at windmills. Physics 
itself is said to be capable of accepting the proposition that heat, electri-
35 city, atoms, and magnetic fluidity etc., are merely modifications of matter 
and not independent essences, without the help of philosophy. It is added 
moreover, that these expressions are essential to communication and the 
discovery of further phenomena; physics is said to make use of them as 
heuristic concepts, which it then attempts to confirm by means of ex-
40 periment. One might reply to this as follows. 
181 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
Philosophy should be grateful for the concession implicit in the point 
about the windmills, for as it was behind these windmills that the giant 
of empiricism had hidden himself, the fact that Hegel was knighted for 
combat of this kind should not detract in any way from his reputation. 
With regard to the second point, it should be remembered that even if 5 
this metaphysic of forces, matter, substances, and atoms etc. is only 
accepted as an hypothesis, it will still distort our initial assessment of 
experiments. It is impossible to interpret experiments soundly if ftxed 
preconceptions of this kind are read into them, and one then deludes one-
self into thinking that they conflI1ll these preconceptions. The way in 10 
which we speak is never a matter of indifference, for thoughts cleave to 
expressions. Philosophy and physics have hitherto spoken different 
languages, and I am convinced that this is the root cause of their being 
unable to understand one another. 
I can see no reason why we should regard this as an insuperable ob-
15 
stacle however, and by offering this book to the general public, I believe 
that we shall be helping to overcome it, for it is here that the divine 
language of Hegel's rational dialectic already approximates to many of 
the modes of human speech used by the understanding. The French and 
English are mainly to blame for the labyrinths of complicated theory that 20 
have been introduced into physics, and Hegel was only too justifted when 
he blamed our physicists for relying too heavily upon the ways of think-
ing which predominate beyond the Rhine and the Channel (II. 2I2). It is 
surely not unreasonable to expect our physicists to draw upon their Ger-
man cultural resources, or at least to show that they are willing to nego-
25 
tiate with German philosophy, and to correct it should it fall into error. A 
state of mutual understanding is one of the essential conditions of any 
future peace treaty however. Each side will have to be aware of the 
other's method of comprehension, for it is only by mastering an opposing 
point of view that one is fully qualifted to refute or accept it. It cannot be 30 
denied that Hegel's attacks were strongly tinged with bitterness, and as he 
improvised upon his notes in the lecture room, the sharpness of his re-
marks was often involuntarily heightened. I beg the physicists to remem-
ber the noble passion for truth which characterized the deceased however, 
and to take into consideration the conscientiousness with which I have 3S 
attempted to given an account of what was communicated. Whatever has 
gone wrong among the living has either been put right already or is still 
open to rectifIcation however; and here we are striving for reconciliation, 
not fresh dissensions. 
We cannot hope to succeed without this understanding, but no matter 40 
I82 

FOREWORD 
how earnestly we attempt to create it, we shall achieve nothing unless we 
have the objective support of a mediating principle, and both empiricism 
and the philosophy of nature are unable to provide this. If this medius 
terminus is to be a true middle term, it will have to display two aspects, 
5 so that both extremes occur within it. I should now like to suggest that 
Goethe's sense of nature in its bearing upon experience, and this work of 
Hegel's in its bearing upon philosophy, constitute the mediating prin-
ciple required. 
Although Goethe takes experience as his starting point, he does so in 
lOa different way from the natural scientists, for instead of concentrating 
upon an investigation of the remotest and subtlest relationships, in which 
phenomena are obscured and distorted by their multifarious connections, 
he concentrates upon the purest, simplest, and most basic form of a 
phenomenon, analyses this basic datum of experience, and without 
15 making use of any preconceived terminology, merely describes it. He 
therefore presents the distinct and basic aspects of a phenomenon, or the 
thought of their relationship. We may say therefore that Goethe's arche-
typal phenomena constitute the immediately intuited ideas of experience, 
and that they may only be readily discovered in experience by those in 
20 command of the sure procedure of an instinctively rational genius. 
Goethe's fine sense of nature enabled him to discover the archetypal 
phenomena of colours, plants, and bones etc. He was proud of a presen-
tation from Alexander von Humboldt which confirmed this, and which was 
accompanied by, 'a flattering characterization, in which he suggested that 
2S poetry might also be able to lift the veil of nature' .... 'If von Humboldt 
+ acknowledges this, who will deny it?' 
Goethe's archetypal phenomenon is the idea which constitutes the 
factual nature of an appearance. If this idea is not discovered by any kind 
of obscure drive, but is grasped consciously by the precise procedure of the 
30 self-motivating progression of dialectical thought, it constitutes the Hegel-
ian method, which develops the Idea of space, time, motion, and matter 
etc., out of the logical Idea. Although these entities are only discovered 
because the philosopher has prior experience of them, they are quite 
independent of this experience, and are in no way determined by its 
35 content. Philosophy certainly does not make an immediate deduction of 
the shapes of nature as such, it merely deduces certain of the thought-
relationships characteristic of nature, and then discovers the intuitions 
which correspond to them in the sphere of natural phenomena. In this 
second a posteriori procedure, it places space at the apex, for it is the intui:' 
40 tion we call space which corresponds most exactly to the simplest form of 
183 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
the Idea of nature to issue forth from logical development. However, 
philosophy does not anticipate this placing of space by means of a priori 
deduction. When we make the transition from the Idea of space to the 
second Idea of nature, we fmd that this has its closest corresponding 
intuition in time, so that this recognition of our concept in an intuition 
5 
repeats itself, as it does throughout the philosophy of nature. It cannot 
be said of this procedure that the Idea is extracted from the intuition, for 
if the individual deduction had allowed the Idea of space to be followed 
by the subjective thought-determination that ,the second Idea of nature 
corresponded more exactly to the intuition of motion or even of the 10 
plant, then the philosopher would have rejected time, and placed this 
intuition next to space in the series of natural forms. 
Consequently, before he enters upon metaphysical determinations of 
this kind, the philosopher will have to make a preliminary survey of 
natural phenomena, in order to assess their relative worth and com-
15 
parative development. Only the dialectical development of the Ideas 
themselves can decide where intuitions such as space and time should be 
placed however, and therefore what general order should be adopted; for 
it would be preposterous to assert that the graded series of forms had also 
been created out of nature, as it is certain that they are all in nature 20 
together. If an Idea is derived a priori, and no corresponding intuition is 
forthcoming, we may proceed in either of two ways. To a certain extent 
we may be justified in assuming that the empty place contains a pheno-
menon which has not yet been discovered empirically, but although Oken 
frequently made use of this expedient, it is not to be recommended. The + 
other procedure open to us is to throw the thought back into the melt-
ing-pot of the dialectic, and then to raise it once more from the produc-
tive mine of reason into the daylight of consciousness, for there is every 
possibility that despite the universally creative thought which slumbers 
in every breast, and which can guide us only along the correct path, our 30 
idiosyncrasies will have caused us to go astray in our thinking. 
It is literally true therefore, that Hegel's philosophy of nature creates the 
entire system of nature's productive Ideas out of its own freedom. Schel-
ling says in effect that Hegel's logical Idea precipitates itself into nature. As 
the logical Idea remains a matter of thought, it is difficult to see what he 3S 
means by this. The logical Idea has no need 'to take the first difficult step 
into actuality', because its thought coincides with the true actuality of 
nature. How can it be said then that philosophy is 'limited' because it can 
'only produce thoughts', and not' a single blade of grass'? Are we to regard it as + 
limited because it produces the universal, the abiding, and the exclusively 40 
184 

FOREWORD 
valuable, instead of the individual, the sensuous, and the transitory? If the 
limitation of philosophy is supposed to consist not only of its being unable 
to constitute individuality, but also of its being unaware of how individual 
things are constituted, one has to reply that this 'how' is inferior to 
5 knowledge, not superior to it, and that knowledge cannot therefore be 
circumscribed by it. Consequently, knowledge goes by the board when 
we ask 'How this transformation of the Idea into reality' etc., the precise 
reason being that nature is the unconscious Idea, and that knowledge is 
unnecessary to the growth of a blade of grass. The true creation is that 
10 of the universal, which remains securely within philosophic cognition 
itsel£ 
Hegel's philosophy of nature also does full justice to experience however, 
by which the speculative course of its Ideas must always be regulated. I 
am therefore convinced that in its purest speculative development, 
15 thought will coincide most completely with the results of experience, and 
on the other hand, that the full capabilities of a mature sense of nature 
based on experience will yield nothing to supersede an insight into the 
embodiments of Ideas. It seems to me therefore, that Goethe and Hegel 
are the two geniuses destined to direct the course of the speculative physics 
20 of the future, for it is these two men who have pointed the way towards 
the reconciliation of speculation with experience. 
This work displays a wide range of empirical knowledge, and it is pro-
bably for this reason that it will first attract attention, for it was in these 
lectures that Hegel's speculations underwent their severest test. I have made 
2S every possible effort to avoid the introduction of errors, by carefully 
consulting sources, and by making use of the expert advice of my col-
leagues, which has always been given willingly, and for which I should 
now like to thank them. I am certain therefore that if any errors remain, 
they are not important enough to have a disturbing effect upon the 
30 Ideas which sought their corresponding intuitions in experience. It can 
always be said of course that Hegel was unaware of certain discoveries, 
but as his Ideas are rooted in their own validity, this has no bearing upon 
their soundness, and when they undergo a further inner development, 
there is always a corresponding increase in the room available for the new 
3S intuitions which might present themselves from without. If one attacks 
Hegel by saying, 'that is it impossible to approach actuality with that which is 
purely rational', it has to be replied that although that which is rational in 
the actual phenomena of nature is stunted and distorted in various ways 
by the form of externality, it is always present there in a purer form than 
40 it is in the extremely sketchy systems of those who want to draw a sharp 
185 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
dividing line between that which is purely rational, and that which is 
actual. 
It now remains for me to indicate the procedure I have employed in 
editing these lectures, and to give an account of the sources I have drawn 
upon, which consist of Hegel's own lecture notes, and of notes taken 
5 
down by those who attended his courses. Hegel lectured on the philo-
sophy of nature eight times in all: once at Jena between 1804 and 1806, 
once at Heidelberg in the summer of 1818, and six times at Berlin in 
1819-1820, 1821-1822, 1823-1824, 1825-1826, 1828 and 1830. From the + 
Jena period we have a complete note-book of Hegel's in quarto. The first 10 
edition of his 'Encyclopaedia' (1817) was the basis of his lectures at 
Heidelberg, and he interleaved it with notes he had written down on 
sheets of paper. At Berlin, the first two series oflectures were based upon 
yet another complete note-book in quarto. He prepared a new introduc-
tion for the lectures of 1823-1824, and added a new supplementary note-
15 
book, both of which were in folio. For these and the later lectures he also 
made use of his earlier note-books however, even the one from Jena. The 
second edition of his 'Encyclopaedia' appeared in 1827, and was also used 
for the last two series oflectures. The third edition only appeared towards 
the end of 1830. The autographic sources I have used also include the 20 
numerous and copious notes he interpolated from time to time as the 
lectures were repeated. I have also made use of the following sources: 
(1) notes which !took during the winter course of 1821 - 1822; (2) three sets 
of notes from the winter courseofI823-1824, taken down by Captain von + 
Griesheim, my worthy colleague Professor Hotho, and myself; (3) notes + 
taken by Vice-principal Geyer in the summer of 1830. 
+ 
There is no need for me to describe the method I have employed in 
making use of these sources, because it is essentially the same as that I 
used in editing Hegel's 'History of Philosophy', and I have explained it in + 
detail in the preamble to that work. I should add however, that when 30 
lectures are brought out in book form, many obvious alterations have to 
be made. As I have had to present the reader with material from all 
periods of Hegel's activity as a writer, I feel that I should give some ac-
count of Hegel's own note-books, and of the printed versions of them 
which appeared in the various editions of the 'Encyclopaedia'. 
35 
The general arrangement of the material in Hegel's Berlin note-books 
differs very little from that of the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' 
and the third edition introduced no changes. In the: note-books, part of 
the theory of colours is placed differently however, and attention has been 
drawn to this in a note (II. 378). These note-books, and the lectures 40 
186 

FOREWORD 
delivered from them, were still based upon the first edition of the 
'Encyclopaedia', where much of the material was arranged differently. 
Hegel became aware of the shortcomings in the ordering of its material 
soon after he had published .this book, but its arrangement approximates 
5 to that of his later work more than it does to that of the Jena notes, and 
it is therefore an important link in the history of his development. The 
main fault .in the first edition was that the higher relationships of a sphere 
were regarded as the premises of the lower relationships. In mechanics 
for example, universal gravitation is said to give rise to pressure, fall, 
10 impact, and inertia. In physics, the individual physics of shape has the 
more finite relationships of specific gravity, cohesion, sound, and heat 
worked into it. Thus the mathematics of space and time constitute section 
one of the whole; in section two, physics is subdivided into the triad of 
absolute and .finite mechanics, elementary physics, and individual physics; 
15 and section three deals with organics. In the second edition however, for 
the first time, the abstract moments of a whole such as shape are no longer 
introduced in the sphere of their totality, but are allowed to precede in 
logical progression as the stages of its becoming, though shape is also the 
true prius of these stages (II. 92-93). 
20 
The Jena note-book still takes the basic division of objectivity in the 
'Logic' as its point of departure, and the philosophy of nature is therefore 
divided into mechanics, chemism, and life as teleology. Its mechanics 
include space, time, place, motion, mass, and the celestial sphere. The 
first sub-division of chemism is 'figuration', and presents light, inertia, fall, 
25 projection, pendulum, pressure, elasticity, impact, sound, cohesion, 
magnetism, the crystal, and electricity. The second sub-division is 'The 
chemical process', which begins with heat, passes to the four physical and 
the four chemical elements, then to the meteorological process, and 
concludes with odour, taste, and colour as the particular characteristics of 
30 bodies, together with their particular existence as metal, sulphur and 
salt. The third sub-division is 'The chemism of physically individual 
bodies', and covers the actual chemical processes of fire and water, and 
galvanism. In this note-book, the only essential change in the arrangement 
of the 'Organics' occurs in the unique and somewhat clumsy ordering of 
3S the three universal organic processes (III. 41-44), the first two divisions 
+ of which cover the processes of nutrition and formation. 
This note-book has many passages which bear the marks of Hegel's 
struggle to complete the dissolution of empirical material into logical 
thought, and in particular to maintain the strictness of the dialectical 
40 transitions from one matter to another. I could draw attention to several 
187 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
passages illustrating this, and despite the efforts I have made to round off 
their phrases and clarify their thought, the reader will still be aware of the 
laboured awkwardness with which their profundity was first expressed. 
Other passages are still brightly coloured with the full poetry of the philo-
sophy of nature, and even its method of drawing ingenious parallels has 
5 
not completely disappeared. The pervasive thoughtfulness of mature 
Hegelianism already shines through this glitter however, for even at the 
beginning of his career, Hegel's mastery in dialectic goes hand in hand 
with the whole breadth of empirical knowledge, and it is this combination 
which breaks forth into his weighty and illuminating thoughts. I did not 10 
want to suppress these passages, their style distinguishes them clearly 
enough from the rest of the writing, and the reader will have no difficulty 
in picking them out by the genuine poetry with which they touch the 
true nature of the subject matter. 
I should also like to draw attention to the fact that in this early note-
15 
book, Hegel began the philosophy of nature with ether. This principle has 
recently found great favour with physicists, and if I now have to dampen 
the enthusiasm with which they have accepted it, this is merely because I 
do not wish to lay Hegel open to the censure of having regarded it in the 
same way as they do. The words he uses when discussing it indicate a 20 
philosophy of nature which is still closely related to the striving Fichtean 
idealism which Schelling built into his first sketch of a systematic 
philosophy of nature. Hegel begins in the following way: this is in fact + 
the fmt transition he made from the logical Idea to nature, 'As the 
determinate being which has gone back into its Notion, the Idea may now 25 
be called absolute matter or ether. It is evident that this has the same signi-
ficance as pure spirit, for this absolute matter is in no way sensuous, but is the 
Notion as pure Notion in itselE As such this is existent spirit. It is called ether 
in so far as spirit is not being thought of, the one name replacing the other for 
the same reason. Ether in its simplicity and self-equality is therefore the + 
indeterminate soul of spirit; it is motionless quiescence or the essence which is 
perpetually returning into itself from otherness. It is the substance and being of 
all things, as well as the inftnite elasticity which has rejected and dissolved every 
form and determinateness within it, but which for that very reason constitutes 
the absolute pliability and potentiality of all form. Ether is therefore being, and 35 
although it is not ubiquitous in its penetration, it constitutes everything. It has 
nothing external to it, and does not change, for it is the dissolution of everything, 
the simple purity of negativity, the fluidity of undisturbable transparency. By 
having returned into the self-equality of being, this pure essence has eradicated 
and left behind difference as such, and has become opposed to it. Ether is therefore 40 
188 

FOREWORD 
the implicitness which has not displayed its becoming, in difference, as this 
essence. It is merely the teeming matter which is in itself the absolute motion of 
the fermentation which is certain of itself as the whole truth, and which remains 
in itself and equal to itself in this free independence of the moments which have 
5 preserved the truth within it. In so far as it is said to be ether or absolute matter, 
it is in itself, or pure self-consciousness, and is this as general being, not as deter-
+ minate being nor as being of a determinately real nature. This determinateness 
of non-determinate being passes over into determinate being however, and the 
element of reality is the universal determinateness in which spirit has its being as 
10 nature. The inner essence or ether is not present there, and one might say that the 
inwardness of its being-in-selfis not its truth; it is in precisely the same way that 
the determination of implicit being expresses the essence of ether, which is 
+ opposed to form'. 
This philosophic encyclopaedia of the natural sciences now awaits the 
15 judgement of philosophers and scientists. The considerable range of 
empirical material it covers is not taken for granted, and is often presented 
with a certain predilection. This is by no means out of place in academic 
discourses of this kind however, for although the professionals are suffi-
ciently aware of the facts, Hegel was not always able to assume that this 
20 basic knowledge was already present in the minds of his students, and as it 
was indispensable for the understanding of his ideas, he was forced to 
present it to them. 
History is rich in the decrees of fate, and the appearance of this work 
+ together with the arrival of Schelling at Berlin, is certainly one of them. 
25 The man who planned the philosophy of nature, but was unable to do 
more than lay its foundations, will fmd the building completed in this 
work. In this book he may hail the genius of one who 'later became' his 
friend, for he is the father of the science developed here, and he of all 
men living is most to be honoured for it. Yet if he believes it to be his 
30 mission, 'to lead philosophy out of the undeniably difficult position in 
which it fmds itself at present', and to save if from, a 'terrible shipwreck, 
and the destruction of all noble convictions', in order to, 'really break 
through into the promised land of philosophy'; he will have to undertake 
a scientific refutation of these legitimate children of his own philosophiz-
35 ing, for without this he cannot hope to return from his long exile, and to 
grasp again the sceptre of philosophy. The 'page in the history of phi-
losophy' which be began to write forty years ago has been 'fmished' by 
his followers, and it is some years now since it was turned, and its con-
clusions drawn and generally acknowledged. The history of philosophy 
40 has not yet failed to fmd expression because Schelling has kept quiet. 
189 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Philosophy is not without 'a free, untroubled, and completely unhindered 
movement', merely because Schelling's 'inner nature' causes him to feel 
constrained and embarrassed by the strictly scientific procedure of a 
dialectical method. 'It is in this metropolis that the fate of German 
philosophy will have to be decided,' but if Schelling merely repeats the 
5 
promises he has made for forty years; if the whole world is still said to 
have misunderstood him, and his first philosophy merely to have con-
tained the injunction 'to avoid absence of thought', while his second philo-
sophy is attempting to draw all its positive content from beyond ration-
ality; then despite the most solemn assurances that this is not the case, he 10 
will have shown that he has abandoned the true freedom of a scientific 
philosophy, and will most certainly come to grief in the shadow of the 
giant he is trying to overreach. In any case, we now await him here on this 
field of battle, where many of the heroes of modern German philosophy 
are still to be found. He is by no means 'a burden' to us, nor are we unable 15 
to 'accommodate' him, for we welcome the opportunity of accounting for 
the necessity of his relapse into a philosophy of revelation, and we shall 
therefore give careful consideration to his reasons for having found it im-
possible to keep to the giddy height which formed the intellectual 
intuition of his youth. 
20 
Berlin, 
Michelet. 
December 10, 1841. 
190 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
The second part of the Encyclopaedia of 
the Philosophical Sciences in outline 
INTRODUCTION 
Addition. It can perhaps be said that philosophy, in our time, enjoys no 
particular favour or affection; it is at least no longer recognized as the 
foundation which must constitute the indispensable introduction to all 
+ further scientific and vocational education. It may certainly be accepted as 
5 indisputably true however, that the philosophy of nature in particular is 
suffering from a very considerable lack of favour. I shall not concern 
myself very fully with the extent to which this particular prejudice is 
justified, although I cannot of course entirely overlook this question. 
Intense stimulation has had the effect that one might have expected, and 
10 looking at the way in which the Idea of the philosophy of nature has exhi-
bited itself in recent times, one might say that in the ftrst gratification 
which its discovery has afforded, it has been grasped by fumbling hands 
instead of being wooed by active reason, and that it is by its suitors rather 
than by its detractors that it has been done to death. For the most part it 
15 has been variously transformed into an external formalism, and perverted 
into a notionless instrument for superftciality of thought and unbridled 
powers of imagination. The details of the extravaganzas into which 
death-struck forms of the Idea have been perverted do not concern me 
here. Some years ago I expressed myself more fully on this subject in the 
+ preface to 'The Phenomenology of Spirit'. It need cause no surprise that 
the more thoughtful view of nature, in which perception has been guided 
by the Idea, as well as the crass empiricism of the external abstract under..:. 
standing, should have shunned such a procedure, which is as grotesque as 
it is pretentious. Crude empiricism and travestied thought-forms, capri-
2 s ciousness of fancy and the flattest methods of proceeding according to 
superftcial analogy, have been mixed into a complete chaos, and this stew 
has been served up as the Idea, reason, science, divine perception. A com-
plete lack of system and scientific method has been hailed as the very 
peak of scientific accomplishment. It is charlatanry such as this, and 
191 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
Schelling's philosophy is a prime example of it, that has brought the 
philosophy of nature into disrepute. 
+ 
To reject the philosophy of nature outright because of such bungling 
and misrepresentation of the Idea, is quite another matter however. Those 
possessed by a hatred of philosophy have often welcomed its misuse and s 
perversion, which they have used in order to bring the science itself into 
discredit, and out of their established rejection of what is bogus, to 
fabricate nebulous evidence of their having called philosophy itself in 
question. 
Bearing in mind the present prejudices and the widespread misunder-
10 
standings of the philosophy of nature, it might seem appropriate to begin 
by evincing the true Notion of this science. The initial opposition we 
encounter is to be regarded as accidental and superficial however, and all 
that it entails may be left on one side without more ado. Dealing with it 
would tend to involve polemics, and would not be gratifying. What 1S 
might be learnt is partly subsumed under the science itself, and would not 
be so instructive as to justify reducing still further the already limited 
space available for the wealth of material to be dealt with in an encyclo-
paedia. We shall therefore content ourselves with what has already been 
said; it can serve as a kind of protest against this manner of thinking, and 20 
as an assurance that such philosophizing about nature, which often glitters 
and entertains, which will always thrill and astonish, and which may well 
satisfy those daring enough to follow the brilliance of a flare dropped into 
the philosophy of nature if it obviates the need for thought, is not to be 
expected from this presentation. What we are engaged on here is not a 25 
matter of imagination and phantasy; it is the matter of the Notion, and 
of reason. 
This standpoint does not justify our discussing the Notion, determina-
tion, manner and method of the philosophy of nature at this juncture. It is 
fitting however that the treatment of a science should be preceded by the 30 
determination of its position, purpose, and content, and the way in which 
the content is to be regarded. It is unnecessary to counter a perversion of 
the philosophy of nature once we have defmed the Notion of the science 
more precisely. The science of philosophy is a sphere, and each member of 
the sphere has its antecedent and sequel, so that the philosophy of nature 35 
appears as only one sphere within the whole of the encyclopaedia. Nature's 
proceeding forth from the eternal Idea, its creation, the proof indeed that 
there necessarily is a nature, lies in that which precedes it (§ 244). Here 
we have to presuppose this as known. In order to determine what the 
philosophy of nature is, it is convenient that we should separate it from 40 
192 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
that which determines it; for all determining requires two terms. In the 
first place we find it standing in a peculiar relationship to natural science 
in general, that is to say, to physics, natural history, and physiology. It is 
indeed physics, but rational physics, and it is at this point of rationality 
5 that we have to grasp it, and in particular to determine its relationship 
to physics. This procedure might appear to rest upon a novel distinction. 
At first the philosophy of nature will tend to be regarded as new science, 
and there is no doubt that in one sense it is. In another sense it is not, for it 
is as old as all observation of nature. It does not differ from this observa-
10 tion, and thus has traditions more ancient than those of physics, which in 
Aristotle for example, is much closer to a philosophy of nature than it is 
+ today. It is only in recent times that the two have become separated. The 
separation is already apparent in Wolff's philosophy, where the science of 
cosmology, which is supposed to be a metaphysic of the world or nature, 
15 but which confines itself to completely abstract determinations of the 
+ understanding, is distinguished from physics. This metaphysics was 
certainly further removed from physics than what we now know as the 
philosophy of nature. The first thing to be noticed about this distinction 
between physics and the philosophy of nature and the mutual determination 
20 which exists between them, is that they are not so widely separated as they 
might seem to be at first. Physics and natural history are regarded as 
eminently empirical sciences, as belonging exclusively to observation and 
experience, and as therefore opposed to the philosophy of nature, the 
cognition of nature by means of thought. It has in the first instance to be 
25 pointed out however, that empirical physics contains much more thought 
than it will either realize or admit; that it is in fact better than it supposes, 
or if thought is considered to be a bad thing for it, that it is worse than it 
supposes. Physics and the philosophy of nature are therefore to be distin-
guished, not as perception and thought, but merely by the nature and 
30 manner of their thought. Both are a thinking cognition of nature. 
We shall first consider the place of thought in physics; this will lead 
us on to observe what nature is; and our third concern will be the division 
of the philosophy of nature. 
A 
Ways of regarding nature 
Addition. In order to find the Notion of the philosophy of nature, we have 
35 first to indicate the Notion of the knowledge of nature in general, and then 
to develop the distinction between physics and the philosophy of nature. 
G 
193 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
What is nature? It is through the knowledge and the philosophy of 
nature that we propose to fmd the answer to this general question. We 
find nature before us as an enigma and a problem, the solution of which 
seems to both attract and repel us; it attracts us in that spirit has a presenti-
ment of itself in nature; it repulses us in that nature is an alienation in 5 
which spirit does not fmd itsel£ From this arose Aristotle's dictum that 
philosophy has its origin in wonder. We begin to observe, and we collect + 
data from the multifarious formations and laws of nature, which may be 
pursued for their own sake into endless detail in all directions; and because 
we can see no end to this procedure, it leaves us unsatisfied. What is more, 10 
despite all this wealth of knowledge, the question, 'What is nature?' can 
always be asked and never completely answered. It remains a problem. + 
When we see nature's processes and transmutations, we want to grasp its 
simple essence, and force this Proteus to relinquish his transformations, to 
reveal himself to us, and to speak out; not so that he merely dupes us with 15 
an everchanging variety of new forms, but so that he renders himself to 
consciousness in a more simple way, through language. This quest for + 
being has a multiple meaning. It is merely the matter of a name if we ask, 
'What sort of plant is this? If we know the name, it may be a matter of 
perception. If for example I do not know what a box-compass is, I merely 20 
have to get someone to show me the instrument, and then I can say that I 
know. In the question, 'What is this man?', 'is' refers to his status, but this 
is not its meaning if we ask, 'What is nature?' The meaning of this ques-
tion, when we ask it because we want to know what the philosophy of 
nature is, is the object of this investigation. 
25 
We could resort immediately to the philosophical Idea, and say that the 
philosophy of nature should provide us with the Idea of nature. To begin 
in this way might however be confusing. Our task is to grasp the Idea 
itself in its concreteness; and so to apprehend and bring together its differ-
ent determinations; in order to take possession of the Idea, we therefore 30 
have to work through a series of determinations, by means of which the 
Idea first comes into being for us. Now if we take these determinations in 
forms known to us, and say that we wish to relate ourselves thinkingly to 
nature, we are immediately presented with still further ways in which to 
relate ourselves to it. I shall introduce these here not in the interest of com-
35 
pleteness, but so that we may fmd in them the raw material or moments 
which necessarily belong to the cognition of the Idea, and which we are 
aware of earlier, particularized as the various ways of regarding nature. In 
this way we shall reach the point at which the characteristic feature of our 
undertaking becomes apparent. We relate ourselves to nature partly in 40 
194 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
practice and partly in theory. A contradiction in the theoretical view will 
become apparent and will, in the third instance, open the way to our 
standpoint; in order to resolve the contradiction we must incorporate 
what is peculiar to the practical relationship, and in this way both the 
5 practical and theoretical approaches will be united and integrated into 
totality. 
In the practical relationship which man establishes between 
himself and nature, he treats it as something immediate and ex-
ternal; he is himself an immediately external, and therefore sen-
10 suous individual, who is nevertheless also justified in acting as 
purpose in the face of natural situations. Nature, viewed in the 
light of the relationship thus established, is seen from the finite-
teleological standpoint (§ 205) which is based on the correct 
supposition, that nature does not itself contain the absolute and 
+ ultimate end (§ 207-2II). Nevertheless, if this view is based on 
particular fini te ends, it transforms them partly into pre-
suppositions, the contingent content of which can, by itself, be 
insignificant and trivial. However, for itself, the teleological 
relationship demands a deeper manner of comprehension than 
20 that appropriate to external and finite relationships. It thus opens 
the way for the Notional point of view, which is universally 
immanent, and therefore also immanent within nature. 
Addition. In general, the practical approach to nature is determined by the 
self-seeking of appetite; need impels us to tum nature to our advantage, 
2S to exploit and harness and in short to annihilate it. Two further determi-
nations are immediately apparent here. (a) The practical approach is only 
concerned with the individual products of nature, or with certain aspects 
of these products. Need and ingenuity have enabled man to discover end-
lessly varied ways of mastering and making use of nature. As Sophocles 
30 says: 
+ 
ov8€v av6pc!nrov 8€tVOT€POV 7TEA€t, -
O.7TOpOS €7T' ov8tv €PX€Tat. 
Whatever powers nature develops and releases against him, cold, wild 
beasts, flood and fire, man knows how to counter them. He uses nature 
35 as a means to defeating nature; the nimbleness of his reason enables him 
195 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
to protect and preserve himself by pitting the objects of nature against 
the natural forces which threaten him and so nullifying them. Nature it-
self, as it is in its universality. cannot be mastered in this manner however. 
nor bent to the purposes of man. (b) The other aspect of the practical ap-
proach is that our purpose overrides the objects of nature. so that they 5 
become means. the determination of which lies not in themselves but in 
us. as for example when we turn food into blood. ( C) The outcome is our 
satisfaction and self-assertion. which had been disturbed by some kind of 
deficiency. The negation of myself, which is within me when I am hungry. 
is present at the same time as something to be consumed; I cancel this 10 
opposition by acting so as to make this other identical with myself; I 
sacrifice this something in order to restore my unity with mysel£ 
The teleological interpretation. which was formerly so 
popular. was certainly based on the relation to spirit; it limited 
itself to external functionalism however. and so confined the 15 
significance of spirit to finite and natural purposes: it has 
become descredited as a way of indicating the wisdom of God 
on account of the triviality of the fini te purposes cited as evi-
dence of the usefulness of natural objects. The notion of + 
purpose is not merely external to nature. as it is when I say that sheep 20 
bear wool only in order that I may clothe mysel£ Silly remarks of this 
kind are often made. as for example in the Xenia. where the wisdom of 
God is admired because He causes cork trees to grow that we might have 
bottlestoppers. herbs that we might cure disordered stomachs. and 
cinnabar that we might make ourselves up. To see purpose as inherent + 
within natural objects. is to grasp nature in its simple determinateness. e.g. 
the seed of a plant. which contains the real potential of everything 
pertaining to the tree. and which as purposeful activity is therefore 
orientated solely towards self-preservation. Aristotle had already noticed 
this notion of purpose in nature. and he called the activity the nature of 30 
a thing. This is the true teleological view. for it regards nature in its proper 
animation as free. and is therefore the highest view of nature. 
+ 
§ 246 
What is now called physics, was formerly called natural 
philosophy. It is, what is more, a theoretical and thinking con-
sideration of nature, and while on the one hand it does not concern 35 
itself with determinations such as these purposes, which are ex-
ternal to nature, on the other hand it does aim at comprehending 
196 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
that which is universal in nature as it presents itself in a deter-
minate form, i.e. forces, laws, genera. Here the content is not a 
simple aggregate, but is distributed through orders and classes, 
and must be regarded as an organic whole. In that the philosophy 
s of nature is a comprehending consideration, its object is the same 
universal; it is however the universal for itself, which it re-
gards in its own immanent necessity, according to the self-
determination of the Notion. 
Remark 
The relationship of philosophy to what is empirical was dis-
+ cussed in the general introduction. It is not only that philosophy 
must accord with the experience nature gives rise to; in its for-
mation and in its development, philosophic science presupposes 
and is conditioned by empirical physics. The procedure involved 
in the formation and preliminaries of a science is not the same as 
15 the science itself however, for in this latter case it is no longer 
experience, but rather the necessity of the Notion, which must 
emerge as the foundation. It has already been pointed out that in 
the procedure of philosophic cognition, the object has not only 
to be presented in its Notional determination, the em-
20 pirical appearance corresponding to this determination also has 
to be specified, and it has to be shown that the appearance does 
in fact correspond to its Notion. This is not however an appeal to 
experience in regard to the necessity of the content, and an appeal 
to what has been called intuition, which was usually nothing 
25 more than a purveyance of random concepts by means of fanciful 
and even fantastic analogies, is even less admissable here. These 
analogies may have a certain value, but they can only impose 
determinations and schemata on the objects in an external manner. 
(§ 231 Rem.) 
30 Addition. In the theoretical approach (a) the initial factor is our withdrawing 
from natural things, leaving them as they are, and adjusting to them. In 
doing this we start from our sense-knowledge of nature. If physics were 
based only on perceptions however, and perceptions were nothing but 
the evidence of the senses, the activity of a natural scientist would consist 
35 only of seeing, smelling, hearing etc., so that animals would also be 
physicists. It is however a spirit, a thinking entity, which sees and hears 
197 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
etc. If we say that in the theoretical approach things are left as they are, 
we shall be referring only partly to the external senses, for these are them-
selves partly theoretical and partly practical (§ 358); only ideation or in-
telligence has this free relation to things. We can of course also look at 
them through the medium of the senses, but cognition will then be merely 
5 
a means, not an end in itself. (b) In the second relation of things to us, they 
either acquire the determination of universality for us, or we transform 
them into something universal. The more thought predominates in or-
dinary perceptiveness, so much the more does the naturalness, individu-
ality, and immediacy of things vanish away. As thoughts invade the limit-
10 
less multiformity of nature, its richness is impoverished, its springtimes 
die, and there is a fading in the play of its colours. That which in nature 
was noisy with life, falls silent in the quietude of thought; its warm abun-
dance, which shaped itself into a thousand intriguing wonders, withers 
into arid forms and shapeless generalities, which resemble a dull northern 15 
fog. (c) Both these determinations are opposed to both practical ones, and 
we also fmd that the theoretical approach is inwardly self-contradictory, 
for it appears to bring about the precise opposite of what it intends. We 
want to know the nature that really is, not something which is not, but 
instead ofleaving it alone and accepting it as it is in truth, instead of taking 20 
it as given, we make something completely different out of it. By thinking 
things, we transform them into something universal; things are singulari-
ties however, and the lion in general does not exist. We make them into 
something subjective, produced by us, belonging to us, and of course 
peculiar to us as men; for the things of nature do not think, and are neither 25 
representations nor thought. In the second determination which we have 
just considered, it is precisely this inversion which takes place; and con-
sequently, what we have started upon may well seem to be impossible 
from the start. The theoretical approach begins by checking appetite, it is 
disinterested, it leaves things to subsist in their own way, and thus im-
30 
mediately displays two aspects, subject and object, the separation of which 
is fixed as this side and that. Our aim is rather to grasp and comprehend 
nature however, to make it ours, so that it is not something beyond and 
alien to us. This is where the difficulty comes in. How are we as subjects 
to get over into the object? If we venture the leap over this gap, and, 35 
while failing to fmd our footing, think that we have found nature, we 
shall tum that which is something other than we are into something other 
than what it is. Both theoretical relationships are also the precise opposites 
of one another: we tum things into universals or make them our own, 
yet as natural things they should be free for themselves. This is the crux 40 
198 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
of the issue concerning the nature of cognition, and is the concern of 
philosophy. 
The philosophy of nature is in such a perilous condition however, that 
it has to demonstrate its existence, and in order to justify it, we shall have 
5 to trace it back to what is familiar. In the dissolution of the subject-object 
opposition a specific shape may be noticed, which has been made known 
partly by science, and partly by religion, in which it is however a past, 
and which readily overcomes the whole difficulty. The unification of both 
determinations is what is called the primal state of innocence, in which spirit 
10 is identical with nature, and the spiritual eye stands immediately in the 
centre of nature. The standpoint of the division of consciousness is the fall 
of man from the eternal and divine unity. This unity is represented as a 
primal intuition, a ratiocination, which is at the same time a vision, forming 
and so rationalizing sensuous shapes. This intuitive reason is the divine 
15 reason, for we may say that God is that in which spirit and nature are one, 
and in which intelligence at the same time has both being and shape. The 
eccentricities of the philosophy of nature have their basis partly in this 
idea, which implies that although people nowadays no longer fmd them-
selves in a state of paradise, there are still some on the sunny side of the 
20 hedge to whom God imparts the verities of cognition and science while 
they sleep, and that even if a man is not on that side of the hedge, he can 
transport himself thither merely by believing in the moments in which 
the secret of nature automatically becomes apparent to him, and allowing 
himself to have brainwaves, so that by giving rein to his imagination, he 
+ may give prophetic utterance to truth. Such a performance, which offers 
no further credentials, has been generally regarded as the consummation 
of scientific ability. What is more, it is also asserted that such a state of 
consummate science preceded the present history of the world, and that 
since our fall from this unity some remnants and distant glimmerings of 
30 that state of spiritual light have remained with us in myths, tradition, and 
other fragments, on to which the subsequent religious culture of the 
human race has fastened, and from which all scientific cognition has pro-
ceeded. If it were no more difficult than this for consciousness to know 
truth, but one only had to sit on a tripod and utter oracles, much of the 
+ labour of thought would certainly be spared. 
Nevertheless, in order to state clearly where the failing of such a general 
conception lies, it must be admitted that there is something lofty in it, 
which at first sight seems highly promising. This unity of intelligence and 
intuition, of the being-in-self of spirit and its relation to externality, must 
40 however be the goal not the beginning; it must be a unity which is 
199 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
brought forth, not one which is immediate. The natural unity of thought 
and intuition found in a child or an animal is no more than feeling, it is 
not spirituality. Man must have eaten of the tree of the knowledge of good 
and evil, he must have gone through the labour and activity of thought 
in order to be what he is, i.e. the subjugator of the separation of what is his, 
5 
from nature. That immediate unity is therefore merely abstract, it is the 
being-in-self of truth, not the actuality of it; not only the content, but also 
the form must be true. The healing of the schism must have the shape of 
the form of the knowing Idea, and the moments of the healing must be 
sought in consciousness itsel£ It is not a matter of resorting to abstraction 10 
and vacuity and deserting knowledge; consciousness must preserve itself, 
so that ordinary consciousness may itself overcome the assumptions out 
of which the contradiction arose. 
Theoretical consciousness, because of its onesided assumption that the 
natural things over against us are persistent and impenetrable, creates a 15 
difficulty which is refuted point-blank by the practical approach, which 
displays the absolutely idealistic belief that individual things are nothing in 
themselves. In its relationship to things, appetite is defective not because 
its attitude towards them is realistic, but because it is all too idealistic. 
Philosophically valid idealism consists in nothing other than the determi-
20 
nation that the truth of things lies in their immediate particularity or sen-
suousness, that they are in fact mere show or appearance. According to a 
metaphysics prevalent at the moment, we cannot know things because 
they are uncompromisingly exterior to us. It might be worth noticing that + 
even the animals, which go out after things, grab, maul, and consume them, 2S 
are not so stupid as these metaphysicians. The same determination, i.e. 
that we think natural objects, occurs in the second aspect of the theoretical 
approach already indicated. Intelligence does not of course familiarize it-
self with things in their material existence. In that it thinks them, it sets 
their content within itself, and to practical ideality, which for itself is mere 30 
negativity, it adds form, universality so to speak, and so gives affirmative 
determination to the negative of particularity. This universality of things 
is not something subjective and belonging to us; it is, rather, the noume-
non as opposed to the transient phenomenon, the truth, objectivity, and 
actual being of the things themselves. It resembles the platonic ideas, 35 
which do not have their being somewhere in the beyond, but which exist 
in individual things as substantial genera. Proteus will only be compelled + 
into telling the truth ifhe is roughly handled, and we are not content with 
sensuous appearance. The inscription on the veil of Isis, 'I am what was, 
is, and shall be, and my veil has been lifted by no mortal', melts before + 
200 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
thought. Hamann is therefore right when he says, 'Nature is a Hebrew 
word, written only with consonants; it is left to the understanding to add 
+ the points'. 
The empirical view of nature has this category of universality in com-
s mon with the philosophy of nature, but it oscillates between regarding it 
as subjective, and regarding it as objective, and one often hears that these 
classes and orders are only formulated for the convenience of cognition. 
This uncertainty is even more apparent when distinguishing features are 
looked for not because it is thought that they are the essential objective 
10 determinations of things, but because they are a convenient way for us to 
distinguish things. If there were nothing more to it than this, one could 
for example select the earlobe as a distinctive feature of humanity, for no 
animal has it. One feels immediately however that such a determination 
is inadequate to the cognition of the essential nature of man. If the uni-
15 versal is determined as law, force or matter however, it will not be asserted 
that this is an external form, a subjective trimming; objective reality is 
attributed to laws, forces are said to be immanent, and matter is taken to 
be the true nature of the fact. Something similar is also asserted of the 
genera, i.e. that they are not such a ranging together of that which is 
20 similar, an abstraction made by us, that they not only have something in 
common, but that they are the peculiar inner essence of objects themselves: 
what is more, that the orders are not merely our mental vision, but form 
a graduated scale in nature itself. The distinguishing features are claimed 
to be the universal, the substantial element of the genus. Physics regards 
25 these universals as its triumph, and it is unfortunately true to say that too 
much of its activity is concerned with such universalization. The current 
+ philosophy is called the philosophy of identity. It might be much more 
appropriate to apply this name to this kind of physics, which simply dis-
penses with determinateness. Contemporary electro-chemistry, in which 
30 magnetism electricity and chemism are regarded as one and the same 
+ thing, is a good example. It is a fault in physics that it should involve so 
much identity, for identity is the basic category of the understanding. 
The material prepared out of experience by physics, is taken by the 
philosophy of nature at the point to which physics has brought it, and re-
35 constituted without any further reference to experience as the basis of 
verification. Physics must therefore work together with philosophy so 
that the universalized understanding which it provides may be translated 
into the Notion by showing how this universal, as an intrinsically neces-
sary whole, proceeds out of the Notion. The philosophic manner of pre-
40 sentation is not arbitrary, it does not stand on its head for a while because 
G* 
201 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
it has got tired of using its legs, nor does it paint up its every-day face 
just for a change; the ways of physics are not adequate to the Notion, and 
for that reason advances have to be made. 
The philosophy of nature distinguishes itself from physics on account 
of the metaphysical procedure it employs, for metaphysics is nothing but 
5 
the range of universal thought-determinations, and is as it were the 
diamond-net into which we bring everything in order to make it intel-
ligible. Every cultured consciousness has its metaphysics, its instinctive 
way of thinking. This is the absolute power within us, and we shall only 
master it if we make it the object of our knowledge. Philosophy in general, 10 
as philosophy, has different categories from those of ordinary conscious-
ness. All cultural change reduces itself to a difference of categories. All 
revolutions, whether in the sciences or world history, occur merely be-
cause spirit has changed its categories in order to understand and examine 
what belongs to it, in order to possess and grasp itself in a truer, deeper, 15 
more intimate and unified manner. The inadequacy of the thought deter-
minations used in physics may be traced to two very closely connected 
points. (a) The universal of physics is abstract or simply formal; its deter-
mination is not immanent within it, and does not pass over into particu-
larity. (b) This is precisely the reason why its determinate content is 20 
external to the universal, and is therefore split up, dismembered, parti-
cularized, separated and lacking in any necessary connection within itself; 
why it is in fact merely fmite. Take a flower for example. The under-
standing can note its particular qualities, and chemistry can break it down 
and analyse it. Its colour, the shape of its leaves, citric acid, volatile oil, 2S 
carbon, hydrogen etc., can be distinguished; and we then say that the 
flower is made up of all these parts. 
'EvXElpTJUW naturae chemistry calls it, 
Mocks itself, knows not what befalls it, 
Holds the parts within its hand, 
But lacks, alas, the spiritual band, 
30 
as Goethe says. Spirit cannot be confmed to this procedure of the reflective + 
understanding. There are two possible ways out. (a) When nature is viewed 
by an alive and open mind, as it is in the apt and effectual manner we fmd 
so often in Goethe, this mind feels the life and the universal relatedness 3S 
within nature; it has a presentiment of the universe as an organic whole, a 
rational totality, just as it experiences an inner unity with itself through the 
living individual. We can assemble all the separate constituents of the 
202 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
flower, but this will not make the flower. Intuition has therefore been 
reinstated in the philosophy of nature, and set above reflection, but this 
gets us nowhere, because one cannot philosophize on the basis of intuition. 
(b) Intuition has to be submitted to thought, so that what has been dis-
s membered may be restored to simple universality through thought. This 
contemplated unity is the Notion, which contains the determinate 
differences simply as an immanent and self-moving unity. Philosophic 
+ universality is not indifferent to the determinations; it is the self-fulflliing 
universality, the diamantine identity, which at the same time holds 
10 difference within itsel£ 
True infmity is the unity of itself and the finite; it is the category of 
philosophy, and also therefore of the philosophy of nature. If the genera 
and forces constitute the inwardness of nature, and as opposed to this 
universal what is outward and particular is ephemeral, a third stage is 
15 required, the inwardness of this inwardness. This, according to what has 
been said, would be the unity of the universal and the particular. 
'Into nature's inwardness'-
Oh ! you philistine !-
'No created spirits steal.' 
20 
I ask you never to remind 
Me and mine 
Of sayings of this kind. 
We think: and here and there 
We fmd the centre everywhere. 
25 
'The sweet of mortal blessedness 
Is to taste the outer peel !' 
For sixty years they've told it me, 
I've learnt to curse them silently; 
But tell me till the shadows fall: 
30 
All riches from its bounty pour, 
Nature has neither rind 
Nor core, 
But everything is found in alL 
Look to yourself, and only fmd 
+ 
Whether you are core or rind. 
When this inwardness is grasped, the onesidedness of the theoretical and 
practical approaches is transcended, and at the same time justice is done to 
both determinations. The one contains a universality without determinate-
ness, the other a particularity without universality. Notional apprehension 
203 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
stands between the two, where universality is not personal and so opposed 
to the particularity of objects, but relates itself negatively to things and 
assimilates them, and while eliciting their particularity, leaves them alone, 
and allows them to determine themselves freely within it. Notional com-
prehension is therefore the unity of the theoretical and practical ap-
5 
pro aches ; the negation of particularity, as negation of the negative, is 
affirmative universality, which gives subsistence to the determinations, for 
true particularity is at the same time universality in itsel£ 
Objections may be raised of course to this standpoint. One might ask 
how the universal comes to determine itself, or how the infmite issues 10 
forth into fmitude. In concrete terms this is the question of the creation of 
the world by God, in which God is imagined to be a subject, an actuality 
for Himself, and divorced from the world. If such abstract infmitude and 
universality were external to singularity however, it would itself be only 
one side of the matter, and therefore finite and singular. The insensibility 15 
of the understanding consists in its precise cancellation of the determina-
tion which it establishes, and so in its doing the opposite of what it intends. 
The singular is supposed to be separated from the universal, but it is pre-
cisely on account of this separateness that it is posited within the universal, 
so that what is present is merely the unity of the universal and the par-
20 
ticular. God has two relevations, as nature and as spirit, and both mani-
festations are temples which He fills, and in which He is present. God as an 
abstraction is not the true God; His truth is the positing of his other, the 
living process, the world, which is His Son when it is comprehended in 
its divine form. God is subject only in unity with His other in spirit. The 25 
determination and the purpose of the philosophy of nature is therefore 
that spirit should fmd its own essence, its counterpart, i.e. the Notion, 
within nature. The study of nature is therefore the liberation of what 
belongs to spirit within nature, for spirit is in nature in so far as it relates 
itself not to another, but to itsel£ This is likewise the liberation of nature, 30 
which in itself is reason; it is only through spirit however, that reason as 
such comes forth from nature into existence. Spirit has the certainty which 
Adam had when he beheld Eve, 'This is flesh of my flesh, this is bone of 
my bones.' Nature is, so to speak, the bride espoused by spirit. Is this + 
certainty also truth however? The inwardness of nature is nothing but 35 
the universal, and we enter it of our own accord if we have thoughts. 
If subjective truth is the correspondence between sensuous representation 
and the object, objective truth is the correspondence of the object, of the 
fact, with itself, so that its reality is in conformity with its Notion. The 
essential ego is the self-equality of the Notion, which pervades everything, 40 
204 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
and which through maintaining its control over particular differences, 
constitutes the universal returning into itself. This Notion is, on this ac-
count, the true Idea of the universe, the sole actuality. Thus God alone is 
+ truth, according to Plato, He is that which is immortally alive, and his 
5 body and soul are by nature one. The first question to arise is therefore, 
+ 'Why has God determined himself in order to create nature?' 
B 
The Notion of nature 
Nature has yielded itself as the Idea in the form of otherness. 
Since the Idea is therefore the negative of itself, or external 
to itself, nature is not merely external relative to this Idea 
10 (and to the subjective existence of the same, spirit), but is em-
bodied as nature is the determination of externality. 
Addition. If God is all sufficient and lacks nothing, how does He come to 
release Himself into something so clearly unequal to Him? The divine 
Idea is just this self-release, the expulsion of this other out of itself, and the 
15 acceptance of it again, in order to constitute subjectivity and spirit. The 
philosophy of nature itself belongs to this pathway of return, for it is the 
philosophy of nature which overcomes the division of nature and spirit, 
and renders to spirit the recognition of its essence in nature. This then is 
the position of nature within the whole; its determinateness lies in the 
20 self-determination of the Idea, by which it posits difference, another, 
within itself, whole maintaining infmite good in its indivisibility, and im-
parting its entire content in what it provides for this otherness. God dis-
poses therefore, while remaining equal to Himself; each of these moments 
is itself the whole Idea, and must be posited as the divine totality. Dis-
25 tinctiveness can be grasped in three forms; the universal, the particular, 
and the singular; firstly it is preserved in the eternal unity of the Idea, 
+ i.e. the ..\6yos, the eternal son of God as it was to philo. The other of this 
extreme is singularity, the form of fmite spirit. Singularity, as return 
into self, is certainly spirit, but as otherness to the exclusion of everything 
30 else, it is finite or human spirit, for we are not concerned with finite 
+ spirits other than men. In so far as the individual man is at the same time 
205 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
received into the unity of the divine essence, he is the object of the Chris-
tian religion, which is the most tremendous demand that may be made 
upon him. Nature is the third form with which we are concerned here, 
and as the Idea in particularity, it stands between both extremes. This form 
is the most congenial to the understanding. Spirit is posited as contradic-
5 
tion existing for itself, for there is an objective contradiction between the 
Idea in its infinite freedom and in the form of singularity, which occurs 
in nature only as an implicit contradiction, or as a contradiction which 
has being for us in that otherness appears in the Idea as a stable form. In 
Christ the contradiction is posited and overcome as life, passion and resur-
10 
rection. Nature is the Son of God, not as the Son however, but as abiding 
in otherness, in which the divine Idea is alienated from love and held fast 
for a moment. Nature is self-alienated spirit; spirit, a bacchantic god inno-
cent of restraint and reflection has merely been let loose into it; in nature, 
the unity of the Notion conceals itself 
15 
The thinking view of nature must note the implicit process by which 
nature sublates its otherness to become spirit, and the way in which the 
Idea is present in each stage of nature itself Estranged from the Idea, 
nature is merely the corpse of the understanding. Nature is the Idea, but 
only implicitly. That was why Schelling called it a petrified intelligence, 20 
which others have even said is frozen. God does not remain petrified and + 
moribund however, the stones cry out and lift themselves up to spirit. 
God is subjectivity, activity, infinite actuosity, within which the other is 
only momentary, and remains implicit within the unity of the Idea, be-
cause it is itself this totality of the Idea. Since nature is the Idea in the form 25 
of otherness, according to the Notion of the Idea, the Idea is not within 
it as it is in and for itself, although nature is nevertheless one of the modes 
in which the Idea manifests itself, and in which it must come forth. 
Secondly, it has to be established and demonstrated that this mode of the 
Idea is nature. In order to do this, a comparison will subsequently have to 30 
be made, to see if the defmition corresponds to ordinary thinking about 
nature. In other respects however, philosophy need not concern itself 
with ordinary thinking, nor undertake the tasks it carries out with respect 
to nature; although such thinking is conformable however, there must, 
in general, be an agreement between these two aspects. 
35 
The relation between the metaphysical aspect and this basic determina-
tion of nature has now to be indicated, and presents itself as the question 
of the eternity of the world. It might well seem as though we could leave 
metaphysics alone in this connection, but as they may be dealt with suc-
cinctly and efficiently at this point, we should not hesitate to bring them 40 
206 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
forward. The metaphysics of nature, the essential thought-determinateness 
of its distinctiveness, is that it is the Idea in its otherness. It is therefore 
essentially of an ideal nature, and determinate only through its being rela-
tive to a first principle. The question of the eternity of the world (which is 
5 confused with nature, since it is a collection of what is spiritual and 
natural), is primarily concerned with a time-image, an eternity as it is 
called, an infinitely long period of time, involving the world's having had 
no beginning in time. Its secondary content is the image of nature as some-
thing uncreated, eternal, and inherently independent of God. This secon-
10 dary content is removed and completely disposed of by the determinate-
ness of nature, its constituting the otherness of the Idea. With regard to its 
primary meaning therefore, after the absoluteness of the world has been 
removed from the argument, the question is merely concerned with the 
relation between eternity and the time-image employed. 
15 
At this point certain observations may be made. (a) Eternity is not before 
or after time, it is not prior to the creation of the world, nor is it the 
sequel to its disappearance; it is absolute present, the now, and has no 
before or after. The world is created, is now being created, and always has 
been created; this becomes apparent in the conservation of the world. 
20 The activity of the absolute Idea is created; like the Idea as such, the Idea 
of nature is eternal. (b) If one asks whether the world, nature, in its finitude, 
has a beginning in time or not, one has the world or nature in general 
before one's mind, i.e. the universal; and it has already been shown that 
the true universal is the Idea, which is eternal. That which is fmite is 
25 temporal however, and has a before and after; and if one has the fmite 
as one's object, one is within time. That which is fmite has a beginning, 
but not an absolute beginning; its time begins with it, and there is no 
time without fmitude. Philosophy is the timeless comprehension of every-
thing in general according to its eternal determination, and including time. 
30 Having removed the concept of the absolute beginning of time, the oppo-
site concept of an infinite time occurs; but infmite time, if it is still regarded 
as time, and not as transcended time, is still to be distinguished from eter-
nity, and if thought cannot resolve the fmite into the eternal, it can never 
be this time; it is perhaps another time, or another, and always another 
35 (§ 258). Matter presents a parallel example, for in that it is infmitely divis-
ible, its nature is such, that what is posited as a whole, as a one, is com-
pletely external to itself, while within itselfit constitutes a plurality. Matter 
is not in fact divided in this way however, and does not consist of atoms; 
its divisibility is a possibility and nothing but a possibility, so that this 
40 infmite division is not something positive and actual, but only a subjective 
207 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
idea. Infmite time is similar in that it also is merely an idea, a postulated 
beyond which remains negatived. It is a necessary conception so long as 
one continues to regard what is fmite, but if one passes to the universal, 
to that which is not finite, then one has left the standpoint at which there 
is an occurrence of individuality and its variability. To ordinary thinking, 
5 
the world is merely a collection of fmitudes; but if it is grasped as uni-
versal, as totality, the question of its beginning becomes meaningless. It is 
then not dear where the beginning is to be made; a beginning has to be 
made, but only a relative beginning. One goes beyond it, but not into 
infinity, merely to another beginning, which is of course also only a con-
10 
ditioned one. In short this beginning simply expresses the nature of that 
which is relative, because we are dealing with finitude. 
Here we have a metaphysics moving indiscriminately between abstract 
determinations which it takes to be absolute. If we ask whether or not the 
world has a beginning in time, it is impossible that we should receive a 15 
plain and straightforward answer to the question. It is assumed that a 
plain answer would assure us of one or the other of these alternatives, but 
the plain answer is that the either-or assumed by the question is un-
warranted. Being finite, one's beginning is also not a beginning, and the 
conflict between these opposed determinations, as it is involved in finitude, 20 
is devoid of resolution and reconciliation. It is because the finite is this 
contradiction that it perishes. The fmite is preceded by another, and its 
antecedents have to be sought, in the history of the earth or of mankind 
for example, when its context is being traced. There is no end to such an 
enquiry, just as there is an end to be found in all that is finite, time having 25 
power over the plurality of the finite. The finite has a beginning, but this 
beginning is not the first; it is independent, but this immediacy is limited 
in the same way. When ordinary thinking leaves this determinate finitude, 
which has a before or after, and passes on to the empty concept of time, 
or of the world in general, it flounders about in the empty ideas of 30 
merely abstract thoughts. 
In this externality, the determinations of the Notion have 
the appearance of an indifferent subsistence and isolation 
with regard to one another; the Notion is therefore inter-
nal, and nature in its determinate being displays necessity 35 
and contingency, not freedom. 
208 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Remark 
Nature is what it is through its determinate existence, and 
it should not therefore be deified. It is wrong to regard and 
treat the sun, the moon, animals, plants etc. as works of 
God superior to the deeds and events of humanity. Nature 
5 is implicitly divine in that it is in the Idea; but in reality 
its being does not correspond to its Notion, and it is rather 
the unresolved contradiction. Its distinctive characteristic 
is its positedness, its negativity. The ancients grasped 
+ matter in general as non-ens, and nature has also been regard-
10 ed as the Idea's falling short of itself, for in this external shape 
the Idea is inadequate to itself. It is only to the external and 
immediate stage of sensuous consciousness that nature ap-
pears as that which is primary, immediate, as mere being. Even 
in such an element of externality, nature is, nevertheless, 
15 the representation of the Idea, and consequently one may 
and should admire the wisdom of God within it. Vanini 
said that a piece of straw was enough to prove the being of 
+ God, but every product of the spirit, the very worst of its 
imaginings, the capriciousness of its most arbitrary moods, 
20 a mere word, are all better evidence of God's being than 
any single object. It is not only that in nature the play of 
forms has unbounded and unbridled contingency, but that 
each shape by itself is devoid of its Notion. Life is the 
highest to which nature drives in its determinate being, but 
25 as merely natural Idea, life is submerged in the irrational-
ity of externality, and the living individual is bound with 
another individuality in every moment of its existence, 
while spiritual manifestation contains the moment of a free 
and universal relation of spirit to itself. 
30 
It is by a similar misunderstanding that we are led to regard 
that which is spiritual as generally less important than the things 
of nature. Works of art are sometimes prized less highly than 
natural things because material has to be brought to them 
from without, and they do not live. This is to talk as if the 
35 spiritual form did not contain a higher animation, and 
spirit were not superior to natural form, as if form in gen-
eral were not superior to matter, and as if that which may 
be called the matter of moral activity were not purely and 
209 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
simply the product of spirit; as if that which is higher and 
more animated in nature did not also take its material from 
without. The superiority of its conforming to its eternal laws 
through all its contingency is attributed to nature, but that is 
also the case in the realm of self-consciousness. Even faith 
5 
acknowledges that a providence guides human events. 
Should we regard the determinations of this providence in 
the field of human events as merely contingent and irration-
al? If spiritual contingency or caprice goes forth into evil, 
that which goes astray is still infinitely superior to the regu-
10 
lar movement of stars, or the innocent life of the plant, + 
because that which errs is still spirit. 
Addition. The infmite divisibility of matter simply means that it is 
external to itself. It is precisely this externality which we first wonder at 
in the immeasurability of nature. Thoughts are not co-ordinated in nature, 15 
for Notionlessness holds sway here, and each material point appears to be 
entirely independent of all the others. The sun, planets, comets, elements, 
plants, animals, all exist as self-contained particulars. The sun is not one 
and the same individual as the earth, and is only bound to the planets by 
gravity. Subjectivity is fIrSt encountered in life, which is the opposite of 20 
extrinsicality. The heart, liver, eye are not independent individualities on 
their own account; the hand, severed from the body, decays. The organic 
body is still a whole composed of a multiplicity of mutually external 
members, but each individual organ subsists only in the subject, and the + 
Notion exists as the power which unites them. In this way the Notion, 25 
which is something merely inward in Notionlessness, first comes into 
existence in life, as soul. The spatiality of the organism is completely de-
void of truth for the soul; if this were not so, we should have as many 
souls as points, for the soul feels at every point. One should not allow one-
self to be deceived by the appearance of extrinsicality; one should remem-
30 
ber that the mutual externality constitutes only a single illlity. Although 
they appear to be independent, the celestial bodies have to patrol a single 
field. Since unity in nature is a relation between apparently self-subsistent 
entities however, nature is not free, but merely necessary and contingent. 
Necessity is the inseparability of terms which are differcnt, and yet ap-
3S 
pear to be indifferent. The abstraction of self-externality also receives its 
due there however, hence the contingcncy or external necessity, contrast-
ing with the inner necessity of the Notion. In physics a lot has been said 
about polarity, and ills concept has marked a great advance in the meta-
2IO 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
physics of physics, for as a concept it is nothing more nor less than the 
determination of the necessary relationship between two different terms, 
which, in so far as the positing of one is also the positing of the other, 
constitute a unity. Polarity of this kind limits itself only to the opposi-
5 tion; it is by means of the opposition however that there is also a positing 
of the return out of the opposition into unity, and it is this third term 
which constitutes the necessity of the Notion, a necessity which is not 
found in polarity. In nature taken as otherness, the square or tetrad also 
belongs to the whole form of necessity, as in the four elements, the four 
10 colours etc.; the pentad may also be found, in the five fingers and the 
five senses for example; but in spirit the fundamental form of necessity is 
the triad. The totality of the disjunction of the Notion exists in nature as a 
tetrad, the ftrst of which is universality as such. The second term is 
difference, and appears in nature as a duality, for in nature the other must 
15 exist for itself as an otherness. Consequently, the subjective unity of uni-
versality and particularity is the fourth term, which has a further exis-
tence as against the other three. In themselves the monad and the dyad 
constitute the entire particularity, and the totality of the Notion itself can 
therefore proceed to the pentad. 
20 
Nature is the negative because it negates the Idea. Jacob Boehme says 
that God's first birth is Lucifer, this creature of light having centred his 
imagination upon himself and become evil; this is the moment of dif-
ference, of otherness held firm in opposition to the Son, who is otherness 
+ held in love. Representations such as this, which have a free rein in 
25 orientalized taste, have their ground and significance in the negative 
nature of nature. Immediacy is the other form of otherness, and consists of 
what is different subsisting abstractly by itself. This subsisting is only 
momentary however, it is not true subsistence; only the Idea, because it 
has returned into itself and is therefore being in and for self, subsists 
30 eternally. In time nature comes first, but the absolute prius is the Idea. 
+ This absolute prius is the fmis, the true beginning, alpha is omega. Men 
often consider that which is immediate to be superior to that which is 
mediated, because the latter seems to imply dependence. The Notion has 
both aspects however, it is mediation through the sublation of mediation, 
35 and therefore immediacy. An immediate belief in God is often spoken of. 
This is the more degraded, and not the higher mode however, and the 
+ original or primitive nature-religions were an expression of it. Affirma-
tion in nature is the shining through of the Notion, which soon displays its 
power through the mutability of this externality. All existences are in fact 
40 one body, in which the soul has its dwelling. Although the Notion 
211 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
displays itself in these gigantic members, it does so imperfectly, and it is 
only in spirit that it exists as it is. 
§ 249 
Nature is to be regarded as a system of stages, the one pro-
ceeding of necessity out of the other, and being the proxi-
5 
mate truth of that from which it results. This is not to be 
thought of as a natural engendering of one out of the other 
however, but as an engendering within the inner Idea which 
constitutes the ground of nature. Metamorphosis accrues 
only to the Notion as such, for development is nothing but the 10 
alteration of the same. In nature the Notion is however partly a 
mere inner principle, and partly an existence which is simply a 
living individuality; existent metamorphosis is therefore limited 
solely to this individuality. 
Remark 
The inept conception in which the progression and tran-
sition of one natural form and sphere into a higher is re-
15 
garded as an outwardly actual production somewhat clari-
fied by being relegated into the murkiness of the past, may 
be found in both ancient and modern philosophies of nature. 
It is precisely the externality which allows differences to 
fall apart and appear as indifferent existence, which is 20 
characteristic of nature; it is the dialectical Notion which 
is the inner principle of the same, and guides its stages for-
ward. Thinking consideration must reject such nebulous and 
basically sensuous conceptions as for example the so-called 
emergence of plants and animals out of water , and of the more 25 
highly developed animal organizations out of the lower etc. 
+ 
Addition. The view that natural things are useful is true 
in that it denies that they are absolute purpose in and for 
themselves. This negativity is not however external to them, 
but is the immanent moment of their Idea, which brings about 30 
their mutability and transition into another existence, but 
at the same time their transition into a higher Notion. 
As the Notion posits all particularity within existence at once, it does so 
in a universal manner. To think. of the genera as gradually evolving 
212 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
themselves out of one another in time is to make use of a completely 
empty concept; the time-difference is quite devoid of interest for thought. 
If it is merely a matter of enumerating the genera in order to show in a 
convenient way how the series of living being divides itself into general 
5 classes, from the simplest to those richer in determinations and content, or 
the other way about, this will always be of general interest. It is a way of 
+ ordering things, as is the division of nature into the three kingdoms, and 
is better than mixing everything up, which tends to repel the intuitive 
Notion in general intelligence. But one must not think one makes such a 
10 dry series dynamic, philosophical, more comprehensible, or what you 
will, merely be using the concept of emergence. The animal world is the 
truth of the vegetable world, which in its tum is the truth of the mineral-
ogical world; the earth is the truth of the solar system. In a system, the 
most abstract term is the first, and the truth of each sphere is the last; it is 
15 at the same time only the first term of a higher stage however. The com-
pletion of one stage out of the other constitutes the necessity of the Idea, 
and the variety of forms has to be grasped as necessary and determinate. 
A land animal has not proceeded by a natural process out of an aquatic 
animal, and then flown into the air, neither has the bird returned to the 
20 earth again. If we want to compare the stages of nature with one another 
we are perfectly justified in observing that this animal has one ventricle, 
while that has two; but we cannot go on to say that parts have been added, 
as if this had actually taken place. Nor should we use the category of an 
earlier stage in order to explain a later one; it would be a formal howler to 
+ say that the plant constituted the carbon, and the animal the nitrogen pole. 
Evolution and emanation are the two forms in which the progressive 
stages of nature have been grasped. The course of evolution begins with 
what is imperfect and formless, such as humidity and aquatic formations, 
leads on to what emerged from water, such as plants, polyps, mollusca, 
30 and fishes, progresses to land animals, and arrives fmally at man, as he 
emerges out of animals. This gradual alteration is said to be an explana-
tion and comprehension of nature. The doctrine is derived from the 
philosophy of nature, and is still widely prevalent. Although quantitative 
difference is easy enough to understand however, it explains nothing. The 
35 course of emanation is peculiar to the oriental world, where it is regarded 
as a series of degradations, beginning with the perfection and absolute 
totality of God. God has created, and fulgurations, flashes, and likenesses 
have proceeded from Him, so that the first likeness most resembles Him. 
The first production is supposed, in its tum, to have given birth to some-
40 thing less perfect than itself, and so on down the scale, so that each thing 
2I3 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
begotten is in its turn procreative down as far as the negative, which is 
matter, or the acme of evil. In this way emanation ends in the complete 
absence of form. Both these progressions are onesided and superficial, and + 
postulate an indeterminate goal, but the progress from the more to the less 
perfect has the advantage of holding up the prototype of a perfect organ-
5 
ism, which is the picture that must be in our mind's eye if we are to under-
stand stunted organizations. That which appears to be subordinate within 
them, such as organs with no functions, may only be clearly understood by 
means of the higher organizations in which one recognizes the functions 
they perform. If that which is perfect is to have the advantage over that 10 
which is imperfect it must exist in reality, and not only in the imagination. 
In the concept of metamorphosis there is also a fundamental idea which 
persists throughout all the various genera as well as the individual organs, 
so that they are merely transfigurations of the form of one and the same 
prototype. One speaks for example of the metamorphosis of an insect, in 15 
which the caterpillar, the chrysalis and the butterfly are one and the same 
individuaL In individuals it is certainly true that the development takes 
place in time, but this is not so in the genus. If the genus exists in a 
particular way, the other modes of its existence are also posited. If 
water is posited, air and fire are also etc. It is important to maintain 20 
identity, but not less important to maintain difference, which is pushed 
into the background if only quantitative change is considered. It is 
here that the simple concept of metamorphosis shows itself to be in-
sufficient. 
This leads on to the concept of a series of natural things, and in parti-
25 
cular, of living things. The desire to understand the necessity of such a 
development makes us look for a law governing the series, or a basic 
determination which, while positing variety, recapitulates itself within it, 
and so simultaneously engenders a new variety. But to augment a term 
by the successive addition of uniformly determined elements, and only to 30 
see the same relationship between all the members of the series, is not the 
way in which the Notion determines. It is in fact precisely this conception 
of a series of stages and so on, which has hindered advances in the recog-
nition of the necessity of formations. It turns out to be a hopeless task to 
attempt to arrange the planets, metals or chemical bodies in general, 35 
plants, and animals, into a series, and to look for a law governing such a 
series, because nature does not distribute its formations into series and 
member, and the Notion distinguishes according to qualitative deter-
minateness, making leaps in the process. The old saying, or law as it is 
called, 'non datur saltus in natura' is by no means adequate to the diremp- + 
214 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
tion of the Notion. The continuity of the Notion with itself is of an 
entirely different nature. 
§ 250 
In so far as the contradiction of the Idea is external to itself as 
nature, one side ofit is formed by the Notionally generated neces-
5 sity ofits formations and their rational determination within the 
organic totality, and the other by their indifferent contingency 
and indeterminable irregularity. In the sphere of nature, contin-
gency and determinability from without come into their own. 
This contingency is particularly prevalent in the realm of concrete 
+ individual formations, which are at the same time only imme-
diately concrete as things of nature. That which is immediately 
concrete is in fact an ensemble of juxtaposed properties, external 
and more or less indifferent to one another, to which simple 
subjective being-for-self is therefore equally indifferent, and 
15 which it consequently abandons to external contingent deter-
mination. The impotence of nature is to be attributed to its 
only being able to maintain the determinations of the Notion in an 
abstract manner, and to its exposing the foundation of the par-
ticular to determination from without. 
Remark 
20 
The infinite wealth and variety of forms, and the utterly irra-
tional contingency which mixes with the external order of natural 
formations, have been praised as the sublime freedom and divinity 
of nature , or at least as the divinity within it. It is to be expected 
that ordinary ways of thinking should mistake contingency, cap-
25 rice and lack of order, for freedom and rationality. This impotence 
on the part of nature sets limits to philosophy; and it is the height of 
pointlessness to demand of the Notion that it should explain, and 
as it is said, construe or deduce these contingent products of 
nature, although the more isolated and trifling they are the easier 
+ the task appears to be. Traces of Notional determination will 
certainly survive in the most particularized product, although they 
will not exhaust its nature. The traces of this transmission and 
inner connection will often surprise the investigator, but will be 
2 15 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
particularly astonishing or even incredible to those accustomed 
only to seeing the same contingency in the history of nature as they 
see in that of humanity. Here one has to guard against accepting + 
such traces as the determinate totality of formations, for it is this 
that gives rise to the analogies mentioned above. 
5 
The difficulty, and in many cases the impossibility of finding 
clear distinctions for classes and orders on the basis of empirical 
observation, has its root in the inability of nature to hold fast to the 
realization of the Notion. Nature never fails to blur essential limits 
with intermediate and defective formations, and so to provide 10 
instances which qualify every firm distinction. Even within a 
specific genus such as mankind, monsters occur, which have to 
be included within the genus, although they lack some of the 
characteristic determinations which would have been regarded as 
essential to it. In order to classify such formations as defective, 15 
imperfect, or deformed, an invariable prototype has to be 
assumed, with the help of which we are able to recognize these 
so-called monsters' deformities, and borderline cases. This proto-
type cannot be drawn from experience, but has as its presupposition 
the independence and worth of Notional determination. 
20 
§ 25 1 
Nature is implicitly a living whole; more closely consider-
ed, the movement through its series of stages consists of the 
Idea positing itself as what it is implicitly, i.e. the Idea 
passes into itself by proceeding out of its immediacy and 
externality, which is death. It does this primarily in order 25 
to take on living being, but also in order to transcend this 
determinateness, in which it is merely life, and to bring 
itself forth into the existence of spirit, which constitutes the 
truth and ultimate purpose of nature, and the true actuality of the 
Idea. 
30 
Addition. It is as a posi.ting of that which it is implicitly, that the de-
velopment of the Notion in accordance with its determination is to be 
grasped. This determination might be regarded as its goal or purpose. In 
the development, these determinations of its content come into existence 
and are manifested, not however as independent self-sufficient being, but 35 
as posited moments of an ideal nature, which remain within its unity. 
216 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
This positedness can therefore be grasped as an expression, protrusion, 
exposition, or self-externalization in so far as the subjectivity of the 
Notion loses itself in the juxtaposition of its determinations. It preserves 
itself within them as their unity and ideality however; and seen from the 
5 opposite side therefore, this outward movement of the centre towards 
the periphery is just as much an internal resumption of that which is 
outward; it is a reminder that it is the Notion which exists in what is 
expressed. Beginning with the externality in which it is first contained, the 
progress of the Notion is therefore a turning into itself in the centre, i.e. 
10 the assimilation into subjective unity or being-within-self of what is, to 
the Notion, the inadequate existence of immediacy or externality; not so 
that the Notion withdraws from this existence and leaves it as an empty 
shell, but so that existence as such is immanent within itself, or adequate 
to the Notion, and so that being-within-self, which is life, itself exists. The 
15 Notion wants to break the rind of externality in order to become itself. 
Life is the Notion which has reached its manifestation and stands dis-
played in its clarity; at the same time however it is the most difficult for 
the understanding to come to terms with, because the understanding 
fmds it easiest to grasp whatever is simplest, abstract, and dead. 
c 
Division 
(The division of the philosophy of nature) 
§ 252 
20 The Idea, as nature, has: 
I. the determination of extrinsicality and of infinite indi vid ua-
tion. Unity of form, as it is external to this, is of an ideal na-
ture, and as it is simply implicit, is merely sought after. This 
constitutes matter and the ideal nature of the system of matter, 
25 i.e. mechanics. 
II. the determination of particulari ty , in which reality is posited 
with an immanent determinateness of form and its own existent 
differentiation. This is a relationship of reflection, the being-in-
self of which constitutes natural individuality, i.e. physics. 
30 III. the determination of subjectivity, in which the real differences 
ofform are also brought back into a unity of an ideal nature, 
+ which has found itself and has being for itself, i.e. organics. 
217 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Addition. This division follows from the standpoint of the Notion as it 
is grasped in its totality, and displays the diremption of the Notion in its 
determinations. As it exhibits its determinations in this diremption and 
yet only allows them independence as moments, it realizes itself in this, 
and so posits itself as Idea. The Notion not only exhibits its moments and 5 
expresses itself in its differences however, but also leads these apparently 
independent stages back into their ideality and unity. By leading them 
back into itself, it in fact turns them for the first time into the concrete 
Notion, the Idea, and truth. There seem therefore to be two ways of 
formulating this division and so proceeding scientifically. The one begins 10 
with the concrete Notion, which in nature is life regarded for itself, and 
from this it is led to the expressions which the Notion throws out of itself 
as independent spheres of nature, and to which it relates itself as to another 
in the more abstract aspects of its existence, ending with the complete 
extinction of life. The other is the opposite one. It begins with the last 15 
self-externality of the merely immediate manner in which the Notion 
first exists, and ends with its true determinate being, the truth of its whole 
exposition. The first way may be compared to the progression in the 
conception of emanation, the second to the progression implied in the 
conception of evolution (§ 249 Addition). Each of these two forms taken 20 
by itself is onesided, for they take place simultaneously, and the eternal 
divine process is a unified flow in two antithetical directions, which 
simply meet and completely permeate each other. The first, even when it 
is given the highest names and regarded as being concrete, is merely an 
immediacy. When matter negates itself as untrue existence for example, 25 
a higher existence emerges, and in one respect the earlier stage is sublated 
by means of an evolution; on the other hand however, it remains in the 
background, and is reproduced by emanation. Matter involves itself into 
life, and evolution is therefore also involution. As the result of the drive of 
the Idea towards being for itself, independent moments such as the senses 30 
of the animal, come into objective existence as the sun, and the lunar and 
cometary bodies. Despite some changes, these bodies retain their shape 
but lose their independence even in the physical sphere, where they are the 
elements. Projected outwards, subjective sight is the sun, taste is water, and 
smell is air. As it is necessary to posit determinations of the Notion here, 35 
we must begin with the most abstract, not with the most concrete sphere. + 
Initially, matter is the form in which the self-externality of nature 
attains its first being-in-sel£ It is the abstract being-for-self which, in that 
it is exclusive, is a plurality which has its unity within itself and at the 
same time outside itself, as the plural being-for-self included within 40 
218 

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
universal being-for-sel£ It is in fact gravity. In mechanics, being-for-self 
is still not an individual stable unity having the power to subordinate 
plurality to itsel£ Weighted matter does not yet possess the individuality 
which preserves its determinations, and since the determinations of the 
5 Notion in it are still external to one another, difference is indifferent or 
merely quantitati.ve, not qualitative, and matter as simple mass has no 
form. It is in physics that the individual bodies acquire form, and at the 
same time it is there that we see gravity revealed for the first time as the 
being-for-self which submits multiplicity to its rule, and which is no 
10 longer a nisus, but which has at least the superficial appearance of being at 
rest. Each atom of gold for example contains all the determinations or 
properties of gold, so that matter is immanently specified and particu-
larized. The second determination is that specification as qualitative 
determinateness, and being-for-self as the point of individuality, still unite 
15 in one and the same term, so that the body is fmitely determined. Indi-
viduality is still bound to defmite, exclusive and specific properties, and 
is not yet present in its complete and general form. If a body of this kind 
is brought into the process, it ceases to be what it is if it loses these pro-
perties. In this way qualitative determinateness is posited affirmatively, 
20 but not at the same time negatively. Organic being, which is an indi-
viduality existing for itself and developing itself into its differences within 
itself, constitutes totality as found in nature. Its determinations are at the 
same time concrete totalities, not merely specific properties, and remain 
qualitatively determined with regard to one another. Life expresses itself 
2S within the process of these members, and also posits them as finite ele-
ments of an ideal nature. We thus have a number of beings-for-self, which 
are however brought back to the being-for-self which is for itself, and 
which, as its own end, subjugates the members and reduces them to 
means. It is unity of qualitative determinedness and of gravity, which 
30 produces itself in life. 
Each of these stages constitutes a characteristic realm of nature, and all 
of them appear to be separately self-subsistent. Each subsequent stage 
contains those prior to it however, so that the last is the concrete unity of 
all that have preceded it, and presupposes them as constituting its inorganic 
35 nature. One stage is the power of the other, but this is a mutual relation, 
and within it one fmds the true meaning of potencies. That which is in-
organic constitutes the potencies opposed to that which is individual and 
subjective, that is to say that whatever is inorganic subverts that which is 
organic. In its tum organic being is the power opposed to its universal 
40 forces such as air and water, which although they are perpetually being 
219 

HllGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
released, are also being ceaselessly appropriated and assimilated by it. The 
eternal life of nature consists firstly in the Idea displaying itself in each 
sphere to whatever extent fmitude makes possible, just as every drop of 
water yields an image of the sun. Secondly, it consists in the dialectic of the 
Notion, which breaks through the limitation of this sphere, and since 5 
it only fmds partial satisfaction in such an inade'luate element, necessarily 
passes over into a higher stage. 
220 

SECTION ONE 
Mechanics 
Mechanics treats of: 
A. The completely abstract extrinsicality of space and time. 
B. Individualized extrinsicality and its relation within this 
abstraction, i.e. the finite mechanicsofmatterandmotion. 
S C. Matter in the freedomofits implicit Notion, i.e. theabsolute 
mechanics of free motion. 
Addition. Self-externality immediately breaks down into two forms: as a 
positive form it is space, and then as a negative form it is time. Matter is the 
first concrete unity and negation of these abstract moments, and in that it 
10 is related to these moments, the moments are related to one another in 
motion. When this is not an external relation, it gives rise to self-motivated 
+ matter, i.e. to the absolute unity of matter and motion. 
221 


CHAPTER ONE 
Space and time 
(Mathematical mechanics) 
A 
Space 
§ 254 
The primary or immediate determination of nature is the 
abstract universality of its self-externality, its unmediated 
indifference, i.e. space. It is on account of its being self-
externality, that space constitutes collaterality of a comple-
5 tely ideal nature; as this extrinsicality is still completely 
abstract, space is simply continuous, and is devoid of any 
determinate difference. 
Remark 
+ 
The nature of space has given rise to many theories. I 
shall only make mention of the Kantian determination of it 
+ as a form of sensuous intuition like time. It is now generally 
accepted that space must be regarded as a merely subjective 
element of the representative faculty. If we disregard the 
determinations of the Kantian Notion and subj ective ideal-
ism in this theory, we are left with the correct determina-
15 tion of space as a simple form, i.e. an abstraction, the form 
of immediate externality. It is inadmissible to speak of 
spatial points as if they constituted the positive element in 
space, because on account of its lack of difference, space is 
merely the possibility, not the positedness of juxtaposition and 
20 what is negative, and is therefore simply continuous. The 
point, which is being-for-self, is therefore rather the negation 
of space, a negation which is posited within space. This also 
+ resolves the question of the infinitude of space (§ 100 Obs.). 
223 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Space is, in general, pure quantity, no longer 1ll its merely 
logical determination, but as an immediate and external 
being. Consequently, nature begins with quantity and not 
with quality, because its determination is not a primary 
abstract and immediate state like logical Being. Essen- + 
tially, it is already internally mediated externality and 
otherness. 
Addition. As it is our procedure to ask how the. thought which has been 
established as a necessity by means of the Notion looks in our sensuous 
intuition, the further requirement is that the intuition of space shall cor-
10 
respond to the thought of pure self-externality. Even if we should deceive 
ourselves in this respect, this would in no way effect the truth of our 
thought. In the empirical sciences on the other hand, the opposite pro-
cedure is adopted; the empirical intuition of space comes first, and is then 
followed by the thought of space. In order to prove that space accords 15 
with our thought, we have to compare the image of space with the 
determination of our Notion. The content of space has nothing to do with 
space itself, in which various heres are juxtaposed without impinging upon 
one another. Here is not yet place, it is merely the possibility of place. The 
heres are completely identical, and this abstract plurality, which has no 20 
true interruption and limit, is the precise constitution of externality. 
Although the heres are also differentiated, their being different is iden-
tical with their lack of difference, and the difference is therefore abstract. + 
Space is therefore punctiformity without points, or complete continuity. 
If one fixes a point, space is both interrupted and simply uninterrupted. 25 
The point has significance only in so far as it is spatial, and so external both 
to itself and to others. The here also has within itself an above, a below, a 
left and a right. If anything were no longer external to itself, but only to 
others it would be a point; but as no here is the last, there can be no such + 
thing. No matter how far away I place a star, I can always go beyond it, 30 
for no one has boarded up the universe. This is the complete externality of + 
space. This other of the point is itself just as external to itself however, and 
consequently both are undifferentiated and unseparated; space is still at 
unity with itself as its otherness beyond its limit; and it is this unity in 
extrinsicality which constitutes continuity. The unity of these two mo-
35 
ments of discreteness and continuity is the objectively determined Notion 
of space. This Notion is however only the abstraction of space, which is 
often regarded as absolute space, and thought to be the truth of space. 
Relative space is something much higher however, for it is the determinate 
224 

MATHEMATICAL MECHANICS 
space of any given material body, and it is rather its being as material body 
which constitutes the truth of abstract space. 
To ask whether space by itself is real, or whether it is only a property 
of things, is to ask one of the most well-worn of all metaphysical questions. 
5 If one says that it is something inherently substantial, then it must resem-
ble a box, which, even if there is nothing in it, is still something subsisting 
within itsel£ Space is absolutely yielding and utterly devoid of opposition 
however; and if something is real, it is necessary that it should be incom-
patible with something else. One cannot point to a part of space which is 
10 space for itself, for space is always filled, and no part of it is separated from 
+ that which fills it. It is therefore a non-sensuous sensibility and a sensuous 
+ insensibility. The things of nature are in space, and as nature is subject to 
the condition of externality, space remains the foundation of nature. 
If one says, as Leibnitz did, that space is an order of things which does not 
15 concern the noumena, and which has its substrata in things, we assume 
that if one removes the things which fill space, the spatial relationships 
+ between them still persist independently. It may certainly be said that 
space is an order, for it is of course an external determination, but it is 
much more than a merely external determination, it is externality itsel£ 
§ 255 
:0 
Space is implicitly the Notion in general, and as such has 
the differences of the Notion within itself: (a) in its indif-
ference it has them immediately as the three dimensions, 
which are merely different. and quite devoid of determina-
tion. 
Remark 
25 
In so far as it is not a philosophical science. geometry 
may assume the universal determinations of space as its object. 
and it is not to be demanded of it that it should deduce the 
+ necessity of the three dimensions of space. The deduction 
of this necessity is founded upon the nature of the Notion. 
30 but because of the non-philosophical nature of geometry, 
it is never considered. In this primary form of extrinsicality 
and abstract quantity. the determinations of the Notion 
constitute a merely superficial and completely empty dif-
ference. Consequently one cannot say how height. length, 
H 
225 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OIl NATURE 
and breadth differ from one another, because they are merely 
supposed to be distinctions. There is as yet no difference 
between them, and no determination is added by calling a direc-
tion height, length, or breadth. Height is more precisely deter-
mined as a direction from the middle of the earth, but a 
5 
more concrete determination of this kind is irrelevant to the 
nature of space itself. Admitting this determination, it is still a 
matter ofindUference whether we call a certain direction height 
or depth; it is the same with length or breadth, which is also 
often called depth, for nothing is determined in this way. 
10 
§ 256 
(b) Spatial difference is however essentially determinate 
and qualitative. As such it is (1) in the first instance the point, 
i.e. the negation of the immediate and undifferentiated self-
externality of space itself. (2) The negation is however the 
negation of space, and is therefore itself spatial. In that this 15 
relation is essential to the point, the point is self-sublating and 
constitutes the line, which is the primary otherness or spatial 
being of the point. (3) The truth of otherness is however the + 
negation of negation, and the line therefore passes over 
into the plane. Although one aspect of the plane is that it 20 
constitutes surface in general, in that it is a determinate-
ness opposed to line and point, it also has the aspect of 
being the transcended negation of space, or the reinstatement 
of that spatial totality which now has the negative moment 
within it. It is therefore an enclosing surface, which divides 25 
off and separates a distinct part of space. 
+ 
Remark 
It is because of their Notion that the line does not consist 
of points nor the plane of lines, the line being rather the 
self-externality of the point in that is relates itself to space 30 
and is self-sublating, and the plane likewise, being the 
transcended self-externality of the line. The point is here 
presented as that which is primary and positive, and it is 
from this that a beginning is made. The contrary is also 
true however, for space may be considered as that which is 35 
226 

MATHEMATICAL MECHANICS 
pOSItIve, the plane as the first negation of space, and the 
line as the second negation, which, because it is the second, is 
in truth the self-relating negation of the point. The necessity 
of this transition is the same as it was in the first case. The necessity 
5 of this transition is not realized when the point and the line etc. 
are grasped and defined in an external manner; the former kind of 
transition is however grasped, as something contingent, when a 
manner of definition is used in which the line is said to arise from 
+ the movement of the point etc. The other figurations of space 
10 treated in geometry are further qualitative limitations of an 
abstract division of space, of the plane, or of a bounded spatial 
unit. Moments of necessity also occur here; in the triangle for 
example, which is the primary rectilinear figure, to which, 
with the square, all other figures must be reduced if they 
15 are to be determined etc. The principle of these construc-
tions is the identity of the understanding, which determines 
the figurations into regularity and so establishes the relation-
s hip s by which they may be understood. 
It may be noticed in passing that Kant was of the extra-
20 ordinary opinion that the definition of a straight line as the 
shortest distance between two points is a synthetic propo-
sition because our conception of straightness is merely 
+ qualitative and does not involve size. In this sense, every 
definition is a synthetic proposition; that which is defined, 
25 which in this case is the straight line, is primarily nothing 
but an intuition or representation. As we have already 
+ seen in § 229, in definitions such as this, it is the determina-
tion as the shortest distance between two points which 
first constitutes the Notion. A definition is necessary here 
30 because the Notion differs from the intuition by not being 
already present within it. Kant's definition is clearly analytic, 
since the straight line reduces itself to simplicity of direction, 
which, when taken in relation to quantity, yields the determina-
tion of the smallest quantity, and consequendy of the shortest 
3S distance. 
Addition. It is only the straight line which is the primary determination 
of spatiality, for curved lines implicitly involve two dimensions; in the 
circle we have the second power of the line. As the second negation, the 
227 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
plane has two dimensions, for the second negation is no less double than 
two. 
+ 
If certain determinations are given, it is the task of the science of geome-
try to discover what other determinations follow from them, the main 
thing being that that which is given, and that which follows, should con-
5 
stitute a single developed totality. The central propositions of geometry 
are those in which a whole is postulated, and expressed in its determinate 
elements. There are two such cardinal propositions involved in the com-
plete determinability of the triangle. (a) If one has any three elements of a 
triangle, one of which has to be a side (and there are three cases of this), 10 
the triangle is completely determined. Geometry deviates here into the 
easier but superfluous presentation of two triangles, which under these 
circumstances are supposed to be congruent. In fact the proposition needs 
only one triangle, for the triangle in itself is such a relationship: if the first 
three parts of it are determined, so are the other three, for the triangle is 15 
determined by two sides and an angle, or two angles and a side etc. The + 
first three elements constitute the determinability or Notion of the 
triangle; the other three belong to its external reality, and are superfluous 
to the Notion. In such postulation, determination is still completely ab-
stract, and there is only a general dependence, for the relation of specific 20 
determinateness in the size of the elements of the triangle is still lacking. 
This is (b) reached in Pythagoras's theorem, which presents the perfect 
determinateness of the triangle, in that in it, only the right angle is com-
pletely determined, its adjacent angle being equal to it. This theorem is 
therefore superior to all others as an illustration of the Idea. It presents a 25 
whole which has divided itself within itself, just as each shape in philos-
ophy is divided within itself as Notion and reality. Here we have the 
same magnitude twice, first as the square of the hypotenuse, and then 
divided into the squares on the two cathetuses. There is a higher defmi- + 
tion of the circle than that based on the equality of radii, in which dif-
30 
ference is taken into account, so that the perfect determinateness of the 
circle is obtained. This occurs in analytical treatment, and contains noth-
ing that is not found in Pythagoras's theorem. The cathetuses are the sine 
and cosine, or abscissa and ordinate, and the hypotenuse is the radius. The 
relationship of these three constitutes the determinateness of the circle. + 
This is not however a simple relationship like that in the first definition, 
but a relationship of different elements. Euclid also concludes his first 
book with Pythagoras's theorem. After this he is interested in bringing 
differences back to likeness, and he therefore concludes his second book by 
reducing the rectangle to the square. A hypotenuse contains the possibility + 
228 

MATHEMATICAL MECHANICS 
of an infmite number of right-angled triangles, and a square, likewise, a 
number of rectangles; the circle is the place for both. It is in this way that 
geometry, as an abstract science of the understanding, proceeds scienti-
+ fically. 
B 
Time 
§ 257 
5 The negativity which relates itself to space as point and 
develops its determinations within it as line and plane, is 
however also a being-Jor-self within the sphere of self-
externality; it posits its determinations within space, but at the 
same time, in conformity with the sphere of self-externality, 
10 and is therefore apparently indifferent to the immobile col-
laterality of space. Thus posited for itself, this negativity 
• is time. 
Addition. Space is the immediate determinate being of quantity, in which 
everything remains subsistent, and even limit has the form of a sub-
IS sistence. This is its deficiency. Space is a contradiction, for the negation 
within it disintegrates into indifferent subsistence. As space is merely this 
• inner negation of itself, its truth is the self-transcendence of its moments. 
It is precisely the existence of this perpetual self-transcendence which 
constitutes time. In time therefore the point has actuality. Through the 
20 generation of difference within it, space ceases to be mere indifference, and 
through all its changes, is no longer paralysed, but is for itsel£ This pure quantity, 
as: difference existing for itself, is that which is implicitly negative, i.e. time; 
it is the negation of the negation, or self-relating negation. Negation in 
space is negation relative to another; in space therefore the negative does 
25 not yet come into its own. In space the plane is certainly negation of the 
negation, but in its truth it is different from space. The truth of space is 
time, so that space becomes time; our transition to time is not subjective, 
space itself makes the transition. Space and time are generally taken to be 
poles apart: space is there, and then we also have time. Philosophy calls 
+ this 'also' in question. 
§ 258 
Time, as the negative unity of self-externality, is also 
purely abstract and of an ideal nature. It is the being which, 
229 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
in that it is, is not, and in that it is not, is. Itisintuitedbecom-
ing; admittedly, its differences are therefore determined as being 
simply momentary; in that they immediately sublate them-
selves in their externality however, they are self-external. 
Remark 
Time, like space, is a pure form of sensibility or intuition; + 
it is the insensible factor in sensibility. Like space however, time 
does not involve the difference between objectivity and a 
distinct subjective consciousness. If these determinations 
were to be applied to space and time, the first would be 
abstract objectivity, and the second abstract subjectivity. 10 
Time is the same principle as the ego=ego of pure self-
consciousness, but as time, this principle, or the simple + 
Notion, is still completely external and abstract as mere 
intuited becoming; it is pure being-in-self, as a plain self- '*" 
production. 
15 
Time is as continuous as space is, for it is abstract negati-
vity relating itself to itself, and in this abstraction there is as + 
yet no difference of a real nature. 
It is said that everything arises and passes away in time, 
and that if one abstracts from everything, that is to say from 20 
the content of time and space, then empty time and empty 
space will be left, i.e. time and space are posited as abstrac-
tions of externality, and represented as if they were for 
themselves. But everything does not appear and pass in time; 
time itself is this becoming, arising, and passing away, it is the 25 
abstraction which has being, the Cronos which engenders all 
and destroys that to which it gives birth. That which is of a + 
real nature is certainly distinguished from time, but is just 
as essentially identical with time. It is limited, and the other 
involved in this negation is outside it. Consequently, the deter-
30 
minateness is implicitly external to itself, and is therefore the 
contradiction of its being. Time itself consists of the abstraction 
and contradiction of this externality and of the restlessness of this 
contradiction. That which is finite is transitory and tem-
poral because unlike the Notion, it is not in itself total nega-
35 
tivity. It certainly contains negativity as its universal 
essence, but as it is not adequate to this essence and is 
230 

MATHEMATICAL MECHANICS 
one-sided, it relates itself to negativity as to its power. The 
Notion however, in its freely existing identity with itself, 
as ego=ego, is in and for itself absolute negativity and free-
dom, and is consequently, not only free from the power of 
5 time, but is neither within time, nor something temporal. 
It can be said on the contrary that it is the Notion which 
constitutes the power of time, for time is nothing but this 
negation as externality. Only that which is natural, in that 
it is finite, is subject to time; that which is true however, 
10 the Idea, spirit, is eternal. The Notion of eternity should 
not however be grasped negatively as the abstraction of time, 
and as if it existed outside time; nor should it be grasped in the 
sense of its coming after time, for by placing eternity in the 
future, one turns it into a moment of time. 
15 Addition. Time does not resemble a container in which everything is as 
it were borne away and swallowed up in the flow of a stream. Time is 
merely this abstraction of destroying. Things are in time because they are 
finite; they do not pass away because they are in time, but are themselves 
that which is temporal. Temporality is their objective determination. It is 
20 therefore the process of actual things which constitutes time, and if it can 
be said that time is omnipotent, it must be added that it is completely 
impotent. The present makes a tremendous demand, yet as the individual 
present it is nothing, for even as I pronounce it, its all-excluding preten-
tiousness dwindles, dissolves, and falls into dust. It is the universality of 
25 these present moments which lasts, and the sublatedness of this process of 
things which does not. Even if things endure, time does not rest, but con-
tinues to pass, and it is because of this that it appears to be distinct and 
independent of things. If we say that time continues to pass even if things 
endure however, we are merely saying that although some things endure, 
30 change appears in other things, as for example the course of the sun; so 
that things still remain in time. The attribution of gradual change is 
employed as a last resort in order to endow things with stillness and per-
manence. If all stood still, even our thinking, we would be permanent, 
and there would be no time, but all finite things are temporal, as sooner or 
3S later they are all subject to change, and their permanence is therefore only 
relative. 
Absolute timelessness is eternity, which is devoid of natural time, and is 
therefore to be distinguished from duration. In its Notion, time itself is 
eternal however, for its Notion is neither the present nor any other time, 
23 1 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
but time as such. Its Notion is, like all Notion, eternal, and thus also 
constitutes the absolute present. Eternity will not be, nor has it been, it is. 
Duration is therefore to be distinguished from eternity, in that it is 
merely a relative sublation of time; eternity is however infInite, that is to 
say, not relative, but intro-reflected duration. That which is not in time, 
S 
is without process; the most imperfect, like the most perfect, is not in 
time, and therefore endures. The most imperfect endures, because it is an 
abstract universality, such as space, and time itself; the sun, the elements, 
stones, mountains, inorganic nature in general, as well as works of man 
such as pyramids, have a barren duration. That which endures is regarded 10 
more highly than that which soon passes, but all blossom, all that is 
exquisite in living being, dies early. The most perfect also endures how- + 
ever, not only in the lifeless inorganic universal, but also in the other 
inherently concrete universal of the genus, the law, the idea, and the 
spirit. We have to decide whether something is the whole process, or 15 
merely one moment of it. As law, the universal is also inherently a pro-
cess, and lives only as process; but it is not part of the process, it is not 
within the process, it contains its double aspect, and is itself without pro-
cess. In its phenomenal aspect, law falls within time, because the moments 
of the Notion show themselves as independent; but in their Notion the 20 
excluded differences reconcile and relate themselves, and are harmoniously 
reassimilated. The Idea or spirit is above time, because it is itself the No-
tion of time; in and for itself it is eternal and unbreached by time, because it 
does not lose itself in its own side of the process. This is not the case with 
the individual as such, on one side of which is the genus; the frnest life is 2S 
that which completely unites its individuality and the universal into one 
form. The individual is not then the same as the universal however, and is 
therefore one side of the process, or mutability, in accordance with which 
mortal moment it falls within time. Achilles, the flower of Greek life, and 
the infInitely powerful personality of Alexander the Great, are no more, 30 
and only their deeds and influences remain through the world that they 
have brought into being. Mediocrity endures, and fInally governs the 
world. Thought also displays this mediocrity, with which it pesters the 
world about it, and which survives by extinguishing spiritual liveliness 
and turning it into flat formality. It endures precisely because it rests in 3S 
untruth, never acquires its right, fails to honour the Notion, and never 
realizes the process of the truth within it. 
+ 
232 

MATHEMATICAL MECHANICS 
The present, future, and past, the dimensions of time, con-
stitute the becoming of externality as such, and its dissolution 
into the differences of being as passing over into nothing, 
and of nothing as passing over into being. The immediate 
5 disappearance of these differences into individuality is the 
present as now, which, as it excludes individuality and is at the 
same time simply continuous in the other moments, is itself 
merely this disappearance of its being into nothing, and of 
nothing into its being. 
Remark 
10 
The finite present is the now fixed as being, and as the con-
crete unity, distinguished from the negative, the abstract 
moments of the past and the future, it is therefore the affirma-
tive factor; yet in itself this being is merely abstract, and disap-
pears into nothing. Incidentally, these dimensions do not 
15 occur in nature, where time is now as separately subsistent 
differences, for they are only necessary in subjective repre-
sentation, in memory, and in fear or hope. The past and the 
future of time are space in so far as they have being in na-
ture, for space is negated time; just as sublated space is 
20 initially the point, which developed for itselfis time. There is 
no science of time corresponding to geometry, the science of 
space. Temporal differences do not have this indifference of 
self-externality which constitutes the immediate deter-
minability of space, and unlike this determinability, do not 
25 therefore give rise to figurations. Time first becomes cap-
able of such figurations when the understanding paralyzes 
it and reduces its negativity to a unit. This dead unity, 
which is thought's highest externality, gives rise to exter-
nal combinations; these are the figures of arithmetic, which 
30 may be applied by the understanding to equality and in-
+ equality, identity and difference. 
One could go further and work out the thought of a 
philosophical mathematics apprehended through notions, 
instead of the assumed determinations from which the 
35 method employed by the understanding derives ordinary 
mathematics. It is because mathematics is the science of the 
233 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
finite determinations of magnitude, which are supposed to 
remain firmly and consistently in their finitude, and may 
not go beyond these determinations, that it is essentially 
a science of the understanding; and since it is capable of 
realizing this science in a perfect manner, it has the advan-
5 
tage over other sciences of this kind, of not being conta-
minated by the admixture of heterogeneous notions or 
empirical application. It is always possible therefore that 
the Notion may establish a more exact awareness of the guid-
ing principles of the operations of arithmetic (cf. § 102) 10 
and the theorems of geometry. 
+ 
It would however by a superfluous and thankless task to 
attempt forcibly to manipulate such a refractory and in-
adequate medium as spatial figures and numbers into a 
means for expressing thoughts. Because of their simplicity, the 15 
elementary primary figures and numbers may be employed 
as symbols without giving rise to misunderstandings, but they 
remain a heterogeneous and perfunctory way of expressing 
thought. The first essays in pure thought had recourse to 
this means; Pythagoras's system of numbers furnishes the 20 
most famous example of this. Richer concepts will find + 
these means completely inadequate however, because their 
external combination, and the contingency of connection in 
general, is not suited to the Notion, and where the many 
relations which are possible in combinations of numbers 25 
and figures should be held together, radical ambiguity is 
introduced. The result, in any case, is that the fluidity of 
the Notion is dissipated in an external medium of this 
kind, so that each determination falls into indifferent ex-
trinsicality. This ambiguity could only be removed by 30 
explanation. The essential expression of thought is then the 
explanation however, and the symbolization becomes a 
worthless superfluity. 
Other mathematical determinations such as the infinite 
and its relationships, the infinitely small, factors, powers etc. 3S 
have their true notions in philosophy itself; it is wrong 
headed to think that they should be borrowed and adapted 
from mathematics, where they are not employed in con-
formity with the Notion, and where they are often taken 
up at random. It is rather by means of philosophy that they 40 
234 

MATHEMATICAL MECHANICS 
can be corrected and given significance. In order to avoid 
thinking and determining by means of the Notion, indolence has 
recourse to formulae, and deals in their ready-made schemata, 
which are in no wayan immediate expression of thought. 
s 
The truly philosophical science of mathematics consider-
ed as the doctrine of quantities, would be the science of 
measures; but this already assumes the real nature and the 
particularity of things, which is first present in concrete 
+ nature. Because of the external nature of quantity, this would 
10 certainly also be the most difficult of all sciences. 
Addition. The dimensions of time complete that which is determinate 
in intuition in that they posit for intuition the totality or reality of the 
Notion of time, which is becoming. This reality consists of the abstract 
moments of the unity which constitute becoming, each being posited 
I S for itself as a whole, although under opposite determinations. Each of 
these two determinations is therefore in itself the unity of being and 
nothing; but they are also different. This difference can only be that of 
arising and passing away. In the first, the principle with which one begins 
+ is being in the past, of Hades; the past has really existed as world-history 
20 or natural events, but it is approached by being posited with the deter-
mination of not-being. In the second determination, the opposite is the 
case. In the future the first determination is not-being, being comes 
later, although not in time. The middle term is the undifferentiated unity 
of both, in which neither the one nor the other is the determining element. 
25 The present is, only because the past is not: the being of the now 
has the determination of not-being, and the not-being of its being is the 
future; the present is this negative unity. The not-being replaced by 
now, is the past; the being of not-being contained in the present, is the 
future. If one considers time positively one can therefore say that only the 
30 present is, before and after is not, but the concrete present is the result of 
the past, and is pregnant with the future. The true present is therefore 
eternity. 
Incidentally it would also be permissible to define mathematics as the 
philosophical consideration of space and time. If one attempted to treat 
35 the figurations of space and of the unit philosophically however, they 
would lose their characteristic significance and shape; a philosophy of 
them would be a matter oflogic, or, to the extent that one attributed a 
more concrete significance to the concepts, even become another con-
crete philosophical science. Mathematics only takes into consideration 
235 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
the determination of quantity involved in these objects, and as we have 
seen, ignores time itself, and concentrates only upon the figurations and 
combinations of the unit. In the theory of motion, time will certainly also 
be treated by this science, but applied mathematics, precisely because it is 
the application of pure mathematics to a given material, and the deter- s 
minations of this material are taken from experience, is in no respect an 
immanent science. 
c 
Place and motion 
(The union of space and time) 
§ 260 
Space in itself is the contradiction of indifferent juxta-
position and of continuity devoid of difference; it is the 
pure negativity of itself, and the initial transition into time. 10 
Time is similar, for as its opposed moments, held together 
in unity, immediately sublate themselves, it constitutes an 
immediate collapse into undifferentiation, into the undif-
ferentiated extrinsicality of space. Consequendy, thenegative 
determination here, which is the exclusive point, is no longer 15 
merely implicit in its conformity to the Notion, but is posited, 
and is in itself concrete on account of the total negativity of time. 
This concrete point is place (§ 255 and § 256). 
Addition. If we refer back to the exposition of the Notion of duration, we see 
that this immediate unity of space and time is already the ground of their being. 20 
The negative of space is time, and the positive, or the being of the differences of 
time, is space. In this analysis however, they are posited as of unequal import, or 
their unity is merely presented as the movement of the transition from one into 
the other. Consequently the beginning, and the realization, the result, fall 
apart. The result is the precise expression of their ground and truth however. 2S 
The durable element is the self-equality into which time has returned; this is 
space, the determinability of which is indifferent existence in general. Here the 
point is that which it is in its truth as a universal; it is in fact the whole of space, 
as a totality of all dimensions. This here is to the same extent time, and is now + 
an immediately self-sublating present, or a now which has been. As it is the 30 
236 

MATHEMATICAL MECHANICS 
point of duration, the here is at the same time a now. This unity of here and 
now is place. 
§ 261 
Initially, the place which is thus the posited identity of space 
and time is also the posited contradiction set up by the mutual 
5 exclusiveness of space and time. place is spatial and therefore 
indUferent singularity, and is this only as the spatial now, or 
time. As this place, it is therefore in a condition of immediate 
indUference to itself; it is external to itself, the negation of itself, 
and constitutes another place. This passing away and self-
10 regeneration of space in time and time in space, in which time 
posits itself spatially as place, while this indifferent spatiality 
is likewise posited immediately in a temporal manner, consti-
tutesmotion. To an equal extent however, this becoming is 
itself the internal collapse of its contradiction, it is therefore the 
1S immediately identical and existent unity of place and mo-
tion, i.e. matter. 
Remark 
The transition from ideality to reality, from abstraction 
to concrete existence, in this case from space and time to 
the reality which makes its appearance as matter, is incom-
20 prehensible to the understanding, for which it therefore 
always remains as something externally presented. Space 
and time are usually imagined as being empty and indUferent 
to that which fills them, and yet as always to be regarded as full. 
They are thought to be empty until they have beenfilled with 
2S matter from without. On the one hand material things are 
therefore taken to be indifferent to space and time, and yet 
at the same time they are accepted as essentially spatial and 
temporal. 
It is said of matter that: (a) it is composite, which is a 
30 property it derives from its abstract extrinsicality, space. 
In so far as an abstraction is made of time and all form, 
matter is said to be eternal and immutable, which is in fact 
the immediate result of this; but matter in such a state is 
merely an untrue abstraction. (b) It is impenetrable and offers 
237 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
resistance, it can be felt, seen etc. These predicates merely 
indicate that matter has two determinations, according to 
which it exists partly for determinate perception, or more 
generally for another, and partly and equally, for itself. It 
has these two determinations as the identity of space and 5 
time, and of immediate extrinsicality and negativity, or as 
the being-for-self of singularity. 
+ 
The transition of ideality into reality also expresses itself in 
the familiar mechanical phenomenon of reality being re-
placeable by ideality and vice versa, and it is only the 10 
thoughtlessness of popular conception and of the under-
standing which prevents the identity of both from being 
recognized in this interchangeability. In the case of the 
lever for example, the mass may be replaced by the dis-
tance and vice versa, and a certain quantum of moments of 15 
an ideal nature produces the same effect as the correspond-
ing moments of a real nature. Similarly, in the magnitude 
of motion, velocity, which is a quantitative relationship, 
simply between space and time, replaces mass; and conver-
sely, the real nature of the same effect is obtained by aug-
20 
menting the mass and correspondingly diminishing space 
and time. A tile does not strike a man dead by itself, it 
only has this effect by virtue of the velocity it has acquired, 
i.e. the man is struck dead by space and time. Here the 
understanding gets no further than the reflectional deter-
25 
mination of force, which it regards as fundamental, and is 
not therefore tempted to look further into the relationship 
of its determinations. Even this thought implies vaguely 
that the effect of force is a sensuous event of a real nature 
however, that there is no difference between the content 30 
and expression of force, and that precisely this force has the 
real nature of its expression in the relationship between the 
ideal nature of the moments of space and time. 
This sort of notionless reflection also thinks of what it 
calls forces, as being implanted in matter, and therefore as 3S 
originally external to it. The very identity of time and space 
which hovers vaguely before this reflectional determination 
of force, and which constitutes the true essence of matter, is 
consequently posited as something alien and contingent to it, 
and as brought into it from without. 
40 
23 8 

MATHEMATICAL MECHANICS 
Addition. One place does not merely imply another, it sublates itself into 
+ becoming another; the difference is also a sublatedness however. Each place 
is for itself only this place, so that all places are the same, and place is the simply 
+ mediated here. Something occupies one place, and then changes its place, passing 
s thereby into another place; but both before and after this, it does not leave, but 
occupies its place. Zeno enunciated this dialectic within place, when he demon-
strated immobility by saying that to move was to change place, but that the 
+ arrow never leaves its place. This dialectic is precisely the infmite Notion, or 
the here, for time is posited as being implicit. There are three different 
10 places, the present, that which is to be occupied, and the vacated. The 
disappearance of the dimensions of time is paralysed, but at the same time 
there is only one place which is common to these places, and invariable 
throughout all change, and this is the duration which is in immediate 
accordance with its Notion, i.e. motion. This demonstration of motion is 
IS self-evident, for the intuition of it coincides with its Notion. Its essence 
is its being as the immediate unity of space and time; it is time realizing 
itself and subsisting in space, or space first truly differentiated through time. 
We know therefore that space and time belong to motion. Velocity, 
which is quantum of motion, is space in relationship to a specific time 
20 elapsed. Motion is also said to be a relation of space and time; it was 
necessary however to grasp the more exact deftnition of this relation. 
Space and time first attain actuality in motion. 
+ 
Just as time is the simply formal soul of nature, and according to 
Newton, space is the sensorium of God, so motion is the Notion 
+ of the true soul of the world. We habitually regard it as a predicate 
or state, but it is in fact the self, the subject as subject, and the per-
sistence, even of disappearance. It is precisely because of its immediate necessity 
to dissolve itself that it appears as predicate. Rectilinear motion is not motion 
in and for itself, but motion subordinated to another term, of which, in that it 
30 has become a predicate, or sublated, it is a moment. The re-establishment of the 
duration of the point in opposition to its motion, is the re-establishment of the 
immobility of place. This re-established place is not immediate, but the return 
from alteration, and is the result and ground of motion. In that it is dimen-
sion, and so opposed to the other moments, it is the centre. This return as line is 
+ the circular line; it is the now, before, and after,joiningitselfwith itself; it is the 
indifference of these dimensions, in which the before is just as much an after as 
the after is a before. This is the first necessary paralysis of these dimensions 
posited in space. Circular motion is the spatial or subsistent unity of the 
dimensions of time. The point tends towards a place which is its future, and 
40 vacates one which is the past; but that which it has behind it, is at 
239 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
the same time that at which it will arrive; and it has already been at 
the after towards which it tends. Its goal is the point which is its past. 
The truth of time is that its goal is the past and not the future. The 
motion which relates itself to the centre is itself the plane, that is to say the 
motion which, in that it forms a synthetic whole, itself contains its moments or 
s 
its dissolution in the centre, as well as the radii of the circle, which relate it 
to the dissolution. This plane itself moves however, and so becomes its other-
ness, an entirety of space, i.e. the motion returns into itself, and the immobile 
centre becomes a universal point, in which the whole sinks into quiescence. It is 
in fact the essence of motion which has here sublated the now, the past, and the 10 
future, or the different dimensions which constitute its Notion. In the circle 
these dimensions are precisely one, and constitute the re-established Notion of 
duration, or of motion extinguishing itself within itself This is posited mass, 
durability, that which has condensed itself through itself, and displays motion as 
its possibility. 
1 S 
We have now reached the following position: Where there is motion, 
there is something which moves, and this durable something is matter. 
Space and time are filled with matter. Space is not adequate to its Notion, 
and it is consequently the Notion of space itself which creates its existence 
in matter. People have often begun with matter, and then regarded space 20 
and time as its forms. This is a valid procedure in so far as matter is the 
reality of space and time, but for us space and time must come first be-
cause of their abstraction, and matter must then show itself to be their 
truth. Just as there is no motion without matter, so there is no matter 
without motion. Motion is the process; it is the passage of time into space, 2S 
and of space into time. Matter on the contrary is the relation of time and 
space as a quiescent identity. Matter is the primary reality, existent being-
for-self; it is not merely abstract being, it is the positive subsistence of 
space as exclusive of other space. The point should also exclude other 
points, but it does not yet do so, for it is merely an abstract negation. 30 
Matter is exclusive relation to self, and consequently the first real limit in 
space. That which is said to fIll time and space, which can be grasped and felt, 
which offers resistance, and which is for itself in its being-for-other, is simply 
reached in the general unity of time and space. 
+ 
240 

CHAPTER TWO 
Matter and motion 
Finite mechanics 
(Gravity) 
§ 262 
Matter maintains itself against its self-identity and in a state 
of extrinsicality, through its moment of negativity, its 
abstract singularization, and it is this that constitutes the 
repulsion of matter. As these different singularities are one 
5 and the same however, the negative unity of the j uxta-
posed being of this being-for-self is just as essential, and 
constitutes their attraction, or the continuity of matter. Matter 
is inseparable from both these moments, and constitutes their 
negative unity, i.e. singularity. This is however still distinct 
10 from the immediate extrinsicality of matter, and is therefore 
not yet posited as being a centre, a material singularity of 
an ideal nature, i.e. gravity. 
Remark 
It is to be regarded as one of the many merits of Kant, 
that in his 'Metaphysical foundations of Natural Science', he 
15 made an attempt at a so-called construction of matter, and 
by establishing a notion of matter, revived the concept of a 
+ philosophy of nature. In so doing however, he postulated the 
reflective determinations of the forces of attraction and 
repulsion as being firmly opposed to and independent of one 
20 another, and although matter had to be derived from them, 
assumed it to be complete in itself, and therefore that that which 
is to be attracted and repelled is already fully constituted matter. 
I have dealt more fully with the fundamental flaw in this 
+ Kantian exposition in my 'Science of Logic'. It should be 
241 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
noted moreover that weighted matter is the first totality and real 
nature in which attraction and repulsion can occur; it has the ideal 
nature of the moments of the Notion, of singularity or subjecti-
vity. Consequendy they are not to be regarded as independent, or 
as self-contained forces. It is only as moments of the Notion that 
5 
they result in matter, although matter is however the presupposi-
tion of their appearance. 
It is essential to distinguish gra vi ty from mere attraction, 
which is simply the general sublation of juxtaposition, and yields 
nothing but continuity. Gravity on the other hand is the reduction 10 
of juxtaposed and yet continuous particularity into unity, into 
negative relation to self, singularity, a single subjectivity + 
which is however still quite abstract. In the sphere of the primary 
immediacy of nature, the self-external being of continuity is 
still posited as subsistent however. Material introflection first 15 
occurs in physics, and although singularity is therefore certainly 
present here as a determination of the Idea, it is external to 
material being. Consequendy the primary essence of matter is 
that it has weight. This is not an external property which may be 
separated from it. Gravity constitutes the substantiality of matter, 20 
which itself consists of a tendency towards a centre which falls 
outside it. It is however this externality ofits centre which con-
stitutes the other essential determination of matter. As it negates its 
juxtaposed and continuous subsistence, one can say that matter is 
attracted to the centre, but if the centre itself is thought of as 25 
material, the attraction is merely reciprocal, and is at the same 
time a being attracted, so that the centre is again different from 
them both. The centre should not be thought of as material how-
ever, for the precise nature of material being is that it posits its 
centre as external to itself. It is therefore not the centre, but the 30 
tendency towards the centre, which is immanent in matter. Gravity 
is so to speak the acknowledgement by matter of its lack of inde-
pendence, its state of contradiction, of the nullity of the self-
externality involved in its being-for-sel£ 
+ 
It can also be said that gravity is the being-in-self of matter 35 
in so far as it is not yet in its own self a centre or subjectivity, but is 
still indeterminate, undeveloped, occludent, and lacking as yet in 
material form. 
Where the centre lies is determined by means of the weighted 
matter of which it is the centre; in so far as it is mass, it is deter-
40 
242 

FINITE MECHANICS 
mined, and is therefore its tendency, which is consequently a 
+ determinate positing of the centre. 
Addition. Matter is spatial separation. By offering resistance it repels 
itself from itself, and so constitutes repulsion, through which it posits its 
5 reality and ftlls space. The singularities, which are repelled from another, 
+ all merely constitute a unit of many units; they are identical with each 
other. The unit only repels itself from itself, and it is this which consti-
tutes the sublation of the separation of being-for-self, or attraction. 
Together, attraction and repulsion constitute gravity, which is the Notion 
10 of matter. Gravity is the predicate of matter, which constitutes the sub-
stance of this subject. Its unity is a mere should, a yearning; this is the most 
afflicted of efforts, and matter is damned to it eternally, for the unity does 
not fulftl itself, and is never reached. If matter reached what it aspires to 
in gravity, it would fuse together into a single point. It is because repul-
15 sion is as essential a moment as attraction, that unity is not attained here. 
This subdued, crepuscular unity does not become free; yet since matter 
has as its determination the positing of the many within a unit, it is not 
+ so thick as those would-be philosophers who separate the one from the 
many, and are therefore refuted by matter. Although the two unities of 
20 repulsion and attraction are the inseparable moments of gravity, they do 
not unite themselves in a single unity of an ideal nature. As we shall see 
later, this unity reaches the ftrst being-for-self of its existence in light. 
Matter searches for a place outside the many, and since there is no dif-
ference between the factors which do this, there is no reason for regarding 
25 one as nearer than the other. They are at the same distance on the peri-
phery, and the point sought is the centre; this extends to all dimensions, 
+ so that the next determination we reach is the sphere. Gravity is not the 
dead externality of matter, but a mode of its inwardness. At this juncture, 
this inwardness has no place here however, for matter, as the Notion of 
30 that which is Notionless, is still lacking in inwardness. 
The second sphere which we now have to consider is therefore fmite 
mechanics, in which matter is not yet adequate to its Notion. This fmitude 
of matter is the differentiated being of motion and of matter as such; 
matter is therefore ftnite in so far as the motion which is its life, is external 
35 to it. Either the body is at rest, or motion is imparted to it from without. 
This is the primary difference within matter as such, which is subse-
quently sublated through its nature, or gravity. Here therefore we have the 
three determinations of fmite mechanics: firstly inert matter, secondly im-
pact, and thirdly fall; this constitutes the transition to absolute mechanics, 
243 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
in which the existence of matter is also adequate to its Notion. 
Gravity does not occur within matter in a merely implicit manner, but 
in so far as the implicitness already makes its appearance; in that 
it does this it constitutes fall, which is therefore the first occurrence of 
gravity. 
5 
A 
Inert matter 
(Inertia) 
§ 263 
Initially, in its mere universality and immediacy, matter 
has only a quantitative difference, and is particularized into 
different quanta or masses, which in the superficial deter-
mination of a whole or unit, are bodies. The body is also 
immediately distinguished from its ideality; it is however wi thin 10 
space and time that it is essentially spatial and temporal, and it 
appears as their content, indifferent to this form. 
Addition. Matter fills space merely because it is exclusive in its being-
for-self, and so posits a real limit in space. Space as such lacks this 
exclusiveness. The determination of plurality necessarily accompanies 15 
being-for-self, but is as yet completely indeterminate difference, and not 
yet a difference implicit within matter itself; matters are mutually 
exclusive. 
In accordance with the spatial determination in which time is 
sublated; the body is durable; in accordance with the temporal + 
determination in which indifferent spatial subsistence is sublated, it 
is transitory; in general, it is a wholly contingent unit. It is 
indeed the unity which binds both moments in their opposition, 
i.e. motion; but in its indifferent opposition to space and time 
(prev. §), and so to the relation of space and time in motion (§ 261), 25 
the body has motion external to it in the same way as its negation 
of motion, or rest. It is in fact inert. 
+ 
244 

FINITE MECHANICS 
Remark 
In this sphere the body is inadequate to its Notion or finite, be-
cause as matter it is only posited as the immediate abstract unity 
of time and space, and not as a single developed resdess unity with 
motion immanent within it. Ordinary physical mechanics accepts 
s the body in this determination, so that it is one of its axioms 
that a body can only be set in motion or come to rest 
through an external cause, motion or rest being merely a 
+ state of the body. Determinations such as this are vaguely 
envisaged as applying to selfless terrestrial bodies, as of 
10 course they do. This is merely finite corporeality in its imme-
diacy and abstraction however. The body as body means this 
abstraction of body. The imperfection of this abstract existence is 
sublated in concretely existent bodies however, and the positing 
of this sublation begins already in the selfless body. Inertia, impact, 
15 pressure, draw, fall etc., the determinations of ordinary mechanics, 
belong to the sphere offinite corporeality and so to fini te m 0 ti on, 
and should not therefore be transferred to absolute mechanics, 
where it is rather in the freedom of their Notion that corporeality 
and motion have their existence. 
20 Addition. 
Mass, posited immediately, contains motion as resistance; for 
this immediacy is being-for-other. The real moment of difference is external 
to mass, which has motion either as this Notion, or as sublated within it. Mass is 
+ inert when it is fixed in this way, yet it does not express rest. Duration is rest 
in that as the Notion of its realization, it is opposed to motion. Mass is the unity 
25 of the moments of rest and motion; both are sublated within it, for it is indif-
ferent to both of them; it is as capable of motion as it is of rest, and in 
itself is confined to neither of them. In itself it neither rests nor moves, but 
merely passes from one state to the other through external impulse, i.e. 
rest and motion are posited within it by means of another. In so far as it rests, 
30 it remains quiescent, and does not, of its own accord, pass over into motion. 
Similarly, when in motion, it is in fact in motion, and does not pass over of its 
+ own accord into rest. Matter is implicitly inert, i.e. it is inert in so far as its 
Notion is opposed to its reality. Its reality has therefore separated itself and gone 
+ into opposition to it, and it is this that first constitutes its sublated reality, or 
35 that in which it exists merely as abstraction; it is this abstraction which is always 
regarded as the implicit nature and essence of matter by those for whom sen-
suous actuality is what is real, and the form of abstraction constitutes implicitness. 
245 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
While fmite matter is moved from without therefore, free matter 
moves itself; within its sphere it is therefore infmite, for within the whole, 
matter belongs to the stage of fmitude. The just man is free, although he 
is bound by the laws which limit the unjust man. In nature each sphere + 
exists not only in its infmitude, but as a finite relationship in itself. Finite 5 
relationships such as pressure and impact have the advantage of being 
known to us through reflection and being drawn from experience. They 
are defective merely because other relationships are subsumed under a rule 
constituted in this way. People think that things should happen in heaven 
as they do at home, but these finite relationships cannot show forth the 10 
infmitude of a sphere of nature. 
B 
Impact 
§ 265 
When movement which is external to an inert body and there-
fore finite, sets this body in motion and so relates it to another, the 
two form the momentary unit of a single body, for they are both 
masses, and only differ quantitatively. It is thus that both bodies 15 
are united by movement through the imparting of motion, 
but as each is to an equal extent presupposed as an immediate unit, 
they also resist one another. In the relationship between them, 
their being-f or-self, which is further particularized by the 
quantum of mass, constitutes their relative gravity. This is + 
weight as the gravity of a quantitatively distinct mass; it is 
extensive as a number of weighted parts, and intensive as a specific 
pressure (see § r03 Rem.). As the real determinateness, together 
with velocity, or the ideal nature of the quantitative determinate-
ness of motion, it constitutes a single determinability (quantitas 25 
motus), within which weight and velocity can reciprocally re-
place one another (c£ § 26r Rem.). 
+ 
Addition. The second moment in this sphere consists in matter being set 
in motion, and fmding contact with itself in this movement. Matter is also 
moved because it is indifferent to place. This is contingent, and all necessity 30 
is here posited in the mode of contingency; later we shall see that the 
movement of matter is also necessary in existence. In impact the two 
colliding bodies are to be regarded as self-motivating, for they conflict 
246 

FINITE MECHANICS 
over a single place. The body which produces the impact assumes the 
place of the body at rest. The latter, the body which receives the impact, 
retains its place by also moving itself, and attempting to reassume the 
place which the other has occupied. It is in the contact produced by the 
5 collision and pressure of these masses, between which there is no empty 
space, that the general ideality of matter begins. It is important to see how 
this internality of matter arises, for it is always important to see how the 
Notion arrives at existence. Masses create contact by being one for the 
other, merely because there are two material points or atoms in a single 
10 moment of identity, the being-for-self of which is not being-for-sel£ No 
matter how hard and inflexible one imagines matters to be, it is always 
possible to postulate an interstice between; as long as they touch one 
another, they have positedness within a unit, no matter how small one 
+ imagines this point to be. This is the higher continuity existing in matter, 
15 which is not external and merely spatial, but real. Similarly, the point of 
time is the unity of the past and the future; for here there are two in one, 
and in that they are in one, they are also not within it. The precise nature 
of motion consists in being in one place while at the same time being in 
another, and yet not being in another, but only in this place. 
20 
To the extent that they are contained in one, masses also have being-for-
self; this constitutes the other moment of repulsion, or the elasticity of 
matter. The one is merely the surface, and the whole is continuous, because 
the body is completely hard. Since only the whole is one however the one 
is unposited, and the body simply gives or is absolutely soft. By leaving its 
+ whole, however, it correspondingly increases the intensity of its oneness. The 
very softness, the sublation of the body's outwardly exerted force, constitutes 
the restoration of this force through a return-into-sel£ The immediate reversion 
+ of these two sides is elasticity. What is soft also repels; it is elastic, it gives 
way, but only to a certain extent, and it cannot be driven out of place 
30 altogether. It is here that the being-for-self of matter becomes apparent, 
and it is by means of this being-for-self that matter asserts itself as in-
ternality (which may also be called force), against its externality, which 
is here its-being-for other, i.e. the being-within-it of another. The ideality 
of being-for-self consists in another asserting a prevalence within the 
35 mass, and vice versa. This determination of ideality, which appeared 
to come from without, shows itself to be the peculiar essence of matter, 
which at the same time itself belongs to matter's internality; this is the 
+ reason why reflective thought makes use of the concept of force in physics. 
The strength of an impact, as an amount of activity, is merely that by 
40 which matter retains its being-for-self, or resists; for impact is also 
247 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
resistance; resistance however simply implies matter. That which offers + 
resistance is material, and conversely, it is material to the extent to which 
it offers resistance. Resistance implies the motion of two bodies, so that a 
determinate motion and a determinate resistance are one and the same 
thing. Bodies act upon one another only in so far as they are independent, + 
and they are only independent by means of gravity. Therefore, bodies 
only offer resistance to one another through their gravity. This gravity is 
relative however, it is not the absolute gravity which expresses the 
Notion of matter. One of the moments of the body is its weight, by which, 
in its tendency towards the centre of the Earth, it puts pressure on that 10 
which resists it. Pressure is therefore a motion which tends to sublate the 
separation of one mass from another. The other moment of the body is the 
transversal movement posited within it, which diverges from the tendency 
towards the centre. The magnitude of its motion is then determined by 
these two moments, i.e. by its mass, and the determinability of its trans-
15 
versal motion as velocity. If we posit the magnitude of this motion as 
internal to matter, we have what is called force. We could however 
dispense with this apparatus of forces, for the propositions of mechanics 
which deal with them are very largely tautological. As the determinate- + 
ness of force is the only determinateness, it is certainly true that we have 20 
the same material activity whether the number of material parts is re-
placed by velocity, or vice versa, for material activity only occurs as 
self-motivating. Yet the real nature of the factor should be only partly, 
and not wholly replaced by its ideal nature, and vice versa. If the mass is 
six pounds, and the velocity 4, the force is 24; and the force is the same if 25 
eight pounds move at velocity 3 etc. The V7TOJLOX>'tov carrying the 
weight, and the length of the arm on one side of it balancing the mass of 
the load carried on ·the other, also illustrates this principle. Pressure and + 
impact are the two causes of external mechanical motion. 
This weight, concentrated as an intensive amount into one point 30 
within a body, is the body's centre of gravity; in that it is 
weighted, the body has its centre where it posits it however, i.e. 
outside itself. Consequendy, impact and resistance, as well as 
the motion posited through them, have a substantial foundation in 
a centre which, while lying outside each particular body, is 35 
common to them all. This explains why each contingent motion 
imposed on them from without, passes into rest in this centre. As + 
248 

FINITE MECHANICS 
the centre is outside matter, this rest is at the same time merely a 
tendency towards the centre, and as the result of the relationship 
of the particular bodies, and of this tendency towards the centre 
in the matter which is common to them, they exert pressure on 
5 one another. In relationships where bodies are separated from 
their centre of gravity by relatively empty space, this tendency 
constitutes fall, i.e. essen tial motion, in which contingent motion 
conforms to the Notion and its existence, by passing over into 
rest. 
Remark 
10 
It is the basic proposition of mechanics, that in external finite 
motion, a body at rest would continue to rest indefinitely, and a 
moving body would continue to move indefinitely, if they were 
+ not forced from one condition to the other by an external cause. 
This proposition merely expresses motion and rest in accordance 
15 with the principle ofidentity (§ IIS): it tells us that motion is 
motion, and that rest is rest and that each determination is external 
+ to the other. It is this abstract separation of motion as it is for itself, 
from rest as it is for itself, which gives rise to the empty postulate 
of a perpetual motion, which always involves certain con-
+ ditions. The nullity of the principle of identity, on which this 
postulate is based, has been shown in its proper place. As a postu-
late it has no empirical basis, for even simple impact is con-
ditioned by gravity, i.e. the determination of fall. It is true ,that in 
projection there is a contingent motion opposed to the essen-
25 tial motion of fall; the abstraction however, the body considered 
as body, is inseparable from its gravity, and in a projection there-
fore, the necessity of taking this gravity into account is self-
evident. One cannot have a bodiless projection existing for 
itself. The example usually given to illustrate motion supposed to 
30 be produced by centrifugal force, is that of a stone swung round 
in a sling, in which there is a constant tendency to fly outwards 
+ (Newton, phil. nat. princ. math. Defin. V). We already know per-
fecdy well that such a direction exists however, it is its existing 
for itself apart from gravity, and the way in which it is to be 
35 presented as a fully independent aspect of force, which has to be 
established. Newton, in the same place, maintains that a leaden 
ball, 'in coelos abiret et motu abeundi pergeret in infinitum', if (a 
useful word here) one could only impart the necessary velocity 
249 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
to it. This separation of external from essential motion is merely a + 
product of abstractive reflection, and belongs neither to experience 
nor to the Notion. It is one thing to distinguish these motions,it 
is in fact necessary to do so, and to consider them mathematically as 
separate lines, or treat them as distinct quantitative factors etc., it is 
5 
another thing to regard them as physically independent existences. + 
In the postulated flight of this leaden ball into infinity, the 
resistance of air and friction is also turned into an abstraction. 
When a perpetuum mobile, no matter how correctly calculated 
and demonstrated in theory, necessarily passes over into rest in a 10 
certain period of time, an abstraction is made of gravity, and the 
phenomenon is attributed solely to friction. The gradual de-
crease in the motion of the pendulum, and its final cessation, 
is also attributed to the retardation of friction, as it is also said of 
this motion that it would continue indefinitely if friction could be 15 
removed. This resistance which the body encounters in its con-
tingent motion, belongs of course to the necessary manifestation 
of its dependence. But just as the body is hindered in its effort to 
reach the middle of its central body without these impediments 
sublating its pressure and its gravity, so the resistance produced by 20 
friction checks the projectile motion of the body, without its 
gravity being removed or replaced by friction. Friction is an im-
pediment, but it is not the essential obstacle to external con-
tingent motion. Finite motion must be inseparably bound up with 
gravity therefore, for in its purely accidental form, it passes over 2S 
into and becomes subject to the direction of gravity, which is the 
substantial determination of matter. 
Addition. It is here that gravity itself now occurs as the principle of 
motion, but of motion determined as cancelling this separation or dis-
tance from the centre. This is self-generating motion, which posits its 30 
own determinateness as a manifestation. Direction is the first determinate-
ness, and the law of fall is the other. Direction is the bearing upon the unit, 
which is sought and presupposed in gravity; it is a tendency which is not a 
random indeterminate spatial vacillation, but a unit which matter posits 
for itself as a place in space which is not however reached by it. One 3S 
cannot say that this centre is present merely as a nucleus to which matter is 
drawn, or around which it subsequently agglomerates; the gravity of 
masses generates such a centre, and material points, by seeking one 
another, posit it as their common centre of gravity. Gravity is the positing 
250 

FINITE MECHANICS 
of such a unit. Each particular mass is the positing of the same, and by this 
it seeks a unit in itself, and so gathers the whole of its quantitative re-
lationship to others into a single point. This subjective unit, which as mere 
tendency constitutes the objective unit, is a body's centre of gravity. Every 
S body has a centre of gravity, by which it has its centre in another body, 
and it is only in so far as it possesses this centre that the mass constitutes an 
actual unit or body. The centre of gravity is therefore the primary reality 
of the unit of gravity, the tendency in which the entire weight of the body 
+ is concentrated. A mass cannot be at rest unless its centre of gravity is 
10 supported, but if it is supported, the rest of the body might just as well not be 
there, for its gravity is completely withdrawn into one point. As a line, this point 
is the lever, to which each part of this unit belongs, and in which the centre of 
gravity divides itself as middle into points of extremity, the continuity of which 
constitutes the line. Gravity is equally the whole of this unit; the surface con-
+ stitutes the unit, but the unit is taken back into the centre as a whole. Whatever 
exhibits itselfhere as the juxtaposition of dimensions, is in its immediacy a unit. It is 
+ in this way that the centre of gravity makes itselfinto the whole individual body. 
Each individual mass is then such a body, which strives towards its 
centre, i.e. the absolute centre of gravity. In so far as matter determines a 
20 centre towards which it strives, and this centre is a point of unity while 
matter remains a multiplicity, matter is determined as proceeding out if 
itself and out of its place. By proceeding out of itself, it also proceeds out 
of its self-externality, and as sublation of externality, this is the first true 
inwardness. All mass belongs to such a centre, and each particular mass is 
2S dependent and contingent as against this truth. It is because of this con-
tingency, that an individual mass can be separated from this central body. 
In so far as the specilic mass which intervenes offers no resistance, the body 
will not be prevented from moving towards the centre; it will then move 
on account of there being no impediment, or rather fall on account of 
30 there being no support. The rest into which external motion is brought by 
fall is certainly still a tendency, but unlike the first kind of rest, it is not 
contingent, nor is it a mere condition, or posited externally. The rest we 
have now is posited through the Notion, like fall, the motion which is 
posited through the Notion and sublates external and contingent motion. 
3S Here inertia has disappeared, for we have reached the Notion of matter. 
In that each mass, through its weight, has a tendency towards the centre, 
and therefore exerts pressure, its motion is only an attempted motion, 
which makes itself effectual within another mass, and so posits its ideal 
nature. Similarly, by offering resistance and maintaining itself, this second 
40 mass posits the ideal nature of the first. In finite mechanics both kinds of 
25I 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
rest and motion are placed on the same level. Everything is reduced to 
interrelated forces differing only in direction and velocity; consequently 
the result becomes all-important. Thus, the motion of fall, which is 
posited by the force of gravity, is placed on the same level as the force of 
projection. 
5 
It is imagined that if a cannon-ball were to be shot forth with a force 
greater than that of gravity, it would escape at a tangent, if, it is added, 
there were no resistance from the air. It is also thought that the pendulum + 
would go on swinging indefmitely if the air offered no resistance. 'The 
pendulum', it is said, 'describes an arc. By falling into the perpendicular, 10 
it has acquired a velocity by virtue of which it must reach a height on the 
other side of the arc equal to that of the point from which it started. It 
must therefore continue to move from side to side'. On one side the 
pendulum follows the direction of gravity, and this direction is then 
sublated; that is to say that it is removed from the direction of gravity by 15 
the communication of a new determination. It is this second determination 
which produces the lateral motion. It is then asserted that, 'It is primarily 
because of resistance, that the arc of oscillation becomes progressively 
smaller and the pendulum fmally comes to rest, for if there were no 
resistance, the oscillatory motion itself would continue indefinitely'. + 
Gravitational and transversal motion are not however two opposed kinds 
of movement. The first is the substantial movement, within which the 
second is contingently absorbed. Friction itselfis not contingent however, 
for it is the result of gravity, although it can also be reduced. Francoeur 
realized this ('Traite elementaire de mechanique', p. 175 n. 4-5) when he 25 
said, 'Le frottement ne depend pas de l' etendue des surfaces en contact, 
Ie poid du corps restant Ie meme. Le frottement est proportionel a la 
pression'. Friction is therefore gravity in the form of an external resistance; + 
it is pressure as a mutual drawing towards the centre. In order to counter-
act the variable motion of the body, it has to be attached to something else. 30 
This material connection is necessary, but it disturbs the motion and so 
gives rise to friction. Friction is therefore a necessary factor in the con-
struction of a pendulum, and can be neither eliminated nor thought 
away. If one imagines what it would be like without it, one is dealing with 
an empty concept. It is not only friction which brings the movement of 35 
the pendulum to rest however, for even if friction ceased, the pendulum 
would still come to rest. Gravity is the power which brings the pendulum 
to rest in conformity with the Notion of matter, for as the universal principle 
of matter, it maintains its preponderance over what is alien, and oscillation 
ceases in the line of fall. This necessity of the Notion appears in + 
252 

FINITE MECHANICS 
this sphere of externality as an external impediment or as friction. A 
man can be struck dead, but this external circumstance is contingent; the 
truth of the matter is that the man himself dies. 
The combinations of fall with contingent motion, in projection for 
5 example, do not concern us here, where we have to consider the 
sublation of purely contingent motion. In projection the magnitude 
of the motion depends upon the force of the projection and the weight 
of the mass. It is this very weight however, which is at the same time 
gravity; in that it gains preponderance as the universal, it overcomes 
10 the determinateness posited within it. The body is projected only by 
+ means of gravity; it passes out of its determinate direction however, although 
+ only to return into the universal and become simple fall. This return gives a 
further determinability to gravity, in which motion comes still closer to its 
unity with it. In projectile motion weight is only one moment of the motive 
15 force, it is the transition by which the force lying outside gravity is posited 
within it. This transition increases the extent to which gravity constitutes 
all motive force. The principle of motion is certainly still external to it, 
but in a completely formal way as mere impulse, which in fall is simple 
removal. It is in this way that projection constitutes fall, and both of 
20 these occur simultaneously in the motion of the pendulum. Gravity is 
removal-from-self, a presentation of itself as self-sundering, but every-
thing is still external. The fixed point, the removal from the line of fall, 
the holding at a distance of the motivated point, and the moments of the 
actual motion, belong to something else. The return from projection into the 
25 line of fall is itself projection, and the oscillation of the pendulum is the falling 
self-producing sublation of projection. 
c 
Fall 
Fall is relatively free motion: free, in that it is posited through 
the Notion of the body and is the manifestation of the body's 
own gravity; within the body it is therefore immanent. At the 
30 same time, it is however only the primary negation of externality, 
and is therefore conditioned. Separation from the connection 
253 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
with the centre is therefore still a contingent determination, 
posited externally. 
Remark 
The laws of the motion are concerned with q uan ti ty, and in 
particular with distances traversed in periods of time, and the 
highest credit accrues to the analysis of the understanding by reason 
5 
of the immortal discoveries it has made in this field. The further + 
non-empirical proof of these laws has been provided by mathe-
matical mechanics however, for even science which bases itself 
upon empiricism discovers the inadequacy of the purely empirical 
mode of demonstration. In the a priori proof in question, it is 10 
assumed that velocity is uniformly accelerated. However, the + 
proof consists in the transformation of the mom e n t s of the 
mathematical formula into physical forces, i.e. into an accel-
erative force which produces a uniform impulse in each moment + 
of time, and a force of inertia, which is regarded as maintaining 15 
the increased velocity acquired in each moment of time. These 
determinations are completely lacking in empirical confirmation, 
and are in no way in conformity with the Notion. Consequently, 
the quantitative determination, which here contains a potency 
relationship, is formed into a sum of two mutually independent 20 
elements, so that the qualitative determination, which is connected 
with the Notion, is eliminated. One of the corollaries drawn + 
from the law supposed to have been proved in this way is, 'That in 
uniformly accelerated motion, the velocities are proportional to 
the times.' In fact this proposition is nothing more than the com-
+ 
pletely straightforward definition of uniformly accelerated motion. 
In simply uniform motion the spaces traversed are proportional to 
the times elapsed; in accelerated motion, velocity increases 
in each successive unit of time; consequently, in uniformly 
accelerated motion, the velocities are proportional to the times 30 
elapsed; hence V, i.e. ~. This is the simple, genuine proof. V is the 
t 
t 
general velocity, which is as yet indeterminate, and so at the 
same time abstract, i.e. simply uniform. The difficulty of the 
proof consists in V being considered at first as an indeterminate 
velocity, and yet presenting itself in the mathematical expression 35 
as ~, i.e. as purely uniform. The roundabout procedure of the proof 
t 
254 

FINITE MECHANICS 
borrowed from the mathematical exposition, makes it possible to 
accept velocity as simply uniform~, and to pass over from there to 
t 
~. In the proposition that the velocity is proportional to times, it 
t 
is primarily velocity in general that is referred to, so that it is 
5 superfluous to represent it mathematically as ~, to posit it as simply 
t 
uniform, to introduce the force of inertia, and then to attribute to 
it this moment of purely uniform velocity. If velocity is to be 
proportional to times, it must be as uniformly accelerated velocity, 
~. Consequently, the determination. s has no place here, and is 
t 
t 
+ excluded. 
As against the abstract uniform velocity of lifeless and externally 
determined mechanism, the law of fall is a free law of nature, i.e. 
it has a side to it which determines itself from the Notion of the 
body. Since it follows from this that the law must be deducible 
15 from this Notion, it has to be shown how Galileo' s la w, 'That the 
+ spaces traversed are as the squares of the times elapsed', accords 
with the determination of the Notion. 
The connection here lies simply in this, that since the Notion is 
here the determinant of motion, time and space, as Notional 
20 determinations, become free with regard to one another, i.e. their 
quantitative determinations conform to their Notional 
determinations. Now since time is the moment of negation, of 
being-for-self, and the principle of the unit, its magnitude (any 
empirical number) in relationship to space is to be considered as 
25 the unit or denominator. Space on the contrary is juxtapo-
sition, the extent of which is determined only by the extent of 
time, for in the velocity of this free motion, space and time are 
not mutually external and contingent, but constitute a single 
determination. The form of the extrinsicality of space, which is 
30 opposed to unity as the form of time, and which is unmixed with 
any other determinateness, is the square; it is quantity coming 
out of itself, positing itself in a second dimension, and so aug-
menting itself, although only in accordance with its own deter-
minability. This self-extension sets its own self as limit,· so that by 
35 becoming an other, it merely relates itself to itself. 
Here the proof of the law of fall is drawn from the Notion of 
~ss 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
the matter. The potency relationship is essentially qualitative, 
and is the only relationship which belongs to the Notion. It should 
be added in connection with what follows, that since fall, 
in its freedom, still contains conditionality, time remains 
an immediate number, a merely abstract unit, and the 
5 
quantitative determination of space only attains to the second 
dimension. 
+ 
Addition. The tendency towards the centre is the only absolute factor 
in fall; we shall see later how the other moment, which is diremption, 
difference, the removal of the body into a state of supportlessness, also 10 
derives from the Notion. In fall mass does not separate itself of its own 
accord, but when it is separated, it returns into the unity. The motion 
which produces itself in fall constitutes the transition therefore, it is a 
middle term between inert matter, and matter in which its Notion fmds 
absolute realization, i.e. absolutely free motion. As merely quantitative 15 
indifferent difference, mass is a factor in external motion, but here, where 
motion is posited through the Notion of matter, purely quantitative 
difference between masses has, as such, no significance, for masses fall not 
as masses but as matters in general. In fall it is in fact merely the weighted-
ness of bodies which comes under consideration, and a large body is as heavy 20 
as a smaller one, i.e. one of less weight. We know well enough, that a feather 
does not fall like a plummet, but this is the result of the medium which 
has to give way, i.e. masses behave in accordance with the qualitative 
difference of the resistance they encounter. A stone falls faster in air than 
it does in water for example, but in airless space bodies fall in the same 25 
way. Galileo put forward this proposition, and expounded it to certain 
monks. Only one of the fathers got a slant on it when he said that a pair 
of scissors and a knife would reach the earth at the same time; but the + 
matter cannot be decided so easily. Knowledge of this kind is worth more 
than thousands upon thousands of so-called brilliant thoughts. 
30 
The empirical extent of the fall of a body is a litde over IS feet per 
second, although there is a slight variation at different latitudes. If a body + 
falls for two seconds, it covers not double, but four times the distance, 
i.e. 60 feet; in three seconds 9X IS feet, and so on. If one body falls for 
three seconds and another for 9, the spaces traversed are related not in the 35 
ratio of 3 : 9, but of 9: 8 I. Purely uniform motion is ordinary mechanical 
movement; motion which is not uniformly accelerated is capricious; 
uniformly accelerated motion is that in which the law of living natural 
movement begins to appear. Velocity increases with time therefore, i.e. 
256 

FINITE MECHANICS 
t=~, i.e. s= tB, for s= tl is the same as ~2' In mechanics this is proved 
t 
t 
mathematically by representing the so-called force of inertia by a square, 
and the so-called accelerative force by the addition of a triangle. This is 
an interesting procedure, and may well be necessary for mathematical 
+ exposition; but this is its only use, and it is a forced representation. Proofs 
of this kind always assume what has to be proved, so they certainly describe 
what happens. Mathematical imagination arises out of the need for a 
transformation of the potency relationship into a more manageable form, 
e.g. by reducing it to addition, or subtraction and multiplication. It is 
10 because of this that the motion which occurs in fall is analysed into two 
parts. The division has no reality however, and is an empty fiction which 
merely serves the convenience of mathematical exposition. 
§ 268 
Fall is merely the abstract positing of a single centre, in the 
unity of which the difference between particular masses and bodies 
15 posits itself as sublated; consequently, mass or weight plays no 
part in the magnitude of this motion. As this negative relation 
to self, the simple being-for-self of the centre is essentially a 
repulsion of itself however. It is formal repulsion into many 
immobile centres (stars), and living repulsion in that it deter-
20 mines these centres according to the moments of the Notion 
and so establishes an essential relation within their Notional 
differentiation. This relation is the contradiction of their 
independent being-for-self, and their connectedness with the 
Notion; the appearance of this contradiction between the reality 
25 and ideality of these centres is motion, and indeed absolutely 
free motion. 
Addition. The deficiency in the law of fall is the result of our regarding 
space as posited here in a simply abstract manner in its first power as line; 
this happens because the motion of fall is conditioned as well as being 
30 free (see prec. §). Because its condition of being removed from the centre 
is still contingent and not determined by gravity itself, fall is merely 
the primary manifestation of gravity. This contingency has still to fall 
away. The Notion must become wholly immanent within matter. This 
takes places in the third main section, in absolute mechanics, where 
matter is completely free, and where its determinate being is completely 
I 
257 

, .. 
HEGEL S.PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
adequate to its Notion. Inert matter is wholly inadequate to its Notion. 
Weighted matter, in so far as it falls, is only pardy adequate to its Notion 
through the sublation of plurality as the tendency of matter towards one 
central place. The other moment, which is the differentiation of the place 
within itself, is not yet posited by the Notion however; that is to say that s 
the self-repulsion of attracted matter as weightedness is lacking as yet, 
and that diremption into many bodies is not yet the act of gravity itsel£ 
Matter of this kind, which is extended as a plurality and at the same time 
continuous within itself, and which contains the centre, must be repelled. 
This is real repulsion, in which the centre is formed out of self-repulsion 10 
and diversification, and a plurality of masses is consequendy posited, each 
having its centre. The logical unit is this infmite relation with itself, which 
is identity with itself, but as self-relating negativity, and consequendy as 
repulsion from itsel£ This is the other moment contained within the 
Notion. The self-positing of matter within the determinations of its 15 
moments is necessary to material reality. Fall posits matter onesidedly as 
attraction; it must now also appear as repulsion. Formal repulsion also 
has a place here, for it is a property of nature to allow an abstract and 
particular moment to subsist in itsel£ The stars are the bodies in which 
formal repulsion finds existence, for as bodies they are as yet simply 20 
multiple and exhibit no difference; here, they are not yet to be regarded 
as luminous, for this is a physical determination. 
We could regard the relations between stars as being rational; but they 
belong to dead repulsion. Their figurations could be the expression of 
essential relations, but they do not belong to living matter, where the 2S 
centre differentiates itself within itse1£ The host of stars is a formal world, 
because only this onesided determination is able to hold sway there. As a 
system it should not be put on a level with the solar system, which for 
us is the primary knowable system of real rationality within the heavens. 
The stars may be admired for their repose, but in worth they are not to 30 
be regarded as the equals of the concrete individual body. The content 
of space explodes into an infinite number of matters; this can delight the 
eye, but it is only the first breaking forth of matter, and this eruption of 
light is as unworthy of wonder as an eruption on the skin or a swarm of 
flies. The tranquillity of these stars means more to the heart, for the 35 
contemplation of their peace and simplicity calms the passions. Their 
world is not so interesting from the philosophical point of view as it is 
to the sentiments however. As a plurality within immeasurable spaces it is 
of no significance to reason; it is externality, emptiness, negative infmity. 
Reason knows itself to be above this, for the wonder is merely negative, 40 
258 

FINITE MECHANICS 
+ an uplifting of the mind which remains strictly limited. The rationality 
of the stars is to be grasped in the figurations in which they are reciprocally 
disposed. The eruption of space into abstract matter proceeds according 
to an inner law, so that the stars present crystalline effects which could 
5 have an inner connection, although interest in these matters can be no 
more than an empty curiosity. Little can be said about the necessity of 
these figurations. Herschel has noted forms in nebulae indicative of 
+ regularity. The spaces are emptier as the distances from the Milky Way 
increase, and from this it has been concluded (Herschel and Kant), that 
10 the stars form the figure of a lens; but this is something wholly indeter-
+ minate and general. It must not be thought that the worth of science 
depends upon its ability to grasp and explain all multifarious shapes. One 
must be content with the fact of that which has already come within one's 
grasp. There is still much that cannot be grasped, and this has to be ad-
15 mitted in the philosophy of nature. At present, rational interest in the 
+ stars must confme itself solely to stellar geometry. The stars constitute the 
field of this abstract and infmite diremption, in which contingency has an 
essential influence upon the disposition of the parts. 
259 

CHAPTER THREE 
Absolute mechanics 
(Astronomy) 
Gravitation is the true and determinate Notion of material 
corporeality realized as the Idea. Universal corporeality + 
divides itself essentially into particular bodies, and links itself 
together in the moment of individuality or subjectivity, as 
determinate being appearing in motion; this, in its immediacy, 
5 
is thus a system of many bodies. 
Remark 
Universal gravitation must be recognized as a profound 
thought in its own right. It has already attracted attention and 
inspired confidence, particularly through the quantitative 
determination bound up within it, and its verification has 10 
been pursued from the experience of the solar system down to 
that of the phenomenon of the miniature capillary tube. + 
When it is seized upon in this way in the sphere of reflection 
however, it has a merely general abstract significance, which in 
its more concrete form is merely gravity in the quantitative 15 
determination of fall, and it therefore lacks the significance of 
the Idea developed into its reality, which is given to it in this 
paragraph. Gravitation is the immediate contradiction of the 
law of inertia, and it is because of this that matter strives 
out of itself towards another. 
20 
As has already been shown, the Notion of gravity contains 
not only the moments of being-for-self, but also that of 
the continuity which sublates being-for-self. These moments 
of the Notion suffer the fate of being grasped as distinct 
forces corresponding to the forces of attraction and re-
25 
pulsion. They are defined more closely as the centripetal and 
260 

ABSOLUTE MECHANICS 
centrifugal forces which, being mutually independent and 
brought to bear upon one another contingently in the body 
as a third element, are supposed to work upon bodies as 
+ gravity does. Whatever profundity there might be in the 
s thought of universal gravity is annulled by this, and as long 
as this vaunted purveying offorces prevails, the Notion and 
reason can never penetrate into the science of absolute 
motion. In the syllogism which contains the Idea of gravity, 
this Idea is the Notion disclosing itself in external reality in 
10 the particularity of bodies, and at the same time, in the ideality 
and intro-reflection of these bodies, displaying its integration 
into itself in motion. This contains the rational identity 
and inseparability of the moments which are otherwise taken 
to be independent. In general, motion as such only has signifi-
15 cance and existence where there is a system of several bodies, 
which are variously determined, and so stand in a certain 
relationship to one another. The closer determination of this 
syllogism of totality, which is in itself a system of three syllo-
+ gisms, is given in the Notion of objectivity (see § 198). 
20 Addition. Primarily, the solar system is a number of independent bodies, 
which maintain themselves in this relation, and posit an external unity 
within another. Difference is posited therefore, and plurality is no longer 
indeterminate as with the stars, so that determinateness consists of ab-
solutely universal and particular centrality. The forms of motion in which 
25 the Notion of matter is achieved follow from these two determinations. 
The body which constitutes the relative centre is in itself the universal 
determinability of place, and it is into this that motion falls; but at the 
same time, place itself is also not determined in so far as it has its centre 
in another, and this indeterminateness has to fmd its determinate being, 
30 for place determined in and for itself is a mere unit. The particular central 
bodies are consequently indifferent to particularity of place; this appears 
in the search for their centre, in which they leave their place and transport 
themselves to another. The third determination is that they could all be 
simultaneously equidistant from their centre, and that if they were, they 
3S would then no longer be separated from one another. If they then moved 
in the same orbit, there would be no difference between them; they would 
be one and the same, each the mere repetition of the other, and their 
variety would then be purely nominal. The fourth determination is that 
by changing their place at different distances from one another, they 
261 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
return to themselves by means of a curve, for it is only in this way that 
they assert their independence of the central body. Similarly, by moving 
around the centre in the same curve, they express their unity with it. It 
is because of their independence of the central body that they keep their 
place, and do not fall further into it. 
5 
There are therefore three movements present here; (I) mechanical 
motion communicated from without, which is uniform; (2) the motion 
of fall, which is partly conditioned and partly free, and in which the 
separation of a body from its gravity is still posited as contingent, although 
the motion already belongs to gravity itself; (3) unconditioned free motion, 10 
the main moments of which we have presented as the great mechanism 
of the heavens. This motion is a curve, in which the particular bodies 
posit the central body, which simultaneously posits them. The centre has 
no significance without the periphery, nor has the periphery a significance 
without the centre. This disposes of the physical hypotheses which proceed 15 
indiscriminately from the centre or from the particular bodies, positing 
first one and then the other as original. Each aspect is necessary, but is + 
onesided when taken alone. The diremption into different terms and the 
positing of subjectivity is a single act, a free motion, which wllike pressure 
and impact, is not external. It is said that the distinct reality of the force 20 
of attraction may be seen and demonstrated in gravity. In that it brings 
about fall, gravity undoubtedly constitutes the Notion of matter, but it 
does so abstractly, and is not yet self-diremptory. Fall is an incomplete 
manifestation of gravity, and is therefore not real. The centrifugal force 
through which a body has the tendency to fly off at a tangent, is supposed, 25 
foolishly enough, to impart an impact to the celestial bodies by a swinging 
side-blow, to which they have evidently always been susceptible. The 
contingency of externally administered motion of this kind belongs to 
inert matter; it appears for example when a stone is attached to a string, 
and swung round so that it tends to fly off. We should not speak of forces 30 
therefore, but if we do so, we should remember that there is one force, 
and that its moments do not pull in different directions as two forces. 
The movement of the heavenly bodies is not a pulling hither and thither, 
but free motion; as the ancients said, they go their ways like the blessed 
gods. The corporeality of the heavens is not of a kind to have the principle of rest + 
or of motion external to it. 'As the stone is inert, and the whole earth is com-
posed of stones, the other heavenly bodies are precisely the same'. This syllogism + 
puts the properties of the whole on the same level as those of the part, but 
impact, pressure, resistance, friction, attraction, and the like, are only valid in 
their application to an existence of matter distinct from that of heavenly cor-
40 
262 

ABSOI UTE MECHANICS 
+ poreality. Matter is certainly common to them both, just as a good thought and 
a bad thought are both thoughts; but the bad is not good because the good is 
also a thought. 
§ 270 
In bodies in which the full freedom of the Notion of gravity 
5 is realized, the determinations of their distinctive nature 
are contained as the moments of their Notion. Thus, one 
of the moments is the universal centre of abstract relation to 
self. Opposed to this extreme is immediate singularity, which 
is self-external and centreless, and which also appears as an 
10 independent corporeality. The particular bodies are however 
+ those which simultaneously stand as much in the determina-
tion of self-externality, as they do in that of being-in-self; 
they are in themselves centres and find their essential unity 
through relating themselves to the universal centre. 
Remark 
15 
As that which is immediately concrete, the planetary bodies 
are the most perfect form of their existence. The sun is usually 
regarded as the most important, for the understanding tends to 
prefer what is abstract to what is concrete; it is for the same reason 
that the fixed stars are more highly regarded than the bodies of the 
20 solar system. Lunar and cometary bodies are the opposites into 
which centreless corporeality divides itself in so far as it belongs to 
externality. 
It is well known that the immortal honour of having dis-
covered the laws of absolutely free motion belongs to 
+ Kepler. Kepler proved them in that he discovered the univer-
+ sal expression of the empirical data (§ 227). It has subse-
quently become customary to speak as if Newton were the 
+ first to have discovered the proof of these laws. The credit 
for a discovery has seldom been denied a man with more 
30 unjustness. In this connection I have the following observations 
to make: 
(I) Mathematicians will admit that Newton's formulae may be 
deduced from Kepler's laws. The simply immediate derivation 
263 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
is straightforward enough. In Kepler's third law ~: is the constant. 
If this is expressed as Ay12, and Newton's definition of ~ as 
universal gravity is accepted, one has an expression of this so-
called gravity as working in inverse proportion to the squares of 
the distances. 
+ 
(2) Newton's proof of the proposition that 'a body subject 
to the law of gravitation moves in an ellipse about a centre' 
simply gives rise to a conic section, whereas the main propo-
sition to be proved consists precisely in the fact that the 
course of such a body is neither a circle nor a conic section, 10 
but simply the ellipse. This Newtonian proof. (Princ. Math. bk. 
I sect. II prop. I) needs further careful qualification; and although 
it is the basis of the Newtonian theory, analysis no longer uses it. 
In the analytical formula, the conditions which make the path of 
the body a specific conic section are constants; and their deter-
15 
mination is made to depend upon an empirical circumstance, 
i.e. a particular position of the body at a certain point of 
time, and the fortuitous strength of the original impulse it is 
supposed to have received. In this way the circumstance which 
determines the curved line into an ellipse falls outside the formula 20 
which is supposed to be proved, and the attempt to prove it is 
never made. 
+ 
(3) The Newtonian law of the so-called force of gravity is 
also merely demonstrated from experience by means of in-
duction. 
+ 
The only difference to be seen here is, that what Kepler ex-
pressed in a simple and sublime manner as constituting the laws 
of celestial motion, is changed by Newton into the reflectional 
form of the force of gravity, and into the form of this force as it 
yields the law of its magnitude in the motion of fall. For the 30 
analytical method, the Newtonian form is not only convenient, 
but necessary; this is merely the difference of a mathematical 
formula however, and for some time now analysis has known how 
to deduce the Newtonian formulation and its dependent proposi-
tions from the form of Kepler's laws. On this point I concur with 35 
the accomplished exposition in Francoeur's, 'Traite elem. de 
Mecanique' Bk. II ch. II n. IV. Taken as a whole, the old-fashioned + 
attempt at what is called a proof, presents a confused web, 
264 

ABSOL UTE MECHANICS 
and entails the lines of a simply geometrical construction, 
given the physical significance of independent forces, and 
empty reflectional determinations involving the accelerating 
force and the force of inertia already mentioned, and particularly 
5 the relationship of what is called gravity itself to centripetal and 
+ centrifugal forces etc. 
The remarks made here need a far more extensive treatment 
than can be given them in a compendium such as this. Propositions 
not in accordance with accepted opinions look like mere assertions, 
10 and when they contradict sober authorities, seem to be presumptu-
+ ous, which is even worse. It is however simple facts rather than 
propositions which have been adduced here. The import of this 
reflection is merely this, that the distinctions and determinations 
employed by mathematical analysis, and the course to which its 
15 methods commit it, should be sharply distinguished from what-
ever is supposed to have a physical reality. It is not the assumptions, 
procedure and results which analysis requires and affords which are 
questioned here, but the physical worth and the physical 
significance of its determinations and procedure. It is here that 
20 attention should be concentrated, in order to explain why physical 
mechanics has been flooded by a monstrous metaphysic, 
which, contrary to both experience and the Notion, has its sole 
+ source in these mathematical determinations. 
It is recognized that the significant moment added by Newton 
25 to the content of Kepler's laws-apart from the basis of the analy-
+ tical treatment, the development of which has moreover rendered 
superfluous and even led to the rejection of much that belonged to 
Newton's essential principles and contributed to his fame-is the 
+ principle of perturbation. In so far as it rests upon the proposi-
30 tion that what is called attraction consists of an action between all 
the individual material parts of a body, the importance of this 
principle has to be adduced here, and is to be found in the fact 
that matter in general posits its centre. It follows that the mass of a 
particular body is to be regarded as a moment in the determina-
35 tion of the place which occupies the centre, and that all the 
bodies of a system posit their sun. The individual bodies themselves 
also give rise to each relative position which they assume with 
regard to one another in the general movement however: this is 
the momentary relation of gravity between them, through 
40 which they not only possess the abstract relationship of distance, 
1* 
265 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
but posit a particular centre amongst themselves. This centre is 
pardy resolved again in the universal system however, and if it 
persists, as it does in the mutual perturbations of Jupiter and 
Saturn, it remains at least pardy subordinate to it. 
+ 
The connection between the main determinations of free motion 5 
and the Notion has only been outlined, and as it is not possible 
here to develop it any further, it must be left to its fate. The 
principle of the matter is that the rational demonstration of the 
quantitative determinations of free motion can rest solely upon 
the Notional determinations of space and time, for these 10 
moments, in their intrinsic relationship, constitute motion. When 
will science reach an awareness of the metaphysical categories 
which it employs, and instead of taking these as basic, found itself 
upon the Notion of the fact in hand! 
The Notion in general affects the primary form of returning 15 
in to itself through a curve; this is due to the general particularity 
and individuality of bodies (§ 269), which have a semi-independent 
existence, with their centre pardy in themselves, and pardy in 
another. It is these Notional determinations which give rise to the 
postulation of centripetal and centrifugal forces, and which 20 
are distorted by being regarding as distinct and independent, 
as existing outside one another and influencing independendy, 
and as only meeting contingendy and externally in their effects. 
As has already been observed, these are the lines which should be 
reserved to mathematical determination, but which have been 25 
transformed into physical actualities. 
Further, this motion is uniformly accelerated, and as it 
returns into itself, it is in turn uniformly retarded. In free 
motion, space and time occur in accordance with what they are by 
differentiating themselves and entering into the quantitative 30 
determination of motion (§ 267 Remark), so that they are not 
related as they are in abstract simply-uniform velocity. It is in the 
so-called explanation of uniformly accelerated and retarded 
motion by means of an alternating decrease and increase in 
the magnitude of the centripetal and centrifugal forces, that the 35 
confusion caused by the postulation of such independent forces 
is greatest. According to this explanation, the centrifugal force 
is I es s than the centripetal force in the movement of a planet from 
aphelion to perihelion; at perihelion itself however, the centri-
fugal force suddenly becomes greater than the centripetal force, 40 
266 

ABSOL UTE MECHANICS 
and in the movement from perihelion to aphelion, the forces are 
+ supposed to work in the inverse relation. It is clear that it is not in 
accordance with the nature of forces that the preponderance 
acquired by one over the other should suddenly switch like 
5 this into subordinacy. On the contrary, it ought to be concluded 
that a preponderance acquired by one force over another should 
not only maintain itself, but lead to the complete annihilation of 
the other, so that motion must either pass over into rest through 
the preponderance of the centripetal force, and the planet crash 
10 into the central body, or pass into a straight line through the 
preponderance of the centrifugal force. The conclusion drawn 
from this is simply that it is because the body draws away from the 
sun after passing perihelion that the centrifugal force increases 
again, and that as it is furthest from the sun at aphelion, it is just 
15 there that this force is greatest. In this metaphysical chimera, two 
opposed and independent forces are assumed, and no further 
investigation of these fictions of the understanding is thought to 
be necessary. No enquiry is made into how an independent force 
of this kind is able, of its 0 wn ac cord, to make itself subordinate 
20 to the other, and then to make itself predominate , to get the other 
force to allow this, and to follow this up by cancelling this pre-
dominance again, or allowing it to be cancelled. If this inwardly 
groundless augmentation and diminution is examined more 
closely, points are found midway between the apsides, in which 
25 the forces are in equilibrium. The supposed movement of these 
two forces out of this equilibrium is just as unmotivated as this 
sudden reversal of their preponderance. It is easy enough to see 
how this method of explanation, in remedying a fault by means 
of a further determination, gives rise to further and more be-
+ wildering confusions. 
A similar confusion arises from the explanation of the fact that 
the oscillation of the pendulum appears to be slower at the equator. 
This phenomenon is also attributed to a supposedly greater centri-
fugal force, but it could be ascribed with equal facility to an in-
35 crease in the force of gravity holding the pendulum more firmly 
+ in the perpendicular, or line of rest. 
In so far as it enters into the shape of the orbit, the circle is 
only to be grasped as the orbit ofa simply uniform motion. It is 
certainly conceivable as it is said, that a uniformly increasing 
40 and decreasing motion should take place in a circle. This conceiv-
267 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
ability, or possibility, is only an abstract representability however, 
and as it leaves out the determinate situation to which it applies, 
it is not only superficial, but wrong. The circle is the line returning 
into itself; all its radii are equal, and it is therefore fully determined 
through its radius; this is merely a unit, and the unit constitutes 5 
the whole determinateness. In free motion however, where 
various spatial and temporal determinations occur in qualitative 
relationship with one another, the relationship necessarily occurs 
as a spatial differentiation; which therefore requires two 
determinations. Consequently the form of the path returning into 10 
itselfis essentially an ellipse, which is the first of Kepler's laws. 
+ 
The abstract determinability which constitutes the circle, also 
appears in the arc or angle being independent of the two radii 
by which it is enclosed, and to which it is a purely empirical 
measure. In motion determined by the Notion however, the 15 
distance from the centre, and the arc described in a certain time, 
must be contained in a single determinability, and constitute a 
single whole, for the moments of the Notion are not related 
contingently. It is this that gives rise to the sector, which is a 
two-dimensional spatial determination. The arc is therefore the 20 
essential function of the radius vector, and by its variation in equal 
periods of time, it carries the inequality of the radii with it. That 
the spatial determination should appear here, by means of time, 
as the two-dimensional determination of a plane, is connected 
with what was said above (§ 267) about the exposition of the same 25 
determinateness in fall: now in the root as time, and again in the 
square as space. Here however the quadrati city of space is 
confined to the sector by the return of the line of motion into 
itself. It will be apparent that the second of Kepler's laws, which is 
concerned with the sweeping out of equal sectors in equal 30 
periods of time, rests upon these general principles. 
+ 
This law only touches the relation between the arc and the radius 
vector, and within it time is an abstract unity; as time is the unity 
which determines the various sectors, they are all equal. The 
further relationship is however that between time and the extent 35 
of the orbit, or, for it comes to the same thing, the distance from 
the centre. Here time is not an abstract unity but the general 
quantum of time taken to complete the orbit. We have seen that 
in fall, which is an imperfectly free motion determined partly in 
accordance with the Notion, and partly from without, time and 40 
268 

ABSOL UTE MECHANICS 
space are related to one another as root and square. In absolute 
motion however, which is the realm of free measures, each 
determinateness attains its totality. As root, time is a purely 
empirical quantity, and in that it is qualitative, it is merely ab-
5 stract unity. As a mom en t of the developed totality however, it is 
at the same time a determined unity, a totality for itself, which 
produces itself, and so relates itself to itself. It is however 
internally dimensionless, and only reaches a formal identity with 
itself by producing itself as the square. Space on the other hand, 
10 as positive extrinsicality, attains the dimension of the Notion in 
the cube. It is in this way that their realization simultaneously 
contains their original difference. This is the third of Kepler's 
laws, which is concerned with the relation between the 
+ cubes of the distances, and the squares of the times. The great-
15 ness of this law consists in its presentation of the rationality 
of the matter with such simplicity and immediacy. In the 
Newtonian formula however, it is transformed into a law 
applied to the force of gravity, and so shows how reflection 
which fails to get to the bottom of things can distort and 
+ pervert the truth. 
Addition. It is here in the mechanical sphere that genuine laws make 
their appearance, for a law is the linking of two simple determinations 
so that only their simple relation to one another constitutes the whole 
relationship, although there must be the appearance of mutual freedom 
25 between them. In magnetism however, the inseparability of the two 
determinations is already posited, so we do not call it a law. In higher 
shapes, the determinations are linked in the individualization of the third 
term, so that we no longer have the direct determinations of two inter-
related terms. It is only in spirit, where there is a mutual confrontation of 
30 independent entities, that laws occur again. Now the laws of this motion 
concern the two aspects of the form of its path, and its velocity. These 
have to be developed out of the Notion, but this would demand an 
extensive investigation, and because of the difficulty of the task, it has 
not yet been fully accomplished. 
35 
Kepler discovered his laws empirically, by working inductively with 
+ the observations of Tycho Brahe; to discover the universal law governing 
these fragmentary phenomena is a work of genius in this field. 
(I) Copernicus still regarded the orbit as circular and the motion as 
+ eccentric. Equal arcs are not described in equal times however, and as it 
269 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
is contrary to the nature of the circle, motion of this kind cannot take 
place within it. The circle is the curve of the understanding, and posits 
equality. Circular motion can only be uniform, for equal arcs can only 
correspond to equal radii. There is no general agreement upon this point, 
but if it is considered more closely, the opposite is found to be an empty s 
assertion. The circle has only one constant, while other curves of the + 
second order have two constants, the major and the minor axis. If different 
arcs are described in the same time, then they must be different not only 
empirically but in their function, i.e. it is in their function itself that the 
difference must lie. In the circle, these arcs would in fact only be dis-
10 
tinguished from another empirically. The radius is essential to the function 
of an arc in that it is the relation of that which is peripheral to the centre. 
If the arcs are different, the radii must also differ, and the Notion of the 
circle be immediately transcended. Consequently, the assumption of 
acceleration necessarily implies a variation in the radii, for arc and radius 1 S 
are inseparably connected. The path must therefore be elliptical, for its 
complete motion is a revolution. We know from observation that the 
ellipse does not correspond completely to the course of the planets, and 
other perturbations are therefore to be assumed. It is for subsequent 
astronomy to decide whether or not the path of the orbit has profounder 20 
functions than the ellipse, it may perhaps be the oval line etc. 
+ 
(2) Here the determinability of the arc lies in the radii by which it is 
intersected; these three lines together form a triangle, which is a single 
determinate whole, of which they are the moments. Similarly, the radius 
is a function of the arc, and of the other radius. It should not be forgotten 2S 
that the determinateness of the whole as an empirical quantity, and a 
distinct determinability which may be brought into external comparisons, 
lies in this triangle, and not in the arc as such. The empirical determin-
ability of the complete curve, of which the arc is a certain part, lies in the 
relation of its axes; the other determinateness lies in the law governing the 30 
variation of the vectors; and so far as the arc is a part of the whole, its 
determinability, like that of the triangle, lies in that which constitutes the 
general determinability of the whole path. A line can only be subsumed 
under a necessary determinateness if it is a moment of a whole. The 
extent of the line is a merely empirical element, the whole first appears in 3S 
the triangle. This is the origin of the mathematical conception of the 
parallelogram of forces in fmite mechanics, in which the space traversed 
is presented as the diagonal, which is therefore posited as part of a whole or 
function, and so susceptible to mathematical treatment. Centripetal force + 
is the radius, centrifugal force the tangent, and the arc is the diagonal of 40 
270 

ABSOLUTE MECHANICS 
the tangent and the radius. These are only mathematical lines however; 
separate the whole from physical reality, and it becomes an empty 
representation. In the abstract motion of fall, the squares, that is to say the 
plane involved in the time factor, are only numerical determinations. The 
5 square is not to be taken in a spatial sense, because in fall only a straight 
line is traversed. It is this which constitutes the formal element in fall, and 
when the space traversed in fall is also represented as a plane expressing a 
quadratic spatial relationship, this is therefore a merely formal con-
struction. However, as the time which sublates itself here corresponds to a 
10 plane, it is here that the self-production of time attains reality. The sector 
is a plane produced by the arc and the radius vector. The two deter-
minations of the sector are the space transversed, and the distance from 
the centre. The radii drawn from the focus in which the central body is 
situated are not all the same. If two sectors are equal, the one with the 
15 longer radii will have the smaller arc. Both sectors should be traversed 
in the same time, consequently, in the sector with the longer radii, both 
the distance travelled and the velocity will be less. The arc or the distance 
travelled is here no longer an immediate term, but by its relation to the 
radius, which is not yet present in fall, it is reduced to a moment, and 
20 therefore to the factor of a product. Yet the spatiality determined through 
time here forms two determinations of the path itself, i.e. the space 
traversed, and the distance from the centre. The time taken determines 
the whole, of which the arc is only a moment. It is because of this that 
equal sectors correspond to equal times; the sector is determined by time, 
25 so that the space traversed is reduced to a moment. The situation here 
corresponds to that in leverage, in which the load and the distance from 
the fulcrum are the two moments of equilibrium. 
(3) Kepler searched for the law that the cubes of the mean distances of 
the various planets are as the square of the times of their revolutions, for 
30 27 years. He had been on the brink of discovering it earlier, but an error 
in calculation had prevented him from doing so. It was his unshakeable 
+ belief in the inherent rationality of the facts that led him to his discovery. 
Previous consideration has made it seem likely that time has a dimension 
+ less than space. Since space and time are bound together here, each is 
35 posited in its singularity, and their quantitative determinability is deter-
mined by their quality. 
These laws are some of the frnest, purest, and least contaminated with 
heterogeneous matter that we have in the natural sciences. It is therefore 
of the greatest interest to reach an understanding of them. These Keplerian 
40 laws are presented in their purest and clearest form. According to the 
271 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Newtonian form of the law, gravity governs motion, and its force works 
in inverse proportion to the square of the distances. The honour of having + 
discovered the law of universal gravitation has been attributed to Newton, 
who, by catching the popular imagination, has won the greatest applause, 
and obscured the glory of Kepler. The Germans have often looked on 
5 
impassively while the English have assumed authority in this way. 
Voltaire furthered the acceptance of the Newtonian theory among the 
French, and then the Germans also followed along. The merit of Newton's + 
form is of course that it has many advantages in mathematical treatment. 
It is often envy which motivates the debunking of great men, but on the 10 
other hand, it is a kind of superstition to regard their accomplishments as 
unsurpassable. 
The mathematicians themselves have been unjust to Newton in so far 
as they have regarded gravity in two different ways. In the first instance + 
it is simply the direction in which a stone falls at IS feet a second on the 15 
surface of the earth, and as such it is a purely empirical determination. 
The law of fall is ascribed principally to gravity, but as the moon also 
has the earth as its centre, Newton applied it to lunar motion, so that the 
quantity of 15 feet is also taken as basic to the orbit of the moon. The 
distance of the moon from the earth is sixty times the earth's diameter, + 
and this fact is therefore used to determine the moment of attraction in 
lunar motion. It is then found that the earth's power of attraction over 
the moon (the sinus versus, the sagitta) also determines the entire lunar 
orbit, and that the moon falls. This may very well work out in this way, 
but it remains a particular case, in which the empirical extent of fall on 25 
the surface of the earth is merely extended to the moon. It is not meant to 
apply to the planets, or would only be valid in the relationship between 
them and their satellites. It is therefore a limited principle. Fall is said to + 
apply to the heavenly bodies. These bodies do not fall into the sun how- + 
ever, and in order to counteract fall, yet another motion is attributed to 30 
them. This is accomplished easily enough. Boys do the same thing when 
they whip the side of a top to keep it from toppling over. Such a puerile 
attitude towards the free motion of the planets is not to be tolerated 
however. Universal gravitation is therefore only the second meaning of + 
gravity, and Newton saw in gravity the law of all motion; he therefore 35 
transferred gravity to the law governing the celestial bodies, and called 
it the law of gravity. It is this generalization of the law of gravity which 
constitutes the merit of Newton's work. We are aware of it when we 
watch the movement of a falling stone, and the fall of an apple from a 
tree is said to have motivated Newton into making this generalization. + 
272 

ABSOLUTE MECHANICS 
According to the law offail, the body moves towards its centre of gravity, 
and heavenly bodies have a tendency towards the sun; their direction is 
posited jointly by this and their tangential tendency, the result being this 
diagonal direction. 
s 
It seems therefore as though we have found a law here, and that it has 
as its moments: (1) the law of gravity as attractive force, and (2) the law of 
tangential force. If we examine the law of planetary revolution however, 
we shall discover only one law of gravity, for although the centripetal 
force is supposed to constitute only one of the moments, the centrifugal 
10 force is a superfluous element, and therefore disappears completely. 
Consequently, the construction of motion out of these forces shows itself 
to be futile. The law of one of these moments, i.e. that which is attributed 
to attractive force, is not the law of this force alone, but shows itself to 
be the law of the entire motion, the other moment becoming an empirical 
15 coefficient. Nothing more is heard of centrifugal force. Elsewhere these 
two forces are readily allowed to separate. Centrifugal force is said to be an 
impulse received by bodies in accordance with their direction and magni-
tude. Such an empirical quantity can no more constitute the moment of a 
law than can the 15 feet. If one wants to determine the laws of centri-
20 fugal force as they are in themselves, contradictions will present themselves, 
as is always the case with opposites of this kind. Sometimes they are 
credited with the same laws as centripetal force, and sometimes with 
others. The greatest confusion arises however if one attempts to separate 
the action of these two forces when they are no longer in equilibrium, 
2S but one is greater than the other, and one is supposed to be increasing 
while the other diminishes. The centrifugal force is said to be at its 
maximum in aphelion, and the centripetal force in perihelion. One could 
just as well assert the opposite however. If the attractive force of the 
planet is greatest when it is closest to the sun, it is precisely at this point 
30 that the centrifugal force ought also to be at its maximum, in order to 
prevail as the distance from the sun begins to increase again. If one assumes 
a gradual increase in the force in question instead of a sudden switchover, 
one has to assume an even greater increase in the other force, so that the 
opposition admitted for the purpose of explanation, breaks down. In 
3S some expositions the increase in one is taken to be different from the 
+ increase in the other, but the result is the same. This switching around, in 
which each is always supposed to be prevailing over the other, merely 
leads to confusion. It is the same in medicine, when irritability and sensi-
+ bility are regarded as in inverse ratio to one another. This form of reflec-
40 tion ought to be dispensed with completely. 
273 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Experience shows that because the pendulum swings slower at the 
equator than at higher latitudes, it has to be shortened there in order 
to increase the rapidity of its oscillations. This is supposed to be 
evidence of a more powerful centrifugal force at the equator, for in the 
same time a point at the equator will describe a greater circle than the pole, 
5 
and it is supposed to be the resultant increase in centrifugal force which 
counteracts the pendulum's force of gravity, or tendency to fall. The 
opposite might be asserted with equal plausibility and rather more truth. 
Slower oscillation means that the direction of the vertical, or the line of 
the rest, is stronger; here therefore motion in general is weakened; the 10 
motion is deviation from the direction of gravity; consequently, the 
truth of the matter is that gravity is augmented. This is the outcome of 
such oppositions. 
+ 
It was not Newton but Kepler who ftrst thought of the planets as 
standing in immanent relation to the sun, and it is therefore absurd to 15 
regard their being drawn as a new idea originating with Newton. What is 
more, 'attraction' is not the right word here, for it is the planets rather 
than the sun, which take initiative. Everything depends upon the proof + 
that they move in an ellipse. This is the crux of Kepler's law, but the 
proof of it was never attempted by Newton. Laplace ('Exposition du 20 
systeme du monde', vol. II p. 12-13.) admits that, 'Infmitesimal analysis, 
which on account of its generality embraces everything that may be 
deduced from a given law, makes it clear that not only the ellipse, but 
every conic section, may be described by means of the force which 
maintains the planets in their orbits'. It is in this essential fact that the 25 
complete inadequacy of the Newtonian proof becomes apparent. In the + 
geometrical proof Newton employs the inftnitely small; it is not a rigorous 
proof, and modern analysis has therefore abandoned it. Instead of proving 
the laws of Kepler, Newton did the opposite. An explanation of the 
matter was called for, and Newton was content with a bad one. The idea 30 
of the infmitely small stands out in this proof, which depends upon 
Newton's having posited all triangles in the infmitely small as equal. The 
sine and the cosine are unequal however, and if one then says that they 
are equal when posited as infmitely small quanta, the proposition will 
certainly enable one to do anything. When it is dark, all cows are black. 35 
The quantum has to disappear, but if qualitative difference is also elimi-
nated in the process, there is no end to what can be proved. It is upon such + 
propositions that the Newtonian proof is based, and that is why it is such 
an utterly bad one. Analysis goes on to deduce the other two laws from 
the ellipse; it has found a non-Newtonian way of doing this, but it is 40 
274 

ABSOLUTE MECHANICS 
precisely the first law, the foundation of the deduction, which remains 
+ unproved. In Newton's law, in so far as gravity diminishes with the 
distance, it is merely the velocity at which bodies move. The mathematical 
determination :2 was stressed by Newton when he arranged Kepler's 
5 laws in order to express gravity, but it was already present in these laws. 
The deduction is made in a manner resembling the definition of the circle 
as a2= x2 + y2, i.e. as the relationship between the invariable hypotenuse 
(of the radius) and the two cathetuses which are variable (abscissa or 
cosine, ordinate or sine). The abscissa for example, may be deduced from 
10 this formula in the following way: x2= a2- y2, i.e. (a+y)(a- y) or the 
ordinate thus: i=a2-x2, i.e. (a+x)(a-x). We are therefore able to 
+ discover all other determinations from the original function of the curve. 
Gravity might be elicited as :2 merely by arranging Kepler's formula 
so as to deduce this determination. This may be done with each of Kep-
15 ler's laws, with his law of ellipses, and with his law concerning the pro-
portionality of times and sectors, but most simply and directly with the 
third. This law has the following formula: ~:= :2
3
. We want to deduce 
:2 from it. S is the space traversed as part of the orbit; A is the distance 
from the sun; both are interchangeable, and may be substituted for one 
20 another, because the distance (diameter) and the orbit as a constant func-
tion of the distance stand in relationship to each other. The diameter being 
determined, I also know the curve of the revolution, and vice versa, for I 
have here a single determinability. I now take the formula A;~ = ::a, i.e. 
A2 :2 = a2 ~, and remove gravity (~), substituting G for :2' and g for 
25 ~ (the different gravitations). I then have A2G= a2g. If I then state this 
relation as a proportion, I have A2: a2=g:G, which is Newton's law. 
So far we have had two bodies in celestial motion. As subjectivity and 
determinateness of place in and for itself, the central body had its ab-
solute centre in itself. The other moment is the objectivity confronting 
30 this determinedness in and for itself, i.e. the particular bodies which have a 
centre not only in themselves but also in another. Since these bodies are 
no longer the body which expresses the abstract moment of subjectivity, 
their place is certainly determined, for they are outside it; their place is not 
275 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
absolutely determined however, the determinateness of the place being 
indeterminate. The various possibilities are realized by the body as it 
moves in the curve. Each place on the curve is in fact indifferent to the 
body, which demonstrates this by simply moving in them around the 
central body. In this primary relationship, gravity has not yet unfolded 
5 
into the totality of the Notion; for it to do so, it is necessary that the 
particularization into many bodies by which the subjectivity of the centre 
objectifies itself, should be further determined within itself. Firstly we 
have the absolute central body, secondly the dependent bodies with no 
centre in themselves, and thirdly relative central bodies. The whole 10 
gravitational system is complete only if it includes these three types of 
body. It is said that there must be three bodies present in order to decide 
which body is moving, as when we are in a boat, and the shore is moving 
past us. Determinateness could be said to be already present in the plurality 
of planets; but this is a simple plurality, not a differentiated determinate-
15 
ness. If only the sun and the earth are under consideration, it is a matter 
of indifference to the Notion which of them moves. Tycho Brahe 
concluded from this that the sun moved about the earth, and the planets 
about the sun, and although this tends to make calculations more difficult, 
it is just as feasible. It was Copernicus who hit upon the truth of the matter; + 
astronomy was providing no real reason when it explained this by 
saying that it is more fitting that the earth should move about the sun 
because the sun is larger. If mass is also brought into consideration, the + 
question of the larger body having the same specific density also arises. 
The law of motion remains essential. The central body represents abstract 25 
rotatory motion; the particular bodies simply move about a centre, 
without independent rotatory movement. The third mode in the system 
of free motion is movement about a centre combined with a rotatory 
motion which is independent of this centre. 
(I) The centre is supposed to be a point, but as it is body and composed 30 
of parts which tend towards a centre, it is at the same time extended. This 
dependent matter involved in the central body causes the latter to rotate 
about itself, for the dependent points, which are at the same time kept 
away from the centre, have no self-relating and clearly determined place; 
they are merely determined in a single direction as falling matter. All 35 
other determinateness is lacking, and each point must therefore occupy 
all the places it is able to. Only the centre is determined in and for itself; 
the rest, forming as it does the extrinsicality of the centre, is indifferent, 
for it is merely the distance of each point from the centre which is deter-
mined here, not the point's place. This contingency of determination comes 40 
276 

ABSOLUTE MECHANICS 
into existence when matter changes its place. The internal rotation of the sun 
about its centre is the expression of this. This sphere is therefore mass in 
its immediacy as a unity of rest and motion, or it is self-relating motion. Axial 
rotation does not constitute a change of place, for all points keep the same 
5 place in relation to one another. The whole is therefore quiescent motion. 
In order that it should be an actual motion, the axis should not be indifferent 
to the mass, and must not remain still while the mass is in motion. 
There is no real difference between this which moves and its rest, because there 
+ is no difference in mass. That which rests is not a mass, but a line, and that which 
10 is moved is distinguished solely by places, not by masses. 
(2) The dependent bodies do not constitute the connected parts in the 
extension of a body endowed with a centre, for they have at the same time 
apparently free existence, and hold themselves at a distance from the 
+ central body. They also rotate, but as they have no centre in themselves, 
+ not upon their axis. They therefore rotate about a centre belonging to 
another individual body, by which they are repelled. They are completely 
indifferent to particularity of place, and they express this contingency of 
determinate place by rotation. As they remain in the same spatial deter-
mination with regard to the central body, they move about it in an inert 
20 rigid manner; the relationship of the moon to the earth is an example of 
this. A certain place A in the mobile peripheral body will always remain 
in the straight line joining the absolute and relative centres, and every 
other point B constantly maintain its determinate angle. It is as a mere 
mass that the dependent body moves about the central body therefore, not 
2S as a self-related individual body. It is the dependent heavenly bodies which 
constitute the aspect of particularity; this is why they fall apart and 
differentiate themselves, for in nature particularity exists as duality, and 
not as unity, as it does in spirit. If we regard this double nature of de-
pendent bodies as a mere difference of movement, we have the two 
30 aspects of the motion as follows:-
(a) The first posited moment is that in which quiescent motion becomes this 
+ restless movement, which is a sphere of aberration, or of effort to break out of 
immediate existence into what is beyond its self This moment of self-exter-
nality, as a mass and sphere, is itself the moment of substance, for each moment 
3S here contains its special existence, or has within it the reality of the whole 
which constitutes a sphere. The second of these is the cometary sphere, and 
expresses this whirling which makes a permanent effort to disperse and scatter 
itself into the infinite or void. In this context, the shape of a body, and the 
whole conception of the comets and celestial bodies which deals merely with 
40 their contingency, and is based upon knowledge accumulated simply by look-
277 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
ing at them, has to be put out of mind. According to this way of thinking, the 
comets might just as well not be there, and the recognition of their necessity, the 
grasping of their Notion, may even seem laughable, used as this mental attitude 
is to regarding such things as quite beyond our comprehension, and conse-
quently of the Notion too. All the imaginative theories of what is called' explain- + 
ing the origin', according to which the comets may be ejected from the sun, + 
atmospheric vapours and so on, belong without exception to this way of 
thinking. Explanation of this kind may well attempt to state what the comets 
are, but it merely bypasses the essential point, which is their necessity; and it is + 
precisely the necessity which constitutes the Notion. There is therefore no 10 
particular excuse for our taking up these phenomena and tinselling them with a 
glitter of thought. The cometary sphere threatens to break away from the 
universal self-relating order, and lose its unity. It is formal freedom, which has 
its substance outside itself, a pushing out into the future. In so far as it constitutes 
a necessary moment of the whole however, it does not escape from this whole, 15 
and so remains included within the first sphere. Nevertheless it is uncertain 
whether such a sphere dissolves itself as an individual and other individuals 
come into existence, or whether it is perpetually moving as a motion about the 
first sphere, which is external to it, and in which it has its repose. Both possi- + 
bilities belong to the contingency of nature, and this division or transition by 20 
stages from the determinateness of this sphere into another, is to be reckoned 
with as proper to material existence. Nevertheless, the extreme limit of the 
aberration itself consists necessarily in an indefmite approach to the sub-
jectivity of the central body, until the point is reached at which repulsion 
takes place. 
25 
(b) It is precisely this moment of unrest in which the moment of whirling 
attains its centre however; this is not a transition of simple change, for in its 
self-immediacy this otherness is the opposite of itself. The opposition is the 
duality of the immediate otherness and the cancellation of this otherness. It is 
not a pure flux or the opposition as such however, but this opposition as it seeks 30 
its rest or centre. It is subIa ted future, the past as moment, in which the opposi- + 
tion is sublated in its Notion, although not yet in its determinate being. This is 
the lunar sphere, which is not the aberration or issuing forth of determinate 
being, but relation to self, to what has become, or to the being-for-sel£ Thus, 
while the cometary sphere is only related to immediate rotation about an axis, 35 
the lunar sphere is related to the new intro-reflected centre, the planet. A 
satellite does not yet have its being-in-and-for-self within itself nor does it 
revolve about its axis; its axis is outside it, but it is not the axis of the solar + 
sphere. Considered purely as a motion, the lunar sphere is rigidly controlled 
by a single centre, to which it is simply subservient, and the sphere of 40 
278 

ABSOLUTE MECHANICS 
aberration is just as dependent. The first is abstract obedience, and 
conformity to another, the second is merely intended freedom. The 
cometary sphere constitutes an eccentricity controlled by an abstract 
whole, while the lunar sphere is quiescent inertia. 
s 
(3) The fmal sphere is the planetary, which is in and for itself, and con-
stitutes relation to self and to another; it is formed as much by motion 
rotating about an axis, as by having its centre outside itself. Consequently, 
although the planet also has its centre in itself, it is a merely relative centre, 
and as it does not contain its absolute centre, it is not independent. The 
10 planet has both determinations within it, and displays them by its change 
of place. It shows its independence only by its parts' changing place in 
relation to the position which they hold with regard to the straight line 
joining the absolute and relative centres; it is this which is the basis of 
the rotatory motion of the planets. The precession of the equinoxes is caused 
+ by the movement of the orbital axis. The axis of the earth also has a nutation, 
+ and its poles describe an ellipse. As it constitutes the third sphere, the 
planet concludes and completes the whole. This quadruplicity of celestial 
bodies forms the completed system of rational corporeality. It is necessary 
to a solar system, and is the developed disjunction of the Notion. These 
20 four spheres between them show forth the moments of the Notion 
within the heavens. It may seem strange to attempt to fit the comets in 
here, but that which is present must necessarily be contained in the Notion. 
Differences are still thrown freely apart here. We shall pursue the solar, 
planetary, lunar, and cometary spheres through all the subsequent stages 
25 of nature. The deepening of nature is merely the progressive transfor-
mation of these four. It is because planetary nature is the totality, the 
unity of opposites, while the other spheres, being its inorganic nature, 
merely exhibit its particular moments, that it is the most perfect to come 
under consideration here; and this is also true of it as a motion. It is for 
30 this reason that living being occurs only on the planets. Ancient peoples 
+ have glorified the sun and worshipped it; we do the same when we 
recognize the final supremacy of the abstract understanding, and so 
determine God for example, as the supreme essence. 
This totality is the ground and universal substance on which that which fol-
35 lows is borne. This totality of motion is everything, but everything with-
drawn into a higher being-in-self, or, to express it differently, realized as a 
+ higher being-in-self. Everything has this totality within it, but is indifferent to 
it, leaves it behind as a particular existence, as a history, or as the origin against 
which the being-in-self has turned in order to be for itsel£ Everything lives in 
40 this element therefore, and also frees itself from it, for only feeble traces of 
279 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
everything subsist there. Terrestrial being, and more particularly organic 
being and self-consciousness, has escaped from the motion of absolute matter but 
remained in sympathy with it, and lived on with it as within its own inner 
element. The changes of the seasons and times of day, and the changeover from 
waking to sleep, constitute the terrestrial life in organic being. In itself each of s 
these moments constitutes a sphere of proceeding out of self, and of returning 
into its central point or power, so that it embraces or subdues all the multi-
farious elements of consciousness. Night is the negative to which everything 
returns, and organic being therefore derives its strength and consequently 
its negative being from thence, so that it may return again refreshed to the + 
waking multifariousness of existence. Each has the universal sphere within 
it therefore, and is a sphere periodically returning into itself, and expressing 
the universal through its determinate individuality. The magnetic needle 
does so by its periodic deviations; according to Fourcroy's observations, man does + 
so partly by his four-day periods of increasing and decreasing, in which he puts 1 S 
on for three days, and on the fourth returns to his original dimensions. The + 
periodic courses of diseases might also be cited here. It is however in the circu-
lation of the blood, the rhythm of which differs from that of the respiratory 
sphere, and thirdly in peristaltic movement, that the fully developed totality of 
the sphere occurs. The generally higher nature of physical being prevents this 20 
sphere from expressing its peculiar freedom however, and in order to study 
universal motion, one must concentrate upon its freedom, not upon these 
trivial appearances. In individuality it is not its free existence, but a mere inter-
nality or intention which is present. 
The exposition of the solar system has not yet been completed by what 25 
has been said, and although the basic determinations have been adduced, 
there are still supplementary determinations which could be added. The 
relationship between the orbits of the planets, their reciprocal inclinations, 
and the inclinations of comets and satellites to them, are all fields of 
enquiry which could still be of interest to us. The orbits of the planets do 30 
not lie in a single plane, and what is more, the courses of the comets cut 
across the planetary orbits at very different angles. These do not deviate 
from the ecliptic, but they change the angle of their reciprocal relations; 
the motion of nodes is secular. It is more difficult to develop these occur- + 
rences, and we are not yet able to do so. We have only concerned our-
3S 
selves with the planet in general, but the distances between the planets 
should also be considered, for although it is as yet undiscovered, there 
may well be a law governing the series in the distances between the 
planets. Astronomers tend on the whole to scorn the idea of there being 
such a law, and will have nothing to do with it, but it is necessary that 40 
280 

ABSOLUTE MECHANICS 
this should remain an open question. Kepler considered the numbers in 
+ Plato's 'Timaeus' for example. Taking these as a basis, something like the 
following conjecture might now be made:-Mercury is the first of the 
planets and if its distance is a, then the orbit of Venus is a + b, the orbit 
5 of the Earth a + 2b, and that of Mars a+ 3b. In this way it will certainly be-
come apparent that these first four planets form a whole. One might say 
that the first four bodies of the solar system, constitute a single system in 
themselves, and that another order subsequently commences, both in the 
numbers, and in the physical constitution of the planets. These four move 
10 ina uniform manner, and it is worth noting that there are four with such a 
homogeneous nature. of these four, only the Earth has a satellite, and it 
is therefore the most perfect. Between Mars and Jupiter there is a sudden 
wide gap, and a+ 4b was not permissible until more recent times, when 
the discovery of the four smaller planets Vesta, Juno, Ceres, and Pallas, 
15 filled it and formed a new group. The unity of the planet is here sundered 
into a crowd of asteroids, all of which have approximately the same orbit. 
+ Dispersion and separation predominate in this fifth position. Then comes 
+ the third group. Jupiter with its many satellites is a a+ sb etc. This only 
works out approximately, and the rationality of it is not yet recognizable. 
20 This great mass of satellites is different again from the kind of arrangement 
found in the first four planets. Then comes Saturn with its rings and 
+ seven satellites, and Uranus, which was discovered by Herschel, with a 
+ host of satellites which few have seen as yet. Here we have a point 
of departure for the preciser determination of planetary relation-
25 ships. It is not difficult to see that the law will be discovered in this 
+ way. 
Philosophy has to proceed on the basis of the Notion, and even if it 
demonstrates very little, one has to be satisfied. It is an error on the part 
of the philosophy of nature to attempt to face up to all phenomena; this 
30 is done in the fmite sciences, where everything has to be reduced to 
general conceptions (hypotheses). In these sciences the empirical element 
is the sole confirmation of the hypothesis, so that everything has to be 
explained. Whatever is known through the Notion is its own explanation 
and stands firm however, so that philosophy need not be disturbed if the 
35 explanation of each and every phenomenon has not yet been completed. 
Here I have merely traced the foundations of a rational interpretation, as 
this must be employed in the comprehension of the mathematical and 
mechanical laws of nature within the free realm of measures. Specialists 
do not reflect upon the matter, but a time will come when the rational 
40 concept of this science will be demanded! 
281 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
§ 271 
Gravity, which is the substance of matter, no longer has the self-
externality of matter external to it when it is developed into 
totality of form. The form appears first in its differences in the 
ideal determinations of space, time, and motion, and in accor-
dance with its being-for-self, as a determinate centre outside 
5 
self-external matter. In developed totality however, this extrinsi-
cality is posited as determined solely by the totality; this is the 
juxtaposition of matter, outside of which it has no existence. It is 
in this way that form is materialized. Looked at in the opposite 
way, matter has itself attained implicit determinateness of form in 10 
this negation of its self-externality in the totality, which was 
formerly merely the centre which it sought. Its abstract and 
subdued being-in-self, general weightedness, has been resolved 
into form; it is qualified matter, or physics. 
Addition. In this way we conclude the ftrst part; mechanics now con-
15 
stitutes a distinct whole. When Descartes said, 'Give me matter and 
motion and I will construct the world', he took the standpoint of mechan-
ics as his ftrst principle, and in these words he shows a greatness of spirit 
which we should not deny, despite the inadequacy of this standpoint. In + 
motion, bodies are mere points, and gravity only determines the spatial 20 
relations between points. The unity of matter is simply the unity of 
place which matter seeks, it is not a single concrete unit. It is in the nature 
of this sphere that this externality of determinedness should constitute the 
peculiar determinateness of matter. Matter is weighted being-for-self 
seeking its being-in-self; in this infmity the point is merely a place, so 25 
that the being-for-self is not yet real. It is only in the whole solar system 
that the totality of being-for-self is posited, so that what the solar system 
is as a whole, matter should be in particular. The complete form of the 
solar system is the Notion of matter in general; its self-externality should 
now be present in each determinate existence of the completely developed 30 
Notion. Matter should fmd its unity by being for itself in the whole of its 
determinate being, which is the being for self of being-for-sel£ Put in 
another way, the self-motivation of the solar system is the sublation of the 
merely ideal nature of being-for-self, of mere spatiality of determination, 
of not-being-for-sel£ In the Notion, the negation of place does not 35 
merely give rise to its re-instatement; the negation of not-being-for-self 
282 

ABSOLUTE MECHANICS 
is a negation of the negation, i.e. an affirmation, so that what comes forth 
is real being-for-sel£ This is the abstractly logical determination of the 
transition. It is precisely the total development of being-for-self which is 
real being-for-self; this might be expressed as the freeing of the form of 
5 matter. The determinations of form which constitute the solar system are 
the determinations of matter itself, and these determinations constitute the 
being of matter, so that determination and being are essentially identical. 
This is of the nature of quality, for if the determination is removed here, 
being also disappears. This is the transition from mechanics to physics. 

NOTES 
179 
Karl Ludwig Michelet (1801-1893) came of a French Calvinist family. He 
was born in Berlin and educated at the French Grammar School there. In 1819 
he was matriculated at Berlin University and began to study law, but Hegel's 
lectures on logic and the philosophy of right broadened his interests, and in 
1824 he took his doctorate in philosophy. In 1826 he qualified as a university 
teacher and lectured at Berlin until 1874. He was appointed professor there in 
1829, and from 1825 until 1850 was also a teacher at his old school. 
He tended to belong to the Hegelian left, and did a great deal of work faith-
fully defending what he considered to be orthodox Hegelianism. He joined 
the 'Society for scientific criticism' in 1827, and contributed ~() its 'Jahrbucher 
fur wissenschaftliche Kritik'. He edited vol. I, 'Hegel's philosophische Abhand-
lungen' and vols. XIII-XV, 'Geschichte der Philosophie', as well as this volume 
of the complete edition of Hegel's works. 
He wrote three works on the ethics of Aristotle (1827, 1835, 1836), and several 
works on the history of philosophy: see for example 'Geschichte der letzten 
Systeme der Philosophie in Deutschland von Kant bis Hegel' (2 vols. Berlin, 
1837-1838). Although he is a competent scholar he does not show much 
originality as a thinker. This is particularly noticeable in his 'Das System der 
Philosophie' (4 vols. Berlin, 1876-1879) which is very largely a mere paraphrase 
of Hegel's system. Volume 3 of this work (Berlin, 1876, p. 486) is devoted 
entirely to the philosophy of nature, but it shows very little intelligent 
assessment of the scientific developments that had taken place since Hegel 
lectured. 
See the article by Adolf Lasson in 'Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie' vol. 
55 pp. 842-844 (Leipzig, 1910): E. H. Schmitt 'Michelet und das Geheimnis der 
Hegelschen Dialektik' (Frankfurt-on-Main, 1888): Pasquale d'Ercole 'C. L. 
Michelet e l'Hegelianismo' ('Riv. Ital. di Filos.' IX, 1894). 
179,1 
See Schelling's 'Erster Entwurf eines Systems der Naturphilosophie. FUr 
Vorlesungen' (1799), republished in 'Schellings Werke' vol. II pp. 1-268 (ed. 
M. Schroter, Munich, 1958), ,~a uber 9latur vf)i1ofovf)iten fo bid f)eiat, al~ 
bie 9latur fd)affen, fo mua ber $unft gefunben ltJerben, bon ItJdcf)em au~ bie 
9latur iw m!erben gefe~t ltJetben fann,. (op. cit. p. 5). 
284 

NOTES 
179, II 
Hegel and Schdling founded the 'Kritisches Journal der Philo sophie' in 
order to attack the philosophy of reflection with 'cudgels, whips and swishes' 
(Hegel's letter to Caroline Hufnagel, December 30,1801). Hegel's contributions 
to it (1802-1803) are to be found in the first volume of his 'Samtliche Werke' (ed. 
H. Glockner, Stuttgart, 1958), 'Aufsatze aus dem kritischenJournal der Philo so-
phie und andere Schriften aus der Jenenser Zeit'. 
180,3 1 
Goethe 'Zur Morphologie' (1817) vol. I p. vi. See 'Goethe, die Schriften zur 
Naturwissenschaft' edited for the 'Deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher' 
part I vol. ix 'Morphologische Hefte' (ed. D. Kuhn, Weimar, 1954). 
180, 39 
Adam Karl August Eschenmayer (1768-1852); his Christian names are 
variously given as Christoph Adam, Carl Adolph August, or Karl August: 
born at Neuenberg in Wlirttemberg, July 4, 1768. He was appointed professor 
of medicine and philosophy at Tlibingen in 1811, and in 1818 professor of 
practical philosophy at the same university. 
In the late 1790'S he came under the influence of Schelling, and it is probably 
the works he published at this time that Michelet has in mind: see 'Satze aus 
der Natur-Metaphysik auf chemische und medicinische Gegenstande ange-
wandt' (Tlibingen, 1797); 'Versuch, die Gesetze magnetischer Erscheinungen 
aus Satzen der Naturmetaphysik, mithin a priori zu entwickeln' (Tlibingen, 
1797). He subsequently concerned himself with animal magnetism, somnam-
bulism etc.: see 'Psychologie, in drei Theilen, als empirisch, reine und ange-
wandte' (Stuttgart and Tlibingen, 1817), and his articles in the 'Archiv fur den 
thierischen Magnetismus' (1817-1822). 
He published several philosophical works: see 'System der Moralphilosophie' 
(Stuttgart, 1818): 'Normalrecht' (Stuttgart, 1819, 1820): 'Religionsphilosophie' 
(3 pts. Tlibingen, 1818-1824) and 'Grundriss der Naturphilosophie' (Tubingen, 
1832). His last works were concerned with religion: see his attack on Hegel, 
'Die Hegel'sche Religionsphilosophie verglichen mit dem christlichen Princip' 
(Tlibingen, 1834). 
'Neuer Nekrolog der Deutschen' Jahrg. XXX, 1852, II p. 785: Roller in 
'Allgemeine Zeitschrift flir Psychiatrie' vol. X, 1853, p. 142: 'Allgemeine 
Deutsche Biographie' vol. VI pp. 349-350: Haberling-Hubotter-Vierordt 
'Biographisches Lexikon der hervorragenden Artzte' vol. II pp. 432-433 (Berlin 
und Vienna, 1930): A. C. P. Callisen 'Medicinisches Schriftsteller Lexicon' voL 
VI pp. 111-114: vol. XXVII pp. 474-475 (Copenhagen, 1831, 1839). 
181,4 
Heinrich Friedrich Link (1767-1851) see the note III. 263. Michelet 1S 
285 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
quoting from his 'Grundlehren der Anatomie und Physiologie der Pflanzen' 
(Gottingen, 1807) pp. 245-246 (Additions I p. 59); pp. 5-6. 
181,9 
Dietrich Georg Kieser (1779-1862), famous mainly as a doctor. For his views 
on plants see 'Aphorismen aus der Physiologie der Pflanzen' (Gottingen, 1808), 
'Memoire sur l' organisation des plantes' (Haarlem, 1812). 
On Kieser himself see Haberling-Hiibotter-Vierardt 'Biographisches Lexikon' 
vol. III pp. 519-521 (Berlin and Vienna, 1931), and 'Allgemeine Deutsche 
Biographie' vol. XV pp. 726-730 (Leipzig, 1882). 
181,22 
See for example the articles by Claude Perrault (c. 1613-1688), Louis Carre 
(1663-17II) and Philippe de la Hire (1640-1718) in 'Memoires de I'Academie 
Royale des Sciences' vol. I p. 145; 1704 Hist. p. 88; 1716 p. 262. 
181,25 
See Michelet's article 'Zugestandnisse der neuesten Physik in Bezug auf 
Gothe's Farbenlehre' ('Hallische Jahrbiicher fUr deutsche Wissenschaft und 
Kunst' (ed. A. Ruge and T. Echtermeyer, nos. 305-307, Dec. 1838). 
183,26 
Goethe 'Zur Morphologie' (1817) vol. I p. 122: see the note 1.285. Alexander 
von Humboldt (1769-1859), the explorer, geographer and natural scientist. 
184,25 
Lorenz Oken (1779-1851): see the note 111.278. Michelet evidently has 
in mind his 'Lehrbuch der Naturphilosophie' (3 vols. Jena, 1809-18II). A. Tulk 
published an English translation of this work for the Ray Society, see 'Elements 
ofPhysiophilosophy' (London, 1848). 
184,39 
Schelling criticized the transition from logic to nature in the Hegelian system 
in the lectures he delivered at Munich in 1827. See 'Zur Geschichte der neueren 
Philosophic' ('Werke' ed. M. Schroter, vol. V pp. 196-234, Munich, 1959). 
W. T. Stace, in 'The Philosophy of Hegel' (London, 1923, Dover ed. 1955) 
discusses the subject at some length in his treatment of the philosophy of nature. 
Michelet is referring here to the preface Schelling wrote to 'Victor Cousin 
iiber franzosische und deutsche Philosophic' (Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 1834). 
This was a translation of Cousin's 'Fragments philosophiques' (Paris, 1833) by 
Hubert Beckers (r806-1889): see Schelling's 'Werke' vol. V p. 456. 
286 

NOTES 
186,9 
Michelet did not know of Hege1' s lectures on the philosophy of nature 
delivered at Jena in 1803-1804: see Johannes Hoffmeister Jenenser Real-
philosophie I. Die Vorlesungen von 1803-04' (Leipzig, 1932). An even earlier 
treatment of the subject (1801-1802) is to be found in Georg Lasson's Jenenser 
Logik, Metaphysik und Naturphilosophie' (Leipzig, 1923). 
Hegel's Heidelberg Encyclopaedia has recently been republished by Hermann 
Glockner: see 'Enzyklopadie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grund-
risse' (Stuttgart, 1956). 
186,24 
Karl Gustav von Griesheim (1798-1854) was the son of an infantry captain. 
He was born in Berlin, and attended the Frederick William Grammar School 
there. He volunteered for the army during the War of Liberation, but did not 
see active service on account of a physical disability. He was commissioned on 
July 3, 1815 however, and marched into Paris with the victorious allies. 
During this period he kept a very detailed diary. 
In 1819 he became adjutant of his regiment and regimental judge for three 
battalions. This gave him practice in the law, and in his spare time he attended 
the lectures given by Hegel, Erman, Ritter and Humboldt at the University 
in Berlin. His notes were also used by Eduard Gans (1798-1839) for the standard 
edition of Hegel's 'Lectures on the Philosophy of History' (Berlin, 1837). He 
contributed to the Jahrbiicher fiir wissenschaftliche Kritik', the official 
publication of the Hegelian school. 
He was appointed captain of the seventh company of the second Guards 
regiment in 1831, and later distinguished himself in army reorganization work, 
as a writer on military matters, and as a staunch opponent of the leftists during 
the turmoil of 1848. He died of Bright's disease on January I, 1854. See his 
'Der Compagnie-Dienst' (Berlin, 1837): 'Die deutsche Centralgewalt und die 
preussische Armee' (Berlin, July 23, 1848). 
186,25 
Heinrich Gustav Hotho (1802-1873) was born in Berlin and educated at the 
Joachimsthal Grammar School there. At the Humboldt University he began 
to study law, but Hege1's lectures interested him in philosophy. He studied this 
subject in Breslau, and then travelled, visiting London, Paris, Belgium, Holland 
and Italy, and studying the history of art. On his return to Berlin, he qualified 
as a teacher of aesthetics and the history of art at the university (1826-1827). In 
1829 he was appointed professor, and in 1830 given a post in the art gallery. 
He edited Hegel's 'Vorlesungen iiber Aesthetik' (3 vols. Berlin, 1835) and 
published several works on the history of painting: 'Geschichte der deutschen 
und niederlandischen Malerei' (2 vols. Berlin, 1842): 'Die Malerschule Huberts 
287 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
von Eyck' (2 vols. Berlin, 1855): 'Geschichte der christlichen Malerei' (Stuttgart. 
1867-1872). 
186,26 
Friedrich Wilhelm Ludwig Geyer was the son of a Berlin painter, and must 
have been born in the city about 1809-1810. He attended the Frederick William 
Grammar School, and on October 9, 1828 was matriculated at the Humboldt 
University in order to read theology. His father must have died by this time, 
for in the records of the University, a Berlin tobacco merchant is quoted as 
being his guardian. During his stay at the University he changed lodgings 
twice, but from the Michaelmas Term of 1830 until Easter 1831 he lived at 
no. 43 Kochstrasse with his schoolfriend and namesake Friedrich August Meyer, 
who was also reading theology: see 'Amtliches Verzeichniss des Personals und 
der Studirenden auf der Konigl. Friedrich-Wilhelms Universitat zu Berlin, Auf 
das Winterhalbjahr von Michaelis 1830 bis Ostern 1831' (Berlin, 1831). He 
finally left the University, without having taken his degree, on March I, 
1832, evidently on account of his not having been able to pay his fees. There 
is no evidence of his having studied elsewhere, and his position as 'vice-principal' 
probably indicates that he stayed in Berlin as a schoolmaster. This would account 
for Michelet's having known him. 
Geyer attended many of Hegel's courses. His leaving certificate is preserved 
in the archives of the Humboldt University: see 'Universitats-Archiv der 
Humboldt-Universitat Berlin, Abgangs Zeugnisse 1832 Litt. A no. 6 vol. 
XCI Blatt 6-10'. From this it appears that he was no. 10 on Hegel's list of those 
attending the lectures on logic and the philosophy of nature delivered during 
the summer of 1830. On his birthday (Aug. 27th) Hegel commented on Geyer's 
attendance, ,'l)en fleifjigen ~efud) be3euge-~ege('. This document also in-
dicates that Geyer attended Hegel's lectures on aesthetics (Winter 1828-9), the 
existence of God (Summer, 1829), the history of philosophy (Winter, 1829-30), 
the philosophy of history (Winter, 1830-31), and the philosophy of religion 
(Summer, 1831), and that he had also signed (no. 15) for the lectures on the 
philosophy of right which were to have been given during the winter of 183 1-
1832, but which were cancelled on account of Hegel's death. 
186,29 
E. S. Haldane and F. H. Simson published a translation of this work, 'Hegel's 
lectures on the History of Philosophy' (3 vols. London, 1892: reprint London, 
1955, 1963), but they merely summarized Michelet's foreword. C£ 'Vorle-
sungen iiber die Geschichte der Philosophie' (3 vols. ed. Glockner, Stuttgart, 
1959) vol. I pp. 1-14. The first edition of Michelet's work appeared in 1833-
187,36 
See the excellent edition of this note-book by Johannes Hoffmeister 'Jenenser 
288 

NOTES 
RealphilosophieII.Die Vorlesungen von 1805-06' (Leipzig, 1931). T. L. Haering, 
in his 'Hegel, sein Wollen und sein Werk' (2 vols. Leipzig, 1938) discusses the 
development of Hegel's treatment of the natural sciences. 
188,23 
See Sir Edmund Whittaker 'History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity' 
(3 vols. Nelson, 1962). The best exposition in English of Fichte's idealism is still 
to be found in Robert Adamson's 'Fichte' (Blackwood's Philosophical Classics, 
1881). Michelet probably has in mind Schelling's 'Darlegung des wahren 
Verhaltnisses der Naturphilosophie zu der verbesserten Fichteschen Lehre. 
Eine Erlauterungsschrift der ersten.' (1806): see 'Schellings Werke' vol. III pp. 
595-720 (ed. M. Schr6ter, Munich, 1958). 
188,30 
In the manuscript there is a pencilled note in the margin at this point ('Jenenser 
Realphilosophie' II ed. Hoffmeister, 1931 p. 3), evidently by Michelet, ,9'Hd)t 
3ugunften be~ ~~t)fifer~ -
abfoluter sram~f, e~od)emad)enbeUmtuii13ung­
~erfud), ben ~erftanb be~ ~~t)fifer~ 3ur ~ernunft 3U bringen-~ernunft, @eift, 
abi olute~ ~rin3i~' . 
189,7 
This translation has been made from Hoffmeister's version of this sentence, 
not Michelet's, ,3nfofern gefagt tuirb, er fei I2tt~er ober abfolute materie, ift 
er in f i d) ober reine~ 6elbftbetuuutfein, bie~ al~ i ei e n b uber~au+>t, nid)t 
al~ bafeienb ober reeU beftimmt;' 
189, 13 
For the original version of this passage see Johannes Hoffmeister 'Jenenser 
Realphilosophie II' (Leipzig, 1931) pp. 3-4. Michelet does not indicate the 
emphasized words. 
189,24 
In 1841 Schelling was appointed Prussian privy councillor and member of 
the Berlin Academy. This gave him the right to deliver lectures in the university, 
and he was requested to exercise it. Hegel's philosophy of religion had become 
involved in the split between the Hegelian left and the Hegelian right through 
the writings of Bruno Bauer (1809-1882), David Friedrich Strauss (1808-1874), 
Ludwig Feuerbach (1804-1872), Heinrich Eberhard Gottlob Paulus (1761-1851), 
and Philipp Konrad Marheineke (1780-1846), and Schelling therefore chose to 
lecture on the philosophy of mythology and revelation. Kierkegaard heard 
these lectures, and his journal and letters from this period give a brilliant picture 
of Schelling's manner of delivery, the crowded auditorium, and the excited and 
K 
289 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
attentive audiences. He mentions the publication of this preface in a letter to 
Spang, '''What's the news?" you'll probably ask. Literary news we have little 
of, apart from Schelling's behaviour, which continues to have the interest of 
novelty. The second volume of Hegel' s Encyclopaedia has appeared, and Michelet 
has written an introduction to it in which he somewhat savagely attacks Schel-
ling. Schelling is looking as testy as a vinegar-maker'. C£ P. Rohde 'S0ren 
Kierkegaard' (tr. A. M. Williams, London, 1963) pp. 72-78. 
Schelling's lectures are to be found in his 'Werke' (ed. M. Schr6ter, Munich, 
1959-1960) vols. V, VI, and suppl. col. VI. In this paragraph, Michelet is quoting 
from the firstlecture of this series, which was delivered on November 15, 1841, 
only four weeks before he finished this preface: see 'Schelling's Werke' vol. VI 
pp. 749-759: see also the first lectures on the philosophy of revelation (suppl. 
vol. VI). 
191,4 
'Philosophia est divinarum humanarumque rerum in quantum hornini 
possibile est, probabilis scientia': see F. M. A. Cassiodorus (485-580) 'Institu-
tiones' (ed. Mynors, Oxford, 1937) II iii 5, p. 110. 'Philosophia est disciplina 
omnium rerum humanarum atque divinarum rationes plene investigans': 
see Hugh of St. Victor (1096-1141) 'The Didascalicon' (ed. Taylor, New York 
and London, 1961) I iv p. 51. 
C£ Cicero 'De oratore' I xlix, 212; 'De officiis' II ii 5; Augustine 'Contra 
academicos' I vi; F. A. Alcuin (735-804) 'De dialectica' i; Raban Maur (776-856) 
'De universo' XV i; St. Isidore (570-636) 'Etymologiae' II xxiv I, 9. 
On the 9th and loth of March 1787, Hegel copied out the following passage 
from the 'Kurzer Begriff aller Wissenschaften' (2nd ed. Leipzig, 1759) by 
J. G. Sulzer (1720-1779), , Untet bet $~Hofo\J~ie tletfte~en tuit ~iet biejenigen 
mHHenfd)aften, tueld)e dne nii~ete ~eoie~ung aUf bie fittHd)e srenntni~ bet lllielt 
unb be~ WCenfd)en ~aoen'. See Johannes Hoffmeister 'Dokumente zu Hegels 
Entwicklung' (Stuttgart, 1936) p. 109. 
191,20 
'Phanomenologie des Geistes' (Bamberg and Wiirzburg, 1807): see J. B. 
Baillie 'G. W. F. Hegel. The Phenomenology of Mind' (2nd ed. revised, London, 
1949); Jean Hyppolite 'Genese et Structure de Ie Phenomenologie de I'Esprit 
de Hegel' (Paris, 1946); Alexandre Kojeve 'Introduction a la Lecture de Hegel' 
(Paris, 1947). 
192 ,2 
F. W. J. Schelling (1775-1854): see his 'Werke' (12 vols. ed. M. Schr6ter 
Munich, 1960), vols. I, II, III, and the supplementary vols. I and II contain his 
writings on the philosophy of nature. Raph. Koeber 'Die Grundprinzipien der 
Schellingschen Naturphilosophie' in 'Sammlung gemeinverstandlicher Vor-
290 

NOTES 
trage' (ed. Virchow and Holtzendorff, Berlin, 1881) no. 381; Max Hoppel 
'Schellings Einfluss auf die Naturphilosophie Garres' (Fulda, 1931); Kurt 
Schilling 'Natur und Wahrheit' (Munich, 1934). C£ G. A. C. Frantz 'Schellings 
Positive Philosophie' (3 vols. Kathen, 1879-1880); John Watson 'Schelling's 
Transcendental Idealism' (Chicago, 1882). 
193, 12 
See Aristotle 'The Physics' (tr. Wicksteed and Cornford, 2 vols. Loeb, 1929, 
1934); W. D. Ross 'Aristotle's Physics' (Oxford, 1936). 
193, 16 
Christian Wolff (1679-1754), the interpreter and systematizer of the teaching 
of Leibniz. His philosophy held almost undisputed sway in Germany until it 
was displaced by Kantianism. Hegel gives a perceptive and sensitive survey of 
it in his 'History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane and Simson 3 vols. London, 1963) 
vol. III pp. 348-356. 
At this juncture he probably has in mind that Wolff's 'Verniinftige Gedanken 
von den Wirkungen der Natur' (Halle, 1723), which deals with cosmology or 
the philosophy of nature, is concerned with abstract or quite general philo-
sophical categories, whereas it is in his 'Verniinftige Gedanken von den Teilen 
der Menschen, Tiere und Pflanzen' (Frankfurt, 1725), that he deals with much 
of the material assessed by Hegel in these lectures. 
See F. W. Kluge 'Christian von Wolff der Philosoph' (Breslau, 1831); W. 
Arnsperger 'Christian Wolff's Verhaltniss zu Leibniz' (Heidelberg, 1897); 
E. Kohlmeyer 'Kosmos und Kosmonomie bei Christian Wolff' (Gottingen, 
1914). 
194,7 
'Metaphysics' bk. I pt. 2 982b 'For it is owing to their wonder that men both 
now begin and at first began to philosophize; they wondered originally at the 
obvious difficulties, then advanced little by little and stated difficulties about the 
greater matters, e.g. about the phenomena of the moon and those of the sun 
and of the stars, and about the genesis of the universe'. 
Hegel is fond of this observation and also mentions it in the addition to 
§ 449 of the 'Encyclopaedia' and his 'Philosophy of History' (tr. Sibree, Dover, 
ed. 1956) p. 234. Cf. Goethes 'Faust' I 766. ,'Ilas ~unber ift bes @laubew 
liebftes Stinb'. 
194, 12 
,Unb in aUem biefen ffieidJtf)um ber C£:.:fenntnia fann uns bie ~rage bon 
~euem lommen, ober erft entftef)en: ~as ift hie ~atur?' 
291 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
194, 17 
In Greek mythology, Proteus was a prophetic old man of the sea who 
knew all things past, present and future, but was loth to tell what he knew. 
Those who wanted to consult him had first to surprise and bind him during 
his noonday slumber in a cave by the sea. Even when he was caught he would 
try to escape by assuming all sorts of shapes, but if his captor held him fast the 
god at last returned to his proper shape, gave the wished-for answer, and then 
plunged into the sea. From his power of assuming whatever shape he pleased 
he came to be regarded, especially by the Orphic mystics, as a symbol of the 
original matter from which the world was created: see C. A. Lobeck 'Aglao-
phamus, sive de theologiae mysticae Graecor' (Regiomonti, 1829). 
'Proteus, a name tremendous o'er the main, 
The delegate of Neptune's watery reign. 
Watch with insidious care his known abode; 
There fast in chains constrain the various God: 
Who bound, obedient to superior force, 
Unerring will prescribe your destin'd course. 
If, studious of your realms, you then demand 
Their state, since last you left your natal land ; 
Instant the God obsequious will disclose 
Bright tracks of glory, or a cloud of woes' 
-'Odyssey' bk. IV 351 (Pope) 
See also Virgil's 'Georgics' iv 386: Herodotus 'The Histories' bk. ii lI2, lI8. 
195, 15 
See 'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963) pp. 346-351. 
195, 32 
'Wonders are many, and none is more wonderful than man; ... 
Nothing destined to befall him fmds him without resources.' 
-'Antigone' lines 332-3 and 360. 
Cf. 'Hamlet' II ii 316, 'What a piece of work is man, how noble in reason, how 
infinite in faculties'. C£ Heinz Oeben 'Hegels Antigone-Interpretation' (Disser-
tation, Univ. of Bonn, July I, 1953). 
196, 19 
The idea may have owed its wide currency in the West to the most used 
textbook of the mediaeval scholastics: see Peter Lombard (c. I095-lI6o) 
'Libri Sententiarum' (2 vols. Florence, 1916) II i 8, 'As man is made for the sake 
of God, namely, that he may serve Him, so is the world made for the sake of 
292 

NOTES 
man, that it may serve him'. Bacon makes mention of it in 'De sapientia veter-
urn'; see 'The Works of Francis Bacon' (7 vols. London, 1889-1892) vi p. 747, 
'Man, if we look to fmal causes, may be regarded as the centre of the world; 
insomuch that if man were taken from the world, the rest would seem to be all 
astray, without aim or purpose, to be like a besom without a binding, as the 
saying is, and to be leading to nothing. For the whole world works together in 
the service of man; and there is nothing from which he does not derive use and 
fruit. Plants and animals of all kinds are made to furnish him either with dwelling 
and shelter or clothing or food or medicine or to lighten his labour or to give him 
pleasure and comfort; insomuch that all things seem to be going about man's 
business and not their own'. 
One of the most popular protestant theological works of the eighteenth 
century made use of the idea: see Jacques Abbadie (1654-1727) 'Traite de la 
Verite de la religion chretienne' (2 vols. Rotterdam, 1684; 8th ed. The Hague, 
1771; English tr. H. Lussan, London, 1694) I p. 95, 'If we consider closely what 
constitutes the excellence of the fairest parts of the Universe, we shall find that 
they have value only in their relation to us, only in so far as our soul attaches 
value to them; that the esteem of men is what constitutes the chief dignity of 
rocks and metals, that man's use and pleasure gives their value to plants, trees 
and fruits'. 
Cf. C. G. Gillipsie 'Genesis and Geology' (Cambridge, Mass., 1951) ch. vii. 
196,25 
In their 'Xenien', which is a series of 926 epigrams modelled on the thirteenth 
book of Martial, and published mainly in their periodical 'Die Horen' (1796-
1797), Goethe and Schiller lampooned many of their contemporaries in a style 
reminiscent of Pope's 'Dunciad'. Writing of this kind helped to check the 
excesses of the romantic movement, but involved them in a number of literary 
battles: see Eduard Boas 'Schiller und Goethe im Xenienkampf' (2 pts. Stuttgart 
and Tiibingen, 1851). 
Hegel is referring here to no. 286 of the series: 
,'l:let %eleolog. 
~eldJe j8ete~tung betbient bet ~eltenfdJo~fet! bet, gniibig, 
W~ et ben ~otfbaum fdJuf, gleidJ audJ bie etO~fel etfanb!' 
Goethe refers to it in a conversation with Eckermann on April II, 1827: see 
Erich Schmidt and Bernhard Suphan 'Xenien 1796' (Weimar, 1893) pp. 32, 143; 
Boas op. cit. pp. 55-56. 
This particular epigram is evidently directed at Friedrich Leopold zu Stolberg 
(1750-1819), who, in his 'Reise in Deutschland, der Schweiz, Italien ulld 
Sicilien in den Jahren 1791 und 1792' (4 vols. Konigsberg and Leipzig, 1794, 
English tr. T. Holcroft, 2 vols. London, 1796-1797): see 'Gesammelte Werke' 
293 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
(20 vols. Hamburg, 1820-1825) vol. viii p. 198, observes of the cork trees 
growing between Bari and Gioja that, ,mus bet ffiinbe bes ~aumes toetben 
\,J!to.)Jfen 3U 
~fafef)en gemaef)t .•. :£:liefet ~aum fann feine fo 
nii~fief)e, 
3u unfetm @eotauef) bon ®ott oeftimmte ffiinbe entoe1)ten, ba jebet anbte ~aum 
ftitot, toenn man i1)m bie ffiinbe nimmt'. See Wilhelm Keiper 'Stolbergs 
Jugendpoesie' (Dissertation, Berlin, 1893). 
196,32 
Hegel deals with this at some length in his 'History of Philosophy' (tr. 
Haldane and Simson, 3 vols. London, 1963) vol. II pp. 157-163, and makes 
special reference to Aristotle's 'Physics' II 8, 9: see the tr. by Wicksteed and 
Cornford (2 vols. Loeb, 1929, 1934), and W. D. Ross 'Aristotle's Physics' 
(Oxford, 1936). 
197, 10 
i.e. to the whole 'Encyclopaedia': see 'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. W. Wallace, 
Oxford, 1963) pp. 3-29. 
199,25 
See Goethe's and Schiller's lampooning of Friedrich Schlegel (1772-1829) 
in 'Xenien' no. 844 (331): 
,:£:lie Sonntagsfinbet. 
3al)te lang bifbet bet ilJ1eiftet unb fann fief) nimmet genug t1)un, 
:£:lem geniafen @efef)feef)t toith es im %taume oefef)ed'. 
A 'Sunday child' is supposed to be particularly lucky and successful in all it 
does: see Alvin Schultz 'Alltagsleben einer deutschen Frau zu Anfang des 18. 
Jahrhunderts' (Leipzig, 1890) p. 195; J. C. Maennling 'Denckwurdige Curio-
sitaeten' (Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1713); Alois Liitolf'Sagen, Brauche, Legenden 
aus den funf Orten Lucern, Uri, Schwiz, Unterwalden und Zug' (Lucerne, 
1862). 
199, 35 
This is almost certainly a reference to one of Schelling's first published 
works, 'Ueber My then, historische Sagen und Philosopheme der altesten Welt' 
(1793): 'Werke' ed. M. Schr6ter, vol. I pp. 1-43 (Munich, 1958). Cf. his 'Philo-
sophie der Mythologie' (1842): op. cit. 5th supplementary volume. See the 
curious exposition of similar views in a sort of intoxicated carlylese in 'N ordens 
Mythologi' (Copenhagen, 1832) by N. F. S. Grundtvig (1783-1872): cf. C. I. 
Scharling 'Grundtvig og Romantiken' (Copenhagen, 1947). 
294 

NOTES 
200,24 
See Kant's doctrine of the 'thing in itself', formulated most clearly in his 
'Critique of Pure Reason'. Cf. Hegel's treatment of Kant in the 'Lectures on the 
History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane and Simson, 3 vols. London, I963) vol. III 
pp. 423-478. C£ E. Adickes 'Kant und das Ding an sich' (Berlin, I924): H. J. 
Paton 'Kant's Metaphysic of Experience' (2 vols. London, I936): T. D. Weldon 
'Kant's Critique of Pure Reason' (2nd ed. Oxford, I958): G. Bird 'Kant's Theory 
of Knowledge' (London, I962): R. Eisler 'Worterbuch der Philosophischen 
Begriffe' (3 vols. Berlin, I927-I930) vol. I pp. 280-285. 
200,37 
See J. A. Stewart 'Plato's Doctrine of Ideas' (Oxford, I909): Paul Natorp 
'Platos Ideenlehre' (Leipzig, I92I): Sir David Ross 'Plato's Theory of Ideas' 
(Oxford, 1951). Hegel deals at length with Plato's philosophy in his 'Lectures 
on the History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane and Simson, 3 vols. London, I963) 
vol. II pp. I-II7. 
200,40 
See E. A. Wallis Budge 'The Gods of the Egyptians' (2 vols. London, I904) 
vol. II pp. 202-240: W. H. Roscher 'Ausfiihrliches Lexikon der Griechischen 
und Romischen Mythologie' (6 vols. Leipzig, I890-I897) vol. II cols. 360-549. 
In art, Isis is often represented as a matron, standing, draped in a long robe 
reaching to the ankles, mantle thrown over the shoulders and crossing the breast, 
where it is made into a large and very apparent knot, and often a veil, symbolic 
of secrecy. In her right hand is the sistrum, in her left a small ewer. Her hair is 
abundant, and on her forehead rises the lotus, emblem of the resurrection. 
See George Sarton 'Why Isis' ('Isis' I953 pp. 232-242). 
20I,3 
Johann Georg Hamann (I730-I788), the religious thinker and friend of 
Kant. His aphoristic and somewhat obscure style earned him the title of 'The 
Magus in the North'. In the intellectual history of his time he is mainly im-
portant on account of his rejection of the popular rationalistic philosophy of 
Moses Mendelssohn (I729-I786), his upholding of Christianity as the historical 
revelation of the Triune God, of Atonement and of Redemption, and his in-
sistence on the importance of inner experience, expecially in matters of religion. 
His works were edited by F. Roth and G. A. Wiener (8 pts. in 9 vols. Berlin and 
Augsburg, I82I-I843), and while the first volumes of this edition were appear-
ing, Hegel published a lengthy review of them: see 'Jahrbiicher fiir wissen-
schaftliche Kritik' (I828 no. 77-80, I09-II4), and 'Vermischte Schriften aus der 
Berliner Zeit' (ed. Glockner, Stuttgart, I958) pp. 203-273: in which he indi-
cates Hamann's importance in the reaction against the 'enlightenment' of the 
295 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
mid-eighteenth century. He also discusses the attitude towards word-analysis 
(pp. 248-253), but makes no mention of the observation cited here. 
Joseph Nadler, in his Johann Georg Hamann. Samtliche Werke' (6 vols. 
Vienna, 1949-1957) vol. vi p. 263 lists all the references to 'nature' to be found 
in these volumes, and observes that this is a key word in the formulation of 
Hamann's world-view. There is however no trace in this list of the passage, 
referred to by Hegel. C£ R. Unger 'Hamanns Sprachtheorie' (Munich, 1904), 
Herbert Heinekamp 'Das Weltbild Johann Georg Hamanns' (Dissertation, 
Bonn, 1936), E. Jansen Schoonhoven 'Natuur en Genade bij Hamann' (Disser-
tation, Leyden, 1945), E. Metzke 1- G. Hamanns Stellung in der Philosophie 
des 18 Jahrhunderts' (Halle, 1934), R. G. Smith 1- G. Hamann, with Selections 
from his Writings' (London, 1960). 
The point of Hamann's remark is that the understanding has to interpret 
nature if it is to make it intelligible, just as the pronunciation of Hebrew words 
has to be indicated by inserting punctuation. He is not saying that the word 
'nature' (Germ. Natur, Latin natura, from 'nasci' to be born or to emerge) is of 
Hebrew origin. 
201,27 
Schelling first gave it this name in 180!. The philosophy attempted to 
demonstrate that subject and object, thought and being, mind and matter, are 
merely various aspects or phenomenal forms of a single actuality, that they are 
in fact 'identical', or rather that they all cohere in the ultimate, indeterminate 
and absolute foundation of things. See his 'Werke' ed. M. Schrater, vol. iii 
(1801-1806), supplementary volume ii (1804), (Munich, 1958): cf. R. Eisler 
'Warterbuch der Philosophischen Begriffe' (3 vols. Berlin, 1927-1930) vol. i 
pp. 708-713. 
201,31 
See § 330. 
202,32 
Goethe 'Faust' pt. i lines 1938-1941. Hegel misquotes the original somewhat 
and gives it as follows: 
,EvXelpTJUW naturae nennt's Me (!:~emie, 
@5~ottet i~tet felbet unb weiu wie, 
~at fteilid) bie ~~eile in i~tet ~anb, 
g:e~lt leibet nut bas geiftige 58anb.' 
C£ E. o. von Lippmann 'Encheiresis naturae' in 'Chemiker Zeitung' Jahrgang 
31 p. 172 (Cathen, 1907), 'GoetheJahrbuch' 1908 p. 163 ff., 'Abhandlungen und 
Vortrage zur Geschichte der Naturwissenschaft' vol. II pp. 439-449 (Leipzig, 
1913). 

NOTES 
'Encheiresis naturae' means literally grasping nature with one's hands. The 
chemist J. K. Spielmann (1722-1783), whom Goethe had as a teacher in Strass-
burg, used the expression to describe the method of research which attempts to 
trace the creativeness of nature by breaking living being down into its parts. 
C£ H. Kopp 'Aurea catena Homeri' (Braunschweig, 1880) pp. 5-7. 
203,8 
~et lJ'f)ilof olJ'f)if c'f)en m£gemein'f)eit filtb hie 58eftimmungen ni c'f)t gleic'f)giiltig'. 
Literally, 'To philosophic universality, the determinations are not indifferent'. 
203,35 
Hegel is evidently quoting this poem from memory, for he makes twelve 
minor changes in it. It was published by Goethe in his 'Zur Morphologie' 
(1820): see 'Morphologische Hefte' (ed. D. Kuhn, Weimar, 1954) vol. I sect. iii 
p. 223, and introduced in the following way: 
'Friendly Acclamation. 
I am unable to conclude here without expressing a joy I have experienced 
repeatedly during the last few days. I feel the happiness of being in harmony with 
earnest and active investigators wherever they may be, for they are ready to 
emphasize that while an unsearchability has to be presumed and admitted, no 
limits ought to be placed upon the investigator. 
Am I not bound to assume and allow my own being without ever actually 
knowing how I am constituted? Do I not continue to study myself without 
ever fully comprehending either myself or others? And yet despite this there is 
the continuous joy of perpetual progress. 
So too with the world! May there be neither beginning nor end to what lies 
before us, may the vistas be without limit and that which is close to us im-
penetrable. Let this be so, for the extent and the depth to which the human spirit 
is able to penetrate into its own and the world's secrets can never be determined 
or circumscribed. 
The expression of this joy in the following rhymes is to be taken and inter-
preted in the light of these remarks.' 
Goethe is quoting the famous lines (289-290) in 'Die Falschheit menschlicher 
Tugenden' (1730) by Albrecht von Haller (1708-1777): 
,3ng 3nnre bet matut bringt fein etfd)affnet ®eift, 
Eu gliicflid), roann fie nod) bie iiuflte Sd)ale roeift!' 
Kant's philosophy had thrown new light on Haller's assertion, and similar 
sentiments were expressed by Lessing and Wieland. It is not likely however that 
Goethe had any particular person in mind when he wrote, although it is just 
possible that 'Ueber meine gelehrte Bildung' (Berlin, 1799) by the author and 
K* 
~7 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURl! 
bookseller C. F. Nicolai (1733-18u) caused him to develop the views he ex-
presses. Cf. 'Faust' pt. i. 672-675. 
204,34 
Genesis II 23. 
205,4 
Plato 'Timaeus' 34c-35b, 'God, however, constructed Soul to be older than 
Body and prior in birth and excellence, since she was to be mistress and ruler 
and it the ruled; and He made her of the materials and in the fashion which I 
shall now describe. 
Midway between the Being which is indivisible and remains always the 
same and the Being which is transient and divisible in bodies, He blended a 
third form of Being compounded out of the twain that is to say, out of the 
Same and the Other; and in like manner He compounded it midway between 
that one of them which is indivisible and that one which is divisible in bodies. 
And He took the three of them, and blent them all together into one form'. 
C£ A. E. Taylor 'A Commentary on Plato's Timaeus' (Oxford, 1928): 
G. M. A. Grube 'Plato's Thought' (London, 1935) ch. V: Hegel's 'Lectures on 
the History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane and Simson, 3 vols. London, 1963) 
vol. II pp. 1-117. 
205,6 
See Klopstock's famous question: 
,~arum, ba aUein bu bir genug roarft, ~fter, fd)affft bu? ... 
~urbeft baburd) bu eeliger, baa bu eeligfeit gaoft?' 
Schiller, in his poem 'Die Freundschaft', answers it in a way which Hegel 
evidently found very largely acceptable, since he refers to it in order to round 
off the peroration at the end of the 'Phenomenology of Spirit' : 
205,27 
,~reunbIo5 roar ber groae ~eftenmeifter, 
~ii~lte ilnangel- barum fd)uf er @eifter, 
eel'ge efjiegel feiner eeligfeitl 
~anb ba6 ~od)fte ~efen fd)on fein @leid)e5, 
m:U5 bem SMd) be5 gan~en eeelenteid)e~ 
ed)iiumt i~m -
bie Unenblid)feit.' 
Philo of Alexandria (c. 20 B.C.-c. A.D. 50) the Jewish thinker and exegete. 
Hegel discusses Philo's doctrines at some length in his 'History of Philosophy' 
298 

NOTES 
(tr. Haldane and Simson, 3 vols. London, 1963) vol. II pp. 387-394. He evidently 
read him in an old seventeenth century edition: see 'Philonis Judaei Opera' 
(ed. A. Turnebo and D. Hoeschelio, Frankfurt, 1691); c£ 'Philonis Judaei opera 
Omnia, Graece et Latine' (ed. A. F. Pfeiffer, Erlangen, 1785). 
H. A. Wolfson, in his 'Philo' (2 vols. Harvard Univ. Press, 1948) comments 
as follows upon the aspect of Philo's thought mentioned here by Hegel, 'It is be-
cause the Logos is conceived by Philo as both the totality ofideas and the totality 
of powers that sometimes as in the case of the ideas, he describes it as created. 
The Logos is thus spoken of as the eldest and most generic of created things, as 
"older than all things which were the objects of creation," as not being un-
created as God, though not created as human beings, as being the first-born 
son of God, the man of God, the image of God, second to God, a second God, 
and as being called a God by those who have an imperfect knowledge of the 
real God. An implication that the Logos is created is contained also in a passage 
where he says that "being the Logos of the Eternal (dtSlov) it is of necessity also 
itselfincorruptible (arfJf)opTOS)." Here, we take it, he uses the term "incorruptible" 
deliberately, in order to show that while God is "eternal", in the sense of being 
both ungenerated and incorruptible, the Logos is only "incorruptible" but not 
ungenerated.' 
C£ Philo's 'On Husbandry' (tr. Colson, Whitaker and Marcus, 12 vols 
Loeb, 1929-1962): J. Drummond 'Philo Judaeus' (2 vols. London, 1888): 
H. A. A. Kennedy 'Philo's Contribution to Religion' (London, 1919): E. R. 
Goodenough 'An Introduction to Philo Judaeus' (New Haven, Conn., 1940). 
205, 31 
This is almost certainly a reference to the whimsical speculations to be found 
in Kant's 'Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels' (1755, 4th 
ed., Zeitz, 1808) pt. iii, 'The excellence of thinking natures, their quickness of 
apprehension, the clarity and vividness of their concepts, which come to them 
from impressions of the external world, their capacity to combine these con-
cepts, and finally, their practical efficiency, in short the entire extent of their 
perfection, becomes higher and more complete in proportion to the remoteness 
of their dwelling place from the sun'. 
Kant evidently speculated on the inhabitants of other planets on account of 
his having read Pope's 'Essay on Man' (epistle i); cf. Henry St. John Boling-
broke (1678-1751) 'Fragments' in 'Works' vol. VIII pp. 173 and 279. The 
origins of their ideas become apparent in the following passage from Addison's 
'Spectator' (no. 621, Nov. 17, 1714), 'If the notion of a gradual rise in Beings 
from the meanest to the most High be not a vain imagination, it is not im-
probable that an Angel looks down upon a Man, as Man doth upon a Creature 
which approaches nearest to the rational Nature'. G. B. Shaw's 'Back to 
Methuselah' provides an instance of a fairly recent revival of similar imaginings. 
299 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
206,21 
Schelling certainly makes remarks resembling this in his 'Ideen zu einer 
Philosophie der Natur' (1797, 2nd ed. 1803): 'Werke' ed. M. Schroter, vol. I 
pp. 653-723. See for example p. 717 ,'Ilie 9Catut, fofern fie al!3 9Catut, b.~. 
als hiefe befonbete @:in~eit etfd)eint, ift bemnad) alS fold)e fd)on au \3 et bem 
mbfoluten, nid)t bie 9Catut alS bet abfolute @:rfenntni\3aft fefbjt (Natura 
naturans), fonbern hie 9Catut ru!3 bet blo\3e £eib obet eit)mbol beHefben 
(Natura naturata)'. 
C£ ,'Ilie 9Catut ift eine tletfteinerte .8aubetftabe .-Novalis 'Gesammelte 
Werke' (ed. C. Seelig, Ziirich, 1946) vol. 4 p. 220. 
209,9 
One of the clearest statements of this doctrine in classical literature is to be 
found in 'The Enneads' of Plotinus (tr. MacKenna and Page, 3rd ed. London, 
1962) I 8, 7, III 6, 7: see especially the fourth tractate (II 4), 'The Matter in the 
Intellectual Realm is an Existent, for there is nothing previous to it except the 
Beyond-Existence; but what precedes the Matter of this sphere is Existence; by 
its alienism in regard to the beauty and good of Existence, Matter is therefore a 
non-existent' . 
Cf. C. Baeumker 'Das Problem der Materie in der griechischen Philo sophie' 
(Munster, 1890). 
209, 18 
Giulio Cesare Vanini (1584-1619) the Italian thinker. Hegel deals with his 
ideas at some length in his 'History of Philosophy' (3 vols. tr. Haldane and 
Simson, London, 1963) vol. III pp. 137-143. He was born at Taurisano in the 
kingdom of Naples, where his father managed the estates of the duke of that 
town. He was educated at the universities of Rome and Naples, where he 
studied mainly philosophy and theology, but where he also had a grounding 
in physics, astronomy and medicine. He was ordained priest at Padua. 
Vanini's thinking was influenced by that of Ibn Averroes (1I26-II98), 
Hieronymus Cardanus (1501-1576), Petrus Pomponatius (1462-1524) and 
Andreas Caesalpinus (1519-1603). Hegel notes that, 'he admires the living energy 
of Nature; his reasonings were not deep, but were more of the nature of 
fanciful ideas'. He developed a pantheistic view, regarding God as the infInite 
being which created the world, works within it, and is all in all. He tends to 
equate nature with God, while also regarding it as the power of God. He regards 
the world as being eternal, and matter as a unified and constant quantity. 
He expressed his views, in the form of dialogues in two main works: 'Amphi-
teatrum aeternae providentiae divino-magicum' (Lyons, 1615), and 'De 
admirandis Naturae, reginae Deaque mortalium' (Paris, 1616). A French trans-
lation of these works was published by X. Rousselet in 1842, and there is an 
300 

NOTES 
Italian translation by L. Corvaglia 'Le opere eli Giulio Cesare Vanini' (2 vols. 
Milan, 1933-1934). 
He travelled widely in Europe, spreading his doctrines, and visited England 
in 1614, where he was imprisoned for 49 days: see E. Namer 'La Vita di Vanini 
in Inghilterra' (Leece, 1933). He was eventually arrested in Toulouse in No-
vember 1618, brought before the Inquisition, condemned as an atheist on 
February 9, 1619, and executed ten days later. 
Hegel is referring here to the account of a visit paid to Vanini by the president 
of the parliament of Toulouse while he was awaiting his execution: see Gabriel 
Bartholomi Grammond 'Historiarum Galliae ab excessu Henrici' (Toulouse, 
1643) bk. III pp. 209-212, 'Lorsque Francon, homme de naissance et de probite, 
deposa que Vanini lui avait souvent nie I'existence de Dieu et s'etait moque en 
sa presence des mysteres de Ia religion chretienne. Vanini interroge sur ce point 
repondit qu'il adorait avec 1'Eglise un Dieu en trois personnes, et que la nature 
demonstrait evidemment l' existence de Ia Divinite. Ayant dans Ie meme temps 
apw;:u une paille qui etait a ses pieds, ilia prit, et fit un long disc ours sur la 
Providence en la construction de cette paille et en la production du ble, d' OU il 
conclut que Dieu etait Ie creature et l' auteur de tous les etres. Mais, il disait cela 
plutot par crainte que par une persuasion interieur'. 
Georg Gustav Fiilleborn (1769-1803), in his 'Beytrage zur Geschichte der 
Philosophie' (12 pts. Ziillichau and Freystadt, 1791-1799) pt. 5 (1795) pp. 1-31 
translates some passages from Vanini's 'Amphiteatrum'. Fichte's being accused 
of atheism evidently motivated W. D. Fuhrmann into producing his excellent 
and scholarly, 'Leben und Schicksale, Geist, Character und Meynungen des 
Lucilio Vanini, eines angeblichen Atheisten im Siebzehnten Jahrhundert; nebst 
einer Untersuchung iiber die Frage: war derselbe ein Atheist oder nicht?' 
(Leipzig, 1800). The story concerning the straw is given on pp. 1 II-II 4 of this 
work. Cf. David Durand (1680-1763) 'The Life ofVanini, with an abstract of 
his writings' (London, 1730): John Owen 'The Skeptics of the Italian Re-
naissance' (London, 1893) pp. 345-419: E. Namer 'Documents sur la vie de 
Jules-Cesar de Taurisano' (Bari, no date; published 1965). 
210, II 
See the note III. 217. 
210,24 
,~et otganifel)e StOtlJet ift noel) bM imannigfaltige, m:uf>eteinanbetfet)enbe.' 
211,24 
Jacob Boehme (1575-1624), the shoemaker of Gorlitz. Hegel evidently has in 
mind the lengthy treatment of this subject in 'Aurora-the Day-Spring, or, 
the Dawning of the Day in the East; or, Morning-Redness in the Rising of the 
301 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Sun' (1612): see 'The Works of Jacob Behmen' (ed. Law, 4 vols. London, 1764-
1781) vol. I pp. 1-269. 
The relevant chapters are headed as follows: XII 'Of the Nativity 
and Life of the Holy Angels': XIII 'Of the terrible, doleful, and lamentable, 
miserable Fall of the Kingdom of Lucifer': XIV 'How Lucifer, who was 
the most beautiful Angel in Heaven, is become the most horrible Devil'. See 
ch. XII verse 129, 'Lucifer (was) created according to the Quality, Condition, 
and Beauty of God the Son, and was bound to and united with him in Love, 
as a dear Son or Heart, and his Heart also stood in the Center of Light, as ifhe 
had been God himself; and his Beauty or Brightness transcended all'. Cf. 
'Mysterium Magnum' (1623) pt. I ch. XII verse 35 ('Works' III p. 54), 'And 
even then the Power of the expressed Word from the Light of the inward 
Nature did pullulate, and spring forth, through the external Nature, out of the 
Heaven through the Earth: (And so) now the Potentate, who was a King and a 
great Prince, has lost his Dominion; for the Essence of the Wrath was captivated 
in the Light of Nature, and he with it; and so he lies between Time and Eternity, 
imprisoned in the Darkness, till the Judgement of God'. 
Similar passages are to be found in 'The Three Principles of the Divine 
Essence' (1619) ch. XII verses 25-30 ('Works' II p. 93) and 'The Threefold Life 
of Man' (1620) ch. IX verse 50. 
In this connection it is interesting to remember that Hegel took evil to be 
'nothing but the inadequacy of that which is to that which should be' ('En-
cyclopaedia' § 472, cf. §§ 23-35). see the note III. 330. 
C£ Jacob B6hme 'Samtliche Schriften' (ed. Peuckert II vols. Stuttgart 
1955-1961). 
2II, 31 
Revelation I 8. 
2II, 37 
See Hegel's 'Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion' (tr. Spiers and Sanderson, 
3 vols. London, 1962) vol. I pp. 270-349, vol. II pp. 1-122. 
212,26 
See the notes III. 229, 366. 
213,7 
See the note III. 215. 
213,25 
See the note II. 406. 
302 

NOTES 
214, 3 
The central idea of emanatien (Latin emanatio, from e-, out, manare, to 
flow), as Hegel notes, is that the universe of individuals consists of the in-
voluntary outpourings of the ultimate divine essence. This essence is usually 
taken to be not only all-inclusive but also absolutely perfect, while the emanated 
individuals are regarded as degenerating in proportion to the degree of their 
'distance' from it. In his 'Science of Logic' (tr. Johnston and Struthers, 2 vols. 
London, 1961) vol. II p. 170, Hegel treats the concept as a sub-category of 
actuality. For an account of its use in European thinking see R. Eisler 'Worter-
buch der Philosophischen Begriffe' (3 vols. Berlin, 1927-1930) vol. I pp. 321-
322. As Hegel makes mention of 'fulgurations', particular attention, should 
perhaps be drawn to Leibniz's postulation of the 'prime monad' from which all 
created or derived productions appear, 'par des fulgurations continuelles de la 
Divinite de moment a moment, bornees par la receptivite de la creature a 
laquelle il est essentiel d'etre limitee': see 'The Monadology' (tr. Latta, Oxford, 
IS9S) 47. 
When he mentions the occurrence of emanation in oriental thinking, Hegel 
almost certainly has in mind the development of this doctrine in the 'Bhagavad-
gita': see S. Dasgupta 'A History of Indian Philosophy' (5 vols. Cambridge, 
1922-1962) vol. II pp. 523-534: M. Hiriyanna 'Outlines ofIndian Philosophy' 
(4th impression, London, 1955) ch. IV: Hegel's review 'tiber die unter dem 
Namen Bhagavad-Gita bekannte Episode des Mahabharata; von Wilhelm von 
Humboldt' (IS26), in 'Berliner Schriften ISIS-1831' (ed. Hoffmeister, Hamburg, 
1956) pp. 85-154. 
C£ F. von Schlegel 'Ueber die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier' (Heidelberg, 
IS0S): E. Frauwallner 'Geschichte der indischen Philosophie' (2 vols. Salzburg, 
1953-1956). 
214,40 
Jacques Tissot quotes this axiom in his 'Discours veritable de la Vie ... du 
Geant Theutobocus' (Lyons, 1613): this work is republished in E. Fournier's 
'Varietes historiques et litteraires' (Paris, 1855-IS63): see vol. 9 p. 247, 'Operatur 
natura quantum et quamdiu potest, sans neant moins faire aucum sault ab ex-
tremis ad extrema. Natura enim in operationibus suis non facit saltum'-Nature 
in her operations does not proceed by leaps. At almost the same time, Sir 
Edward Coke (1552-1634) applied it to the law: see 'The first part of the 
Institutes of the Lawes of England' (London, 162S) pp. 23sb, 239, 'Natura non 
facit saltus, ita nec lex'. 
Hegel probably came across the saying in the preface to Leibniz's 'Nouveaux 
Essais' (1704, ed. Boutroux, Paris, ISS6) p. 135, 'C'est une de mes grandes 
maximes et des plus verifiees, que la nature ne fait jamais des sauts'. C£ Linnaeus 
'Philosophia Botanica' (Stockholm, 1751) p. 27, Sect. 77. 'Primum et ultimum 
hoc in botanicis desideratum est, Natura non facit saltus'. 
303 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
In the quantum theory and quantum mechanics of present day theoretical 
physics however, it is assumed that the elements only make abrupt and dis-
continuous transitions in passing from one state to another. 
215, 10 
F. Nicolin and o. Poggeler in their edition of the 'Enzyklopadie' (Hamburg, 
1959) omit the word ,inbitlibuellen' at this juncture (p. 203). 
215,30 
In a footnote here, Hegel refers to Wilhelm Traugott Krug (1770-1842), 
'This is what Mr. Krug did, in what was at the same time a wholly naIve request, 
when he set the philosophy of nature the modest task of deducing his quill. If it 
were possible that the time should come when science should be so advanced 
and perfected in all the more important matters of heaven and earth, the present 
and the past, that there should be nothing more important to be explained, then 
one might have been able to offer him hope with regard to the accomplishment 
of this undertaking and the proper glorification of his quill'. 
Hegel deals very shortly with Krug's ideas in the 'History of Philosophy' 
(tr. Haldane and Simson, 3 vols. London, 1963) vol. III p. 5II-5I2. His main 
treatment of him is to be found in a hard-hitting article published in the 'Critical 
Journal of Philosophy' (vol. I art. i, 1802): cf. 'Aufsatze aus dem kritischen Jour-
nal der Philosophie' (ed. Glockner, Stuttgart, 1958) pp. 193-2I2: 'Wie der 
gemeine Menschenverstand die Philosophie nehme'. In this work he singles out 
Krug's 'Briefe uber die Wissenschaftslehre' (Leipzig, 1800) 'Briefe uber den 
neuesten Idealism' (Leipzig, 1801), and 'Entwurf eines neuen Organons der 
Philosophie' (Meissen and Lubben, 1801). W. T. Stace, in 'The Philosophy of 
Hegel' (Dover ed. 1955) thinks that Krug may well have made an important 
point here, but these lectures should have clarified the issue for him. Hegel is 
surely justified in concentrating upon assessments of the generalized subject-
matter of the natural sciences rather than particularities. Particular phenomena 
certainly provide an essential foundation for these generalizations, but it is the 
generalizations which make further particularities intelligible, and not vice versa. 
Krug studied at Wittenberg, Jena and Gottingen, and habilitated as a uni-
versity teacher at Wittenberg in 1794 with a dissertation, 'De pace inter philo-
sophos'. In 1800 he published 'Philosophie der Ehe' and in 1802 replied to 
Hegel's attacks in two pamphlets, 'Wie der ungemeine Menschenverstand die 
Philosophie nehme', and 'Der Widerstreit der Vernunft mit sich selbst'. He 
married the daughter of a major general in 1803, and ten years later volunteered 
for the army. In 1815 he published 'System der Kriegswissenschaft'. 
He succeeded Kant as professor of philosophy at Konigsberg in 1804, and in 
1809 gained an appointment at Leipzig, where he remained for the rest of his 
life, becoming 'Rektor' of the university there in 1830. In all, he published no 
less than 189 works, and towards the close of his life attempted various syntheses 
304 

NOTES 
of knowledge, alphabetical in 'Allgemeines Handworterbuch der philosophischen 
Wissenschaften' (4 vols. Leipzig, 1827-1829), and co-educational in 'Univer-
salphilosophische Vorlesungen fur Gebildete beiderlei Geschlechts' (Neustadt, 
1831). He first published his autobiography in 1825, and re-issued it with 
supplementary information during the railway boom seventeen years later: 
see his 'Lebensreise in 6 Stazionen von ihm selbst beschrieben' (Leipzig, 1842). 
On his political views see Alfred Fiedler 'Die staatswissenschaftliche Anschauung 
und die politisch-publizistische Tatigkeit des Nachkantianers W. T. Krug' 
(Dissertation, Leipzig, 1933); 'Krug's Gesammelte Schriften' (12 vols. Bruns-
wick, 1830-1841). 
216,30 
See Robert Southey (1774-1843) 'The Poet's Pilgrimage to Waterloo' (1816) 
pt. II ii 20:-
217,32 
'The winds which have in viewless heaven their birth, 
The waves which in their fury meet the clouds, 
The central storms which shake the solid earth, 
And from volcanoes burst in fiery floods, 
Are not more vague and purportless and blind, 
Than is the course of things among mankind.' 
The lay-out of this § adopted by F. Nicolin and O. Poggeler in their edition 
of the 'Enzyklopadie' (Hamburg, 1959) has been reproduced in this translation. 
218,36 
,nid)t mit bet tua'£)t'£)aften 6p'£)iite'. 
221, 12 
For a criticism of the term 'mechanics', and the general background to the 
Newtonian world-picture, see E. J. Dijksterhuis 'The Mechanization of the 
World Picture' (Oxford, 1961). For a recent general history of mechanics see 
R. Dugas 'A History of Mechanics' (tr. Maddox, London, 1957). 
223,8 
See J. T. Baker 'An historical and critical examination of English space and 
time theories' (New York, 1930). M.Jammer 'Concepts of Space' (New York, 
1960): A. Grunbaum 'Philosophical Problems of Space and Time' (New York, 
1963). 
J. J. C. Smart has made an interesting collection of passages and papers on the 
subject in his 'Problems of Space and Time' (London, 1964). 
30S 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
223, 10 
Kant's views on space underwent considerable development: see C. B. Garnett 
'The Kantian Philosophy of Space' (New York, 1939). Hegel is evidently 
referring to the mature exposition of them in the 'Critique of Pure Reason'. See 
J. J. C. Smart 'Problems of Space and Time' (London, 1964) pp. 104-125. 
Kant denied that space is an empirical concept derived from experiences of 
objective phenomena, because he took it to be a necessary presupposition of these 
experiences. He therefore regarded it as an a priori representation underlying all 
our intuitions of the external world. As he took it to underlie them, he regarded 
it not as a general concept arising from the relations of things in general, but as a 
pure intuition, which is essentially one. 
From this line of reasoning he concluded: (a) That space represents neither 
any property of things in themselves, nor any relation between them. (b) That 
space is nothing but the subjective condition of sensibility, under which alone 
intuition of objectivity is possible for us. 
C£ B. Russell's critical analysis of Kant's theory of space and its bearing upon 
the distinction between logic, and mathematics in 'The Principles of Mathe-
matics' (7th impression, London, 1956). 
223,24 
'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963) pp. 189-190. 
224, 5 
Cf. 'The Logic' §§ 84-86. Just as Being is the most comprehensive and primary 
category of the logic, so space is the most comprehensive and primary stage of 
nature. This observation underlines the fact that Hegel regarded the overall 
structure of the philosophy of nature as a reformation in natural phenomena of 
the logical pattern exhibited in the first part of the 'Encyclopaedia'. 
224,23 
See John Keill (1671-1721) 'An introduction to natural philosophy' (4th ed. 
London, 1745) p. 15, 'We conceive space to be that, wherein all Bodies are 
placed, or, to speak with the Schools, have their Ubi; that it is altogether 
penetrable, receiving all Bodies into itself, and refusing ingress to nothing 
whatsoever; that it is immovably fixed, capable of no Action, Form or Quality; 
whose Parts it is impossible to separate from each other, by any Force however 
great; but the space itself remaining immovable, receives the Successions of 
things in Motion, determines the velocities of their Motions, and measures the 
distances of the things themselves'. 
306 

NOTES 
224,29 
See Euclid's definition of a point as, 'that which has no part': T. L. Heath 
'The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements' (3 vols. Cambridge, 1908) vol. I p. 
153. Heath discusses the difficulties Aristotle encountered in dealing with similar 
definitions, see his 'Mathematics in Aristotle' (Oxford, 1949) pp. 89-90. Cf. 
B. Russell 'The Principles of Mathematics' (7th impression, London, 1956) pp. 
445-455. Hegel's statement that there can be no such thing as a point accords 
well with subsequent views on the subject. Cf. H. M. Weber and]. Wellstein 
'Encyclopadie der elementaren Mathematik' (Leipzig and Berlin, 1905) vol. II 
p. 9, 'This notion (the point) is evolved from the notion of the real or supposed 
material point by the process of limits, i.e. by an act of the mind which sets a term 
to a series of presentations in itself unlimited. Suppose a grain of sand or a mote 
in a sunbeam, which continually becomes smaller and smaller. In this way 
vanishes more and more the possibility of determining still smaller atoms in the 
grain of sand, and there is evolved, so we say, with growing certainty, the 
presentation of the point as a definite position in space which is one and is in-
capable of further division. But this view is untenable; we have, it is true, some 
idea how the grain of sand gets smaller and smaller, but only so long as it 
remains just visible; after that we are completely in the dark, and we cannot 
see or imagine the further diminution. That this procedure comes to an end is 
unthinkable; that nevertheless there exists a term beyond which it cannot go, 
we must believe or postulate without ever reaching it ... It is a pure act of 
will, not of the understanding'. Cf. Max Simon 'Euklid und die sechs plani-
metrischen Bucher' (Leipzig, 1901). 
Hegel's dialectical assessment of the point throws light on the nature of this 
'act of will'. What is more, the problem of the point as stated by Weber, 
Wellstein and Simon, tends to confirm the validity of Hegel's transition from 
the being-for-self of the Idea (§ 244), to space as implicitly three-dimensional. 
i.e. Notional (§ 255), and of his characterisation of space as 'a non-sensuous 
sensibility' (i.e. its natural aspect), and a 'sensuous insensibility' (i.e. its logical 
aspect). 
See F. Robartes 'On the proportion of mathematical points to each other' 
('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol.27 P.470).In the light of Hegel's subsequent analysis 
of the point, the line and the plane it may be of interest to note that Roberts 
regards the point of contact between a sphere and a plane as being infmitely 
greater than that between a circle and a line. Cf. Andrzej Grzegorczyk 'Axioma-
tizability of geometry without points' in 'The Concept and Role of the Model in 
Mathematics' (ed. Kazemier, Dordrecht, 1961). 
224,3I 
,Me ~e{t ift nirgenbs mit ~rettetn 3ugenagelt.' See K. Simrock 'Die 
deutschen Sprichworter' (Frankfurt-on-Main, 1845) no. 1297: K. F. W. Wander 
'Deutsches Sprichworter-Lexikon' (5 vols. 1867-1880) vol. V col. 166. The pro-
307 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
verb is usually explained as meaning that a capable person will get on anywhere, 
but in German folklore the remark seems to have had another significance. 
Johann Sommer (1559-1622) 'Olorinus' or 'Variscus' as he sometimes called 
himself, the protestant botanist, translator, folklorist, satirist, tragedian and 
theologian from Zwickau, in his 'Ethnographia Mundi. Lustige, Artige, und 
Kurtzweilige, jedoch Warhafftige und Glaubwirdige Beschreibung der heutigen 
Newen Welt' (Magdeburg, 1609) p. 17 makes mention of a traveller who has 
been to the end of the world and found it boarded up. There is also a folk-tale 
from Ditmarsh according to which, 'The world beyond Husum is in fact 
boarded up. A giant sits there at the furthest end of it, and has the sun on a rope. 
Every morning he winds it up, and in the evening lets it down again'. See Carl 
Miillenhof 'Sagen, Mlirchen, und Lieder der Herzogthiimer Schleswig-Holstein 
und Lauenburg' (Kiel' 1845) no. 1921 p. 378. 
225, II 
In Hegel's day it was usual to overcome this problem simply by following 
Newton and distinguishing between absolute and relative space: see 'Mathe-
matical Principles' (ed. Cajori, Berkeley, 1947), the scholium following the 
initial deftnitions, 'Absolute space, in its own nature, without relation to any-
thing external, remains always similar and immovable. Relative space is some 
movable dimension or measure of the absolute spaces: which our senses determine 
by its position to bodies; and which is commonly taken for immovable space; 
such is the dimension of a subterraneous, an aerial, or celestial space, determined 
by its position in respect of the earth. Absolute and relative space are the same in 
ftgure and magnitude; but they do not remain always numerically the same'. 
Cf. Charles Hutton (1737-1823) 'A Philosophical and Mathematical Dictionary' 
(2 vols. London, 1815) vol. II pp. 416-417. 
Hegel is therefore attempting to assess what was usually referred to as absolute 
space, in its relation not to 'bodies', but to the concepts of Euclidean geometry. 
Kant (see notes pp. 306 and 309) has clearly influenced his formulation of this 
transition. 
Cf. Bishop Berkeley's objections to absolute space in his 'Principles of Human 
Knowledge' (1710) and 'The Analyst' (Dublin, 1734), and the note by Cajori 
(op. cit. pp. 639-644). 
225, 12 
,(i£;t ift a1lO eine unfinnlicf)e 6innlicf)feit, unb dne finnlicf)e Unfinnlicf)fcit.' 
See the note on p. 307. The 'non-sensuous sensibility' of space is its natural aspect, 
its 'sensuous insensibility' is its logical aspect. It is this, its dual nature, which 
gave rise to Hegel's making use of it in the transition from logic to nature. C£ 
G. J. Whitrow 'Why physical space has three dimensions' ('British Journal for 
the Philosophy of Science' vol. 6 pp. 13-3 I, 1955). 
308 

NOTES 
225,17 
Leibniz treats this subject most extensively in his correspondence with 
Samuel Clarke (1675-1729): see 'A collection of papers, which passed between 
the late learned Mr. Leibniz and Dr. Clarke in the years 1715 and 1716 relating 
to the principles of natural philosophy and religion' (London, 1717, ed. H. G. 
Alexander, Manchester, 1956) paper III sects. 3-6, paper V sects. 32-124. See 
also his 'Mathematische Schriften' (ed. C. I. Gerhardt, 7 vols. Berlin and Halle, 
1849-1863; reprinted Hildesheim, 1962) vol. VII p. 17 ff.: 'Hauptschriften zur 
Grundlegung der Philosophie' (5 vols. Leipzig, 1904-1906) vol. I p. 53 ff. 
'Nouveaux Essais sur l'entendement humain' (Eng. tr. A. G. Langley, Chicago, 
1949) II ch. 13 § 17. 
As against Descartes, Leibniz held a relational theory of space, whereby space 
is in no sense a materiality, but merely a system of relations dependent upon the 
relationships between the indivisible substances or 'monads.' 
225,28 
C£ the treatment of space in Kant's 'Critique of Pure Reason' (note p. 306) 
§ 3, 'Geometry is a science which determines the properties of space syn-
thetically, and yet a priori. What, then, must be our representation of space, in 
order that such knowledge of it may be possible? It must in its origin be in-
tuition; for from a mere concept no propositions can be obtained which go 
beyond the concept-as happens in geometry ... Further, this intuition must be 
a priori, that is, it must be found in us prior to any perception of an object, and 
must therefore be pure, not empirical, intuition. For geometrical propositions 
are one and all apodeictic, that is, are bound up with the consciousness of their 
necessity; for instance, that space has only three dimensions. Such propositions 
cannot be empirical or, in other words, judgements of experience, nor can they 
be derived from any such judgements ... 
How, then can there exist in the mind an outer intuition which precedes the 
objects themselves, and in which the concept of these objects can be determined 
a priori? Manifestly, not otherwise than in so far as the intuition has its seat in 
the subject only, as the formal character of the subject in virtue of which, in 
being affected by objects, it obtains immediate representation, that is, intuition of 
them; and only in so far, therefore, as it is merely the form of outer sense in 
general. 
Our explanation is thus the only explanation that makes intelligible the 
possibility of geometry, as a body of a priori synthetic knowledge.' 
When B. Russell (note p. 306) criticizes Kant for distinguishing between logic 
and mathematics in this way, he has some common ground with Hegel, who is 
here indicating the logical antecedent of the three dimensions of classical geometry. 
When he sketches the extent to which he regards geometry as being susceptible 
to dialectical assessment (§ 256), Hegel refers to Euclid. He refuses however to 
treat Euclidean geometry as being rigorously philosophical, despite his having 
309 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
dialectically assessed several of its axioms. This is almost certainly due to the 
developments then taking place in non-Euclidean geometry. See the letter 
written by K. F. Gauss (1777-1855) to his friend H.W. M. Olbers (1758-1840) 
in 1817, 'I become more and more convinced that our geometry cannot be 
demonstrated, at least neither by, nor for, the human intellect. In some future 
life, perhaps, we may have other ideas about the nature of space which, at 
present, are inaccessible to use. Geometry therefore, has to be ranked until such 
time not with arithmetic, which is of a purely aprioristic nature, but with 
mechanics': Gauss's 'Werke' (Leipzig, 1863-1903) vol. VIII p. 177. C£ A. 
Vucinich 'Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevskii: the man behind the first non-
Euclidean geometry' ('Isis' 1962 pp. 465-481). 
The validity of Euclid' s fifth axiom, 'That if a straight line falling on two other 
straight lines make the alternate angles equal to one another, the two straight 
lines shall be parallel to one another' was defended by Girolamo Saccheri 
(1667-1733) in his 'Euclidis ab omni naevo vindicatus' (Milan, 1733), but this 
work merely initiated a widespread questioning of the demonstrability of the 
postulate, which by the early decades of the last century had already given rise 
to an extensive literature: see G. S. Klugel (1739-1812) 'Conatuum praeci-
puorum theoriam parallelarum demonstrandi recensio' (Gottingen, 1763), J. H. 
Lambert (1728-1777) 'Zur Theorie der Parallellinien' (Leipzig, 1786): G. S. 
Klugel 'Mathematisches Worterbuch' (7 vols. Leipzig, 1803-1836) vol. III pp. 
727-739: J. W. Muller 'Auserlesene mathematische Bibliothek' (Nuremberg, 
1829): F. Engel and P. Stackel 'Theorie der Parallellinien von Euclid bis Gauss' 
(Leipzig, 1895): D. M. Y. Somerville 'Bibliography of Non-Euclidean Ge-
ometry' (St. Andrews, 1911): R. Bonola 'Non Euclidean Geometry' (Chicago, 
1912). 
226,18 
This definition of the line overcomes the objection Aristotle raised against 
Euclid's Platonic definition of it as 'breadthless length': 'The Thirteen Books of 
Euclid's Elements' (3 vols. Cambridge, 1908) vol. I pp. 153-165. See Aristotle's 
'Topics' VI. 6. 143b-144"4, 'Again there is the case where one divides the genus 
by negation, as those do who defme a line as "breadthless length". This signifies 
nothing except that it has not any breadth. The effect in this case will be that the 
genus will partake of the species; for every length is either breadthless or pos-
sessed of breadth, because either an affrrmation or the corresponding negation is 
true of anything whatever ... This commonplace rule is of service in arguing 
with those who assume the existence of "Forms".' 
Aristotle's conception of the line ('Metaphysics' 1016b25-27) is closer to 
Hegel's in that he regards it as a magnitude 'divisible in one way only', in contrast 
to a magnitude divisible in two ways (a surface), and a magnitude divisible 'in all 
or three ways' (a body). 
See T. L. Heath 'Mathematics in Aristotle' (Oxford, 1949) pp. 88-91. 
310 

NOTES 
226,26 
Cf. T. L. Heath op. cit. I pp. 169-176. Hegel is here reconstructing the 
following of Euclid's definitions:-
no. 5 'A surface is that which has length and breadth only'. 
no. 6 'The extremities of a surface are lines'. 
no. 7 'A plane surface is a surface which lies evenly with the straight lines on 
itself'. 
For an almost contemporary discussion of the evolution of the properties of 
the plane, see A. L. Crelle (1780-1855) 'Zur Theorie der Ebene' ('Abhandlugen 
der Koniglichen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin' 1834 pp. 23-64). 
227,9 
See Aristotle 'De Anima' I. 4, 409 a 4, 'They say that a line by its motion 
produces a surface and a point by its motion a line'. 
Proclus (410-485) defines the line as the 'flux of a point' (pll(US U1)/.t€tov), i.e. 
the path of a point when moved. See Thomas Taylor (1758-1835) 'The Philo-
sophical and Mathematical Commentaries of Proclus on the first Book of 
Euclid's Elements' (London, 1792). 
227,23 
In the 'Critique of Pure Reason' (Introduction), Kant defines analytical 
judgements as being those in which the connection of the predicate with the 
subject is cogitated through identity, and synthetical judgements as being those 
in which this connection is cogitated without identity. He therefore takes the 
intuition to be an essential factor in the formation of synthetical judgements. 
Cf. H. Feigl 'Some Major Issues and developments in the philosophy of science 
and logical empiricism.' ('Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science' 3 
vols. Minneapolis, 1962) I pp. 3-37: cf. III pp. 357-397. 
Hegel is referring to the following passage (op. cit. Introduction V i), 'A 
straight line between two points is the shortest', is a synthetical proposition. For 
my conception of straight contains no notion of quantity, but is merely qualitative. 
The conception of the shortest is therefore wholly an addition, and by no analysis 
can it be extracted from our conception of a straight line. Intuition must 
therefore here lend its aid, by means of which and thus only, our synthesis is 
possible.' 
Kant may also have been led to regard this as a synthetical proposition 
involving intuition on account of his having entertained the possibility of there 
being different kinds of space, arising out of different gravitational relationships: 
see N. K. Smith 'A Commentary to Kant's 'Critique of Pure Reason'. (London, 
1918) pp. II7 if, 128 f£ For an exhaustive treatment of the subject, see C. B. 
Garnett 'The Kantian Philosophy of Space' (New York, 1939). 
3II 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
227,27 
'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963) pp. 366-367. 
228,2 
,benn 3um Stueiten ge~oren eoenfo gut 3tuei, al~ 3ur Stuei/. 
228, 16 
This is a reference to Euclid's 'Elements' bk. I prop. 4, 'If two triangles have 
two sides of the one equal to two sides of the other, each to each, and have also 
the angles contained by those sides equal to one another, they shall also have their 
bases or third sides equal; and the two triangles shall be equal; and their other 
angles shall be equal, each to each, namely, those to which the equal sides are 
opposite.' 
Euclid proves this by superposition, a method which he evidently disliked. The 
first triangle is taken up and placed on the second, so that the parts of the triangles 
which are known to be equal fall upon each other. Jacques Peletier (1517-1582) 
was one of the first to point out that the mere superpositing oflines and figures 
does not constitute a geometrical proof: see his note on this proposition in his 
'In Euclidis Elementa geometrica demonstrationum libri sex' (Lugduni, 1557). 
Although John Playfair (1748-1819), in his 'Elements of geometry' (Edin-
burgh, 1826) pp. 427-429 defends the 'purity' of Euclid's reasoning at this 
juncture, by Hegel's day it was usual to say that this proof is unsatisfactory 
because it introduces motion into geometry, and presupposes the axiom that 
figures may be moved without change of shape or size. Hegel's assessment of the 
matter is surely more to the point, and is in substantial agreement with D. 
Hilbert's statement that Euclid would have done better to assume this propo-
sition as an axiom: see 'Grundlagen der Geometrie' (Leipzig, 1899) p. 12: 
Eng. tr. by Townsend 'The Foundations of Geometry' (London, 1902) p. 9. 
C£ Moritz Pasch 'Vorlesungen aber neuere Geometrie' (Leipzig, 1882) § 13, 
Grundsatz ix: B. Russell 'The Principles of Mathematics' (7th impression, Lon-
don, 1956) pp. 404-407. Russell follows Pasch and Hilbert, and gives a brilliant 
and colourful exposition of the subject. A manuscript of Hegel's, dated Mainz, 
23rd Sept. 1800, and now in the Harvard University Library, shows the care 
with which he considered this and related problems: Johannes Hoffmeister 
'Dokumente zu Hegels Entwicklung' (Stuttgart, 1936) pp. 288-300, 470-473. 
228,29 
Euclid's 'Elements' bk. I prop. 47, 'In right-angled triangles the square on the 
side subtending the right angle is equal to the squares on the sides containing 
the right angle.' See the detailed account of the ways in which Pythagoras may 
have discovered this theorem in T. L. Heath 'The Thirteen Books of Euclid's 
Elements' (3 vols. Cambridge, 1918) vol. I pp. 349-368. 
In Hegel's day the standard German edition of Euclid was that ofJ. F. Lorenz 
312 

NOTES 
(1738-1807) 'Euclid's Elemente, funfzehn Bucher aus dem Griechischen 
ubersetzt' (3rd edition ed. K. Mollweide, Halle, 1809). 
228,35 
For the definition of the circle based on the equality of the radii see Euclid's 
'Elements' bk. I de£ 15. 
The 'higher deftnition of the circle' mentioned here by Hegel is the standard 
defmition of analytical geometry, employing Cartesian co-ordinates: see R. 
Descartes 'Geometry' (tr. Smith and Latham, La Salle, 1924). For every point 
of the circumference of a circle with the origin of the co-ordinate-system as 
centre, we have from Pythagoras's theorem the equation 
y 
x 
Cf. Gaspard Monge (1746-1818) 'Feui1les d'analyse appliquee a la Geometrie' 
(Paris, 1801): T. L. Heath 'A Manual of Greek Mathematics' (Oxford, 1931) 
p. 96: C. B. Boyer 'A History of Analytical Geometry' (New York, 1957): 
H. Eves 'An introduction to the history of mathematics' (New York, 1953) 
ch. X. 
228,40 
This is not quite accurate. The concluding proposition of bk. I is 110. 48, 'If in 
a triangle the square on one of the sides be equal to the squares on the remaining 
two sides of the triangle, the angle contained by the remaining two sides of the 
triangle is right.' Pythagoras's theorem is presented by Euclid as no. 47. The 
concluding proposition of bk. II (no. 14) is, 'To construct a square equal to a 
given rectilineal ftgure.' T. L. Heath 'The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements' 
(3 vols. Cambridge, 1908) vol. I. 
229.4 
Johann Karl Friedrich Rosenkranz (1805-1879), in his 'Kritische Erlauterun-
313 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OP NATURE 
gen des Hegel'schen Systems' (Konigsberg, 1840), puts forward a 'Probe eines 
Commentar's zu Hegels Lehre von Raum und Zeit' (1835), in which he attempts 
to develop geometry dialectically. He points out that there are right-angles, 
acute and obtuse angles, equilateral, scalene and isosceles triangles, that four-sided 
plane figures are either squares, parallelograms or trapeziums, and that the 
relation of all straight-lined figurations within the circle might be used to round 
off such an exposition. 
The triadic nature of such a geometry is clear enough, but it can hardly be 
regarded as dialectical. 
C£ Erwin Metzke 'Karl Rosenkranz und Hegel' (Leipzig, 1929): Hermann 
Liibbe 'Die Hegelsche Rechte' (Stuttgart and Bad Cannstadt, 1962). 
229, 12 
On this transition from space to time see R. C. Archibald 'Time as a Fourth 
Dimension' ('Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society' 1914, 20: pp. 
409-412), who points out that both Jean Ie Rond d' Alembert (1754) and J. L. 
Lagrange (1797) mention, in mechanical contexts, the possibility of considering 
time as a fourth dimension. C£ A. M. Bork 'The Fourth Dimension in Nine-
teenth-Century Physics' ('Isis' Sept. 1964 pp. 326-338). 
229, 17 
Hegel entered a significant note in the margin at this point: see Jenenser 
Realphilosophie II' (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1931) p. 10 n. 2, 'Leaping point-
more complex {teid)et} than fire, soul, movement with the spatially involved 
power of nature which belongs to it. Itself secondary; in spirit primary.' Cf. the 
note III. 315. 
229, 30 
Cf. Aristotle's comparison of the 'now' in time and the point in space (,Phy-
sics' IV. 10. 218 a 6-8; II. 219b II-15; 220 a 4-13, 18-21). This is discussed by 
T. L. Heath in his 'Mathematics in Aristotle' (Oxford, 1949) pp. 120-121. 
230, 5 
Cf. Kant's 'Critique of Pure Reason' sect. II § 4, 'Time is a necessary repre-
sentation that underlies all intuitions. We cannot, in respect of appearances in 
general, remove time itself, though we can quite well think time as void of 
appearances. Time is, therefore, given a priori. In it alone is actuality of appear-
ances possible at all. Appearances may, one and all, vanish; but time (as the 
univeral condition of their possibility) cannot itself be removed.' 
230, 12 
See Robert Adamson 'Fichte' (London, 1881) p. 145 ff. Cf. the note III. 301. 
314 

NOTES 
230, 14 
Cf. 'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963) § 88. The position of 
'becoming' in the logic, corresponds to that of time in the philosophy of nature. 
230 , 17 
,bie abfttatt fid) auf fid) be3ieqenbe'. In the 1817 edition of the 
'Encyclopaedia' this phrase occurs as 'abftrutte fid) aUf fid) be3ief)enbe'. 
230,27 
Cronos (time) was originally a harvest god, and presided over the GoldenAge 
of the world, when the earth brought forth of its own accord, and all men lived 
in peace and charity. He was one of the Titans, son of Uranus (the sky) and 
Gaea (the earth), and came to rule the world by overthrowing his father with 
the aid of his mother. 
He married his sister Rhea (Cybele, the power of nature), and became the 
father of Hestia (the family), Demeter (agriculture), Hera (wifehood), Poseidon 
(the sea), Hades (wealth), and Zeus (supreme brightness). Fearing the prophecy 
that he also would be overthrown by his own offspring, he swallowed his 
children as soon as they were born. Rhea saved Zeus however, and when the 
boy had grown to maturity, he forced his father to disgorge his brothers and 
sisters. The subsequent war of the Titans against the gods resulted in the over-
throw of Cronos and his confmement in Tartarus. 
See Hesiod 'Theogony' 167 ff; 485 ff; 617 ff; 'Works and Days' 169 ff: 'Paulys 
Real-Encylopadie der Classischen Altertumswissenschaft' (ed. Wissowa and 
Kroll, Stuttgart, 1922) vol. XI cols. 1982-2018. 
232, 12 
See Goethe and Schiller 'Xenien' (note p. 293): 
,m!atum bin id) betgnnglid), 0 8eu~?' frugte bie 6d)onf)eit. 
,9J1ad)t' id) bOd)' fagte bet @ott, ,nut bas ~etgnnglid)e fd)on'. 
C£ Ben Jonson's 'Ode Pindaric to the immortal Memory' etc. in his 'Under-
woods': 
'It is not growing like a tree 
In bulk, doth make men better be.' etc. 
232,37 
The general lay-out of the Hegelian system has to be borne in mind if this 
exposition of time is to be fully intelligible. The Logic does not involve time, 
and so endures on account of the imperfection of its abstract universality. The 
315 

IfEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
things of Nature give rise to the process of time through the restlessness and 
contradiction of their externality and fmitude. Spirit is above time in that the 
universality of the Idea is realized within it. This realization involves eliciting the 
Notion of time, which is what Hegel is attempting to do in these paragraphs. 
It was evidently Kant's characterization of time as a pure form of intuition, 
which helped to form the distinctive features of Hegel' s thinking at this juncture, 
although he rejects Kant's assertion that time involves the difference between 
objectivity and a distinct subjective consciousness. 
Kant's work is to be seen against the background of early eighteenth century 
thinking on this subject. Newton for example distinguished between absolute 
and relative time, 'Absolute, true, and mathematical time, of itself, and from its 
own nature, flows equably without relation to anything external, and by another 
name is called duration: relative, apparent, and common time, is some sensible 
and external (whether accurate or unequable) measure of duration by the means 
of motion, which is commonly used instead of true time; such as an hour, a 
day, a month, a year.'-'Mathematical Principles' (ed. Cajori, Berkeley, 1947), 
the scholium following the initial defmitions. Ernst Mach (1838-1916) 'The 
Science of Mechanics' (tr. Mc. Cormack, Chicago and London, 1919) II vi, 2 and 
Cajori (op. cit. pp. 640-641) both criticize Newton for postulating an abstract 
absolute time, 'since our knowledge of time can only be based upon our obser-
vation of the changes of things'. Kant took a step forward here in that he showed 
that knowledge of these things would be impossible without the presupposition 
of time. Hegel disregarded Kant's peculiar epistemological considerations, and 
simply treated time as the sequence of space and the antecedent of motion, that is 
to say, as a necessary presupposition not only of experience, but also of the things 
of nature. 
The dialectical assessment involved in this treatment constitutes the Notion of 
time; the construing of time at this juncture in the dialectical progression 
certainly has advantages in any attempt to expound the phenomena of mechanics 
in a rational sequence. The geometry assessed in § 256 does not involve time, 
whereas the motion, impact, fall etc. assessed in § 260 et. seq. do. However, 
taking time to be the abstract presupposition or antecedent of the things of nature 
involved a distinction closely resembling Newton's. While emphasizing the 
prime importance of the Notion of time, Hegel therefore distinguishes between 
eternity or absolute timelessness, duration or the relative sublation of time, and 
natural time or the easily observable becoming involved in the arising and passing 
away of the finite things of nature. 
When he observes that eternity is not relative to time, but that like the Notion 
of time itself, constitutes the absolute present, Hegel is redefming Newton's 
'absolute time' in a way which overcomes the objections raised against it by 
Mach and Cajori. Newton was quite clearly not justified in attributing an 
'equable flow' to absolute time, although his (religious?) instinct was right when 
it told him that time is not simply a 'measure of duration by means of motion' : 
316 

NOTES 
see E. A. Burtt 'The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science' 
(London, 1925) pp. 243-263. 
Cf. Samuel Vince (1749-1821) 'A Complete System of Astronomy' (3 vols. 
London, 1814-1823) vol. I pp. 562-568 on relative time: J. M. E. Mc Taggart 
'The Nature of Existence' (Cambridge, 1927) vol. II, 'Philosophical Studies' (ed. 
Keeling, London, 1934) pp. IIo-155, where the Notion of time is confused with 
natural time: C. D. Broad 'Examination of Mc Taggart's Philosophy' (Cam-
bridge, 1938) vol. II, pt. i p. 316, D. N. Sanford 'McTaggart on Time' 
('Philosophy' Oct: 1968); G. J. Whitrow 'The Natural Philosophy of Time' 
(London, 1961); Helmut Kobligk 'Denken und Zeit. Beitrage zu einer 
Interpretation des Hegelschen Zeitbegriffes' (Dissertation, Univ. of Kiel, 
January 21, 1952); Norbert Altwicker 'Der Begriff der Zeit im philosophi-
schen System Hegels' (Dissertation, Univ. of Frankfurt-on-Main, July 25,1951). 
233,3I 
Kant's 'Critique of Pure Reason' sect. II § 4, 'Time is not an empirical concept 
that has been derived from any experience. For neither coexistence nor success-
ion would ever come within our perception, if the representation of time were 
not presupposed as underlying them a priori. Only on the presupposition of 
time can we represent to ourselves a number of things as existing at one and 
the same time (simultaneously) or at different times (successively).' 
Georg Simon Klugel (1739-1812), in his extremely valuable 'Mathematisches 
W5rterbuch' (7 vols. Leipzig, 1803-1836) vol. V pp. 1053-4 has the following 
to say about number, 'The general origin of the notion of number is the concept 
of a multiplicity of things, which are either really and completely similar and 
homogeneous, or which have at least a variety that is ignored in so far as they are 
regarded as being united in a number. It might well be said therefore that its 
origin is the concept of the repetition or duplication of one and the same thing, 
indicated in general by A.' The same dictionary (vol. III pp. 602-613) contains 
an interesting account of the basic concepts of 'pure' mathematics, i.e. multi-
plicity, dimension, location, ratio etc. 
B. M. Stewart, opens his 'Theory of Numbers' (New York, 1964) by 
quoting the remark made by Leopold Kronecker (1823-1891), 'God made the 
integers, all else is the work of man.' The recent attempts to treat embryology 
and cytology mathematically provide a good example of the involvement of 
time in any defmition of a unit and a number. The cells or nuclei submitted 
to this treatment cannot of course be regarded as the merely spatial units which 
may be seen on a fixed microscope slide. They are therefore regarded as having 
their temporal beginning in division or fusion, and their temporal end in division, 
fusion or death: see J. H. Woodger 'The Axiomatic Method in Biology' 
(Cambridge, 1937) 'Problems arising from the application of mathematical 
logic to biology in "Actes de 2ieme Colloque Internationale de Logique 
Mathematiqtle" , (Paris, 1954). 
317 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
234, II 
'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963) pp. 190-192. Hegel treats 
number as a sub-category of quantum. 
234,21 
Hegel is referring here to Aristotle's 'Metaphysics' 1092a 21- 1093b 29, and 
is evidently in substantial agreement with Aristotle's criticism of the Pytha-
gorean doctrine of numbers, 'Those who derive existing things from elements 
and hold that the primary entities are the numbers, should have distinguished 
the senses in which one thing is said to come from another, and should then have 
explained in which of these senses number is derived from its elements ... It 
has yet to be explained how numbers are the causes of substances and of being; 
whether (i) as boundaries, as points are of spatial magnitudes, or as Eurytus 
determined the number of each living thing (e.g. man or horse) by counting 
the number of pebbles he used in tracing its outline (in the way that some people 
reduce numbers to the forms of triangles or squares); or (ii) because harmony, 
man, and everything else is a ratio of numbers. 
But how can attributes like white, sweet, hot, be numbers? ... Number in 
general, then, or the number which consists of abstract units is neither the 
efficient, material, formal, nor of course the fmal cause of things'. 
See the brilliant exposition of the Pythagorean philosophy in Hegel's 'Lectures 
on the History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane and Simson, 3 vols. London, 1963) 
vol. I pp. 208-239. C£ F. M. Cornford 'Mysticism and Science in the Pytha-
gorean Tradition' ('The Classical Quarterly' 1922 and 1923: vol. XVI pp. 137-
150, vol. XVII pp. 1-12). C£ J. E. Raven 'Pythagoreans and Eleatics' (Cam-
bridge, 1948) ch. X: P. H. Michel 'De Pythagore a Euclide' (Paris, 1950): R. 
Harre 'The Anticipation of Nature' (London, 1965) ch. 4: Sir William Hamil-
ton's famous attack upon the study of mathematics as a training of the mind. 
which appeared in the 'Edinburgh Review' of 1836. 
235,9 
Cf. Charles Hutton (1737-1823) 'A Philosophical and Mathematical Dic-
tionary' (2 vols. London, 1815) vol. II p. 23, 'Mathematics, the science of quan-
tity; or a science that considers magnitudes either as computable or measurable. 
The word in its original /La()7)u£s, mathesis, signifies Discipline or Science in 
general; and, it seems, has been applied to the doctrine of quantity, either by 
way of eminence, or because, this being the first of all other sciences, the rest 
took their common name from it.' 
Leibniz and]. H. Lambert (1728-1777) had both attempted, not very success-
fully, to develop systems of mathematical logic. In Hegel's day the distinction 
between 'pure' and applied mathematics was certainly drawn, but an examina-
tion of the axioms on which 'pure' mathematics was then supposed to rest, 
makes it abundantly clear that a radical reassessment of them was necessary: 
318 

NOTES 
see for example G. S. Kliigel's 'Mathematisches Worterbuch' (7 vols. Leipzig, 
1803-1836) vol. III pp. 602-613. Hegel was certainly justified in arguing that 
since it involved the presupposition of certain axioms, capable of philosophical 
assessment, but in fact taken up more or less at random from 'concrete nature', 
the mathematics of his day was not pure in any rigorous or truly philosophical 
sense. George Boole (1815-1864), in his 'An Investigation of the Laws of 
Thought' (London, 1854) was the ftrst to develop mathematics as a truly philo-
sophical science, and his work led on to the founding of mathematical logic 
by F. L. G. Frege (1848-1925), Louis Couturat (1868-1914), and Bertrand Russell. 
For Hegel, philosophical mathematics would simply involve a dialectical 
assessment of the concepts involved in dealing with ftgurations of space (geo-
metry) and time (the unit, arithmetic), and would include the distinction be-
tween the 'pure' and applied levels of the subject. 
See G. T. Kneebone 'Mathematical Logic and the foundation of mathe-
matics' (London, 1963), E. Carruccio 'Mathematics and Logic' (tr. Quigly, 
London, 1964): L. O. Kattsoff 'A Philosophy of Mathematics' (Iowa, 1949). 
235, 19 
Hades was the son of Cronos and Rhea (see note p. 315). When he was over-
thrown by Zeus a threefold division of the world took place: Zeus ruled heaven 
and earth, Poseidon the waters, and Hades the underworld, the regions of the 
dead. 
See the 'Iliad' IV, 59: V, 395 ff; IX, 569 ff; XV, 187 ff, XX, 61 ff: Hesiod 
'Theogony' 311; 455; 768; 774; 850: 'Works and Days' 153. 
236,29 
,a1£1 i:otalitiit aUet 'ilimeniionen/ see 'Jenenser Realphilosophie II' (ed. 
Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 1931) p. 14. Michelet's version read ,t$ i:otalitiit bet 
'ilimeniionen'• 
238,7 
See Newton 'Opticks' (3rd ed. London, 1721) pp. 375-376: 'It seems prob-
able, God, in the beginning, formed matter in solid, massy, hard, impenetrable, 
movable particles, of such sizes, ftgures, and with such other properties, and in 
such proportion to space, as most conduced to the end for which he formed 
them ... While the particles continue entire, they may compose bodies of one 
and the same nature and texture in all ages'. C£ his 'Mathematical Principles' 
(ed. Cajori, Berkeley, 1947) Bk. III Prop. VI, Cor. IV: A. R. and M. B. Hall 
'Newton's Theory of Matter' ('Isis' 1960 pp. 131-144). 
R. J. Boscovich (1711-1787), in his 'Theoria Philosophiae Naturalis' (Venice, 
1763, Eng. tr. J. M. Child, London, 1922) criticizes the theory that matter is 
impenetrable, and puts forward the view that it consists only of physical points 
endued with powers of attraction and repulsion. C£ J. Priestley (1733-1804) 
319 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
'History and Present State of Discoveries relating to Vision, Light, and Colours' 
(2 vols. London, 1772) p. 390. 
For late eighteenth century objections to the theory of the penetrability of 
matter, see Richard Price (1723-1791) 'A Free Discussion of the doctrines of 
Materialism and Philosophical Necessity' (London, 1778). Price's argument 
rests upon the axiom that, 'nothing can act where it is not'. C£ A. E. Woodruff 
'Action at a distance in Nineteenth Century Electrodynamics' ('Isis' 1962 pp. 
439-459). 
239,2 
,iJiefet ()tt weift nief)t nut auf einen anbettt fJin, fon(bettt) fJebt fief) felbft aUf, 
witb anbets': see 'Jenenser Realphilosophie II' (ed. Hoffmeister, Leipzig, 193 I) 
p. 15. Michelet's version is as follows, ,Q;in ()tt weift nut aUf einen anbeten fJin, 
fJebt fo fief) felbft auf unb witb ein anbetet'. 
239,4 
,obet bet ()tt ift bas fef)leef)tfJin betmittelte ~iet': see 'Jenenser Realphilosophie 
II' p. 15. Michelet substituted ,allgemeine' (universal) for ,betmittelte'. 
239, 8 
The Greek fragments relating to Zeno's views on motion are to be found in 
H. D. P. Lee's 'Zeno ofElea' (Cambridge, 1936) pt. III. Here, Hegel is evidently 
referring to Aristotle's 'Physics' bk. IV ch. 9, where Zeno's four celebrated 
dilemmas are dealt with. Zeno argued that a flying arrow cannot move because 
at any given moment it always occupies a space equal to itself, and everything 
which does this must be at rest. Aristotle points out (op. cit. 239b 31-34) that 
this argument rests upon the assumption that time consists of 'nows', and that 
this is a questionable proposition. 
This subject has recently attracted a great deal of attention: see Gilbert Ryle 
'Dilemmas' (Cambridge, 1954); V. C. Chappell 'Time and Zeno's Arrow' in 
'Journal of Philosophy' vol. 59 pp. 197-213 (1962); H. N. Lee 'Are Zeno's 
arguments based on a mistake?' in 'Mind vol. 14 pp. 563-590 (Oct. 1965); 
Adolf Griinbaum 'Modern Science and Zeno's Paradoxes' (Middletown Conn., 
1967): F. Cajori 'History of Zeno's arguments on motion' ('American Mathe-
matical Monthly' 1922 vol. 22 p. 114). 
239,23 
The original form of this phrase differs from Michelet's version of it, which 
is translated here. See 'Jenenser Realphilosophie II' pp. 16-17, ,~ie bie .8eit bie 
einfaef)e Seete, fo ift fie bet 5Begriff bet wafJten eeete, bet ~elt.' 
In the margin, Hegel wrote, 'Moments of Quantity, formerly pure being and 
not-being, here reality, or determinate being, i.e. space in its indifference and 
time in its otherness'. 
320 

NOTES 
239, 25 
Newton 'Opticks' (4th ed. London, 1730) bk. III pt. i query 28, 'And these 
things being rightly dispatch'd, does it not appear from the Phaenomena that 
there is a Being incorporeal, living, intelligent, omnipresent, who in infmite 
Space, as it were in his Sensory, sees the things themselves intimately, and 
throughly perceives them, and comprehends them wholly by their immediate 
presence to himself.' Cf. op. cit. query 31, where Newton speaks of God, 'who 
being in all places, is able by his will to move bodies within his boundless 
uniform sensorium'. 
Addison, in the 'Spectator' (no. 565, July 1714) brings out the point of 
Newton's remark, 'Others have considered infmite space as the Receptacle, or 
rather the Habitation of the Almighty: but the noblest and most exalted way 
of considering this infinite Space, is that of Sir Isaac Newton, who calls it the 
Sensorium of the Godhead. Brutes and Men have their Sensoriola, or little 
Sensoriums, by which they apprehend the Presence, and perceive the Actions, 
of a few Objects that lie contiguous to them. Their Knowledge and Observa-
tion turn within a very narrow Circle. But as God Almighty cannot but per-
ceive and know everything in which he resides, infinite Space gives Room to 
infinite Knowledge, and is, as it were, an Organ to Omniscience.' 
This observation of Newton's played an important part in the Leibniz-
Clarke correspondence: see 'The Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence' (ed. H. G. 
Alexander, Manchester, 1956). 
239,35 
,'l)iefe miidfe~t al£l bet mnie ift bie Sftei£lliniel: 'Jenenser Realphilosophie II' 
p. 19. Michelet omitted ,al£ll. In the margin Hegel wrote, 'The self-moving 
point, the quiescent unit.' 
240, 34 
This presentation of matter as the' quiescent identity' of space, time and motion 
is evidently meant to replace Newton's corpuscular theory (see note p. 319), 
and is an interesting anticipation of the corresponding dynamical concepts of 
modern physics: see Max Jammer 'Concepts of Mass' (New York, 1964): B. 
Russell 'The Principles of Mathematics' (7th imp.) London, 1956 §§ 437-441. 
Newton does not defme density. He begins his 'Mathematical Principles' 
with a defmition of mass, 'The quantity of matter is the measure of the same 
arising from its density and bulk conjointly ... It is this quantity that I mean 
hereafter everywhere under the name of body or mass. And the same is known 
by the weight of each body, for it is proportional to the weight, as I have found 
by experiments on pendulums .. .' Ernst Mach (1838-1916), in 'The Science of 
Mechanics (Chicago, 1919) ch. II iii points out that as density can only be 
defined as the mass of unit volume, Newton's use of the concept in a definition 
of mass involves him in a circular argument. For a somewhat unconvincing 
L 
321 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
defence of Newton on this point see H. Crew 'The Rise of Modern Physics' 
(Baltimore, 1928) p. 134. 
C£ Newton's 'Mathematical Principles' (ed. Cajori, Berkeley, 1947) pp. 
638-639: E. McMullin 'From Matter to Mass' in 'Boston Studies in the Phil-
osophy of Science' (New York, 1965) vol. II pp. 25-53. For a recent treatment 
of the subject involving physical factors see A. H. Cottrell 'The Mechanical 
Properties of Matter' (London, 1964). 
241, 17 
Kant 'Metaphysische Anfangsgriinde der Naturwissenschaft' (Riga, 1786). 
Hegel is evidently referring to the second main part of this work 'Metaphysische 
Anfangsgriinde der Dynamik'. See 'Immanuel Kant. Werke' (ed. W. Weis-
chedel, 6 vols. Wiesbaden, 1960) vol. V pp. 7-135. Cf. G. Martin 'Kant's 
Metaphysics and Theory of Science' (tr. Lucas, Manchester, 1951). 
241,24 
In his 'Science of Logic' (tr. Johnston and Struthers, 2 vols. London, 1961) 
vol. I pp. 192-197, Hegel treats the Kantian exposition of attraction and repulsion 
in an observation on a sub-category of Being-for-Self. 
242, 12 
In the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1827) Hegel added here 'the 
being-for-self as universal'. 
242,34 
See Newton's 'Mathematical Principles' (ed. Cajori, Berkeley, 1947) bk. I 
sect. xi, 'I have hitherto been treating of the attraction of bodies towards an 
immovable centre; though very probably there is no such thing existent in 
nature. For attractions are made towards bodies, and the actions of the bodies 
attracted and attracting are always reciprocal and equal, by Law III; so that if 
there are two bodies neither the attracted nor the attracting body is truly at rest, 
but both (by Cor. IV of the Laws of Motion), being as it were mutually attrac-
ted, revolve about a common centre of gravity.' 
The two references in this extract throw more light upon Hegel's statement. 
'Law III. To every action there is always opposed an equal reaction: or, 
the mutual actions of two bodies upon each other are always equal, and directed 
to contrary parts.' 
'Corollary IV. The common centre of gravity of two or more bodies does 
not alter its state of motion or rest by the actions of the bodies among them-
selves; and therefore the common centre of gravity of all bodies acting upon 
each other (excluding external actions and impediments) is either at rest, or 
moves uniformly in a right line.' 
In the scholium which concludes bk. I sect. xi Newton defmes attraction more 
closely. However, a letter he wrote to Cotes (28.iii.1713) makes it seem probable 
322 

NOTES 
that he would have countenanced the use of the word 'attraction' in Motte's 
translation of the 'Principia' (2 vols. London, 1729), despite the fact that the 
distinction between the centripetal forces by which bodies tend (petunt) 
towards each other and mere attraction is not so clearly apparent in Motte's 
English as it is in the orginal Latin. Newton uses the concrete Keplerian 
term 'tractio' for the former, and gives 'attractio' a more passive meaning. 
In Newton's Latin therefore, bodies 'trahunt' each other, but are 'attracta'. 
Hegel, using the Latin version, grasped this distinction rather better than 
some of his English contemporaries. See Alexandre Koyre 'Newtonian Studies' 
(London, 1965) appendices A, B, C. H. Metzger 'Attraction universelle et 
religion naturelle chez quelques commentateurs anglais de Newton' (Paris, 1937). 
Cf. I. B. Cohen 'Pemberton's Translation of Newton's Principia, with notes 
on Motte's Translation' ('Isis' 1963 pp. 319-351): A. E. Short 'Elementary 
Statics' (Oxford, 1955) ch. 9: J. Edelston 'Correspondence of Newton' (London, 
1850), p. 154 
243,2 
Newton op. cit. bk. iii prop. 7, 'That there is a power of gravity pertaining 
to all bodies, proportional to the several quantities of matter which they 
. , 
contaIn. 
234,6 
,'Ilie )8etein&eften, ttJeld)e bon einanbet te1JeUirt ttJetben, finb aoet aUe nut 
(fins, bide Q:ins., 
243, 18 
,fo ift fie nid)t 10 bumm, rus bie \l!f)ilof01Jf)en .. .' Cf. 'The Logic of Hegel' 
(tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963) §§ 96-98. 
243,27 
See G. S. Klugel 'Mathematisches Worterbuch' (Leipzig, 1803-1836) pt. iii 
pp. 402-429. C£ Newton 'Mathematical Principles' bk. i sect. 12, 'The attrac-
tive forces of spherical bodies.' 
244,20 
,\)lad) bet ffiaumoeftimmung, in ttJdd)et bie Seit aufgef)ooen ift., In the 
1817 and :i:827 editions of the 'Encyclopaedia', this read, ,I.nad) bem ffiaum, 
in ttJdd)em., 
244,27 
Galileo was the first to discover the so-called law of inertia: see his 'Discorsi 
demostrazioni matematiche' (Leyden, 1638, Eng. tr. Crew, New York, 1914), 
by considering a body falling down an inclined plane and then ascending a 
second plane with the velocity so acquired. He observed that the nearer the 
second plane approaches the horizontal, the less will be the retardation of the 
323 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
body, and that if it is horizontal, the body would continue to move indefmitely 
with a constant velocity if air resistance and friction could be removed. 
This law reappears in Newton's 'Mathematical Principles' (ed. Cajori, 
Berkeley, 1947) definition iii, 'The vis insita, or innate force of matter, is a 
power of resisting, by which every body, as much as in it lies, continues in its 
present state, whether it be of rest, or of moving uniformly forwards in a right 
line.' 
Ernst Mach (1838-1916), in 'The Science of Mechanics', points out that it was 
Galileo's successors who developed a theory of inertia out of his description of 
this situation, and that Newton's third definition is rendered superfluous by 
his subsequent definitions (iv-viii) of force, inertia being included and given in 
the fact that forces are accelerative. 
Hegel avoids this fault in the traditional treatment of inertia, by taking it to 
involve a body's having motion external to it. He would therefore have denied 
that a body's 'moving uniformly forwards in a right line' is an example of 
inertia. He may have been influenced by Kant and Euler's questioning of the 
concept: see 'Neuer Lehrbegriff der Bewegung und Ruhe' (1758, ed. O. Biik, 
Leipzig, 1907). Cf. Max Jammer 'Concepts of Mass' (New York, 1964); P. 
Frank 'Foundations of Physics' ('International Encyclopedia of Unified Science' 
vol. i, part 2, iii 10, Chicago, 1955). 
245,8 
Newton, 'Mathematical Principles' (ed. Cajori, Berkeley, 1947), 'Axioms, or 
Laws of Motion. Law 1. Every body continues in its state of rest, or of uniform 
motion in a right line, unless it is compelled to change that state by forces 
impressed upon it.' 
245,23 
,~ie IDCaffe, in bie;em 6inne fi~;itt, f)eiflt triige: e5 ift aver nicf)t ;0, baa ba5 
ffiuf)en bamit aU5gebrMt Itliirbe.' Hoffmeister ('Jenenser Realphilosophie' II 
p. 21) suggests this version of the sentence. Hegel's punctuation of the following 
sentences differs considerably from Michelet's. 
245,32 
Jean Bernoulli (1667-1748) was the first to observe that as the same body can 
receive different gravitational accelerations, a distinction should be made be-
tween mass and weight: see his 'Meditatio de Natura Centri Oscillationis' (1714); 
'Opera Omnia' (4 vols. Lausanne and Geneva, 1742) vol. ii p. 168. It was the 
observations on the pendulum made between 1671 and 1673 by Jean Richer 
(d. 1696), which led him to make this distinction: see 'Observations astrono-
miques et physiques faites en l'isle de Cayenne' (Paris, 1679); J. W. Olmsted 
'The Scientific Expedition of Jean Richer to Cayenne, 1672-1673' ('Isis' 1942 
pp. II7-128). Cf. Newton's proof of the proportionality of mass and weight 
324 

NOTES 
on the same spot of the earth, by observations on pendulums of different 
materials: 'Mathematical Principles' bk. ii sect. 6. On Newton's subsequent 
definition of mass see the note on p. 321. 
Ernst Mach (1838-1916) criticized Newton's definition of mass in that it 
involves a circular argument and the obscure concept of a 'quantity of matter'. 
Hegel's definition of mass as 'the unity of the moments of rest and motion' etc. 
accords rather well with Mach's definition of equal masses, 'All those bodies are 
of equal mass, which, mutually acting on each other, produce in each other 
equal and opposite accelerations.'-'The Science of Mechanics' II v. 
245, 34 
In the margin at this juncture, Hegel wrote, ,?Reibung, ~ibetftanb bet Buft; 
l.l!enbeI fortfdJtoingen -
lo£lgefdJoHene Sfugel 5ufiiUig.' Jenenser Realphiloso-
phie' II p. 22 n. I. 
246,4 
See Hegel's 'Philosophy of Right' (tr. Knox, Oxford, 1962) §§ 103-104. 
246, 12 
See Lazare Nicholas Marguerite Carnot (1753-1823), 'Essai sur les machines 
en general' (Paris, 1783), and the extension of this work in, 'Principes fonda-
mentaux de l'equilibre et du mouvement' (Paris, 1803). 
Carnot regards the action of a continuous force such as gravity as a series of 
infinitely small impacts. In his studies on the mechanics of systems he introduces 
the concept of geometrical motions, that is to say, motions that have no effect on 
the actions which are exerted between the bodies of a system, but depend only 
upon the conditions of constraint between the parts of the system. This led him 
to establish his theorem of the impact of 'hard bodies', 'In the impact of hard 
bodies, the sum of living forces before the impact is always equal to the sum 
of the living forces after the impact together with the sum of the living forces 
that each of these bodies would have if it moved freely with only the velocity 
which it lost in the impact.' 
Cf. Rene Dugas 'A History of Mechanics' (tr. Maddox, London, 1957) 
ch.lo. 
246,27 
Cf. Newton 'Mathematical Principles' de£ ii, 'The quantity of motion is the 
measure of the same, arising from the velocity and quantity of matter con-
jointly.' In more modern mechanics this 'quantitas motus' as it is called by New-
ton throughout the 'Principia', is known as momentum, and is measured by the 
product of mass and velocity. 
For the history of the concept see Ernst Mach (1838-1916) 'The Science of 
Mechanics' III ii 3-4. 
325 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
247, 14 
See John Wallis (1616-1703) 'Mechanica sive de Motu' (3 pts., London, 
1670-1671). Wallis observed that if a body is rotating about an axis, and its 
motion is suddenly checked by the retention of one of its points, the force of 
the percussion will vary with the distance of this point from the axis. This 
observation led him into investigations of what he called the centre of percussion, 
i.e. the point at which the intensity of impact is greatest. 
247,25 
,mber fein @an3es betlaHenb, ift er urn ebenfo inteniit>eres ~inS/ The text 
of the manuscript is clearly corrupt at this juncture, and Hoffmeister amends it 
as follows, ,iein @an3es t>erlaHenb ift (et ein) urn fo (~egel- ebenfo) inten~ 
fit>etes ~inSl. See Jenenser Realphilosophie II' p. 42. 
247,28 
See I. Todhunter 'A History of Elasticity' (2 vols., Cambridge, 1886-1893): 
A. H. Cottrell 'The Mechanical Properties of Matter' (London, 1964) pp. 82-
155: S. Timoshenko and J. N. Goodier 'Theory of Elasticity' (New York, 
1951): A. E. Green and W. Zerna 'Theoretical Elasticity' (Oxford, 1954). 
247,38 
See Newton's parallelogram of forces and the second of his laws of motion 
(note p. 358). 
248, 1 
In 1666 the Royal Society set certain of its members, including Huyghens, 
Wallis and Wren, the problem of investigating the laws of impact. Their 
papers were communicated between November 26, 1668 and January 4, 
1669, and constituted the fIrst systematic treatment of the subject: see Newton 
'Mathematical Principles', the scholium to the initial axioms. 
According to Wallis, the decisive factor in impact is momentum, or the 
product of the mass (pondus) into velocity. All his theorems may be brought 
together in the formula u= (mv+m'v')j(m+m'), in which m,m' denote the 
masses, v,v' the velocities before impact, and u the velocity after impact. See 
his 'Mechanica sive de Motu' ( 3 pts., London, 1670-1671). 
For Huyghens' mature views see his 'Opuscula posthuma': 'De Motu 
Corporum ex Percussione' (Leyden, 1703). For a survey of eighteenth century 
views on the subject see Ernst Mach (1838-1916) 'The Science of Mechanics' iii 
4, 4-10: W. L. Scott 'The Signiftcance of "Hard Bodies" in the history of 
scientilic thought' ('Isis' 1959 pp. 199-210). 
248, 5 
Newton's 'Mathematical Principles' law iii, 'To every action there is always 
326 

NOTES 
opposed an equal reaction: or, the mutual actions of two bodies upon each other 
are always equal, and directed to contrary parts.' Cf. V. F. Lenzen 'Newton's 
Third Law of Motion' ('Isis' 1937 pp. 258-260); A. E. Short 'Elementary 
Statics' (Oxford, 1955) ch. 6. 
248, 19 
It has often been said for example, that the principle enunciated by Jean Ie 
Rond d'Alembert (1717-1783), see his 'Traite de dynamique' (Paris, 1743), that 
the internal forces in an assemblage of particles constituting a material body 
form a system in equilibrium, reduces all dynamics to statics. For a concise 
survey of theories relating to force from Descartes to Lagrange, see A. Wolf 
'A History of Science, Technology, and Philosophy in the Eighteenth Century' 
(London, 1938) pp. 61-71: Charles Hutton 'A Philosophical and Mathematical 
Dictionary' (2 vols., London, 1815) vol. i pp. 533-538. Forces were defined as 
being motive, accelerative, retardive, constant, variable etc., and the general 
conception of the subject had changed very little by the end of the 1820'S: see 
Neil Arnott (1788-1874) 'Elements of Physics' (3rd. ed. London, 1828) vol. i 
pp·45-IIO• 
On the new critical attitude of the mid-nineteenth century, anticipated here 
by Hegel, see Max Jammer 'Concepts of Force' (Cambridge, Mass., 1957). 
248,28 
'Hypomochlium', i.e. the fulcrum: see Archimedes' proof of the law of the 
lever, which depends fundamentally on the extension of two ideas: (i) that 
equal weights at equal distances from the fulcrum are in equilibrium, and (ii) 
that the centre of gravity of two equal weights not having the same centre of 
gravity is at the middle point of the line connecting their individual centres of 
gravity. 
Archimedes 'De Planorum Aequilibriis' props. vi and vii: see 'The Works of 
Archimedes' (ed. Heath, 2 pts. Cambridge, 1897, 1912); 'Des unvergleichlichen 
Archimedis Kunst-Bucher' (ed. Sturm, 2 pts. Nuremberg, 1670); 'Archimedes 
von Syrakus vorhandene Werke' (tr. and ed. Nizze, Stralsund, 1824). 
Cf. John Playfair (1748-1819) 'Outlines of Natural Philosophy' (2 vols., 
Edinburgh, 1812); Ernst Mach's criticism that in this exposition Archimedes 
presupposed everything he wished to prove: 'The Science of Mechanics'; 
J. M. Child 'Archimedes' principle of the balance and some criticisms upon it' 
in C. Singer 'Studies in the history and method of science' (2 vols., Oxford, 
I9I7, I92I). 
248,37 
See Newton's law of the conservation of the centre of gravity: 'Mathe-
matical Principles' bk. i prop. lxi theorem 24. 
327 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
2m 
m 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
D 
A 
S 
B 
C 
Imagine in A and B two masses, 2m and m, in mutual action, say that of 
electrical repulsion; their centre of gravity is situated at S, where BS= 2AS. 
The accelerations they impart to each other are oppositely directed and in the 
inverse proportion of the masses. If, then, in consequence of the mutual action, 
2m describes a distance AD, m will necessarily describe a distance BC= 2AD. 
The point S will still remain the position of the centre of gravity, as CS = 2DS. 
Therefore, two masses cannot, by mutual action, displace their common centre 
of gravity. 
C£ Daniel Bernoulli (1700-1782), 'Hydrodynamica, seu de Viribus et 
Motibus Fluidorum Commentarii' (Strassburg, 1738), in which the attempt is 
made to apply the idea that when a liquid sinks, the space through which its 
centre of gravity actually descends is equal to the space through which the 
centre of gravity of the separated parts affected with the velocities acquired in 
the fall can ascend. 
249, 13 
Newton 'Mathematical Principles' law i, 'Every body continues in its state 
of rest, or of uniform motion in a right line, unless it is compelled to change 
that state by forces impressed upon it.' 
249, 17 
In the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1827), Hegel added the following 
remark here, 'Descartes' proposition that the universe always contains the 
same amount of motion, is of this kind.' 
See 'The Philosophical Works of Descartes' (tr. Haldane and Ross, 2 vols., 
Cambridge, I9II) vol. I p. 267. Hegel is evidently referring to the 'Principles 
of Philosophy' pt. II princ. 36, 'That God is the First Cause of movement and 
that He always preserves an equal amount of movement in the universe.' 
Descartes distinguishes between the vulgar conception of motion as the passing 
of a body from one place to another, and the 'true or scientific' conception of 
it as the transfer of matter from the vicinity of those bodies with which it was 
in immediate contact into the vicinity of other bodies. 
Leibniz questioned this Cartesian tenet in 'A short demonstration of the re-
markable error of Descartes and others, concerning the natural law by which 
they think that the Creator always preserves the same quantity of motion.' 
('Acta Eruditorum' 1686.) Cf. J. 1. R. D'Alembert (1717-1783) 'Traite de 
dynamique' (Paris, 1743); E. Mach 'The Science of Mechanics' III iii 4. On the 
loss of kinetic energy in collisions see 1. N. M. Carnot (1753-1823) 'Essais sur 
les machines en general' (Paris, 1783). 
328 

NOTES 
249,20 
In Hegel's day, a distinction was drawn between the relatively perpetual 
motion of, for example, electricity and the expansion and contraction of metal 
rods brought about by changes of temperature (perpetuum mobile electricum 
et physicum), and absolute 'perpetuum mobile mechanicum'.1t is clearly the second 
of these that Hegel has in mind. 
See C. G. Kratzenstein (1723-1795), 'De horologio perpetuo mobili' ('Novi 
Commentarii Academiae Petropolitanae' II 1751 p. 222). In 1775 the French 
Academy decided to consider no further claims that perpetual motion machines 
had been constructed, 'Memoires de I'Academie' 1775 p. 65. Cf. L. N. M. 
Carnot (1753-1823), 'Principes fondamentaux de l'equilibre et du mouvement' 
(Paris, 1803) 8. § 281; Thomas Young (1772-1829) 'Lectures on Natural 
Philosophy' (2 vols. London, 1807) vol. 1 p. 91, where the possibility of a 
'perpetuum mobile mechanicum' is ruled out. 
249,32 
Newton 'Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy' (tr. A. Motte, ed. 
F. Cajori, Berkeley, 1947): 'A stone, whirled about in a sling, endeavours to 
recede from the hand that turns it; and by that endeavour, distends the sling, 
and that with so much the greater force, as it is revolved with greater velocity, 
and as soon as it is let go, flies away.' 
250, I 
Newton loco cit., 'If a leaden ball, projected from the top of a mountain by 
the force of gunpowder, with a given velocity, and in a direction parallel to the 
horizon, is carried in a curved line to the distance of two miles before it falls 
to the ground; the same, if the resistance of the air were taken away, with a 
double or decuple velocity, would fly twice or ten times as far. And by in-
creasing the velocity, we may at pleasure increase the distance to which it might 
be projected; ... so that ... lastly ... it might never fall to earth, but go for-
wards into the celestial spaces, and proceed in its motion in infinitum.' 
250,6 
Hegel inserts a foot-note here in which he quotes again from the Latin 
version of the 'Mathematical Principles' giving the following emphasis, 'Newton 
(ibid. Defin. viii.) says expressly, 'I likewise call attractions and impulses, in 
the same sense, accelerative, and motive; and use the words attraction, impulse 
or propensity of any sort towards a centre, promiscuously, and indifferently, 
one for another; considering those forces not physically, but mathematically: 
wherefore the reader is not to imagine that by those words I anywhere take upon 
me to defme the kind, or the manner of any action, the causes or the physical 
reason thereof, or that I attribute forces, in a true or physical sense, to certain 
centres (which are only mathematical points); when at any time I happen to 
L* 
329 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
speak of centres as attracting, or as endued with attractive powers." Merely by 
introducing the concept of forces, Newton wrenched the determinations out of 
physical reality, and made them essentially independent. At the same time he 
continued consistently to treat these representations as physical objects. Yet in 
the professedly purely physical and supposedly unmetaphysical expositions of 
what he called the system of the world, he spoke of such mutually independent 
and distinct forces, as well as their attractions, impacts and suchlike, as if they 
were physical existences, and treated them according to the principle of identity.' 
Hegel is right when he points out that although Newton expressly (and 
repeatedly) makes the distinction between the mathematical representations of 
the problems he is dealing with and the physical reality of the situations he is 
describing, it often appears to be absent from his expositions. Nevertheless, 
it is quite certain that the passage quoted here by Hegel expresses his opinion 
on the matter, and that the attribution of distinctness and physical reality to the 
forces mentioned in the 'Principia' is due mainly to his interpreters, and not to 
Newton himself. 
Newton frequently stated for example, that he was ignorant of the physical 
nature of gravity; see his letter to Bentley of January 17, 1693, 'You some times 
speak of gravity as essential and inherent to matter. Pray, do ascribe that notion 
to me; for the cause of gravity is what I do not pretend to know, and therefore 
would take more time to consider of it.' Alexandre Koyre, 'Newtonian Studies' 
(London, 1965) p. 163, remarks that by ignoring Newton's distinction between 
the mathematical and physical aspects of his expositions, 'the eighteenth century, 
with very few exceptions, became reconciled to the ununderstandable.' 
Cf. 'Four Letters from Sir Isaac Newton to Doctor Bentley' (London, 1756); 
Ernst Mach 'The Science of Mechanics' II iii 6; Newton 'Mathematical Princi-
ples' (ed. Cajori, Berkeley, 1947) pp. 632-635; A. E. Heath 'Newton's influence 
on method in the physical sciences' in W. J. Greenstreet 'Isaac Newton 1642-
1727' (London, 1927) pp. 130-133; A. J. Snow 'Matter and Gravity in Newton's 
Physical Philosophy' (Oxford, 1926); C. Isenkrahe 'Das Rathsel von der 
Schwerkraft' (Brunswick, 1879). 
The slight inaccuracies which have been discovered of recent years in New-
ton's laws, only become apparent in astronomy or nuclear physics, when very 
large or very small measurements are being made. Newtonian mechanics still 
provides the broad basis of the great bulk of the work being done in engineering 
and general physics: see for example A. S. Ramsey 'An Introduction to the 
theory of Newtonian attraction' (Cambridge, 1940). Cf. P. Frank 'Foundations 
of Physics' in 'International Encyclopedia of Unified Science' (Chicago, 1955) 
vol. I pp. 423-504. 
25 1,9 
The following lines are condensed by Michelet from a passage roughly four 
times as long: see Jenenser Realphilosophie II' pp. 40-41. 
330 

NOTES 
251, 15 
At this juncture, Hegel entered the following note in the margin: see Jenenser 
Realphilosophie II' p. I07, 'In the pulley, lever and centre; friction on the 
pulley, so that a weight on one side, quickly released, tears the rope and does 
not pull the other after it, see Kastner-or friction becomes pure intensity, 
which is free from gravity, as is even the point of the lever. Individuality which 
has weight. 
That which exhibits itself here in dimensions, is immediately one-or the 
centre of gravity makes itself in this way into the whole individual body.' 
See Abraham Gotthelf Kastner (1719-1800) 'Anfangsgrunde der h6heren 
Mechanik' (Leipzig, 1765, 2nd ed. Leipzig, 1793). 
251, 17 
,bet 6d)ltlettJunft'. Michelet changed this to ,hie 6d)ltlete' (gravity). 
252,8 
See the note on p. 329. Certain papers on this subject by the severely practical 
and military Newtonian Benjamin Robins (1707-1751), were collected and 
published as the famous 'New Principles of Gunnery' (London, 1742). Euler 
translated the work into German, 'Neue Grundsatze der Artillerie' (Berlin, 
1745), supplying it with an immense commentary, and Charles Hutton (1737-
1823) brought out a new edition of it as late as 1805. Robins makes much of the 
importance of air resistance in ballistics. C( A. Wolf' A History of Science ... 
in the Eighteenth Century' (London, 1938) pp. 72-73. 
252,20 
See Charles Hutton (1737-1823) 'A Philosophical and Mathematical Dic-
tionary' (2 vols. London, 1815) vol. II p. 163, 'A pendulum raised to B, through 
the arc of the circle AB, will fall, and rise again, through an equal arc, to a 
point equally high, as D; and thence will fall to A, and again rise to B; and thus 
continue rising and falling perpetually, supposing neither friction nor resist-
, 
ance. 
This doctrine originated in the work of Christian Huyghens (1629-1695), 
who was the first to investigate the principles and properties of pendulums in a 
successful manner. He maintained that if the centre of motion is fixed and all 
resistance is removed, a pendulum will continue to oscillate indefinitely, that 
all its vibrations will be perfectly isochronal, and that its arc of vibration will 
remain constant: see his 'Horologium Oscillatorium' (Paris, 1673 Germ. tr. 
Heckscher and Oettingen, Ostwalds Klassiker no. 192); A. H. Bell 'Christian 
Huygens' (London, 1947). 
For Newton's treatment of the pendulum see 'Mathematical Principles' hk. I 
sect. 10; hk. II sect. 6. Cf. John Playfair (1749-1819) 'Outlines of Natural 
Philosophy' vol. I pp. 120-128 (Edinburgh, 1812); Thomas Reid 'Treatise on 
331 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY 01= NATURE 
Clock and Watch Making' (Edinburgh, 1826); A. Wolf' A History of Science, 
Technology and Philosophy in the Eighteenth Century' (London, 1938) pp. 
75-81. 
252,28 
Louis-Benjamin Francoeur (1773-1849) came of a musical family. His 
father, Louis-Joseph (1738-1804) was employed at the French court as a musician 
and wrote some valuable works on musical theory. 
Louis-Benjamin was born in Paris, and lived the whole of his life there. He 
was not educated for an academic career, but in 1795, when he was already 
married, he entered the newly founded Paris Polytechnic, and soon discovered 
his flare for mathematics. He then taught the subject at a central school in Paris 
for some years. In 1798 he gained a minor teaching post at the Polytechnic, and 
when he finally left this institution in 1804, continued to examine there. In 1805 
he was appointed teacher of differential and integral calculus (mathematiques 
transcendantes) at a Paris Grammar School, and in 1809 professor of higher 
algebra at the Sorbonne. He taught in the Science Faculty of the University, 
mainly algebra, geodesy and the theory of probabilities. 
As his loyalty to the royalist cause was suspect, he was penalized in 1815, and 
although he kept his position at the Sorbonne, he was not allowed to examine. 
In 1842 he was elected a member of the Academy of Sciences: see 1. Francoeur 
'Notice sur la vie et les ouvrages de M. 1. B. Francoeur' (Paris, 1853); 'Nouvelle 
Biographie generale' (ed. Hofer, 41 vols. Paris, 1855-1862); E. G. Gersdorf 
'Leipziger Repertorium' (72 vols. Leipzig, 1843-1860) 1850. 
Francoeur's works on pure and applied mathematics are distinguished by 
their accuracy, orderliness and clarity of exposition. Several of them were 
translated into English: see 'Cours complet de Mathematique pures' (2 vols. 
Paris, 1809), 'A complete course of Pure Mathematics' (tr. R. Blakelock, 2 vols. 
Cambridge and London, 1830); 'Le Dessin lineaire' (Paris, 1819), 'Lineal Draw-
ing' (London, 1824). His works on applied mathematics proved to be particularly 
popular: 'Uranographie, ou traite elementaire d' Astronomie' (Paris, 1812) 
reached a fifth edition by 1853, and 'Geodesie ou traite de la figure de la Terre' 
(Paris, 1835) an eighth edition by 1895. See also his 'Elements de Statique' 
(Paris, 1810) and 'Astronomie pratique' (Paris, 1830). 
Hegel is referring here to his 'Traite elementaire de Mecanique, adopte dans 
l'instruction publique' (Paris, 1801), which reached a fifth edition by 1825. The 
book begins with a series of definitions, and then falls into four main sections: (i) 
Statics, dealing with forces, gravity, machines and obstacles (the section quoted 
by Hegel); (ii) Dynamics, dealing with movement in lines, curves and systems; 
(iii) Hydrostatics, dealing with equilibrium, pressures and density; and (iv) Hydro-
dynamics, dealing with the movements of fluids. The work probably interested 
Hegel on account of the potentially 'speculative' nature of this arrangement. 
332 

NOTES 
Francoeur deals with friction on pp. 174-184, and Hegel is referring to the 
following passages: 
'4° Le frottement ne depend pas de l'Itendue des surfaces en contact, fe poids du 
corps restant fa meme. Ce principe, atteste par l' experience, parolt d' abord 
singulier; cependant on peut observer que, suivant qu' on fait frotter un paralleli-
pipede sur 1'une ou 1'autre de ses faces, les points de contact sont plus ou moins 
nombreux, mais que chacun d' eux porte un poids moins ou plus considerable, 
et il paroit qu'il y a compensation entre ces deux effets. Cependant si les corps 
frottant etoit termine par une pointe, comme ce corps traceroit par son poids 
un sillon sur la surface frottee, ce cas doit etre excepte de la regIe. 
5° Le frottement est proportionnel a fa pression, toutes choses egales d' ailleurs; 
c' est-a.-dire qu' on eprouve une resistance d' autant plus grande que Ie corps 
presse davantage. V oici comment on doit entendre cette proposition, qui va 
servir de fondement a. tout ce que nous aurons a. dire.' 
252,40 
This analysis of dry friction accords fairly well with the classical view of the 
subject as established by C. A. Coulomb (1736-I806) in 'Theorie des machines 
simples, en ayant regard au frottement de leurs parties et a. la roideur des cor-
dages' (Paris, 1779, newed. 1820), Samuel Vince (1749-1821) in 'On the motion 
of bodies affected by friction' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' I785 p. I65), and A. J. 
Morin (I795-I880) in 'Notions fondamentales de mecanique' (Paris, I855, Eng. 
tr. New York, I860). G. Amontons (I663-I705) was the first to maintain that 
the magnitude of friction depends upon the force with which the surfaces press 
each other, and not upon the extent of these surfaces: see 'Sur la resistance causee 
dans les machines par Ie frottement et par Ie roideur des cordes.' ('Mem. de 
1'Acad. de Paris' I699); cf. J. H. Lambert (I728-I777) 'Sur Ie frottement' 
('Mem. de l'Acad. de Berlin' I772 and I776), where this thesis is questioned. 
The 'laws of friction, which are simply empirical and not strictly accurate, 
are generally forma ted as follows: 
(i) The friction is just sufficient to prevent sliding provided the friction 
required to do so is not greater than a certain fraction of the normal reaction. 
(ii) The value f1- of this fraction is constant for any two materials in contact. 
It is called the coefficient of friction. 
(iii) When sliding is taking place the friction opposes the motion and assumes 
its maximum value, which is f1- times the normal reaction. See D. E. Rutherford 
'Classical Mechanics' (Edinburgh, 1964) p. 41. 
During Hegel's lifetime, most of the research into this subject was concerned 
with the relation between friction and pressure, and special attention was paid 
to the specific substances and conditions under observation. Very few generaflaws 
were confidently enunciated: see for example George Rennie (1791-1866) 
'Experiments on the friction and abrasion of surfaces and solids.' ('Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' 1829 pp. 143-170). This caution was justified, for apart from the 
333 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
distinctions between dry, fluid, internal and external friction, a comprehensive 
theory of the dry friction mentioned here by Hegel has yet to be worked out. It 
would involve a consideration of the influence of molecular attraction under 
conditions where the mating surfaces are in very intimate contact, of the defor-
mation and tearing of surface irregularities, the generation of high local tem-
peratures and adhesion at contact points, the relative hardness of mating sur-
faces, and the presence of thin surface films of oxide, oil, dirt, or other substances. 
It would in fact be a physical as much as a mechanical matter: see F. P. Bowden 
and D. Tabor 'The Friction and Lubrication of Solids' (2 vols. Oxford, 1950, 
1964); Robert Davies 'Friction and Wear' (Amsterdam, 1959); M. Lavik 
'Mechanisms of Solid Friction' (Amsterdam, 1964). 
253, II 
,et ge'£)t abet au£; l:1On bet beftimmten/ Michelet substitutes ,babei' for ,aber, 
and Hoffmeister suggests ,MtJat': Jenenser Realphilosophie II' p. 39. 
253, 12 
The motion of anything but a vertically trajected projectile, even if air 
resistance and the motion of the earth are not taken into consideration, is a 
parabola, and never becomes 'simple fall'. See Thomas Rutherforth (1712-
1771) 'A System of Natural Philosophy' (2 vols. Cambridge, 1748) vol. I pp. 
126-139: Charles Hutton (1737-1823) 'A Philosophical and Mathematical 
Dictionary' (2 vols. London, 1815) vol. II pp. 247-252; Ernst Mach 'The Science 
of Mechanics' IIi 18-19; H. Weiler 'Mechanics' (London, 1957) ch. ix; D. E. 
Rutherford 'Classical Mechanics' (Edinburgh, 1964) §§ 35-37-
254,6 
See Alexandre Koyre 'A Documentary History of the Problem of Fall from 
Kepler to Newton' ('Trans. Amer. phil. Soc.' new series vol. 45 pt. 4 pp. 329-
395: Oct. 1955). 
254, II 
See for example Newton's 'Mathematical Principles' bk. I sect. vii, 'The 
rectilinear ascent and descent of bodies.' 
254, 14 
Hegel inserts the following foot-note at this juncture, 'It can hardly be 
denied that this so-called accelerative force has been most unfortunately named, 
since the effect it is supposed to have in each moment of time is uniform and 
constant. It is in fact the empirical factor in the magnitude of fall, which is a unit 
of 15 feet on the surface of the earth. The acceleration consists solely of the 
addition of this empirical unit in each moment of time. But on the other hand, 
334 

NOTES 
acceleration might with equal plausibility be attributed to what is called the force 
of inertia, the action of which is held to account for the persistence of the velocity 
attained at the end of each moment of time, i.e. inertia contributes by adding this 
velocity to the said empirical magnitude: and this velocity is greater at the end 
of each moment of time than at the end of the preceding moment.' 
cf. Newton 'Mathematical Principles' definition vii, 'The accelerative quan-
tity of a centripetal force is the measure of the same, proportional to the velocity 
which it generates in a given time.' Newton goes on to say that at equal distances 
the force of gravity, 'is the same everywhere; because ... it equally accelerates all 
falling bodies, whether heavy or light, great or small'. 
See also op. cit. definition viii, 'I refer the motive force to the body as an 
endeavour and propensity of the whole towards a centre, arising from the 
propensities of the several parts taken together; the accelerative force to the 
place of the body, as a certain power diffused from the centre to all places around 
to move the bodies that are in them ... I here design only to give a mathematical 
notion of those forces, without considering their physical causes and seats. 
Wherefore the accelerative force will stand in the same relation to the motive 
as celerity does to motion. For the quantity of motion arises from the celerity 
multiplied by the quantity of matter; and the motive force arises from the 
accelerative force multiplied by the same quantity of matter. For the sum of the 
actions of the accelerative force, upon the several particles of the body, is the 
motive force of the whole.' 
Newton was not of course the first to define accelerative force; to the Oxford 
scholastics of the fifteenth century it was already a commonplace: see Pierre 
Duhem 'Les origines de la statique' (2 vols. Paris, I907); 'Le mouvement absolu 
et Ie mouvement relatif' (Montligeon, I907). 
254,22 
See the note on p. 323. Ernst Mach (I838-I916) observes, with regard to 
Newton's definitions, that, 'It is ... a matter of taste and of form whether we 
shall embody the explication of the idea of force in one or in several definitions. 
In point of principle, the Newtonian definitions are open to no objections'-. 
'The Science of Mechanics' II vii 2. 
254,25 
See Newton op. cit., the scholium to the axioms, 'When a body is falling, the 
uniform force of its gravity acting equally, impresses, in equal intervals of time, 
equal forces upon that body, and therefore generates equal velocities; and in the 
whole time impresses a whole force, and generates a whole velocity proportional 
to the time.' 
Cf. Galileo's 'Discorsi e dimostrazioni matematiche' (Leyden, I638 Eng. tr. 
Crew, New York, I914), in which the basic question asked is not why but how 
335 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
do heavy bodies fall. His demonstration of uniformly accelerated motion is as 
follows:-
B 
F 
o 
C 
G 
A 
'On the straight line OA let the successive portions represent the times 
elapsed. Erect perpendiculars (ordinates) at the extremities of these portions to 
represent the velocities acquired. Any portion of the line OA then denotes the 
time of descent elapsed, and the corresponding perpendicular the velocity 
acquired in such time.' 
It will be observed that at instant C, when half the time of descent OA has 
elapsed, the velocity CD is also half the final velocity AB. 
It will also be observed that at the two instants E and G, which are equally 
distant in opposite directions from the instant C, the velocities EF and GH fall 
short of and exceed the mean velocity CD by the same amount. 
Consequently, whatever loss is suffered in the first half as compared with 
uniform motion, with half the final velocity, is made up in the second half. We 
may therefore regard the total distance as having been uniformly traversed with 
half the final velocity. Consequently, if we make the fmal velocity v proportional 
to the time of descent t, we shall obtain v=gt, where g denotes the final 
velocity acquired in unit of time-the so-called acceleration. 
The space s descended through is therefore given by the equation s= (gt/2) or 
S=gt2/2.' 
255, 10 
At this juncture, Hegel inserts the following foot-note: 'Lagrange, in his own 
way, employs the straightforward and perfectly valid procedure in his 'Theorie 
des fonctions': see pt. III ch. i 'Application de la Theorie a la Mecanique'. He 
takes the mathematical treatment of functions as given, and in his application of 
the same to mechanics, discovers that the fi and bt2 involved in s=fi occur in 
nature; s=ct3 does not occur there. At this juncture it is quite right that there 
should be no attempt to prove that s=bt2, but that this relationship should 
336 

NOTES 
simply be accepted as occurring in nature. In the development of the function; 
1 becomes 1=8, and as the series expressing the space traversed in 8 time can 
only make use of the first two terms, the others are omitted. As is usual with 
Lagrange, this circumstance is dealt with in an analytical manner. It is however 
only because the first two terms have a determination of a real nature, that they 
are treated as being of significance to the object, 'on voit que les fonctions primes 
et secondes se presentent naturellement' (Hegel's emphasis) 'dans la mecanique, OU 
elles ont une value et une signification determinees.' (ibid. 4.5). It is true that 
at this point Lagrange falls into Newtonian expressions, abstract or simply uni-
form velocity derived from the force of inertia, and an accelerative force, and 
so also introduces the mental fabrications of an infinitely small space of time (8) 
having a beginning and an end. This in no way prejudices the legitimacy of his 
procedure however, in which, instead of these determinations being used to 
prove the law, the relevant aspect of the law is taken up as it is presented in 
experience, and then submitted to mathematical treatment.' 
Cf. A. 1. Crelle (1780-1855) 'Lagranges mathematische Werke' (3 vols. 
Berlin, 1823-1824) vol. I p. 572, where the observation is made that Lagrange is 
working here, 'merely in relation to observation and experience'. Hegel deals at 
length with Lagrange's differential calculus, as a sub-category of quantum, in 
the 'Science of Logic' (tr. Johnston and Struthers, 2 vols. London, 1961) vol. I 
pp. 276-318: see esp. p. 281. 
Joseph Louis Lagrange (1736-1813) was well known in Berlin: he had 
succeeded Euler as director of the mathematical department of the Berlin 
Academy in 1766, and remained in the city until 1787; see J. J. Virey 'Precis 
historique sur la vie et la mort de Joseph-Louis Lagrange' (Paris, 1813). The 
'Theorie des fonctions analytiques' (Paris, 1797) was republished in vol. iii of 
the 'Journal de l'ecole polytechniclue' (Paris, 1813). The main object of the 
work is to set calculus on a sound basis by relieving the mind of the difficult 
conception of a limit. In Newton's 'Method of Fluxions' (1671, tr. Colson, 
London, 1736) there is no way of finding the magnitudes of the limiting ratio, 
for as the arc and chord are taken to be equal not before or after but only when 
they vanish, they have no being at the very moment when they should be 
caught and equated. Lagrange comments as follows on this, 'That method has 
the great inconvenience of considering quantities in the state in which they 
cease, so to speak, to be quantities; for though we can always well conceive the 
ratios of two quantities as long as they remain finite, that ratio offers to the mind 
no clear and precise ideas as soon as both its terms become nothing at the same 
time.' 
He attempts to overcome the difficulty by developing Taylor's series for the 
expansion of variables in powers thereof: see Brook Taylor (1685-1731) 
'Methodus incrementorum directa et inversa' (London, 1715); he was in fact 
the first to show the power of this theorem. By means of it, he proposes to 
defme the differential coefficient o(f(x) with respect to x as the coefficient of h in 
337 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
the expansion ofJ(x+h), and so to avoid all reference to limits. In the algebra 
of his day however, there was no rigorous theory of infinite series. He therefore 
uses this concept without ascertaining that the series are convergent, and there 
are serious defects in his proof thatJ(x+ h) can always be expanded in a series of 
ascending powers of h. See R. Reiff 'Geschichte der Unendlichen Reihen' 
(Tiibingen, 1889); A. 1. Cauchy (1789-1857) 'Resume des lec;:ons ... sur Ie 
calcul infinitesimal' (Paris, 1823); Journal de l'Ecole Poly technique' vol. xii, 
1823: R. Taton 'The Beginnings of Modern Science' (tr. Pomerans, London, 
1964) p. 413. His 'method of derivatives' as it was called, was at first greatly 
applauded, but Abel Biirja (1752-1816) of Berlin questioned its rigour as early 
as 1801, see 'Sur Ie developpement des fonctions en series.' ('Memoires de 
l' Academie de Berlin' 1801, c£ the article ibid. 1802), and it has now been gen-
erally abandoned. 
As Hegel notes, the main importance of this work is that it establishes, though 
imperfectly, a clear distinction between a purely abstract mode of regarding 
functions, and their applicability to mechanical problems. It is for this reason 
that it may be regarded as the starting point of the theory of functions as 
developed by A. 1. Cauchy (1789-1857), G. F. B. Riemann (1826-1866), and 
K. Weierstrass (1815-1897). It was not entirely original however, for in 'The 
Residual Analysis' (London, 1764), John Landen (1719-1790) had also attempted 
to obviate the difficulties of Newton's 'fluxions' by employing algebraic and 
geometrical principles 'without recourse to some external principle such as the 
imaginary motion of incomprehensible infinitesimals'. See H. J. J. Winter John 
Landen, F.R.S .... Mathematician and Land Agent' (Peterborough, 1944); 
R. Dugas 'A History of Mechanics' (tr. Maddox, London, 1957) ch. II; M. 
Bunge 'Metascientific Queries' (Springftcld, 1959) pp. 166-172; M. Behm 
'Hegels spekulative Deutung der Inf111itesimalrechnung' (Dissertation, Univ. of 
Cologne, Dec. 16th 1963). 
255, 16 
See Galileo's 'Discorsi e dimostrazioni matematiche' (Leyden, 1638, Eng. tr. 
Crew, New York, 1914) Third Day, theorem II prop. ii, 'The spaces described 
by a body falling from rest with a uniformly accelerated motion are to each other 
as the squares of the time-intervals employed in traversing these distances.' 
256,7 
In order to grasp the significance of this' deduction', Hegel's preceding treat-
ment of space, time and motion (§§ 254-261) has to be borne in mind, as well as 
his subsequent use of Galileo's discovery in the exposition of Kepler's laws 
(§ 270 Remark). 
It is evidently meant to be regarded as a refutation of Newton's treatment of 
the matter in the opening pages of the 'Mathematical Principles'. Newton took 
338 

NOTES 
Galileo's discovery to be founded on two laws: (i) that every body continues in 
its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a right line, unless it is compelled to 
change that state by forces impressed upon it; (ii) that the change of motion is 
proportional to the motive force impressed; and is made in the direction of the 
right line in which that force is impressed: and two corollaries: (i) that a body, 
acted on by two forces simultaneously, will describe the diagonal of a parallelo-
gram in the same time as it would describe the sides by those forces separately; 
(ii) that a direct force may be composed of any two oblique forces, and resolved 
into the same. See the scholium to the axioms, 'By the first two laws and the first 
two corollaries, CaWeo discovered that the descent of bodies varied as the square 
of the time (in duplicata ratione temporis).' 
It can obviously be argued that in this 'deduction' Hegel makes excessive use 
of the determinations he has given space and time in the course of his preceding 
dialectical assessments. Hegel would probably have replied that although this 
may very well be so, the determinations he is employing are at least more 
radically and soundly verifiable than Newton's forces. 
The non-philosophical importance of this exposition is that it constitutes an 
attempt to free the treatment of fall from dogmatic Newtonianism, and to relate 
it in a more satisfactory way to both simpler and more complex mechanical 
phenomena. See the excellent survey of the subject by Ernst Mach (I838-I9I6), 
in 'The Science of Mechanics' II viii. 
256,28 
Simon Stevinus (I548-1620), the Dutch mathematician, was in fact the first 
to prove experimentally that bodies differing in weight can have the same rate 
of fall: see his description of the experiment made at Delft in co-operation with 
the father of Hugo Grotius: 'De Beghinselen der Weeghconst' (Leyden, 1586) 
appendix: cf. 'Simon Stevin. The Principal Works' (5 vols. Amsterdam, 1955). 
Galileo discovered this about 1590: see his early treatise 'De Motu' in 'Le 
Opere di Galileo Galilei' (20 vols. Florence, 1929-1939) vol. I pp. 243-419: cf. 
Salusbury's translation of the 'Dialogue on the Great World Systems' (ed. 
Santillana, Chicago, I957) pp. 27-28. 
There is of course an extensive literature on Galileo's relations with the 
church: see K. von Gebler 'Galilei und die romische Curie' (Stuttgart, 1876): 
Emil Wohlwill 'Galileo and his judges' (London, 1889): Adolf Miiller S. J. 
'Der Galilei-Prozess' (Freiburg-im-Breisgau, 1909): G. de Santillana 'The 
Crime of Galileo' (London, 196I). J. J. Fahie 'The Scientific Works of Galileo, 
with some account of his life and trial' in C. Singer 'Studies in the History and 
Method of Science' (2 vols. Oxford, 1917-1921) vol. II pp. 205-284. 
256, 32 
Newton 'Mathematical Principles' bk. III prop. iv theorem 4; bk. III prop. xx 
problem 4. 
339 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
257, 5 
See John Harris (r667?-r719) 'Lexicon Technicum' (2 vols. London, 1736), 
article 'Acceleration'. 
'The consideration of the annexed figure will teach us, that if an heavy body 
be thus uniformly accelerated in its descent, the space which it describes from 
the beginning of the time of its motion, shall be just half of that which it would 
have described, had it gone on for the same time with a velocity equal to what it 
had acquired in the end of its fall. 
Let AC represent the time of its descent, DC the velocity at last acquired; 
and complete the triangle ACD. Let also the time AC be distinguished into an 
indefinite number of small parts, as ef ... etc. and draw the parallels ek ... etc. 
to the base CD. Then will ek be as the velocity of the heavy body, in the 
infmitely small part of time ef, and fI will be the velocity in the small time fg, 
etc. 
But now it is proved in the laws of motion, that the space or length described 
by any moving body, in any given time, and with a given celerity; is as the 
rectangle under the time and the celerity, wherefore the space described as the 
rectangle fk; and the space described in the time fg, with the celerity gm, will 
be as the rectangle gl, etc. wherefore the space run through in the sum of all 
these times, will be as the sum of all the triangles; that is, as the triangle ACD, 
'Which contains them alL' 
C£ Thomas Rutherforth (1712-1771) 'A System of Natural Philosophy' (2 
vols. Cambridge, 1748) vol. I pp. 94-97. 
259, 1 
For contrasting interpretations of this famous remark, see J. W. A. Pfaff 
340 

NOTES 
(1774-1835), 'Der Mensch und die Sterne' (Nuremberg, 1834), and Orest 
Danilovic Chwolson (1852-1934) 'Hegel, Haeckel, Kossuth und das 12. Gebot' 
(Brunswick, 1906) ch. II. 
The logical foundation of Hegel's argument here is to be found in his treat-
ment of the 'bad infinite': see his 'Science of Logic' (tr. Johnston and Struthers, 
2 vols. London, 1961) vol. I pp. 241-253. Cf. W. R. Inge 'God and the Astrono-
mers' (London, 1933). 
259, 8 
Sir William Herschel (1738-1822): see A. M. Clerke 'The Herschels and 
Modern Astronomy' (London, 1895); J. B. Sidgwick 'William Herschel, 
Explorer of the Heavens' (London, 1953). In a paper read to the Royal Society 
on February 10, 1791, Herschel wrote, 'The milky way itself, as I have shown 
in some former Papers, consists intirely of stars, and by imperceptible degrees 
I have been led on from the most evident congeries of stars to other groups in 
which the lucid points were smaller, but still very plainly to be seen; and from 
them to such wherein they could but barely be suspected, till I arrived at last to 
spots in which no trace of a star was to be discerned. But then the gradations to 
these latter were by such well-connected steps as left no room for doubt but that 
all these phaenomena were equally occasioned by stars variously dispersed in the 
immense expanse of the universe': see 'On Nebulous Stars, properly so called' 
('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1791 pp. 71-88: 'The Scientific Papers of Sir William 
Herschel' ed. Dreyer, 2 vols. London, 1912 vol. I p. 415). 
In his 'Astronomical Observations relating to the Construction of the 
Heavens' (Phil. Trans. 18Il pp. 269-336, Dreyer op. cit. vol. II pp. 459-497), 
Herschel attempts to define thirty two types of nebulae, no. 30 being 'planetary 
nebulae'. It is probably this paper that Hegel has in mind. 
Hegel was of course justified in regarding these definitions as very largely 
hypothetical. It was probably the wealth and accuracy of Herschel's observations 
and his admirable reluctance to generalize on the basis of them which laid the 
foundation of Hegel's cautious attitude towards any kind of theorizing in stellar 
astronomy. 
259, II 
For the state of knowledge with regard to the Milky Way during the 1820'S 
and 1830's, see 1- S. T. Gehler's Physikalisches Worterbuch' vol. vi pp. 2281-
2288 (Leipzig, 1837). Hegel is referring here to Kant's 'Allgemeine Natur-
geschichte und Theorie des Himmels' (Konigsberg and Leipzig, 1755, 4th ed. 
1808): see 'Immanuel Kant. Werke' (ed. W. Weischedel, 6 vols. Wiesbaden, 
1960) vol. I pp. 265-267. ,'l)aa e!3 Heine, etwa!3 mef)r a1!3 ba!3 {}inftere be!3 
Ieeren 
~immeI!3raum!3 etleudytete ~Iii~dyen fein, bie aUe barin uberein 
lommen, baa fie mef)r ober weniger offene @;UilJfen tlorfteUen, aber beren Bidyt 
weit fdywiidyer ift, aI!3 irgenb ein anberes, ba!3 man am ~immeI gewaf)r wirb 
341 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
.. 3n bet ;tat fief)et man, baa bie eUi,))tifd)e i}iguten biefe mtten nebHd)tet 
eterne, roeId)e bet ~ett bon WCau,))ettius anfiif)tet, dne fef)t naf)e >8e3-ief)ung 
aUf ben I.l3fan bet WCHd)fttaae f)aben/. Cf. Pierre Louis Morceau Maupertius 
(1698-1759) 'Discours sur la figure des astres' (Paris, 1742); 'Oeuvres' (4 vols, 
Lyons, 1756). Kant was also influenced by Thomas Wright (1711-1786) who 
in his 'Theory of the Universe' (London, 1750) pointed out that the fixed stars 
are condensed towards the plane of the Milky Way: see H. Dingle 'The 
Scientific Adventure' (London, 1952) ch. vi. 
The paper by Sir William Herschel referred to by Hegel is evidently, 'On 
the Construction of the Heavens' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.') vol. 75 p. 213, 1785). 
Hegel had probably read 'Ueber den Bau des Himmels' (Konigsberg, 1791) by 
G. M. Sommer, which contains translations of three of Herschel's papers and 
an extract from Kant's work. See 'The Scientific Papers of Sir William Herschel' 
(ed. Dreyer, 2 vols. London, 1912) vol. 1 p. 251. 
259, 16 
In thus assessing the accomplishments of the stellar astronomy of his day, 
Hegel was by no means so unjust as some of his critics have implied. Accurate 
and substantial knowledge of the stars was at that time extremely scanty. 
This 'stellar geometry' was evidently to be based on the excellent star-cata-
logues and atlases then available. The first of these drawn up on modern 
principles were the 'Historia coelestis britannica' (3 vols. London, 1725) and the 
'Atlas coelestis' (London, 1729) by John Flamsteed (1646-1719), which showed 
the right ascensions and polar distances, as well as the longitudes and latitudes of 
2848 stars. James Bradley's 'Astronomical Observations ... 1750-1762' (ed. 
Hornsby and Robertson, 2 vols. Oxford, 1798-1805), showed the positions of 
3,222 stars. Such was the accuracy of Bradley's observations that this work 
became the basis of all nineteenth century determinations of the proper motions 
of the stars, and of successive computations of the precession: see F. W. Bessel 
(1784-1846) 'Fundamenta Astronomiae' (Regiom., 1818). The precision of work 
in this field was greatly increased when J. T. Mayer (1723-1762) of the 
Gottingen Observatory published his famous correction formulae, which made 
allowances for instrumental deviations: see 'Mayer's Lunar Tables' (ed. Mason, 
London, 1787), 'AstronOInical Observations' (London, 1826), 'Mayer's Cata-
logue of Stars Corrected' (ed. Baily, London, 1830). Cf. J. E. Bode (1747-1826) 
'Vorstellung der Gestirne auf 34 Kupfertafcln' (Berlin, 1782); K. 1. Harding 
(1765-1834) 'Atlas novus coelestis' (7 sects., Gottingen, 1808-1823). 
It is just possible however, that Hegel is here confining rational interest in the 
stars to what were known as the 'figures of stars' (eternfiguten) i.e. their 
apparent shapes: see G. S. Kliigel (1739-1812) 'Mathematisches Worterbuch' 
(7 vols. Leipzig, 1803-1836) vol. iv pp. 546-549. 
F. W. Bessel (1784-1846) was the first to determine the distance of a star with 
any accuracy: see 'Bestimmung der Entfernung des 61. Sterns des Schwans' 
342 

NOTES 
('Astronomische Nachrichten' 1838 XVI, 1840 XVII): he found its parallax, 
which is in fact o'P", to be 0'37". For the uncertainty of contemporary work in 
this field, see the articles by John Pond (1767-1836), published in the 'Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc.' between 1815 and 1825; G. Piazzi (1746-1826) 'Praecipuarum 
stellarum inerrantium positiones mediae' (Panormi, 1803); G. Calandrelli 
(1749-1827) 'Risultato di varie osservazioni sopra la parallasse annua di Vega 0 a 
della Lira' in 'Opuscoli astronomici' (8 vols. Rome, 1803-1824) 1806. 
No satisfactory work was done on the diameter of stars until 1890. 
Edmund Halley (1656-1724) noticed the movement of stars: see 'On the 
change of the latitudes of some of the principal fixed stars' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc.' 1718), as did J. T. Mayer (1723-1762), 'Opera inedita' (ed. Lichtenberg, 
Gottingen, 1775), and Herschel, 'Account of the changes that have happened 
during the last 25 years in the relative situation of double stars'. ('Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' 1803). 
Thirteen novae were recorded prior to 1670, but no more were discovered 
until 1848: Tycho Brahe observed the Nova Cassiopeiae in 1572 and Kepler 
the Nova Ophiuchi in 1604. Interesting articles on periodic changes in the 
brightness of stars were published by N. Pigott (d. 1804) and John Goodricke 
(d. 1786) in 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1781-1786. 
Developments in spectroscopy, photographic photometry and radiometry 
would involve a modern philosophic treatment of stellar astronomy in assess-
ments of fairly complex physical data relating to radiation, luminosity, tempera-
tures and chemical constituency. 
See J. E. Bode (1747-1826) 'Kurzgefasste Erlauterung der Sternkunde' (2 
vols. Berlin, 1778, 3rd ed. Berlin, 1808); Ernst Zinner 'Die Geschichte der 
Sternkunde' (Berlin, 1931); G. P. Kuiper 'Stars and Stellar Systems' (9 vols. 
Chicago, 1965-). Cf. the interesting postulation of 'a hierarchic structure' of 
star-systems in 'International Encyclopedia of Unified Science' (ed. Neurath, 
Carnap, Morris, Chicago, 1955) vol. I pp. 511-515. 
260,2 
'Every particle of matter in the universe attracts every other particle with a 
force that varies inversely as the squares of the distances between them and 
directly as the products of their masses.' Newton never states the law in pre-
cisely these words; for approximations see 'Mathematical Principles' bk. III 
general scholium, penultimate paragraph; bk. I prop.lxxvi cor. iii and iv; 'The 
System of the World' par. 26. 
It is the assessments involved in Hegel's presentation of gravitation at this 
juncture which constitute the main originality and importance of his 'Mechanics'. 
Newton was not primarily concerned with a systematic assessment of his fields 
of enquiry, although the general lay-out of the 'Mathematical Principles' and 
his own statements show that he was instinctively aware of the necessity of some 
343 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
such systematization. See the scholium to bk. 1 sec. xi, 'In mathematics we are 
to investigate the quantities of forces with their proportions consequent upon 
any conditions supposed; then, when we enter upon physics, we compare those 
proportions with the phenomena of Nature, that we may know what conditions 
of those forces answer to the several kinds of attractive bodies. And this pre-
paration being made, we argue more safely concerning the physical species, 
causes and proportions of the forces'. However, even the defInitions and 
axioms with which he begins his book, admirable and serviceable though they 
are, contain a certain number of difficulties (see notes pp. 308, 319,321, 323, 324, 
334, 336,349). Subsequent scientifIc developments are not strictly relevant to an 
understanding of Hegel's work, but it should perhaps be remembered that when, 
in 1901, W. Kaufmann showed that the mass of an electron increases rapidly as 
its speed nears the velocity of light, he disproved Newton's assumption of the 
invariance of mass, and that Einstein's gravitational theory of 1915 undermined 
belief in the reality of gravitation as a 'force'. 
It cannot be said therefore that Newton's work promotes any satisfactory 
degree of precision in the interrelating of qualitatively distinct fIelds of physical 
enquiry. Its merit lies in the clarity and vigour with which certain specifIc 
problems are brought within the scope of mathematical calculation. The concept 
of force is one of the means he employs to this end. Even if we allow that he 
distinguished between its heuristic value and its physical reality however (note 
p. 329), his use of it in the 'Mathematical Principles' in order to relate the various 
phenomena dealt with to the central principle of the law of gravitation, has to 
be criticized on account of its having led so easily to the assumption that these 
phenomena could be exhaustively investigated and fully understood by means 
of a single technique. As Alexandre Koyre has remarked, the immediate result 
of his work was that, 'the eighteenth century, with very few exceptions, 
became reconciled to the ununderstandable'.-'Newtonian Studies' (London, 
1965) p. 163. 
Hegel recognizes that the law of gravitation embodies the most comprehensive 
generalization the science of his day could make about simply material bodies. 
He also realizes however, that subordinate to it are several fIelds of specific 
enquiry in which the law itself is not fully apparent. This leads him to treat 
geometry, arithmetic, motion, matter, gravity, fall etc. as involving disciplines 
and studies less complex in subject matter and limited in scope than enquiry into 
the nature of universal gravitation itsel£ He takes the solar system to involve 
still more comprehensive generalizations (Kepler's laws) on account of the 
particularity of its component bodies and the complexity of their motions (§ 270): 
see especially the note on Francoeur (p. 332). 
In his 'De Orbitis Planetarum' (Jena, 1801), Hegel suggested that magnetic 
theory might provide a more satisfactory explanation of Kepler's laws than 
Newton's forces (notes pp. 362, 372), but as no facts were forthcoming in his 
lifetime to confIrm this, he failed to develop the idea. The present view that 
344 

NOTES 
Keplerian motion involves both gravitational and electrostatic factors, and that 
whereas the gravitational force is always attractive, the electrostatic element 
may be either attractive or repulsive, would certainly have interested him: see 
H. C. Corben and P. Stehle 'Classical Mechanics' (New York and London, 
1960) pp. 93-100; L. Brillouin 'Scientific Uncertainty, and Information' (New 
York and London, 1964) ch. viii. 
At that time, Hegel was not of course alone in realizing that a physical ex-
planation of gravitation and related phenomena was needed. Newton (note p. 
329) regarded himself as an agnostic in these matters, and Laplace, in his 'Expo-
sition du Systeme du Monde' ('Oeuvres' vi p. 443, not the 2 vol. 1796 ed. quoted 
by Hegel) not only enquired into the very nature of gravitation, but went so far 
as to ask whether or not its propagation is instantaneous, 'Le principe de la 
pesanteur universelle, est-il une loi promordiale de la nature, ou n'est-il qu'un 
eff"et general d' une cause inco1U1ue? N e peut' on pas ramener a ce principe les 
affinites? Newton, plus circonspect que plusieurs de ses disciples, ne s'est point 
prononce sur ces questions auxquelles l'ignorance ou nous sommes, des proprietes 
intimes de la matiere, ne permet pas de repondre d'une maniere satisfaisante'. 
260, 12 
When a tube of very small diameter Qike a hair, capillus), open at both ends, 
is dipped into water, the fluid within it will rise about the level of that without, 
and its surface become concave. If mercury is used, the fluid in the tube will 
fall, and its surface become convex. The finer the tube, the greater will be the 
movement. 
This phenomenon attracted attention on account of its appearing to provide 
an exception to all the laws which regulate the equilibrium of fluids. Robert 
Hooke ( 1635-1702) performed experiments with very fine tubes in which the water 
rose twenty one inches above its surface in the vessel. Newton mentions related 
phenomena in his 'Opticks' (4th ed. London, 1730) p. 367. James Jurin (1684-
1750), in 'On the Suspension of Water in Capillary Tubes' and 'On the Action 
of Glass Tubes upon Water and Quicksilver' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' vol. 30 pp. 
739 and 1083): see 'Dissertationes Physico-mathematicae' (London, 1732): put 
forward the theory that the water which enters the tube has its gravity taken off 
by the attraction of the tube's periphery with which its upper surface is in 
contact, so that it rises partly because of attraction and partly because of the 
pressure of the external water. Thomas Morgan (d. 1743), in his 'Philosophical 
Principles of Medicine' (London, 1725, 2nd ed. 1730) p. 88, accounted for the 
phenomenon in a similar manner, as did A. C. Clairaut (1713-1765), in his 
'Theorie de la Figure de la Terre' (Paris, 1743) § 59. Clairaut showed that if the 
law by which the matter of the tube attracts the fluid is the same as that by which 
the parts of the fluid attract one another, the fluid will rise above the level when-
ever the intensity of the first of these attractions exceeds half the intensity of the 
345 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
second, and that if it is exactly half, the surface of the column within the tube 
will be a plane, on a level with the surface without. 
In Hegel's day the accepted explanation of capillary attraction was that put 
forward by Laplace, and Hegel probably mentions the subject here on account 
of its treatment in the 'Traite de Mecanique Celeste' bk. x supplement ('Oeuvres 
de Laplace' vol. 4 pp. 389-552); c£ Laplace's articles in the Journal de Physique' 
1806 pp. 120-128,246-256; 1819 pp. 292-296: 'Nicholson'sJournal' xiv, 1806 
pp. 249-258, xvii, 1807 pp. 286-297. Laplace was of the opinion that a narrow 
ring or zone of glass immediately above the surface of the water, exerts its force 
on the water, so that the phenomena of capillary tubes may be explained by 
supposing that the attraction of the glass, combined with the weight of the 
water and the cohesion of its particles, is the cause of the concave surface, or of 
the little meniscus of water which terminates the column. Consequently, he 
regarded this meniscus as a body of water stretched across the tube, and sustained 
there by the attraction of the glass, while it exerts its own attraction on the 
particles of the column immediately underneath, by which means the gravity 
of those particles is diminished, and the water rises in the tube above its level 
on the outside, to supply their deficiency of weight. 
Cf.James Challis (1803-1882) 'Report on the Theory of Capillary Attraction' 
('British Association Report' 1834 pp. 253-294). 
261,4 
See the note on p. 354. 
261,19 
'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963). 
262, 17 
It was evidently the 'Theory of the Universe' (London, 1750), by Thomas 
Wright (1711-1786), which initiated speculations of this kind. Wright pointed 
out that the fixed stars themselves are not scattered at random, but are con-
densed towards the plane of the Milky Way. Kant was certainly inspired by 
Wright's idea. In his 'Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels' 
(1755) he assumed that matter was originally distributed, in a finely divided 
condition, throughout the whole of space, and that owing to gravitation, 
central bodies and nuclei were formed, about which the proximate matter 
condensed. He assumed that the nuclei gravitated towards the central bodies, 
and were then diverted under the influence of a repulsive force, so that their fall 
towards the centre was transformed into a vortical motion about it. 
G. 1. 1. Buffon (1707-1788), who had a great propensity for forming 
hypotheses, supposed that a comet had collided with the sun, tearing a jet of 
matter away from its surface, and that this matter had condensed into spheres at 
346 

NOTES 
various distances from the central body: see his 'Histoire Naturelle' (44 vols. 
Paris, 1749-1804); Supplement vol. v 'Epoques de la Nature'. 
The most famous hypothesis of this kind was that put forward by P. S. 
Laplace (1749-1827) in his 'Exposition du Systeme du Monde' (2 vols. Paris, 
1796). He assumed that the bodies of the solar system originated from an 
immense incandescent nebula, rotating from west to east, of which the sun is a 
relic. As this nebula cooled and contracted, its rate of rotation increased, in 
accordance with the laws of mechanics. A stage was reached at which the centri-
fugal force at the equator just counterbalanced the gravitational attraction of the 
nucleus of the nebula, and a ring of matter then detached itself and was left 
behind. This happened repeatedly; as the rings were unstable however, each 
broke up into rotating masses, which eventually coalesced to form the separate 
planets. 
This nebular hypothesis was generally accepted until Moulton and Chamber-
lin put forward their planetesimal hypothesis at the end of the last century. 
Hegel evidently objected to these theories not only because they could not be 
confirmed, but because they were used in order to account for the centrifugal 
force held to be involved in the motions of the celestial bodies. 
262, 35 
See Hegel's 'De Orbitis Planetarum' (Jena, 1801), 'corpora autem coelestia 
glebae non adscripta et centrum gravitatis perfectius in se gerentia, Deorum 
more per levem aera incedant'. 
The five planets known to antiquity were all given the names of gods: 
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury. This practice evidently began in Greece 
in the fourth century B.C., and was influenced by Babylonian and Egyptian 
astronomy: 'Paulys Real-Encyclopadie der Classischen Altertumswissenschaft' 
vol. 40 cols. 2017-2185 (ed. Ziegler, Waldsee, 1950). Cf. M. R. Cohen and I. E. 
Drabkin 'A Source Book in Greek Science' (New York, 1948) pp. 89-134: M. 
Clagett 'Greek Science in Antiquity' (London, 1957) pp. 83-98. 
C£ A. S. Eddington 'The Nature of the Physical World' (Cambridge, 1929) 
p. 147, where this remark of Hegel's is misquoted and defended, despite its being, 
'particularly foolish even for a philosopher'. 
262,37 
Cf. Newton 'Mathematical Principles' bk. III prop. vii theorem 7. 
263, I 
Michelet omits these quotation marks, and alters the following sentence 
somewhat: see jenenser Realphilosophie II' p. 23 ,muf bie ~immHfd)e 
srotlJetHd)feit muffen ba~et bie )8otfteUungen bOn etoa, '!Itud, .8ie~en u.bgL 
nid)t angetuenbet tuetben; fie gelten nUt bon einet anbem Q;~iften3 bet 9Raterie./ 
347 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
263, II 
,ilie oeionbeten abet finb, bie ... ' Hegel occasionally uses this grammatically 
shortened form when adding a relative clause, cf. I. 254, 28 ,bie bei cf)leunigte 
ift, in bet bie@efcf)roinbigfeit ... ' In the 1817 edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' 
the passage reads as follows, ,ilie befonbern abet finb anbete, bie ... , 
263,25 
The laws of Kepler are as follows: 
(I) The planets move about the sun in ellipses, in one focus of which the sun 
is situated. 
(2) The radius vector joining each planet with the sun describes equal areas in 
equal times. 
(3) The cubes of the mean distances of the planets from the sun are propor-
tional to the squares of their times of revolution. 
The first two were discovered between 1602 and 1606, and published in 
Kepler's 'Astronomia nova' (Prague, 1609): see chapters 40, 58, 59; cf. the 
German translation by Max Caspar (Munich and Berlin, 1929). The third law 
was discovered in 1618, and published in the 'Harmonice Mundi' (Linz, 1619, 
German tr. Caspar, Munich and Berlin, 1939) bk. 5 ch. iii. Cf. G. Holton 
Johannes Kepler's Universe: Its Physics and Metaphysics' ('American Journal 
of Physics' vol. 24 pp. 340--351, May 1956). 
For a recent consideration of them in relation to Newton's theories see T. E. 
Sterne 'An Introduction to Celestial Mechanics' (New York, 1960). 
263,26 
'The Logic of Hegel' (tr. Wallace, Oxford, 1963) pp. 364-366. 
In this and the following paragraph Hegel distinguishes between the analytical 
method of cognition, which attempts to understand a complex phenomenon by 
breaking it down into its simpler constituents, and the synthetic method, which 
starts by accepting a phenomenon in its full complexity and then proceeds to 
indicate simpler aspects of it. He is implying here that Newton followed the 
first and Kepler the second of these methods: see the notes on pp. 343, and 
351 (Francoeur). 
Cf. Hegel's 'De Orbitis Planetarum' (Jena, 1801), 'quam physica scientia 
methodum veram perfecte imitari debebat totum ponendi ex eoque rationes 
partium deducendi, neutiquam vero ex oppositis viribus, id est, ex partibus 
totum componendi.'-Lasson's ed. (Leipzig, 1928) p. 364. 
263,28 
See Newton's 'Mathematical Principles' bk. I sect. iii: bk. III phen. ivand 
prop. xiii theorem 13. 

NOTES 
264,5 
See Sir J. F. W. Herschel (1792-1871) 'Outlines of Astronomy' (London, 
1849) pp. 295, 300, 'The third law of Kepler, which connects the distances and 
periods of the planets by a general rule, bears with it, as its theoretical inter-
pretation, this important consequence, viz. that it is one and the same force, 
modified only by distance from the sun, which retains all the planets in their 
orbits about it ... Of all the laws to which induction from pure observation has 
ever conducted man, this third law (as it is called) of Kepler may justly be regarded 
as the most remarkable, and the most pregnant with important consequences. 
When we contemplate the constituents of the planetary system from the point 
of view which this relation affords us, it is no longer a mere analogy which 
strikes us ... The resemblance is now perceived to be a true family likeness; they 
are bound up in one chain . . . subjected to one pervading influence, which 
extends from the centre to the farthest limits of that great system, of which all 
of them, the earth included, must henceforth be regarded as members'. 
264,22 
Cf. Hegel's reference to Laplace's 'Systeme du Monde' on p. 274. 
The calculus, as presented in the 'Mathematical Principles', is certainly lacking 
in logical rig our. In the opening lemma of bk. I sect. i for example, Newton 
supposes the motion to be calculated as the ultimate criterion of the validity of 
his exposition (note p. 364). It was probably his awareness of its shortcomings 
which caused him to delay the publication of his 'Method of Fluxions' (1671, 
Eng. tr. Colson, London, 1736) for so long. His conception of the basic principles 
of the calculus had certainly changed by 1704, for in his 'Quadratura curvarum' 
(London, 1704), he dispenses with the postulate of the infinitely small increment. 
He writes in the introduction, 'I consider mathematical quantities in this place 
not as consisting of very small parts, but as described by a continued motion. 
Lines are described, and thereby generated, not by the apposition of parts, but 
by the continued motion of points; superficies by the motion oflines; solids by 
the motion of superficies; angles by the rotation of the sides; portions of time 
by continual flux: and so on in other quantities. These geneses really take place 
in the nature of things, and are daily seen in the motion of bodies ... 
Fluxions are, as near as we please, as the increments of fluents generated in 
times, equal and as small as possible, and to speak accurately, they are in the 
prime ratio of nascent increments; yet they can be expressed by any times 
whatever, which are proportional to them.' 
In the subsequent exposition it becomes apparent that although Newton has 
avoided the postulation of infinitely small quantities by introducing motion 
into his definitions of the point and the line etc., he still requires us to believe that 
a point may be considered as a triangle, that a triangle may be inscribed in a 
point, and that three dissimilar triangles become similar and equal when they 
349 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
have reached their ultimate form in one and the same point. For eighteenth 
century criticism of this, see note p. 35 I. 
It is certainly true that bk. I prop. i theorem 1 of the 'Mathematical Principles', 
which follows immediately after the preliminary sketch of the calculus, gives 
rise to a conic section in general rather than an ellipse in particular. Newton 
admits as much in the scholium which concludes bk. I sect. ii, 'In all figures 
whatsoever, if the ordinates are augmented or diminished in any given ratio, or 
their inclination is in any way changed, the periodic time remaining the same, the 
forces directed to any centre placed in the abscissa are in the several ordinates 
augmented or diminished in the ratio of the distances from the centre.' 
In bk. I sect. iii therefore, where Newton deals with the motion of bodies in 
eccentric conic sections, the various conic sections, ellipse, hyperbola and para-
bola are merely assumed. It is quite clear that when he deals with movement in 
an ellipse he has the planets in mind, but as Hegel notes, the identification is 
supposed rather than proved. 
Hegel takes this lack of rigour in the Newtonian exposition to be evidence 
of the fact that Kepler's first law is essentially more complex than the law of 
gravitation as such, and that the attempt to deduce it from the latter is therefore 
futile (note p. 343). 
On Newton's treatment of conics see note p. 360. See alsoH. G. Zeuthen 'Die 
Lehre von den Kegelschnitten im Alterthum' (Copenhagen, 1886); T. L. Heath 
'Apollonius of Perga' (Cambridge, 1961); 'Apollonii Pergaei conicorum libr. 
VIII' (ed. Halley, 2 vols. Oxford, 1710); J. M. F. Wright 'An Algebraic System 
of Conic Sections' (London, 1836);J. L. Coolidge 'A History of Conic Sections 
and Quadric Surfaces' (Oxford, 1945). 
264,25 
See pp. 272-3. The reference here is to the famous earth-moon test of the law 
of gravitation: 'Mathematical Principles' bk. III prop. iv theorem 4, 'The moon 
gravitates towards the earth, and by the force of gravity is continually drawn off 
from a rectilinear motion, and retained in its orbit'. Newton told Halley at 
one time that the theory of lunar motions made his head ache and kept him 
awake at night so often, that he would think of it no more: see Sir David 
Brewster 'Memoirs of the Life, Writing, and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton' 
(2 vols. Edinburgh, 1855) vol. II p. 108. He had formulated his theory of 
gravitation as early as 1665, but it was not until 1685 that he realized the im-
portance of the centre of gravity in the attraction of a sphere (note p. 362). 
Newton grapples with the complicatep principles involved in the three body 
problem in bk. III prop. xxii theorem 17: see E. O. Lovett 'The Problem of 
Three Bodies' ('Science' vol. 29 pp. 81-91, 1909), R. Marcolongo '11 problema 
die tre corpi' (Milan, 1919). The moon's motion has not yet been exactly 
explained by gravitational theory. It has been suggested that the cause of the 
difference between prediction and observation lies in the variation of the earth's 
350 

NOTES 
rate of rotation caused by slight periodic changes in the shape of the earth, or by 
the varying elevation of the centre of the moon' sdisc in the course of a month: 
see for example E. W. Brown's articles in 'Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society' vols. 73-75, 1913 - 19 15 ; Z. Kopal 'Physics and Astronomy 
of the Moon' (London, 1962) p. 24. 
264, 37 
See the note on p. 332. In both the 1827 and 1830 editions of the 'Encyclopaedia' 
Hegel referred, incorrectly, to chapter eleven of book two. 
Francoeur's 'Traite elementaire de Mecanique' (Paris, 1801) had reached a 
fifth edition by 1825. Bk. II ch. ii no. 4 is concerned with 'universal gravitation'. 
Kepler's laws are accepted here as truths demonstrated by observation, slight 
inaccuracies due to perturbation etc. being disregarded. The following propo-
sitions are then deduced from them: 
(i) That the force drawing each planet is directed towards the centre of the 
sun. 
(ii) That the force which moves the planets in ellipses is in inverse proportion 
to the square of the distance of the centre of these bodies from that of the sun. 
(iii) That in their being drawn towards the sun, the planets have weights 
proportional to their masses. 
(iv) That the molecules of matter are mutually attractive in accordance with 
their masses, and in inverse proportion to the squares of their distances. 
Hegel evidently regards these deductions as illustrating the relationship 
between the universal law of gravitation and the more complex phenomena of 
the Keplerian laws (note p. 343). 
265,6 
See the note on p. 354. 
265, II 
In the second edition of the 'Encyclopaedia' (1827), Hegel added the following 
sentence here, 'I shall not call into evidence the fact that my interest in these 
matters has occupied me now for twenty-five years.' He evidently had in mind 
his thesis 'Dissertatio philosophica de Orbitis Planetarum' (Jena, 1801): 5ee 
'Hegels Samtliche Werke' (ed. Lasson, Leipzig, 1928) vol. I pp. 347-401: cf. 
note p. 372. 
265,23 
See the note on p. 336. 
265,26 
In Newton's 'Mathematical Principles' the calculations are reduced to 
351 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
geometric form. However, in his 'Method of Fluxions' (1671, tr. Colson, London, 
1736) Newton helped to lay the foundations of infinitesimal analysis. 
It is curious that Hegel should not have attempted to deny Newton the credit 
of having been the discoverer of the calculus. The acrimonious priority dispute 
with Leibniz must have been well known to him. He was evidently content to 
accept the account of the matter given in the 'Commercium epistolicum' 
(1712, ed. Keill, London, 1725: ed. Biot and Lefort, Paris, 1856), and by 
Joseph Raphson (1648-1715) in his 'History of Fluxions' (London, 1715). The 
truth of the dispute did not come to light until the 1840'S and 1850'S: see A. De 
Morgan 'Essays on the Life and Work of Newton' (ed.Jourdain, Chicago and 
London, 1914). 
George Berkeley (1685-1753), in 'The Analyst' (Dublin, 1734), criticized 
Newton's fluxions as being 'the ghosts of departed quantities', and argued that 
the fundamental idea of supposing a finite ratio to exist between two absolutely 
evanescent terms was absurd and unintelligible: see Robert Woodhouse (1773-
1827) 'The Principles of Analytical Calculation' (Cambridge, 1803); J. O. 
Wisdom 'Berkeley's Criticism of the Infinitesimal' ('British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science' vol. 4, pp. 22-25, 1953). Berkeley's criticism gave rise to 
a lively controversy between James Jurin (1684-1750), John Walton of Dublin, 
Benjamin Robins (1707-1751) and Henry Pemberton (1694-1771), regarding 
Newton's views on the existence of variables which reach their limits. The 
constructive outcome of it was Robins' rejection of all infinitely small quantities 
and presentation of a more logically coherent theory of fluxions in 'A Discourse 
concerning the Nature and Certainty of Sir Isaac Newton's Methods of Fluxions' 
(1735, ed. J. Wilson, 2 vols. London, 1761), and 'A Complete System of 
Fluxions' (2 vols. Edinburgh, 1742) by Colin Maclaurin (1698-1746). In 1813 
George Peacock (1791-1868), John Herschel (1792-1871), Charles Babbage 
(1792-1871) and a few other Cambridge students founded the 'Analytical 
Society' in order, as they said, to promote the principles of pure 'D-ism' 
(Leibnizian notation) against those of 'dot-age' (Newton's). 
For a contemporary treatment of the calculus, see 1. N. M. Carnot (1753-1823) 
'Reflexions sur la Metaphysique du Calcul Infinitesimal' (Paris, 1813, English 
tr. 1832). 
It was the 'Introductio in analysin infinitorum' (Lausanne, 1748) by Leonhard 
Euler (1707-1783), which put analytical mathematics on a systematic basis. 
J. 1. Lagrange (1736-1813), see especially his 'Theorie des fonctionsanalytiques' 
(Paris, 1797) quoted by Hegel 255, 10, attempted to work out an entirely new 
basis for the calculus. The culmination of this work with regard to celestial 
mechanics was the 'Mecanique Celeste' (5 vols. Paris, 1798-1827) ofP. S. Laplace 
(1749-1827): Eng. tr. N. Bowditch (4 vols. Boston, Mass., 1829-1839): German 
tr. J. C. Burckhardt (2 vols. Berlin, 1800-1802), in which Newton's geometric 
presentation is completely transformed into a fully analytic exposition. Laplace 
removes all doubt as to the stability of the solar system, so that he was also able 
352 

NOTES 
to dispense with Newton's postulation of a regulating Deity: see 'Mathematical 
Principles' bk. III general scholium. When he presented Napoleon with a copy 
of his book, the Emperor commented, 'M. Laplace, they tell me you have written 
this large book on the system of the universe, and have never even mentioned its 
Creator.' The reply was short, 'Je n'avais pas besoin de cette hypothese-Ia'. See 
J. Pelseneer 'La Religion de Laplace' ('Isis' 1945-6 pp. 158-160). 
C£ H. Brougham and E. J. Routh 'Analytical View of Sir Isaac Newton's 
Principia' (London, 1855);]. Ravetz 'The Representation of Physical Quantities 
in Eighteenth Century Mathematical Physics' ('Isis' 1961 pp. 7-20). 
265,29 
Newton 'Mathematical Principles' bk. I prop. lxv theorem 25; bk. III prop. 
xiii theorem 13, 'The force of gravity towards Jupiter is towards the sun as I to 
1067; and therefore in the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn, because the distance 
of Saturn from Jupiter will be to the gravity of Saturn towards the sun as 8 I to 
16.1067: or, as to I to about 211. And hence arises a perturbation of the orbit of 
Saturn in every conjunction of this planet with Jupiter, so sensible, that astrono-
mers are puzzled with it'. 
266,4 
Perturbations are the deviations of planets from exact elliptic motion. Newton 
explained the long inequality of Jupiter and Saturn correctly, but he failed to 
distinguish between the various kinds of perturbation with any degree of 
comprehensiveness: op. cit. bk. III prop. xiii theorem 13, 'Butthe actions of the 
planets one upon another are so very small, that they may be neglected'. 
It was P. S. Laplace (1749-1827) who made the first detailed investigations 
of such variations, and showed clearly that they constitute a class of ordinary 
and regular periodic perturbations: see 'Sur les inegalites seculaires des planetes 
et des satellites' (1784); 'Theorie de Jupiter et Saturne' (1785-6); 'Sur les vari-
ations seculaires des orbites des planetes' (1787) etc. in 'Memoires de l' AcadeInie 
de Paris'. C£ 'Oeuvres de Laplace' (14 vols. Paris, 1843-1912) vols. 3,4,5, II 
12, 13. 
Calculations made by]. C. Adams (1819-1892) and U.].]. Leverrier (1811-
1877) on the basis ofirregularities in the orbit of Uranus led to the discovery of 
Neptune by]. G. Galle (1812-1910) in 1846. C£ Alexis Bouvard (1787-1843) 
'Tables astronoIniques ... contenant les tables de Jupiter, de Saturne et d'Uranus' 
(paris, 1821), who speaks of, 'une action etrangere et inapercru qui aurait influ-
ence la marche de la planete' Uranus. The existence of Pluto was also suspected 
by Bouvard: see G. B. Airy 'Account of some circumstances historically con-
nected with the discovery of the planet exterior to Uranus' ('Monthly Notices 
of the Royal AstronoInical Society' 1846, 7: 124); M. Gosser 'The search for a 
Planet beyond Neptune' ('Isis' 1964). 
M 
353 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
267,2 
Newton Mathematical Principles' bk. I sect. ii: see the following note. 
267,30 
As Hegel has good reasons for questioning the validity of the hypotheses 
accounting for the origin of centrifugal force in celestial mechanics (p. 346), the 
logical rigour of the Newtonian calculus (p. 349), and Newton's use of the 
principle of the composition offorces (p. 358), and as he points out that Newton 
never attempted to prove that the planets must move about the sun in ellipses 
(p. 350), he is perfectly justified in raising these objections to the traditional 
explanations of planetary motion. His fundamental reason for doing so has 
already been indicated (p. 343). Any worthwhile refutation of his argument here 
must begin by considering these subsidiary points. See Newton on the motions 
of projectiles in certain orbits: 'The System of the World' par. 3 (Cajori's ed. of the 
'Mathematical Principles' pp. 551-2). Samuel Vince (1749-1821) 'A Complete 
System of Astronomy' (3 vols. London, 1814-1823) vol. II pp. 1-28, provides a 
good contemporary example of the sort of exposition Hegel probably has in 
mind. C£ N. R. Hanson 'Leverrier: The Zenith and Nadir of Newtonian 
Mechanics' ('Isis' 1962 pp. 359-378), an account of the ill-starred hidden planet 
hypothesis, put forward to explain the precession of the perihelion of Mercury 
on Newtonian principles. 
Thomas Rutherforth (1712-1771), 'A System of Natural Philosophy' (2 vols. 
Cambridge, 1748) vol. I pp. 139-154 provides a good example of the 'old-
fashioned' kind of proof mentioned by Hegel on p. 264. Like Newton, he 
describes the motion of projectiles, and then assumes that the same principles are 
at work in the motion of the planets. In fact he calls the centrifugal the 
'projectile' force. 
354 

NOTES 
'This may be a little farther explaned, if we go on with considering the 
angle made by the projectile and centripetal forces. This angle is the least of all 
when the body is at D, and keeps increasing constantly, till it becomes a right 
one, when the body arrives at P. The reason of its increasing after the body has 
passed by D is, because the projectile velocity, or velocity with which the body 
endeavours to move in the tangent, is greater than what would be requisite to 
make the body revolve round S in a circle. But the same reason holds when 
the body is a P: its velocity is still too great to suffer it to move in a circle having 
PS for its radius or semidiameter. Therefore the angle SPp, as the body moves 
on, will keep still increasing, and consequently must become greater than a 
right one. From hence it is evident that after the body is arrived at P, that is, 
after the angle made by the projectile and centripetal forces is become a right 
one, it can approach towards S no longer. For if the body was to approach nearer 
to S, the angle made by the lines Pp and PS must decrease: just as the angle made 
by the lines Al and AS decreased in the approach of the body towards S, when 
it set out from A. But the angle at P will increase, as has been proved, whilst the 
body moves forward from P. Therefore it will not approach nearer to S than 
when it is at P: but the point P, where this angle is a right one, will be its least 
distance from S. 
When the body goes on from P, the velocity being too great for it either to 
approach nearer to S or to keep at the same distance from S, it will depart from 
S, and the angle made by the projectile and centripetal forces will increase; 
so that when the body arrives at F it will be SFf greater than a right one. And 
because, as the body rises or departs from S, the centripetal force, though it is not 
sufficient to draw it back again, will retard its motion, the projectile velocity 
will keep decreasing. Till at last, in the return of the body towards A, this 
velocity will be such a one as would be just sufficient to make the body revolve 
in a circle round the point S. Now, whilst the body's velocity was greater than 
this, the direction, in which it endeavours in every point of its orbit to fly off in 
a tangent to that point, that is, the direction of the projectile force departed 
farther from the direction of that force by which it is impelled towards the 
center, or the angle made by these two forces encreased. Thus when the body was 
at P, the angle was SPp; when it was at F, the angle was SFf; and when it 
arrives at G, the angle becomes SGg. Butsince, as the body goes on from G, it 
will be still retarded, the tangent, or direction of the projectile force, will 
approach towards the line, in which the centripetal force acts, that is, this angle 
will constantly decrease; at H it will be SHh, less than SGg; at I, it will be SIi 
less than SHh; and at last at A, it will be so far diminished as to be a right one· 
again.' 
Hegel suggested, in his 'De Orbitis Planetarum' Oena, 1801), see note p. 372, 
that a magnetic theory might provide a better explanation of planetary motion. 
As no facts were forthcoming in his lifetime to confirm this surmisal, he failed 
to develop it. The involvement of electrostatic principles in Keplerian motion 
355 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
would certainly have interested him: see H. C. Corben and P. Stehle 'Classical 
Mechanics' (New York and London, 1960) pp. 93-100; L. Brillouin 'Scientific 
Uncertainty and Information' (New York and London, 1964) ch. vii, 'Weak-
nesses and limitations of mechanics' pp. 85-105. 
267,36 
See the note on p. 363. 
268,11 
On the problems involved in circular motion, see Ernst Mach (1838-1916) 
'The Science of Mechanics' II ii 4, appendix xi; H. Weiler 'Mechanics' (London, 
1957) pp. 233-265. Cf. Galileo's 'Dialogue on the Great World Systems' (ed. 
Santillana, Chicago, 1957) pp. 55, 223 and the note on p. 349. Galileo's neglect 
of Kepler's laws was certainly due in part to his belief in the perfection of the 
circle. For a recent discussion of the seventeenth century dilemmas Hegel is 
overcoming in this analysis, see E. Panofsky 'Galileo as a Critic of the Arts' 
(The Hague, 1954) pp. 24-26, and E. Rosen's review of this book ('Isis' XlVII, 
1956, pp. 78-80), A. Koyre 'Attitude esthetique et Pensee scientifique' ('Critique' 
Oct. 1955 pp. 835-847). 
268, 31 
The significance of this exposition of Kepler's second law becomes more 
apparent if it is remembered that the law gave rise to the famous Keplerian 
problem in the theory of functions: see the statement of it given by Robert 
Small of Edinburgh in his 'An Account of the Astronomical Discoveries of 
Kepler' (London, 1804) p. 296, 'Having the area of part of a semi-circle given, 
and a point in its diameter, to determine an arch of the semi-circle, and an angle 
at the given point, such that the given area may be comprehended by the lines 
including the angle, and by the required arch; or, to draw from a given point 
in the diameter of a semi-circle, a straight line dividing the area of the semi-circle 
in a given ratio'. 
C£ Newton 'Mathematical Principles' bk. I prop. xxxi prob. 23 and scholium: 
J. C. Adams 'On Newton's Solution of Kepler's Problem' ('Monthly Notices 
of the Royal Astronomical Society' vol. 43 pp. 43-49, 1882); F. W. Bessel 
(1784-1846) 'Analytische Auflosung der Kepler'schen Aufgabe' ('Berlin. 
Abhand. Acad. Wissen.' 1816-1817 p. 49); 'Bulletin Astronomique' vol. xvii 
pp. 37-47 (Paris, 1900); J. J. Astrand 'Hiilfstafeln zur leichten und genauen 
Auflosung des Kepler'schen Problems' (Leipzig, 1890); J. P. MelBer 'On the 
Solution of Kepler's Equation' in 'Festschrift fiir Elis Stromgren' (Copenhagen, 
1940) pp. 163-174. 

NOTES 
269, 14 
See the note on p. 348. 
269,20 
Newton 'Mathematical Principles': see bk. III phen. iv and the following 
propositions. In a scholium here Newton writes, 'The force which retains the 
celestial bodies in their orbits has been hitherto called centripetal force; but it 
being now made plain that it can be no other than a gravitating force, we shall 
hereafter call it gravity.' 
269,36 
It was the observations made by Tycho Brahe (1546-1601) at the Stjarneborg 
observatory on the island ofVen which provided the empirical basis for Kepler's 
speculations: see]. L. E. Dreyer 'Tycho Brahe' (Edinburgh, 1890),]. von Hasner 
'Tycho Brahe und J. Kepler' (prague, 1872), F. Becket and C. Christensen 
'Uraniborg og Stjrerneborg' (Copenhagen, 1921), Martin Olsson 'Uraniborg 
och Stjarneborg' (Stockholm, 1951). Hegel may have readJ. T. B. Helfrecht's 
'Tycho Brahe, geschildert nach seinem Leben, Meynungen und Schriften' 
(Hof, 1798); cf. W. Faxe 'Forlamningar af Tycho Brahes Stjerneborg och 
Uranienborg pi on Hven' (Stockholm, 1824). 
When Brahe died unexpectedly near Prague on October 24, 1601, Kepler 
was given the task of editing his observations, which appeared in the first 
volume of the 'Astronomiae Instauratae Progymnasmata' (2 vols. Prague, 
1602-1603). This work contains a treatment of the motions of the sun and the 
moon, gives the positions of 777 fixed stars, and was later incorporated into the 
famous 'Rudolphine Tables' (Ulm, 1627), in which 1005 stars were catalogued, 
and to which Kepler appended logarithmic and refraction tables. These tables 
remained the best aid to astronomy, of this kind, until the early eighteenth 
century. Cf. the note on Jean Picard (1620-1682) and Ole R0mer (1644-1710) 
II. 235. 
See Max Caspar Johannes Kepler' (Stuttgart, 1948, tr. C. D. Hellman 
London and New York, 1959). 
269, 39 
Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543) 'De revolutionibus orbium coelestium' 
(Nuremberg, 1543), translated by J. F. Dobson as 'On the Revolutions of the 
Heavenly Spheres' (London, 1955) bk. V ch. 4, "Why the Proper Movements of 
the Planets Appear Irregular': 'Accordingly as the ancients placed one movement 
in two eccentric circles, as was shown, we have decreed two regular movements 
out of which the apparent irregularity is compounded either by a circle eccentric 
to an eccentric circle, or by the epicycle of an epicycle or by a combination of 
an eccentric circle carrying an epicycle. For they can all effect the same irregu-
larity, as we demonstrated above in the case of the sun and the moon'. 
357 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY Oil NATURE 
Cf. L. Prowe 'Nicolaus Coppernicus' (2 vols. Berlin, 1883-4); A. Armitage 
'Copernicus, the founder of modern Astronomy' (London, 1938); E. Rosen 
'Three Copernican Treatises' (Dover Pubs., 1959), this work contains an 
excellent bibliography. For a less technical and more autobiographical account 
see H. Kesten 'Copernicus and his World' (New York, 1945). 
270,6 
See the relation between uniform motion in a circle and the regular oscillatory 
motion of the pendulum mentioned by Ernst Mach (1838-1916) 'The Science of 
Mechanics' II ii 3-10. 
270,21 
An oval line consists of any curve shaped like the section of an egg, and is 
therefore a line which is closed and always concave towards the centre. Hegel 
probably has in mind the effect of perturbation and precession upon the plane-
tary orbits (notes pp. 353 and 367), and sinuous heliocentric orbits such as the 
, 
moons. 
Kepler evidently grasped the significance of the oval line before he formulated 
the first of his laws: see his 'Astronomia nova' (Prague, 1609) p. 213, 'ltaque 
plane hoc est: Orbita planetae non est circulus, sed ingrediens ad latera utraque 
paulatim, iterumque ad circuli amplitudinem in perigaeo exiens, cujusmodi 
figuram itineris ovalem appellitant'. 
C£ Robert Small of Edinburgh 'An Account of the Astronomical Discoveries 
of Kepler' (London, 1804) pp. 242-254 and 276-277; E. H. Lockwood 'A book 
of curves' (Cambridge, 1961). 
270,39 
Newton 'Mathematical Principles' (tr. Cajori, Berkeley, 1947), Axioms 
corollary i, treats the principle of the parallelogram of forces as the corollary 
to his second law of motion, i.e. that 'the change of motion is proportional to the 
motive force impressed; and is made in the direction of the right line in which 
that force is impressed'. As Newton formulates this corollary it is the first 
distinct enunciation of the principle of the composition of forces. 
A.~ ________________________ 
~ 

NOTES 
'If a body in any given time, by the force M impressed apart in the place A, 
should with an uniform motion be carried from A to B, and by the force N 
impressed apart in the same place, should be carried from A to C, let the 
parallelogram ABCD be completed, and, by both forces acting together, it 
will in the same time be carried in the diagonal from A to D.' 
By taking this principle of finite mechanics as being involved in Kepler's 
second law, Hegel avoided treating it as necessarily involving distinct and 
independent forces and motions. C£ Newton's corresponding use of it in 'the 
determination of centripetal forces' (op. cit. bk. I sect. ii prop. theorem I). For 
subsequent nineteenth century criticisms of the Newtonian concept see Max 
Jammer 'Concepts of Force' (Cambridge, Mass., 1957) pp. 116-146. Bertrand 
Russell for example, in 'The Principles of Mathematics' (London, 1956) p. 477 
maintains that a force should not be regarded as the sum of its components. 
By confming the basic significance of this parallelogram to mathematics, 
Hegel is therefore more in tune with pre- and post-Newtonian mechanics than 
with the views of his own day: see P. Duhem 'Les origines de la statique' (2 
vols. Paris, 1907); Simon Stevin (1548-1620) 'Wisconstige Gedachtenissen' 
(Leyden, 1605, tr. Snell 'Hypomnemata Mathematica' 1608); Ernst Mach 'The 
Science of Mechanics' I iii. 
271, 32 
See 'Harmonice Mundi' (Linz, 1619 ed. Frisch, 1864) pp. 30-40. Cf. the 
German tr. of this work by Max Caspar (Munich and Berlin, 1939), and the 
extract translated by J. H. Walden in 'A Source Book in Astronomy' (ed. H. 
Shapley and H. E. Bowarth, New York, 1929) p. 38. Kepler writes, 'Again, 
therefore, a part of my "Mysterium Cosmographicum", suspended twenty-
two years ago, because I did not then see my way clear, must be completed 
and introduced here. For, after I had by unceasing toil through a long period 
of time, using the observations of Brahe, discovered the true distances of the 
orbits, at last, the true relation of the periodic times to the orbits, and, if you 
ask for the exact time, 
... though late, yet looked upon me idle 
And after long time came; 
conceived on the 8th of March of this year, 1618, but unsuccessfully brought 
to the test and for that reason rejected as false, but, finally returning on the 
15th of May, by a new onset it overcame by storm the shadows of my mind, 
with such a fullness of agreement between my seventeen-years' labour on the 
observations of Brahe and this present study of mine that I at first believed I 
was dreaming and was assuming as an accepted principle what was still a subject 
of enquiry. But the principle is unquestionably true and quite exact: the periodic 
times of any two planets are to each other exactly as the cubes of the square roots of 
359 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
their median distances; this fact should be observed, however, that the arithmetic 
mean between the two diameters of the elliptical orbit is a little less than the 
longer diameter'. 
271,34 
See § 267. 
272,2 
See the notes on pp. 343 and 363. At this juncture Michelet prints a foot-note, 
evidently by Hegel, 'Laplace, 'Exposition du systeme du monde' vol. II p. 12 
(Paris, an. iv): 'Newton trouva qu' en effet, cette force est reciproque au carre 
du rayon vecteur'. Newton says ('Phil. nat. prine. math.' I prop. xi et seq.): 'If 
a body revolves in an ellipse, hyperbola or parabola' the ellipse however passes 
over into the circle 'then the centripetal force is reciproce in duplicata ratione 
distan tiae.' 
For an English translation of Laplace's book see 'The System of the W orId' 
(tr. J. Pond, 2 vols. London, 1809). On Newton's contribution to the geometry 
of conics see op. cit. bk. Ilemma xxii et seq. ;J.J. Milne 'Newton's contribution 
to the geometry of conics' in 'Isaac Newton, 1642-1727' (London, 1927) pp. 
96-114; Ernst Kotter 'Die Entwicklung der synthetischen Geometrie' (Leipzig, 
1901). 
Newton meets Hegel's objection in prop. xii prob. viii cor. 2, 'In these 
Corollaries I consider the circle as an ellipse'. 
272,8 
Voltaire gives a competent and very lucid account of the Newtonian theory 
in 'Elemens de la Philosophie de Newton mis a la portee de tout Ie monde' 
(Amsterdam, 1738): see 'Oeuvres Completes de Voltaire' vol. 41 (Paris, 1828). 
An English translation of this work was published by J. Hanna (London, 1738). 
On Voltaire's predecessors, see P. Brunet 'L'introduction des theories de Newton 
en France au XVIIIe siecle (avant 1738)' (Paris, 193 I). 
Jean Banieres, who, when this work appeared, had just published his 'Traite 
physique de la lumiere' (Paris, 1737), attacked Voltaire's exposition in 'Examen 
et refutation des Elemens de la philosophie de Newton par M. de Voltaire' 
(Paris, 1739), and, of course, elicited a 'Defense du Newtonianisme' (Paris, 1739): 
see 'Oeuvres' vol. 42 pp. 3-29; cf. H. GuerIac 'Newton in France' ('Isis' 1962 
pp. 219-221). 
England was by no means as sympathetic to Newtonianism and hostile to 
Kepler as Hegel seems to have thought. F. Cajori, in his edition of the 'Mathe-
matical Principles' (Berkeley, 1947) pp. 629-632, points out that when Voltaire 
visited England in 1727, he estimated that there were no more than twenty 
Newtonians in the whole country, and that even at Cambridge, Newtonianism 
had not entirely replaced Cartesianism forty years after the first publication of the 
360 

NOTES 
'Principia'. Curiously enough, Newton's ideas were spread there mainly by 
means of Samuel Clarke's commentary on a purely Cartesian work by Jacques 
Rohault (1620-1675): see 'Rohault's System of Natural Philosophy' (2 vols. 
London, 1723). The testy and peevish notes and commentary to be found in 
the edition of Newton's 'Principia' brought out by William Davis (1771-1807) 
show the extent to which orthodox English Newtonians felt themselves to be 
on the defensive in the early years of the last century: see 'The Mathematical 
Principles of Natural Philosophy by Sir Isaac Newton' (3 vols. London, 1803). 
Kepler's accomplishments were certainly not unacknowledged this side of the 
Channel: see S. Vince (1749-1821) 'A Complete System of Astronomy' (3 
vols. London, 1814, 1823) vol. I pp. 98-102; Robert Small of Edinburgh 'An 
Account of the Astronomical Discoveries of Kepler' (London, 1804). 
272, 14 
Gravity is distinguished from gravitation. Gravitation is the universal attrac-
tion of every particle of matter for every other, wherever located. Gravity is 
the resultant effect, at the earth's surface of the earth's gravitation and the 
centrifugal force caused by its rotation. 
Hegel seems to be unaware of the research then being done into the influence 
of the earth's rotation upon fall: see Thomas Rutherforth (1712-1771) 'A System 
of Natural Philosophy' (2 vols. Cambridge, 1748) vol. I p. 130, 'Though a 
heavy body, when it is thrown perpendicularly upwards, appears to ascend 
and descend in a right line; yet, supposing the earth to turn round its axis, the 
body does really describe a parabola'. Cf. Johann Friedrich Benzenberg (1777-
1846) 'Versuche tiber die Gesetze des Falles, den Widerstand der Luft und die 
Umdrehung der Erde' (Dortmund, 1804); Giovanni Battista Guglielmini (d. 
1817) 'De diurno terrae motu, experimentis physico-mathematicis confirmato, 
opusculum' (Bologna, 1792); Ferdinand Reich (1799-1883) 'Fallversuche tiber 
die Umdrehung der Erde' (Freiberg, 1832). 
272,20 
The mean distance of the moon from the earth is sixty earth-radii, or 239,000 
Iniles. Hegel's slip here may be due to Newton's phrasing: see 'Mathematical 
Principles' bk. III prop. iv theorem 4, 'For if both earth and moon move about 
the sun, and at the same time about their common centre of gravity, the distance 
of the centres of the moon and earth from one another will be 60i semi diameters 
of the earth'. 
272,28 
See note p. 350. 
272,29 
See Newton's 'Mathematical Principles' bk. III prop. iv theorem 4, scholium. 
MoI(c 
361 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
272,34 
See J. W. Herivel 'Newton's Discovery of the Law of Centrifugal Force' 
('Isis' 1960 pp. 546-553). Unpleasantly enough, this may well be a reference 
to one of the most memorable of Spence's anecdotes: see Joseph Spence (1699-
1768) 'Observations, Anecdotes, and Characters of Books and Men' (ed. Osborn, 
2 vols. Oxford, 1966) no. 1259, 'Sir Isaac Newton, a little before he died, said, "I 
don't know what 1 may seem to the world, but as to myself, I seem to have been 
only like a boy playing on the sea-shore and diverting myself in now and then 
finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great 
ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me".' Cf. 'Paradise Regained' bk. iv 
lines 313-330. 
The difficulty physicists encountered in reproducing elliptical motion un-
doubtedly encouraged Hegel to take this attitude: see Sir J. F. W. Herschel 
(1792-1871) 'Outlines of Astronomy' (London, 1849) p. 300, 'We know of no 
artificial mode of imitating this species of elliptic motion; though a rude 
approximation to it ... may be had by suspending a small steel bead to a fine 
and very long silk fibre, and setting it to revolve in a small orbit round the 
pole of a powerful cylindrical magnet, held upright, and vertically under the 
point of suspension.' 
272,40 
Newton's three greatest discoveries, the calculus, the theory of gravitation 
and the spectrum, were all made about 1665-1666. Hegel probably knew of this 
event from Voltaire's 'Elemens de la Philosophie de Newton' (Amsterdam, 
1738) pt. III ch. iii, 'Un jour, en l'annee 1666, Newton retire a la campagne, 
et voyant tomber des fruits d'un arbre, a ce que m'a conte sa niece (Madame 
Conduitt), se laissa aller a une meditation profonde sur la cause qui entraine 
ainsi tous les corps vers une ligne qui, si elle etait prolongee, passerait a peu 
pres par Ie centre de la terre'. 
Newton's favourite niece Catherine Barton married John Conduittin 1717, 
and for the last ten years of his life the couple lived with him. In 1727 John 
Conduitt wrote to B. L. B. de Fontenelle (1657-1757) correcting certain errors 
in the latter's eloge of Newton written for the French Academy, 'In the year 
1665, when he retired to his own estate, on account of the plague, he first 
thought of his system of gravity, which he hit upon by observing an apple fall 
from a tree ... The apple tree is now remaining, and is shewed to strangers'. 
In 1732 the manor and estate of Wools thorpe in Lincolnshire, where this event 
took place, was bought from the Newtons by the Tumor family, and it was 
Edmund Tumor (1755 ?-1829), the Lincolnshire antiquary and fellow of the 
Royal Society, who published Conduitt's letter in his 'Collections, for the 
History of the Town and Soke of Grantham' (London, 1806) pp. 158-167. The 
original is in the Portsmouth collection of papers: see L. T. More 'Isaac Newton' 
(London, 1934). 

NOTES 
The original apple tree was blown down by a storm in 1820, but a grafted 
scion was propagated at the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew. It is an old variety 
of cooking apple called the 'Flower of Kent': the apples are flavourless, red 
streaked with yellow and green, and shaped much like a pear: see H. P. Macom-
ber 'Catalogue of the Babson Newton Collection' (2 vols. New York, 1950-
1955) vol. II p. 85. 
Newton did not announce the law of universal gravitation until 1686, be-
cause until 1685 he was not aware of the importance of the centre of gravity 
in the attraction of a sphere: see H. H. Turner's letter to 'The Times' March 
19, 1927: F. Cajori 'Newton's twenty years' delay in announcing the law of 
gravitation' in 'Sir Isaac Newton 1727-1927'-'The History of Science Society' 
(London, 1928) pp. 127-188. Cf. The Portsmouth Collection, Cambridge 
University Library, Additional Manuscripts 3968, no. 41, bundle 2. 
See the reference to the apple story in Hegel's 'De Orbitis Planetarum' (jena, 
1801, ed. Lasson, Leipzig, 1928) p. 378, 'The general public was reconciled to 
the concept of gravitation less by the way in which the force which is common 
to the whole universe gives meaning to the expositions of Kepler and other 
thinkers, than by the teaching that the everyday force which causes a stone to 
fall to the ground, also moves the celestial bodies in their orbits. The story of 
Newton's having seen the apple fall has so captured the popular imagination, 
that it has been quite forgotten that the fall of the whole human race, as well 
as the subsequent fall of Troy, also began with an apple-a bad omen for the 
philosophic sciences'. Cf. Sir Thomas Browne (1605-1682) 'Pseudodoxia 
Epidemica' (London, 1646, German tr. C. Rautner, Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1689) 
bk. 7 ch. i. 
273,36 
See the note on p. 354. 
273,39 
See the notes III. 302, 379. 
274, 13 
See the notes on pp. 331, and II. 323. Cf. K. F. Gauss (1777-1855) 'Funda-
mentalgleichungen fiir die Bewegung schwerer Karper auf der rotirenden 
Erde' ('Werke' V p. 495, 1867). Huyghens was the first to undertake the exact 
determination of the acceleration of gravity g by means of pendulum observa-
tions: see Ernst Mach (1838-1916) 'The Science of Mechanics' II ii 14-15. 
274, 18 
Copernicus preceded Kepler in this: see 'De revolutionibus orbium coelestium' 
(Nuremberg, 1543, tr. Dobson, London, 1955), 'I am at least of opinion that 
gravity is nothing more than a natural tendency implanted in particles by the 
363 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
divine providence of the Master of the Universe, by virtue of which, they, 
collecting together in the shape of a sphere, do form their own proper unity 
and integrity. And it is to be assumed that this propensity is inherent also in the 
sun, the moon, and the other planets'. 
Newton was therefore most certainly anticipated in regarding the planets 
as 'standing in immanent relation to the sun'; see Colin Maclaurin (1698-1746) 
'An Account of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophical Discoveries' (3rd ed. London, 
1775) bk. III ch. i; E. Goldbeck 'Kepler's Lehre von der Gravitation' (Halle, 
1896), 'Die Gravitation bei Galileo und Borelli' (Berlin, 1897); F. Rosenberger 
'Newton und seine physicalischen Principien' (Leipzig, 1895); A. Koyre 'La 
gravitation universelle de Kepler a Newton' (Paris, 1951); 1. D. Patterson 
'Hooke's Gravitation Theory and its influence on Newton' ('Isis' 1949 pp. 
327-341). The point usually made is however that Newton was the first to 
formulate the law of gravitation (note p. 322). Cf. I. Todhunter 'History of the 
Mathematical Theories of Attraction' (2 vols. London, 1873). 
274,26 
See the note on p. 349. Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749-1827) 'Exposition du 
Systeme du Monde' (2 vols. Paris, 1796), 'The System of the World' (tr. J. 
Pond, 2 vols. London, 1809). Hegel translated this extract from a chapter 'On 
the principle of universal gravitation'. The original is as follows, 'L' analyse qui 
dans ses generalites, embrasse toute ce qui peut resulter d'une loi donnee, nous 
montre que non-seulement l' ellipse, mais toute section conique, peut etre 
decrite en vertu de la force qui retient les planetes dans leurs orbes'. 
Cf. Laplace's paper 'Sur Ie principe de la gravitation universelle et sur les 
inegalites seculaires des planetes qui en dependent' ('Memoires de l' Academie' 
1773, vol. vii, pub. 1776). 
274,37 
Newton 'Mathematical Principles' bk. I lemma i-ix. Hegel is referring in 
particular to lemma vii, 'I say, that the ultimate form of these evanescent 
triangles is that of similitude, and their ultimate ratio that of equality ... And 
hence in all reasonings about ultimate ratios, we may use anyone of these 
triangles for any other'. 
This is of course the famous difficulty of Newton's calculus. George Berkeley 
(1685-1753) first called public attention to it in 'The Analyst' (Dublin, 1734) 
when he dubbed the fluxions 'the ghosts of departed quantities' (see note p. 351). 
Newton first dealt with the subject in a tract which he sent to Barrow in 
1669 'De Analysi per Aequationes Numero Terminorum Infmitas'. His fullest 
treatment of it is to be found in the 'Method of Fluxions' (written 1671, tr. 
Colson, London, 1736). It is hardly true to say that there is no end to what can 
be proved if Newton's reasoning is accepted, since the motion calculated is the 
fundamental determining factor. See op. cit. bk. I lemma i, 'Quantities, and 
364 

NOTES 
the ratios of quantities, which in any finite time converge continually to equality, 
and before the end of that time approach nearer to each other than by any 
given difference, become ultimately equal. If you deny it, suppose them to be 
ultimately unequal, and let D be their ultimate difference. Therefore they can-
not approach nearer to equality than by that given difference D; which is 
contrary to the supposition.' 
Newton himself was however unsatisfied with his early treatment of the 
infinitely small quantity, and in the 'Quadratura curvarum' (London, 1704) it 
is abandoned with the remark that, 'errores quam minimi in rebus mathematicis 
non sunt contemnendi.' Cf. the differences between bk. II lemma ii in the first 
(1687) and the seond (1713) editions of the 'Mathematical Principles'. 
A. De Morgan (1806-1871) 'On the Early History ofInfinitesimals' ('Phil-
osophical Magazine' November, 1852); F. Cajori 'A History of the Conceptions 
of Limits and Fluxions in Great Britain' (Chicago, 1931). 
275,2 
See the note on p. 349. 
275, 12 
See the note on p. 313. 
276,20 
TychoBrahe (1546-1601) attempted to combine certain features of the Ptolemaic 
and Copernican systems. His 'De Mundi Aetherei recentioribus Phaenomenis' 
(Uraniborg, 1588) was mainly concerned with the comet of 1577, but it also 
included a theory of the cosmos according to which the earth retained its 
immobility, the five planets revolved around the sun, and the sun circuited the 
earth once a year with its entire cortege, while the sphere of the fixed stars 
continued to perform its all-inclusive diurnal rotation. 
This work was privately printed. It became known to the general public 
when it appeared as volume two of Brahe's 'Astronomiae Instauratae Progy-
rnnasmata', edited by Kepler (Prague, 1602-3). 
See Kepler's 'The Harmonies of the World' bk. v ch. iii (tr. C. G. Wallis, 
Chicago, 1952), 'In the case ofTycho Brahe the whole planetary system (where-
in among the rest the circles of Mars and Venus are found) revolves like a tablet 
on a lathe, the midspace between the circles of Mars and Venus; and it comes 
about from this movement of the system that the Earth within it, although 
remaining motionless, marks out the same circle around the sun and midway 
between Mars and Venus, which in Copernicus it marks out by the real move-
ment of its body while the system is at rest'. 
276,23 
Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543) 'De revolutionibus orbium coelestium' 
365 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Nuremberg, 1543, tr. Dobson, London, 1955). In book one of this work 
Copernicus himself calls the sun the 'spirit, ruler and visible god of the universe' 
and takes it to be placed at the centre of the universe on account of its per-
fection, 'Who, in this universal temple, would place this splendid light in another 
or better place than whence it can shine on all at once?' 
277,9 
,~er Untericf)ieb ber ffiuf)e an bem, ltJa~ f)ier ~eltJegung ift, ift rein realer 
Untericf)ieb, fein Untericf)ieb ber maiie': 'Jenenser Realphilosophie II' p. 25. 
Michelet changed the meaning of this sentence somewhat by substituting 
,bon' for ,an'; his interpretation is captured if 'its' is removed from the English 
translation. 
277, 14 
Newton's formulation of the law of universal gravitation, and failure to 
explain the physical nature of it gave rise to the concept of action at a distance, 
which was challenged in eighteenth and early nineteenth century mechanics 
by that of the forces of contact. This controversy was resolved to some extent by 
the work of Faraday and Maxwell: see Ernst Mach 'The Science of Mechanics' 
appendix xv. C£ A. E. Woodruff 'Action at a distance in nineteenth century 
electrodynamics' ('Isis' 1962 pp. 439-459); note p. 37. 
277, IS 
See the note II. 243. 
277,32 
Michelet emphasizes this word. 
278, 5 
Hegel entered the following note in the margin at this juncture ('Jenenser 
Realphilosophie II' p. 27 n. 3), 
,~orf)er, entftef)en, ltJa~ e~ ift, immer 
iein ~egriff, feine @eicf)icf)tei bieie~ ift gemeinti' 
278,6 
,00 bie Sfometen au~ bet @5onne' au!3geltJorfen ltJerben.' Hegel wrote 
,ltJorben' (finb) i.e. 'have been': 'Jenenser Realphilosophie II' p. 27. 
278,9 
Aristotle regarded comets as transient combustible bodies conslstmg of 
exhalations raised to the upper regions of the air and there set on fire, far below 
the course of the moon: see 'Meteorologica' 42b25-45alo. J. Hevelius (16n-
1687) took them to be formed from the exhalations of the sun: see 'Cometo-
graphia' (Danzig, 1668); 'Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1665 p. 104. Newton was the 
366 

NOTES 
first to determine their composition and the nature of their orbits with any 
success: see 'Mathematical Principles' bk. III lemma iv et seq. Fanciful theories 
regarding their nature were however common during the eighteenth century. 
Hugh Hamilton (1729-1805) for example, expressed the view that they have the 
function of bringing back the electric fluid which the planets are continually 
discharging into the higher regions of their atmospheres; see 'Philosophical 
Essays' (London, 1766), 'Conjectures on the Nature of the Aurora Borealis, 
and on the Tails of Comets'. 
C£ H. Williamson 'An Essay on Comets, and an account of their luminous 
appearance' ('Trans. American Phil. Soc.' lapp. 27,1771) ;J. A. Deluc 'Gedanken 
tiber die Natur der Kometen' ('Berliner astronomisches Jahrbuch' 1803 p. 92); 
H. Flaugergues (1755-1835) 'Examen critique des differentes hypotheses 
imaginees pour expliquer ... des cometes' (Journal de Physique' 1817 pp. 173, 
245: 1818 p. 101). 
278, 19 
Hegel made the subject of this sentence plural (,6+>~iiten\ but the rest of it 
singular (Jenenser Realphilosophie II' p. 28). Hoffmeister's and not Michelet's 
version has been followed in the translation. 
278, 31 
Hegel entered the following note in the margin at this juncture (Jenenser 
Realphilosophie II' p. 29 n. 2): 'Centre, generating the whirling motion'. 
278, 38 
See the note II. 243 
279, 15 
Precession was discovered by Hipparchus about 125 B.C. by comparing the 
length of the year determined by the dates of the heliacal risings of certain 
stars with its length determined by the dates when the shadow of a vertical 
post was at its average length. 
As Hegel notes, this motion is caused by the earth's axis gyrating in a cone 
while keeping its inclination to the ecliptic practically unchanged. 
One 
complete circuit occupies 25,800 years. 
See Newton's 'Mathematical Principles' bk. III prop. xxxix, prob. 20; 
Laplace 'Memoire sur la Precession des Equinoxes' (read August 19, 1779: 
'Memoires de l'Academie' 1777-1780). 
279, 16 
See 'Jenenser Realphilosophie II' p. 3 I. Michelet puts this sentence in brackets, 
and reads ,motation, for ,~utation,. Nutation is the oscillation of the earth's pole 
367 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
of rotation superposed upon its precessional motion through the regression of 
the moon's nodes. 
For articles on the subject available to Hegel see: James Bradley (1672-1762) 
'A letter to the Earl of Macclesfield concerning an apparent motion observed 
in some fixed stars' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1748 p. I); J. H. Lambert (1728-
1777) 'Ueber die Nutation oder Schwankung bey Voraussetzung der ellipti-
schen-Bewegung des We1tpols urn seinen wahren Mittelpunkt' ('Berlin. 
astron. Jahrbuch' 1776 p. 108); B. A. von Lindenau (1780-1854) 'Eine neue 
Methode zu einer zuverlassigern Bestimmung der Aberration- und Nutation 
Constante' ('Berlin. astron. Jahrbuch' 1818 p. 244); John Brinkley (1763-1835) 
'The quantity of solar nutation' ('Trans. of the Irish Acad.' vol. xiv pp. 5-38, 
1825); F. W. Bessel (1784-1846) 'Nutationsformel', see 'Quarterly Journal of 
Science' (vol. xx p. 321, 1826). 
279,31 
See G. C. Lewis 'An Historical Survey of the Astronomy of the Ancients' 
(London, 1862); F. E. Manuel 'The Eighteenth Century Confronts the Gods' 
(Cambridge, Mass., 1959). For an account of Chaldean, Egyptian, Greek and 
Roman sun-worship, see F. Cumont 'Astrology and Religion among the Greeks 
and Romans' (New York and London, 1912). 
279,37 
This translation has been made from Michelet's version of the sentence, 
Hegel wrote as follows (Jenenser Realphilosophie II' p. 32), ,2rUe£! ift 
bie l:otaIitiit bet ~etuegung, ~at feine 2eit unb feinem 
~tei£!lauf an ifJm, 
abet 3Utiidgetteten untet (ein) t)o~ete£! in fidJ, obet tua£! ba£!felbe ift, 3U fJofJetem 
3nfidJfein tealifiett'. 
280, IO 
,ba£l ()tganifdJe feine 
~taft, alfo fein il1egatibe£! fJat': see Hoffmeister's 
version of this sentence in jenenser Realphilosophie II' p. 32. 
280, 14 
,bet IDCenfdJ teU£l babutdJ bau et': see Hoffmeister's version of this sentence 
in jenenser Realphilosophie II' p. 32. C£ the notes 11.3 11-322 
280, 16 
Antoine Fran'1ois Fourcroy (1755-1809), see the note III. 347 This is 
evidently a reference to Fourcroy's analysis of digestion: see 'Systeme des Con-
naissances Chimiques' (10 vols. Paris, 1800). The work was immensely popular, 
and was translated into German by F. Wolff (4 vols. Konigsberg, 1805-1803) 
and D. Veith and Wiedemann (5 vols. Brunswick, 1805). William Nicholson 
368 

NOTES 
brought out an English translation 'A General System of Chemical Knowledge' 
(II vols. London, 1804): see vol. ix pp. 22-24 (sect. 8 art. 2 par. 7), 'Digestion 
... is very much varied ... We may, however, distinguish in it four periods: 
the ftrst, the preparatory, comprehends the bruising, mastication and deglutition; 
the alimentary bolus is formed and conducted into the stomach in this ftrst 
period; the second, which comprehends the digestion in the stomach, or the 
change of the alimentary matter into chyle, or homogeneous pulp; the third, 
which belongs to a second change produced in the intestine, and which separates 
the chylous matter from the excremental; ftnally, the fourth, which compre-
hends the absorption of the chyle that has been formed, by the lacteal vessels, 
and the expulsion of the excrement. 
These four periods are very distinct in man, in the mammalia, the birds, the 
reptiles, the ftshes and the insects'. 
See Fourcroy's 'La Medecine eclairee par les Sciences Physiques' (4 bks. 
Paris, 1791-1792), in which many topics related to this are touched upon. Cf. 
W. A. Smeaton 'Fourcroy, chemist and revolutionary' (Cambridge, 1962) 
ch. ix. 
280, 34 
See Samuel Vince (1749-1821) 'A Complete System of Astronomy' (3 vols. 
London, 1814-1823) vol. I pp. 151-160; 'From observing the course of the 
planets for one revolution, their orbits are found to be inclined to the ecliptic, 
for they appear only twice in a revolution to be in the ecliptic; and as it is 
frequently requisite to reduce their places in the ecliptic, ascertained from 
observation, to corresponding places in their orbits, it is necessary to know the 
inclinations of their orbits to the ecliptic, and the points of the ecliptic where 
their orbits intersect it, called the Nodes . .. The motion of the nodes is found, 
by comparing their places at two different times ... This motion of the nodes is 
in respect to the equinox; if therefore we subtract from each 50",25 the pre-
cession of the equinoxes, it will give the motion in respect to the fixed stars, or 
the real motion. The motion in the following Table is in respect to the equinoxes. 
Motion of the nodes in one hundred years. 
Planets 
M. Cassini 
Dr. Halley 
M. de la Lande 
Mercury 
1° . 24' . 40" 
1° . 23' . 20" 
1° . 12' . 10" 
Venus 
0 . 56 . 40 
0 . 5 I 
. 40 
0 . 5 I . 40 
Mars 
0 . 56 . 40 
1 . 3 . 20 
0 . 46 . 40 
Jupiter 
0 • 40 . 9 
1 . 23 . 20 
0 . 59 . 30 
Saturn 
I . 35 . II 
0 . 30 . 0 
0 .55 .30 
The Georgian Planet has not yet been discovered long enough to determine 
the motion of its nodes from observation'. 
369 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
281,2 
See 'The Timaeus of Plato' 36 (ed. R. D. Archer-Hind, London, 1888) pp. 
II3-II5, which contains a useful commentary on the subject. C£ the detailed 
analysis in A. E. Taylor's 'Commentary on Plato's Timaeus' (Oxford, 1928) 
pp. 160-166; F. M. Cornford 'Plato's Cosmology' (London, 1937). 
Timaeus took the 'circle of the Other' to be broken up into seven concentric 
circles, corresponding to the seven 'planets'. These he evidently assumed to be 
ranged from the Earth at the following comparative distances: Moon I, Sun 2, 
Venus 3, Mercury 4, Mars 8, Jupiter 9, Saturn 27. 
In the preface to his 'Prodromus Dissertationum Cosmographicarum con-
tinens Mysterium Cosmographicum' (Tiibingen, 1596, German tr. Caspar, 
Augsburg, 1923), Kepler gives an account of the theory which dawned upon 
him onJuly 9-19,1595, 'If, for the sizes and relations of the six heavenly paths 
assumed by Copernicus, five figures possessing certain distinguishing charac-
teristics could be discovered among the remaining infinitely many, then every-
thing would go as desired . . . The earth is the measure for all other orbits. 
Circumscribe a twelve-sided regular solid (dodecahedron) about it; the sphere 
stretched around this will be that of Mars. Let the orbit of Mars be circum-
scribed by a four-sided solid (tetrahedron). The sphere which is described about 
this will be that of Jupiter. Let Jupiter's orbit be circumscribed by a cube. The 
sphere described about this will be that of Saturn. Now, place a twenty-sided 
figure (icosahedron) in the orbit of the earth. The sphere inscribed in this will 
be that of Venus. In Venus's orbit place an octahedron. The spheres inscribed in 
this will be that of Mercury. There you have the basis for the number of the 
planets'. 
See M. Caspar 'Kepler' (tr. Hellman, London and New York, 1959) 114; 
J. 1. E. Dreyer 'A History of Astronomy from Thales to Kepler' (ed. Stahl, 
Dover Pubs., 1953) ch. xv; D. C. Knight 'Johannes Kepler' (London, 1965) 
pp. 28-37; J. P. Phillips 'Kepler's Echinus' ('Isis' 1965 pp. 196-200). 
281, 17 
The sequence 0, 3, 6, 12, 48, 96, 192 in Bode's Law (note II. 250) had led 
astronomers to look for a planet to fill the gap between Mars and Jupiter. 
Hegel belittled their efforts in the inaugural dissertation (note p. 372) which he 
defended at Jena on August 27, 1801, but by that time the surrnisals had 
already been confirmed. 
On January I, 1801 Guiseppe Piazzi (1746-1826) of Palermo noticed an 
eighth magnitude star in Taurus, which had changed its position by the follow-
ing evening. He watched it until February 11th, when it came too close to the 
sun for further observation, and on January 23rd communicated his discovery to 
Barnaba Oriani (1752-1832), the director of the Milan observatory: see 'Cor-
rispondenza astronornica fra Guiseppe Piazzi e Barnaba Oriani' ('Pubbl. del 
Osserv. di Brera' no. vi pp. 48-49): the letter did not arrive until April 5th. On 
370 

NOTES 
January 24th he wrote to J. E. Bode (1747-1826) at Berlin, and this letter was only 
received on March 20th. Bode suspected that this 'star' was the planet he was 
seeking, and K. F. Gauss (1777-1855), who had just developed an improved 
method of computing elliptical orbits from three observations: see his 'Theoria 
motus corporum coelestium' (Hamburg, 1809), confirmed his surmisal. Ceres, 
the largest of the asteroids had been discovered. C£ Piazzi's letter to Bode of 
August 1st, published in 'Risultati delle osservazioni della nuova stella scoperta 
il primo gennajo 1801' (Palermo, 1801), and 'Della scoperta del nuovo pianeta 
Cerere Ferdinandea' (Palermo, 1802). 
On March 28, 1802 H. W. M. Olbers (1758-1840) discovered Pallas. The 
existence of two planets where only one was expected led Olbers to formulate 
his celebrated hypothesis, according to which these bodies were fragments of a 
larger planet which had been shattered by an internal convulsion. This theory 
seemed to be confirmed by the discovery of Juno and Vesta in 1804 and 1807, 
in the precise regions of Cetus and Virgo where the nodes of such supposed 
planetary fragments should be situated. His argument was fallacious however: 
mutual perturbations would quickly have effaced all traces of a common dis-
ruptive origin, and the catastrophe, to be perceptible in its effects, would have 
had to have been fairly recent. No more asteroids were discovered until 1845. 
See H. W. M. Olbers 'Entdeckung eines beweglichen Sterns (Pallas), ('Bode, 
Astron. Jahrbuch' 1805, pp. 102-II2); 'Beobachtung eines von Herrn Harding 
zu Lilienthal am 1 Septbr. 1804 entdeckten wandel sterns' (op. cit. 1807, pp. 
245-247); 'Beobachtungen der Juno und Pallas' (op. cit. 1808, pp. 179-184); 
'Entdeckung und Beobachtung eines vierten neuen Planeten (Vesta) zwischen 
Mars undJupiter am 29 Mlirz 180i (op. cit. 1810, pp. 194-201). 
281, 18 
For a contemporary English account of Jupiter and its satellites see Samuel 
Vince (1748-1821) 'A Complete System of Astronomy' (3 vols. London, 1814-
1823) vol. I pp. 231-262. 
281,22 
For a detailed account of knowledge of Saturn at this time, see A. F. o. 
Alexander 'The Planet Saturn' (London, 1962). Between 1789 and 1808 Sir 
William Herschel published eight papers on the planet in the 'Phil. Trans. of 
the Royal Society'. 
281,23 
While watching the stars at Bath on the evening of March 13, 1781, Sir 
Frederick William Herschel (1738-1822) noticed a round, slowly moving, 
nebulous disk which he took at first to be a comet. He announced it as such to 
the Royal Society: see 'Account of a Comet' ('Transactions', 1781 p. 492), but a 
few weeks of observation showed it to be moving in a nearly circular orbit at a 
371 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
distance from the sun about nineteen times that of the earth. Its planetary 
character was thus established, and Herschel named it the Georgium Sidus in 
honour of his royal patron: see 'On the name of the new planet' ('Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc.' 1783 p. I). It was Johann Ehlert Bode (1747-1826) who proposed 
that it should be known as Uranus ('Astronomisches Jahrbuch' 1785 p. 191), and 
this name was generally accepted on the continent, although in England the 
body was known as the Georgian planet until about 1850. 
Bode ('Astronomisches Jahrbuch' 1784 p. 219, 1785 p. 189) attempted to 
show that Tycho Brahe had observed Uranus as early as 1587, that Flamsteed 
had seen it on Dec. 23, 1690 ('Historia Coelestis Britannica' 1725 vol. IIp. 86), 
and that it had been sighted on various occasions during the middle of the 
eighteenth century. Not all his assertions have been substantiated, and there can 
at least be no doubt that Herschel was the first to recognize that the body is not 
a star or a comet. 
On January II 1787, Herschel detected Titania and Oberon: see 'An account 
of the discovery of the two satellites revolving round the Georgian planet' 
('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1787 p. 125). He later claimed to have discovered four 
further satellites: see 'On the discovery of four additional satellites to the 
Georgium Sidus' ('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1798 pp. I, 47), but careful investi-
gation of his observations has shown that the supposed objects could not have 
been of this character. Ariel and umbriel were not discovered until 1851-2. 
See Herschel's 'A series of observations of the satellites of the Georgian Planet' 
('Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.' 1815 pp. 293-362). 
J. H. Schroter (1745-1816) also saw Titania and Oberon: see 'Observations 
on the satellites of the Georgium Planet' ('Tilloch's Philosophical Magazine' 
111798 pp. 282-290), as did Sir John Herschel (1792-1871) in 1828. In his 'Treatise 
on Astronomy' (London, 1831) p. 298 however, the younger Herschel says of 
these bodies that, 'they have never been discerned but with the most powerful 
telescopes which human art has yet constructed, and this only under peculiar 
circumstances' . 
C£ G. N. Fischer (1748-1800) 'Ueber das Monden-System des Uranus' 
('Berliner astronomisches Jahrbuch' 1790 p. 213); 'The Scientific Papers of Sir 
William Herschel' (ed. Dreyer, 2 vols. London, 1912); A. F. O. Alexander 'The 
Planet Uranus' (London, 1965). 
281,26 
Hegel's inaugural dissertation 'De Orbitis Planetarum' Gena, 1801) should 
perhaps be mentioned here, as it is usually cited in connection with this topic. 
On the last page of this work, Hegel criticizes the a priori theorizing of his day, 
which used the arithmetical series of Bode's law (note p. 370) as a reason for 
searching for a planet to fill the gap between Mars and Jupiter, and suggests, 
evidently not without some irony, that the sequence attributed to the demiurge 
372 

NOTES 
in the 'Timaeus' (note p. 370) might provide a better guide, as it not only accounts 
for the known planetary sequence, but also simplifies consideration of the satel-
lites of Jupiter and Saturn. On this occasion the a priori intuitive approach was 
however confirmed by the discovery of Ceres in January 1801 (note p. 370). 
It is perhaps worth remembering that no theoretical justification for Bode's 
Law has yet been found, and that the discovery of Neptune in 1846 disproved it 
to some extent. 
The main importance of Hegel's dissertation lies in the first two sections. In 
the first, the astronomy of the day is submitted to a radical analysis which, 
with regard to the topics discussed, closely resembles the mature expositions 
of the 'Encyclopaedia'. The distinction between 'pure' and applied mathematics 
is drawn, universal gravitation is shown to be implicit in Kepler's laws, the 
rigour of Newton's calculus is questioned, the use of forces to explain planetary 
motions and the pendulum is criticized, the Newtonian God is banished from 
rational mechanics etc. 
In the second section Hegel makes an interesting attempt to explain the 
structure of the solar system in the light of the magnetic theories of his day, 
bringing out the possible importance of light, lines of cohesion, poles, culmi-
nation points etc., and emphasizing the 'purity' of Kepler's laws. This section is 
clearly hypothetical; it is interesting however, not only as an anticipation of 
later ideas (note p. 343), but as an example of a priori theorizing which, as Hegel 
did not live to see it borne out by facts, he failed to develop. Cf. the note on 
J. F. W. Herschel's experiment (p. 362). 
The bad press which this dissertation has been given in general articles and 
text-books is remarkable, not only on account of the learning, acumen and 
distinction of the writers who have contributed to it, but because, unlike many 
of their kind, almost all these pundits seem to have taken the trouble to read 
right through to the end of what is, after all, a rather obscure, difficult, and un-
obtainable Latin treatise. 
See Georg Lasson 'Hegels Erste Druckschriften' (Leipzig, 1928) pp. 347-405; 
T. 1. Haering 'Hegel, sein Wollen und sein Werk' (2 vols. Leipzig and Berlin, 
1929-1938) vol. I pp. 699-762; Rudolf Wolf 'Geschichte der Astronomie 
(Munich, 1877) pp. 684-5; 'Memoires de l' Academie de Berlin' 1786-7 p. 341. 
'Berliner astronomisches Jahrbuch' 1791 p. 235; 1806 p. 224; 1809 p. II3: 
'Zachs monatliche Correspondenz' 1803 p. 74; 1808 p. 545; 1813 p. 389' 
'Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society' I 1822 p. 179. Otto 
Class 'Kepler und Newton und das Problem der Gravitation in der Kantischen, 
Schellingschen und Hegelschen Naturphilosophie' (Heidelberg, 1908). 
282, 19 
In his 'Lectures on the History of Philosophy' (tr. Haldane and Sirnson, 3 
vols. London, 1963) vol. III p. 247, Hegel gives as the origin of this remark 
373 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Descartes' 'Principles of Philosophy' pt. III sects. 46, 47: see 'Descartes. Philo-
sophical Writings' (tr. and ed. Anscombe and Geach, Nelson, 1954) pp. 225-226 
and J. G. Buhle (1763-1821) 'Geschichte der neuem Philosophie' (6 vols. Got-
tingen, 1800-1804; French tr. by Jourdan, 6 vols. Paris, 1816). He is not quoting 
Descartes' actual words. 
Cf. 'Principles of Philosophy' pt. II, arts. 4,10; VIII, 45; IX, 68: 'Le Monde' 
in Descartes' 'Oeuvres' (ed. Adam and Tannery, Paris, 1897-1913) vol. ix p. 35: 
'Discours de la Methode' ibid., vi p. 42 et seq.: Alexandre Koyre 'Newtonian 
Studies' (London, 1965) app. D. 
374 

INDEX TO TEXT VOL. I 
aberration, 277, 278, 279 
abscissa and ordinate, 228, 275 
acceleration, 254, 255, 256. 266. 270; 
accelerative force. 254. 257. 265 
Achilles. 232 
acid (citric). 202 
action, 195 
actuositY.206 
Adam, 204 
addition. 257 
air, 218, 219; resistance, 250. 252. 256 
Alexander the Great. 232 
analogy. 197, 216 
analysis. 254. 264,265.274; defmition. 277; 
treatment. 228. 265 
Ancients (the), 209, 262 
angle. 268 
animal. 197. 200. 209. 210. 214; emergence, 
212; land and aquatic. 213; world, 213 
aphelion. 266. 267. 273 
appetite, 195, 198 
Apple (Newton's), 272 
are, 268, 270; and radius. 270, time, 269; 
determinability, 270 
Aristode, 193, 194, 196 
arithmetic, 233, 234 
arrow (Zeno's), 239 
art (works of). 209 
asteroid,281 
astronomy. 260.270.276; astronomer, 280 
atom, 207. 219 
attraction. 241. 242. 243, 262. 265. 274; 
force of, 260. 262, 273 ; of Earth, 272 
authority. 265 
axis. 277, 279; major and minor. 270; of 
Earth, 279; orbital. 279; rotation, 277 
ball (leaden), 249, 250 
becoming. 230.233 
bird,213 
body, 244. 245, 248, 253, 257; and forces, 
261; material parts. 265; celestial. 262; 
central, 261,262.271,275,276.277.278; 
cometary. 263; dependent. 277; gravity, 
251, 253. 263; individuality. 266; inert 
246; lunar, 263; moving, 249, 276; 
particularity, 261; planetary, 263; solar 
system, 263, 281; stellar, 258; subject to 
law. 264; weight. 251, 256; unsupported, 
256 
blood, 196; circulation, 280 
blossom, 232 
Boehme,]., 2II 
botdestopper. 196 
box-compass, 194 
boy (whipping top), 272 
Brahe, T., 269 
brainwave, 199 
breadth, 226 
Butterfly, 214 
cannon-ball, 252 
capillary tube, 260 
carbon, 202; pole, 213 
category, 201, 202, 203, 213; metaphysical, 
266; of philosophy, 203 
caterpillar, 214 
cathetus, 228, 275 
celestial body, 210, 262 
centrality, 26 I 
centre, 217, 239, 240. 241, 242, 248. 249, 
254. 258, 262, 264, 271, 278; absolute. 
275, 279; and periphery, 262, 270; as 
body, 263; determinate. 282; differenti-
ation of 258; equidistance from. 261; 
extended, 276; movement about, 276; of 
gravity, 248, 250, 273. nature, 199, 
planet, 279; particular, 266; positing of, 
243, 257; relative, 261; subjectivity of, 
276; tendency towards, 256; universal, 
263 
centrifugal force, 249, 261, 262, 265, 266, 
267,270,273. 274 
centripetal force, 260, 265, 266. 267, 270, 273 
change (quantitative), 214 
chemistry. 202; chemical body, 214 
375 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
child, 200 
Christian religion, 206 
chrysalis, 214 
cinnabar, 196 
circle, 229, 240, 264, 267, 268, 269; defmi-
tion, 228, 275; nature, 270 
circular: line, 239; motion, 239 
citric acid, 202 
class, 201 
cognition, 193, 194, 198, 199; philosophic, 
197; scientific, 199 
cold,I95 
collaterality, 223, 229 
collision, 246, 247 
colours (four), 2II 
comet, 210,263, 277,278,279 
comprehension, 196, 197 
conic section, 264, 274 
consciousness, 194, 199, 200, 280; division 
of, 199; subjective, 230 
continuity, 230, 236, 242, 258, 260; com-
plete, 224; of matter, 241 
Copernicus N., 269, 276 
Cork tree, 196 
cosmology, 193 
Cow, 274 
creation,192,Z04,205,207,213 
Cronos, 230 
cultural change, 202 
curve, 262, 266, 276; complete, 270; 
function of, 275; of revolution, 275, 
understanding, 270 
day (times of), 280 
death,216 
deduction, 215, 225; analytical, 264; from 
law, 274 
deficiency, 196 
density (specific), 276 
depth,226 
Descartes, R., 282 
diagonal, 270, 273 
dialectic, 212, 220, 239 
dimension, 225, 236 
direction, 250, 252, 273 
disease (periodic), 280 
distance, 238, 265 
distinguishing feature, 201 
divine unity, 199 
divisibility (infmite), 210 
drive (ofIdea), 218 
duality, 2II 
duration, 232, 237, 239, 240, 245 
dyad,2II 
earlobe, 201 
Earth, 213, 226, 272, 281; and sun, 276; 
attraction, 272; axis, 279; centre, 248; 
history, 208 
ecliptic, 280 
education, 191 
ego, 204, 230, 231 
elasticity, 247 
electro-chemistry, 201 
element, 210, 2II, 218, 232 
ellipse, 264, 268, 270, 274, 279; elliptical 
path,270 
emanation, 213,218 
emergence, 212,213 
empiricism, 191; empirical appearance, 197; 
application, 234; basis (of postulate) , 249; 
being, 197; circumstance, 264; coefficient, 
273; 
confirmation, 
254; 
data, 263; 
determination, 272; difference, 270; dis-
covery, 269; measure, 268; number, 255; 
physics, 197; quality, 269, 270; science, 
193; view, 201 
encheiresin naturae, 202 
encylopaedia, 192 
English (the), 272 
equator, 267, 274 
equilibrium (of forces), 267 
eternity, 207, 231, 232, 235; of world, 206, 
207 
Euclid,228 
Eve, 204 
evil,200,210,211,214 
evolution, 212, 213, 218 
experience, 197,246,260,264,274 
eye, 210; spiritual, 199 
factor, 234 
faith,210 
fall, 243, 244, 245, 251, 252,253, 256, 257, 
258, 268, 271; absolute factor in, 256; 
and heavenly bodies, 272; empirical 
extent, 256; free, 256; law of, 255, 257, 
272, 273; line of, 252, 253; motion of, 
257,262,264 
fate, 266 
'Faust' (quoted), 202 
376 

INDEX TO TEXT 
fear, 233 
feather, 256 
feeling, 200,238 
figuration (stellar), 258, 259 
fmgers, (five), 2II 
finitude, 230 
fire, 195 
fish, 213 
flood, 195 
flower, 202, 203 
flux (pure), 278 
fly (swarm), 258 
fog, 198 
food,196 
force, 197, 201, 203, 238, 247, 248, 267; 
accelerative, 254, 265; and motion, 273; 
attractive, 241, 260, 262, 273; centrifugal, 
249, 261, 262, 265, 266, 267, 270, 273, 
274; centripetal, 260, 265, 266, 267, 270, 
273; concept of, 247; independent, 265; 
of gravity, 252, 264, 272, 274; of inertia, 
254,255,277,265; of projection, 252,253; 
interrelated, 252; parallelogram of, 270; 
repulsive, 241, 260; tangential, 273 
formalism, 191; formality, 232 
Fourcroy, A. F., 280 
Francoeur, L.-B., 252, 264 
freedom, 206, 208, 215, 231, 243, 245, 253, 
256, 257; formal, 278; intended, 279; 
mutual, 269; of gravity, 263 
freeing (of form of matter), 283 
free motion, 266; laws of, 263 
French (the), 272 
friction, 250, 252,253,262 
fulcrum, 271 
function, 270 
functionalism, 196 
fusion, 243 
future,23 1,233,235,240, 247,278 
Galileo, 255, 256 
genus, 197,201,203,212,232 
geometrical: construction, 265; proof, 274 
geometry, 225, 228, 233; central proposi-
tion, 228; scientific, 229; theorems of, 234 
Germans (the), 272 
God, 199, 204, 205, 206, 279; and nature, 
207; belief in, 2II; creation by, 213; 
first birth, 2 II ; perfection of, 2 I 3 ; 
proof of being, 209; sensorium of, 239; 
Son of, 206; wisdom of, 196, 209; 
works of, 209 
god, 262; bacchantic, 206 
Goethe,]. W., von, 202; quoted, 203 
gold, 219 
good (and evil), 200 
gravitation, 260, 264, 272, 276 
gravity, 210, 219, 241, 242, 243, 244, 248, 
249, 250, 253, 257, 258, 260, 261, 262, 
272, 275, 276, 282; and forces, 265, 
motion, 272; centre of, 248, 250, 273; 
direction of, 252; form, 252; force of, 264, 
269, 274; freedom of, 263; law of, 272, 
273; of mass, 250; relative, 246; universal, 
264 
Greek life, 232 
Hades, 235 
Hamann,]. G., 201 
hand,210 
heart, 210 
heavenly body, 272, 273 
heavens, 279; corporeality, 262; mechanism, 
262 
Hebrew, 201 
height, 225, 226 
herb,196 
Herschel,]. F. W., 259, 281 
higher: nature, 280; shape, 269 
history, 208, 279; of humanity, 216; 
nature, 2 I 6 
hope, 233 
humanity, 201, 213, 216; deeds, 209; spirit, 
205 
hunger, 196 
hydrogen, 202 
hypomochlion, 248 
hypotenuse, 228, 275 
hypothesis, 262, 281 
idealism, 200 
ideation, 198 
identity, 214; philosophy of, 201 
imagination, 2II 
immanence, 195 
immobility, 239 
impact, 243, 245, 246, 247, 248, 262 
impulse, 245, 253, 254, 264, 273 
inclination (of planet, comet, satellite), 280 
individual,232 
induction, 264,269 
377 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
inertia. 244. 245. 262; force of. 254. 255. 257. 
265; law of. 260; of matter. 245; inert 
matter. 244.262 
infInite. 234; infInitely small. 234. 274; 
infInity. 203 
infInitude (of space). 223 
innocence. 199 
inorganic nature. 219. 232 
insect (metamorphosis). 214 
integration. 261 
intelligence. 198. 199.200.206 
intuition. 197. 199. 200. 203. 213. 223. 224. 
227.23°.235.239; rational. 199 
involution. 218 
irrationality. 209. 210 
irritability. 273 
Isis. 200 
Jupiter, 266. 281 
just man. 246 
Kant. I.. 223. 227. 241. 259 
Kepler. J.. 263. 264. 274; and planetary 
series. 281; laws. 263. 265. and gravity. 
275. discovery. 269. Newton's arrange-
ment. 275; fIrst law. 268. 274. 275; 
second law. 268; third law. 264. 269. 271 
kingdoms (of nature). 213 
knowledge. 194.257; and looking, 277 
language, 194 
Laplace, P. s .. 274 
law, 194, 197, 201. 223, 246, 254. 273; 
eternal, 210; genuine, 269; in natural 
science, 271; inner, 259; Kepler's, 263. 
264.265,268.269,271.274,275; mathe-
matical, 281; mechanical, 281; offall. 255; 
free motion, 263; inertia, 260; motion, 
276; planetary series. 281; series. 214 
leaf,202 
Leibnitz, G. W., 225 
length, 225, 226 
lens (fIgure of). 259 
level (metaphysical), 252. 258, 262; cf. 
'stage' 
lever, 238. 251, 271 
life, 209. 210, 216. 219; extinction, 218; 
terrestrial,280 
light. 199, 243 
line. 226. 229, 239. 251, 257, 266, 268, 270, 
277; curved, 227; mathematical, 271; 
movement of point. 227; of rest. 274; 
oval. 270; straight, 271 
Lion, 198 
liver, 210 
living being, 216, 232. 279 
logic, 224. 235; science. 241; determination, 
283; unit. 258. 
logos. 205 
love. 206. 211 
Lucifer, 211 
luminosity, 258 
lunar; body, 263; sphere. 278 
magnetism. 269; magnetic needle, 280 
man, 195. 200, 213; essential nature. 201; 
works, 232 
mankind (history), 208 
Mars, 281 
mass, 219. 238. 240, 242, 245, 251• 257, 277; 
and contact. 247; gravity of, 250; in fall. 
256; of particular body, 265; quantum of, 
246 
mathematical: analysis, 265; consideration 
of motion, 250; determination. 265. 266. 
275; exposition, 255, 257; expression. 
254; imagination, 257; law. 281; line, 271; 
proof. 257; representation, 255; sym-
bolization, 234; treatment, 270, 272 
mathematician, 263. 272 
mathematics. 235; applied. 236, defIned. 
235; philosophical, 233. 235; pure, 236 
matter, 201, 209, 214. 217, 218, 221, 237. 
243.245,248,262,263,282; abstract. 259; 
and centre. 265, motion. 241. space and 
time, 240; attracted, 258; composite, 237; 
divisibility, 207, 210; fIrst breaking 
forth. 258; form, 283; free, 245; im-
penetrability. 237; inert. 243, 244, 258, 
262; living, 258; punctiform fusion, 243; 
qualifIed, 282; quantitative difference, 
244; spatial separation, 243; unity. 282; 
weighted. 219, 242 
measure: empirical. 268 ; realm, 
281 ; 
science, 235 
mechanical: law. 28 I; motion, 262; phen-
omenon, 238 
mechanics. 217, 219, 221. 257, 282, 283; 
absolute. 245, 257. 
280; basic. 249; 
determination. 245; fInite. 220 241. 243, 

INDEX TO TEXT 
25I; mathematical, 223; of heavens, 262; 
physical, 245, 265 
mechanism, 255 
medicine, 273 
mediocrity, 232 
memory, 233 
Mercury, 28I 
metal, 2I4 
metamorphosis, 2I2, 2I4 
metaphysical: aspect (of nature), 206; 
category, 266; chimera, 267; procedure, 
202; question, 225 
metaphysician, 200 
metaphysics, I93, 200, 202, 208, 2II; 
monstrous, 265; of nature, 207 
Milky Way, 259 
mind (uplifting), 259 
mineralogical world, 2I3 
Mollusc,2I3 
monad,2II 
monk,256 
monster, 216 
Moon, 209, 272, 277; distance from Earth, 
272 
moral activity, 209 
motion, 22I, 237, 239, 240, 243,244,266, 277, 
282; absolute, 26I; absolutely free, 256; 
257; abstract, 27I; and bodies, 282, 
gravity, 272, matter, 240, 24I, place, 236, 
rest, 245; celestial, 264, 275; circular, 270; 
construction of, 273; contingent, 248, 
249, 253; curved, 262; eccentric, 269; 
essential, 249, 250; external, 250; fmite, 
245, 250; free, 255, 262, 263, 266, 268, 
272, 276; imparting of 246; in fall 256, 
257; lateral, 252; laws of, 254, 276; 
magnitude of, 238, 257; mechanical, 248, 
262; of absolute matter, 280; fall, 257, 
262, 264; lunar sphere, 278; node, 280; 
pendulum, 250; oscillatory, 252; precise, 
nature, 247; principle of. 250, 253, 262; 
projectile, 253; quantitative determin-
ateness, 246; quiescent, 277; rectilinear, 
239; relatively free, 253; rotatory, 279; 
totality of, 279; transversal, 248; uniform, 
'256,267; uniformly accelerated, 254, 266; 
universal, 280 
mountain, 232 
movement: fmite, 246; living, 256; mech-
anical, 257; of Earth, 276; point, 227; 
peristaltic, 280; rotatory, 276 
multiplication, 257 
myth, I99 
name, I94 
natural: history, I93; philosophy, I96; 
science, I 9 3 
nature: and dimensions of time, 233, end, 
I95, God, 207, Notion, 2I6; as life, 2I8; 
beginning, 224; bride of spirit, 204; 
centre, I99; comprehension, 2I3; con-
crete, 235; contingency, 278; deepening, 
279; deification, 209; divinity, 
209; 
division from spirit, 205; eternality, 207; 
eternal life, 220; externality, 225;forma-
tions, 214; foundation, 225; Hebrew 
word, 20I; history, 2I6; impotenc~, 2I5; 
inorganic, 2I9, 232; kingdoms, 2I3; 
laws, 28I; metaphysics, I93, 206, 207; 
multiformity, I98; necessity, I92, 2IO; 
negativity, 2II; Notion, 205; objects, 
I96; philosophy of, I9I, I92, I93, I94, 
I97, I99,20I,203,204,205,2I2,217,24I, 
259, 28I; powers, I95; primary immedi-
acy, 242; purpose, 2I6; realm of, 2I9; 
soul, 239; stages, 212, 279; secret of, I99; 
study of, 204; sublation, 206; things of 
2I5; universality, I97; What is it?, 
I94; whole, 2I6 
nebula, 259 
necessity, I92, I97, 208, 2IO, 2II, 212, 224, 
277 
Newton, I., 239, 249, 263, 272, 274; apple, 
272; and Kepler's laws, 265, 272; formu-
lae, 263,269; law, 264; theory, 264, 272 
night, 280 
nisus,2I9 
nitrogen pole, 2I3 
node (motion of), 280 
'non datur saltus in natura', 2I4 
non-ens, 209 
noumenon, 200,225 
now, 233, 237 
nucleus, 250 
number, 234, 256; empirical, 25S; numerical 
determination, 27I 
nutation, 279 
object, 204 
objectivity, I98, 20I, 230 
observation, I93 
occlusion, 2{2 
379 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
oil (volatile), 202 
oracle, 199 
orbit, 261, 267, 268, 269, 272, 280 
order, 201 
organ (without function), 214 
organic being, 219, 280; organics, 217 
organism, 210; prototype of, 214 
oriental: taste, 2II; world, 213 
origin of comet, 278 
oscillation: arc, 252; of pendulum, 267, 274 
oval line, 270 
paradise, 199 
parallelogram (of forces), 270 
paralysis, 229 
past (the), 212, 233, 235, 239, 240, 247 
path (elliptical), 270 
pendulum, 250, 252, 253, 267, 274 
pentad,2II 
perception, 193, 194, 198 
perfection, 232 
perihelion,266, 267,273 
periphery, 217, 262,270 
peristaltic movement, 280 
perpetuum mobile, 250 
perturbation, 265, 266, 270 
'Phenomenology of Spirit', 191 
phenomenon. 200 
Philo, 205 
philosopher, 243 
philosophy, 191. 197, 207, 228, 281; and 
ordinary thinking, 206; category, 203; 
limit, 215; of identity, 201; mathematics, 
233, 234. 235; of nature. 191. 192, 193, 
194, 197, 199, 201, 203, 204. 205, 212, 
217, 241, 259, 281; origin of 194; 
presentation, 201; science, 225, 235 
physical: actuality, 266; being, 280; deter-
mination, 258; hypothesis, 262; reality. 
265,271 
physicist, 197 
physics, 193, 196, 197, 201, 202, 210, 217, 
219,242,247,282,283 
physiology, 193 
place, 237, 251, 262; and motion, 236, 
point, 282; central, 258; change of, 261; 
immobility, 239; negation of, 282; of 
point, 276; particularity of, 261; sub-
lation, 239 
plane,226,228,229,240,268,271 
planet, 214, 266. 278; and sun. 274. 276; 
course, 270; physical constitution, 281 
planetary: body, 263; orbit. 274; revolution, 
273; series, 280; sphere. 279 
plant, 194, 196. 209. 210, 213. 214; emer-
gence, 212; innocence, 210 
Plato, 200. 205, 281 
plummet, 256 
point, 210,224.226,229.233.240,243,251. 
276, 282; actuality, 229; duration, 239; 
exclusive, 239; fixed. 253; material, 250; 
motivated, 253; of time, 247; spatial,223 
polarity. 210, 2II 
poles (of Earth). 279 
Polyp, 213 
potency, 219; relationship. 254. 256, 257 
potentiality, 196 
power, 195, 234 
practical: approach, 200. 203; relationship, 
195 
precession (of equinoxes), 279 
present (the), 231, 232, 233, 235, 236 
pressure, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 262 
presupposition, 242 
process (eternal), 218 
projection, 252, 253 
proof, 263, 264, 274 
Proteus, 194, 200 
prototype, 214,216 
providence, 210 
punctiformity, 224 
purpose, 195, 196, 216 
pyramid, 232 
Pythagoras, 228, 234 
quadratic spatial relationship, 271 
quantitas motus, 246 
quantity (and laws of motion), 254 
radius, 228, 268; vector, 268, 271 
rationality, 193, 258, 259, 269, 281 
reason, 192, 195, 199,204,258 
rectangle, 229 
rectilinearity, 227 
religion, 199, 206, 2II 
repulsion, 242, 243, 247, 257, 258, 278; 
dead, 258; force, 260; of matter, 241 
resistance, 248, 251, 262 
respiration, 280 
rest, 245, 248, 249, 250, 251, 277; line of, 
267,274; principle, 262 

INDEX TO TEXT 
retardation, 266 
revelation (of God), 204 
revolution, 202, 275 
root (mathematical), 269 
rotation: axial, 277; of sun, 277 
satellite, 28 I 
satisfaction, 196 
Saturn, 266, 281 
Schelling, F. W. J., von, 193, 206 
science, 197, 199; and metaphysical cate-
gories, 266; of absolute motion, 261; 
philosophical, 235; worth of, 259 
scientific: cognition, 199; method, 191; 
procedure, 218; revolution, 202 
seasons, 280 
seed,196 
self: -consciousness, 210, 280; -preserva-
tion, 196: -repulsion, 258 
senses, 197, 198, 2Il 
sensibility, 273 
sensorium (of God}, 239 
series (metaphysical), 214, 216 
Sheep, 196 
sight, 218, 238 
sine and cosine, 228, 274, 275 
size, 227 
skin (eruption on), 258 
sleep, 199,280 
sling,249 
smell,218 
softness, 247 
solar system, 213, 258, 260, 261, 263, 280, 
281,282 
Son of God, 204, 206, 2Il 
Sophocles, 195 
soul, 205, 210, 2Il; of nature, 239; world, 
239 
space,221,223,229,232,236,243,244,255, 
257, 282; absolute, 224; airless, 256; and 
time, 235, 236,238,239,240,266,271; as 
order, 225; content, 224; emptiness, 237; 
entirety, 240; eruption, 259; exclusive-
ness, 237; figuration, 227, 235; immeasur-
able, 258; infinitude, 223; nature of, 223 ; 
negation of, 226; reality of, 225; science 
of 233; sensorium of God, 239; square, 
268; three dimensions, 225 
spatiality, 227; spatial relation, 282 
specialist, 281 
sphere (metaphysical), 192, 212, 213, 218, 
220,229,242,243,245,24~253,260,269, 
277,278,279,28 
sphere (shape), 243, 277 
spirit, 204, 206, 209, 212, 216, 231, 232, 
269; division from nature, 205; superi-
ority,209 
spirits, (fmite, non-human), 205 
spirituality, 200 
square, 211,227,229,257,269,285 
stage (metaphysical), 206,212,213,214,216, 
218,219,220,246,278: cf. 'level' 
star,210,22~257,258,259,261,263 
stomach,I96 
stone, 232 
straight: conception of, 277; line (defmed), 
277 
stupidity,200 
subjective consciousness, 230 
subjectivity, 198, 200, 201, 210, 215, 219, 
223,242 
subject-object opposition, 199 
subordination, 214 
subtraction, 257 
Sun, 209,210,218,220, 263,265,273,275; 
and Earth 276, planet, 274; internal 
rotation, 277; worship, 279 
superstition, 272 
surface, 226. 247, 251 
syllogism, 261, 262 
synthetic: proposition, 227; whole, 240 
system: gravitational, 276; metaphysical, 
213; of bodies, 260, 261, 265 
tangent, 270, 271; tangentia Itendency, 273 
taste, 218 
tautology, 248 
teleological: interpretation, 196; standpoint, 
195 
temporality, 231 
terrestrial being, 280 
tetrad,2Il 
theory, 195; theoretical approach, 197, 203 
thing in itself, 200 
thought, 191, 192, 193, 197, 198, 199, 200, 
201, 203, 204, 210, 213, 224, 232, 234, 
235,256,260,263,278 
three bodies (and movement), 276 
Timaeus, 281 
time, 207, 2Il, 221, 223, 229, 236, 255, 256, 
282; and motion, 268, space, 230, 245, 
255,268,269. velocity, 256; as becoming. 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
230, 
sensibility" 
230; content, 244; 
dimensions, 233, 239; exclusiveness, 237; 
factor, 271; infinite, 208; moments, 236; 
natural, 231; Notion of, 235; omni-
potence, 23 I ; point of, 247; power of, 23 I ; 
root, 268; science of, 233; self-production 
of, 371; soul of nature, 239; sublation, 
244; truth of, 240 
tradition, 199 
transition, 212; by stages, 278; fmite-abso-
lute mechanics, 243; force and gravity, 
253; ideality-reality,237, 238; logical 
determination of, 283; mechanics-physics, 
283; plane-line, 277; space-time, 229, 
236 
transversal motion, 248 
tree, 196; of knowledge, 200 
triad,2Il 
triangle, 227, 228,229,257,270,274 
truth, 199, 200, 205, 213, 218, 236, 269; 
objective, 204; of nature, 216, space, 299; 
process of, 232, 
unit, 233, 243, 244, 246, 250, 251, 256, 268; 
figurations of, 235 ; logical, 258 
universal, 201, 204; gravity, 264; inorganic, 
232; of physics, 202 
universality, 203. 204, 2Il, 230, 231; 
abstract, 232 
universe, 202, 224 
Uranus, 281 
usefulness, 212 
Vanini, G. C., 209 
vegetable world, 213 
velocity, 238. 239, 246, 249, 252, 254, 255, 
256, 266, 269, 271; accelerated, 255; 
uniform, 255 
. 
Venus, 281 
volatile oil, 202 
Voltaire, F. M. A., de, 272 
waking, 28o 
water,218,219,220,2S6 
weight, 246, 248, 251, 253, 257; of body, 
251,256; matter, 242 
weightedness, 282 
whole (synthetic), 240 
wild beasts, 195 
Wolff, c., 193 
wonder, 194 
WOOI,196 
world, 208 ; beginning in time. 
208 ; 
construction, 282; creation, 204, 207; 
eternity of, 206, 207; history of, 199,202, 
235: metaphysic of, 193; soul of, 239 
'Xenia'196 
Zeno,239 

INDEX TO FOREWORD AND NOTES VOL. I 
Abbadie, J., 293 
Academy: Berlin, 337; French, 329 
acceleration, 334, 335, 338, 340, 363 
action: and reaction, 326, 327; at a distance, 
320,366 
Adam, C., 374 
Adams, J. c., 353, 356 
Adamson, R, 289,314 
Addison, J., 299, 321 
Adickes, E., 295 
aesthetics, 287 
aether, 188,289 
Airy, G. B., 353 
Alcuin, F. A., 290 
Alexander, A. F. 0., 371, 372 
Alexander, H. G., 309, 321 
algebra, 338 
Altwicker, N., 317 
Amontons, G., 333 
analysis (infmitesimal), 352 
analytical judgement, 3 II 
angel, 299, 302 
Anscombe, G. E. M., 374 
Apollonius ofPerga, 350 
a priori theorizing, 372, 373 
Archer-Hind, RD., 370 
archetypal phenomenon, 183 
Archibald, R C., 314 
Archimedes, 327 
Aristode, 179, 284, 291, 294, 307, 310, 3Il, 
314,318,320,366 
Armitage, A., 358 
army (Prussian), 287 
Arnott, N., 327 
Arnsperger, W., 291 
asteroids, 371 
Astrand, J. J., 356 
astronomy: ancient, 347, 368; stellar, 342 
atheism, 301 
adas (star), 342 
atom, 181 
attraction, 322, 323, 345; Newtonian theory, 
33<> . 
Augustine (of Hippo), 290 
aurora borealis, 367 
Averroes, I., 300 
Babbage, C., 352 
Bacon, F., 293 
Baeumker, C., 300 
Baillie, J. B., 290 
Baily, F., 342 
Baker, J. T., 305 
ball (leaden), 329 
Banieres, J., 360 
Barrow, I., 364 
Barton, C., 362 
Bauer, B., 289 
Beckers, H., 286 
Becket, F., 357 
becoming, 315 
Behm, M., 338 
Bell, A. H., 331 
Bendey, R, 330 
Benzenberg, J. F., 361 
Berkeley, G., 308, 352, 364 
Berlin lectures, (Hegel's), 186 
Bernoulli, D., 328 
Bernoulli,]., 324 
Bessel, F. W., 342, 356, 368· 
Bhagavad-Gita, 303 
Biot,]. B., 352 
Bird, G., 295 
Blakelock, R, H2 
Boas, E., 293 
Bode,]. E., 342, 343. 371, 372 
Bode's law, 370; 372, 373 
Boehme,]., 301, 302 
Bolingbroke, H., St.,]., 299 
Bonola, R, JIO 
Boole, G., 319 
Borelli, G. A., 364 
Bork, A. M., 314 
Boscovich, R]., 319 
Boutroux, E., 303 
Bouvard, A., 353 
Bowden, F. P., 334 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY Of NATURE 
Bowditch, N., 352 
Boyer, C. B., 313 
Bradley, J., 342, 368 
Brahe, T., 343, 357, 359, 265, 372 
Brewster, D., 350 
Brillouin, 345, 356 
Brinkley, J., 368 
Broad, C. D., 317 
Brougham, H., 353 
Brown, E. W., 351 
Browne, T., 363 
Brunet, P., 360 
Budge, E. A. W., 295 
Bufi"on, G. L. L., 346 
Buhle, J. G., 374 
Bilk, 0., 324 
Bunge, M., 338 
Burckhardt,J. C., 352 
Biirja, A., 338 
Burtt, E. A., 317 
Caesalpinus, A., 300 
Cajori, F., 308, 316, 319, 320, 322, 323, 329, 
354, 358, 360, 363, 365 
Calandrelli, G., 343 
calculus, 337, 349; and motion, 365; 
criticism, 351, 35z, 353; discovery, 352, 
362; rigour, 364, 373 
Callisen, A. C. P., 285 
caloric, 181 
capillary attraction, 345, 346 
Cardanus, H., 300 
Camap, R., 343 
Camot, L. N. M., 325, 328, 329, 352 
Carre L., 286 
Carruccio, E., 319 
Caspar, M., 348, 357, 359, 370 
Cassiodorus, F. M. A., 290 
Cauchy, A. L., 338 
celestial mechanics, 352 
centre, 367; of gravity, 327, 350, 363; per-
cussion, 326 
centrifugal force, 347, 354, 362 
centripetal force, 323, 357, 360 
Ceres (asteroid), 371, 373 
Challis, J., 346 
Chamberlin, T. C., 347 
Chappell, V. C., 320 
Child, J. M., 319, 327 
Christensen, C., 357 
Chwolson, O. D., 341 
Cicero, 290 
circle, 313, 356, 360; circular motion, 356, 
358 
Clagett, M., 347 
Clairaut, A. C., 345 
Clarke, S., 309, 321 
Class, 0., 373 
Clerke, A. M., 341 
co-education, 305 
Cohen, I. B., 323 
Cohen, M. R., 347 
cohesion (lines of), 373 
Coke, E., 303 
colour (theory of), 286 
Colson, A. N., 299 
Colson, F. H., 337, 364 
comet, 365, 366 
composition (of forces), 358 
Conduitt, J., 362 
conics, 3 So, 360 
contact (forces of), 366 
Coolidge, J. L., 350 
Copernicus, N., 357, 358, 363, 365 
Corben, H. C., 345, 356 
Comford, F. M., 291, 294, 318, 370 
corpuscular theory (of matter), 321 
Corvaglia, L., 301 
Cotes, R., 322 
Cottrell, A. H., 326 
Coulomb, C. A., 333 
Cousin, V., 286 
Couturat, L., 319 
creation, 179, 298 
Crelle, A. L., 3Il, 337 
Crew, H., 322, 323, 335, 338 
'Critical Joumal of Philosophy', 179 
Cronos, 315, 319 
culmination point, 373 
Cumont, F., 368 
cytology, 317 
D'Alembert,J.le R., 314, 327, 328 
Dasgupta, S., 303 
Davies, R., 334 
Davis, W., 361 
deduction, 183, 351 
Deity (Newtonian), 353 
Deluc, J. A., 367 
density, 321 
'De Orbitis Planetarum' 3440 347, 348, 351, 
355, 363, 370, 37Z, 373 

INDEX TO FOREWORD AND NOTES 
derivatives (method of), 338 
Descartes, R., 309, 313, 327,328,360, 361, 
374 
dialectic, 183, 188 
differential calculus, 337 
digestion, 368 
Dijksterhuis, E. J., 305 
Dingle, H., 342 
Dobson,]. F., 357, 363, 366 
Drabkin, I. E., 347 
Dreyer,J. L. E., 341, 342, 357, 370, 372 
Drummond, J., 293 
Dugas, R., 305, 325, 338 
Duhem, P., 335, 359 
Durand, D., 301 
dynamics, 327, 332 
Earth (immobility), 365 :-Moon test, 350 
Eckermann, J. P., 293 
Eddington, A. S., 347 
Edelston, J., 323 
Einstein, A., 344 
Eisler, R., 295, 296, 303 
elasticity, 326 
electricity, 181, 289; electric fluid, 367 
electrostatics, 345, 355 
ellipse, 360; elliptical motion, 362, 371 
emanation, 303 
embryology, 317 
empiricism, 180, 181, 182, 183, 185 
encheiresin naturae, 296 
'Encyclopaedia' 186, 187, 189 
Engel, F., 310 
English (the), 182 
enlightenment, 295 
Ercole, P. d', 284 
Erman, P., 287 
Eschenmayer, A. K. A., 180, 285 
ether, 188,289 
Euclid, 307, 309, 310, 311,312,313 
Euler, L., 324, 331, 337, 352 
Eurytus, 318 
Eves, H., 313 
Eyck, H., von, 288 
Fahie, J. J., 339 
fall, 334, 335, 336, 338, 339, 361 
Faraday, M., 366 
'Faust', 296 
Faxe, W., 357 
N 
Feigl, H., 3 II 
Feuerbach, L., 289 
Fichte, J. G., 289, 301, 314 
Fiedler, A., 305 
figure (of stars), 342 
fire, 314 
Fischer, G. N., 372 
Flamsteed, J., 342, 372 
Flaugergues, H., 367 
Fontenelle, B. L. B., de, 362 
force, 344, 373; and inertia, 324; composi-
tion, 358; of contact, 366; parallelogram 
of, 326, 339, 358; theory of, 327 
Fourcroy, A. F., 368, 369 
Fournier, E., 303 
Francoeur, 1., 332 
Francoeur, L. -B., 332, 344, 348, 351 
Francoeur, L. ~J., 332 
Frank, P., 324, 330 
Frantz, G. A. C., 291 
Frauwallner, E., 303 
Frege, F. L. G., 319 
French (the), 182; French Academy, 362 
friction, 33 I, 333, 334 
Fuhrmamr, W. D., 301 
fulcrum, 327 
Fulleborn, G. G., 301 
functions, 338, 356 
Galileo, 323, 324, 335, 338, 339, 356, 364 
Galle, J. G., 353 
Gans, E., 287 
Garnett, C. B., 306, 311 
Gauss, K. F., 310, 363, 371 
Geach, P. T., 374 
Gebler, K., von, 339 
Gehler, J. S. T., 341 
'Genesis' (book of), 298 
geometry, 309; Euclidean, 308, 312, 313; 
logical antecedent, 309; motion, 325; 
non-Euclidean, 310; of conics, 
360; 
stellar, 342; triadic, 314 
Georgian planet, 369, 372 
Gerhardt, C. 1., 309 
German philosophy, 182 
Gersdorf, E. G., 332 
Geyer, F. W. L., 186, 288 
Gillipsie, C. G., 293 
Glockner, H., 285,287,288,295,304 
God, 299, 300, 328; Newton's conception of 
321,373 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
gods, (and planets), 347 
Goethe J. W. von, 183, 185, 285, 286, 291, 
293,294,296,297,315 
Goldbeck, E., 364 
Goodenongh, E. R, 299 
Goodier, J. N., 326 
Goodricke, J., 343 
Gosser, M., 353 
Grammond, G. B., 301 
gravitation, 3Il, 343-345, 350, 351, 361, 
362, 364, 373 
gravity, 323, 325, 357, 361, 363; centre of 
327,350; physical nature, 330 
Green, A. E., 326 
Greenstreet, W.J., 330 
Griesheim, K. G., von, 186, 287 
Gratius, H., 339 
Grotius, J. H., 339 
Grube, M. A., 298 
Griinbaum, A., 305, 320 
Grundtvig, N. F. S., 294 
Grzegorczyk, A., 307 
Guerlac, H., 360 
Guglielmini, G. B., 361 
Haberling, W., 285, 286 
Haeckel, E. H. P. A., 341 
Haering, T. L., 289, 373 
Haldane, E. S., 288, 291, 294, 295, 298,299, 
300,304,318,328,373 
Hall, A. R, 319 
Hall, M. B., 319 
Haller, A., von, 297 
Halley, E. 343, 350 
Hamann, J. G., 295, 296 
Hamilton, Ho, 367 
Hamilton, W., 318 
'Hamlet', 292 
Hanna, J., 360 
Hanson, N. R, 354 
Harding, K. L., 342, 371 
Harre R, 318 
Harris, J., 340 
Hasner, J., von, 357 
heat, 181 
Heath, A. E., 330 
Heath, T. L., 307, 310, 3Il, 312, 313, 314, 
327,350 
Hebrew, 296 
Heckscher, A., 331 
Hegel, G. W. F., 181, 182, 184, 185; 
lectures, 186, 287; foot-notes by, 304, 
329,331,334,336,360; Society, 179 
Heidelberg Encyclopaedia, 187,315, 348 
Heinekamp, H., 296 
Helfrecht,]. T. B., 357 
heliocentric orbit, (sinuous), 358 
Hellman, C. D., 357, 370 
Herivel,]. W., 362 
Herodotus, 292 
Herschel,]. F. W., 349, 352, 362, 372, 373 
Herschel, W., 341, 342, 343, 371, 372 
Hesiod, 315, 319 
Hevelius, J., 366 
Hilbert, D., 312 
Hipparchus, 367 
Hire, P., de la, 286 
Hiriyanna, M., 303 
'History of Philosophy', 186,288,291,294, 
295,298,299,300,304,318,328,373 
Hoeschelio, D., 299 
Hofer,]. C. F. 332 
Hoffmeister,]., 287, 288, 289, 290, 303, 3U, 
314, 319, 320, 324, 326, 367, 368 
Holcroft, T., 293 
Holton, G., 348 
Holtzendorff, F., von, 291 
Hooke, R, 345, 364 
Hoppel, M., 291 
Hornsby, T., 342 
Hotho, H. G., 186, 287 
Howarth, H. E., 359 
Hlibotter, F., 285, 286 
Hufuagel, c., 285 
Hugh, of St. Victor, 290 
Humboldt, A., von, 286, 287 
Humboldt, W., von, 303 
Hutton, C., 308, 318, 327, 331, 334 
Huyghens, C., 326, 331, 363 
hydrodynamics, 328, 332 
hydrostatics, 332 
hypomochlium,327 
Hyppolite, J., 290 
idea (Platonic), 295 
identity (philosophy of), 296 
impact (laws of), 326 
Indian philosophy, 303 
inertia, 323, 324, 328 
infmitesimals, 338, 349, 352, 365 
Inge, W. R, 341 
intuition, 183, 184 

INDEX TO FOREWORD AND NOTES 
Isenkrahc, c., 330 
Isidore, St., 290 
Isis, 295 
Jamlller, M., 305,231, 324, 327, 359 
Jena: Hegel's lectures, 186, note-book, 187 
Johnston, W. H., 303, 322, 337, 341 
Jonson, B., 315 
Jourdain, P. E. B., 352 
Jourdan, A.-J.-L., 374 
JWlO (asteroid), 371 
Jupiter (planet), 347, 353, 369, 370, 371, 372, 
373 
Jurin, J., 345, 352 
Kant, I., 284, 291, 295, 297, 299, 304, 306, 
308, 309, 311 , 314, 316, 317, 322, 324, 
341,342,346,373 
Kastner, A. G., 331 
Kattsoff, L. 0., 319 
Kaufmann, W., 344 
Kazemier, B. H., 307 
Keeling, S. V., 317 
Keill, J., 306, 352 
Keiper, W., 294 
Kennedy, H. A. A., 299 
Kepler, J., 323,338,343, 344,355, 356,357, 
358,359, 363, 365, 370, 373; in England, 
360; laws, 348, 349, 350, 351, 356, 359, 
373; problem, 356 
Kesten, H., 358 
Kierkegaard, S. A., 289, 290 
Kieser, D. G., 181, 286 
kinetic energy, 328 
Klopstock, F. G., 298 
Kluge, F. W., 291 
Kliigel, G. S., 317, 319, 323, 342 
Kneebone, G. T., 319 
Knight, D. c., 370 
knowledge (synthesis of), 305 
Knox, T.M., 325 
Kobligk, F., 317 
Koeber, R., 290 
Kohlmeyer, E., 291 
Kojeve, A., 290 
Kopal, Z., 351 
Kopp, H., 297 
Kossuth, H., 341 
Kotter, E., 360 
Koyre, A., 323, 330, 334, 344, 356, 364, 374 
Kratzenstein, C. G., 329 
Kroll, W., 315 
Kronecker, L., 317 
Krug, W. T., 304, 305 
Kuhn, D., 285, 297 
Kuiper, G. P., 343 
Lagrange, J. L., 314, 327, 336,337,352 
Lambert, J. H., 310, 318, 333, 368 
Landen, J., 338 
Langley, A. G., 309 
Laplace, P. S., 345, 346, 347, 349, 352, 353, 
360, 364, 367 
Lasson, G., 284, 287, 348, 351, 363, 373 
Latham, M. L., 313 
Latta, R., 303 
Lavik, M., 334 
Law, W., 302 
leaping-point, 314 
Lee, H. D. P., 320 
Lee, H. N., 320 
Lefort, F., 352 
Leibniz, G. W., 291,303,309,318,321,328, 
352 
Lenzen, V. F., 327 
Lessing, G. E., 297 
lever, 327, 33 I 
Leverrier, U. J. J., 353, 354 
Lewis, G. C., 368 
Lichtenberg, G. c., 343 
light, 373 
Lindenau, B. A., von, 368 
line, 310, 3II, 358, 373 
Link, H. F., 181,285 
Linnaeus, C. von, 303 
Lippmann, E. 0., VOll, 296 
Lobachevskii, N. I., 310 
Lobeck, C. A., 292 
Lockwood, E. H., 358 
logarithmic table, 357 
'Logic' (Hegel's), 292, 294, 303, 306, 312, 
315,318,323,337,341,346,348 
logic; and nature, 184; mathematical, 318; 
logical vigour (of calculus), 349 
logos, 299 
Lombard, P., 292 
long inequality (Jupiter and Saturn), 353 
Lornez,J. F., 312 
Lovett, E. 0., 350 
387 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Liibbe, H., 314. 
Lucas, P. G., 322 
Lucifer, 302 
Lussan, H., 293 
Liitolf, A., 294 
Mc Cormack, T. J., 316 
Mach, E., 316, 321, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 
330, 334. 335, 339, 356, 358, 359, 363, 
366 
Mac Kenna, S., 300 
Maclaurin, C., 352, 364 
Macomber, H. P., 363 
Mc Taggart, J. M. E., 317 
Maddox, J. R, 305, 325, 338 
Maennling,]. c., 294 
magnet, 362; organic, 181 
magnetic theory, 344, 373 
man, 292, 293 
Manuel, F. E., 368 
Marcolongo, R, 350 
Marcus, R., 299 
Marheineke, P. K., 289 
marriage, (philosophy of), 304 
Mars, 347, 369, 370, 372 
Martial, 293 
Martin, G., 322 
Mason, C., 342 
mass, 324, 325 
mathematics, 318; applied, 329, 373; pure, 
3 19, 329, 373; mathematical logic, 3 I 8 
matter, 300, 319, 321 
Maupertius, P. L. M., 342 
Maur, R., 290 
Maxwell, J. c., 366 
Mayer,]. T., 342, 343 
mechanics, 305; celestial, 352; rational,373 
Mendelssohn, M., 295 
Mercury, 347, 354, 369 
metaphysics, 184,318 
Metzger, H., 323 
Metzke, E., 296, 314 
Meyer, F. A., 288 
Michel, P. H., 318 
Michelet, K. L., 179, 284, 285, 286, 287, 
288, 289, 290, 319, 320, 321, 324, 330, 
331,334,347,360,366,367 
Milky Way, 341, 342, 346 
Milne,].]., 360 
molecule, 181 
Moller,]. P., 356 
Mollweide, K., 313 
momentum, 325, 326 
Monge, G., 313 
Moon: distance, 361; motion, 350; orbit, 
358 
More, L. T., 362 
Morgan, A. De., 352, 365 
Morgan, T., 345 
Morin, A.]., 333 
morphology, 285 
Morris, C. W., 343 
motion; circular, 356, 358; elliptical, 362; 
geometrical, 3 II, 312, 325; planetary, 
323,354,355; quantity, of, 325, 328; laws 
of, 326; perpetual, 329; Zeno, 320 
Motte, A., 323, 329 
Moulton, F. R, 347 
movement of star, 343 
Miillenhof, C., 308 
Milller, A., 339 
Miiller, J. W., 310 
Mynors, R A. B., 290 
mysticism, 318 
mythology, 289, 292, 294, 295 
Nadler,]., 296 
Namer, E., 301 
Napoleon, 353 
Natorp, P., 295 
natural science (systematic), 180 
natura naturans, naturata, 300 
nature: and logic, 184; creation, 179; 
knowledge of, 180; leap in, 303; phil-
osophy of 179, 180, 183, 284, 304, 373 
nebula, 341; nebular hypothesis, 347 
Neptune, 353,373 
Neurath, 0., 343 
N ewtonianism : acceleration, 335 ; action 
and reaction, 326, 327; apple, 362; 
analysis (infInitesimal), 352; ascent and 
descent of bodies, 334; attraction, 322, 
323,329,344; ball (leaden), 329; calculus, 
350, 362, and motion, 364, difficulties, 
337, 349, 352, 354, discovery, 352; 
centre, 329, 335,350, immovable, 322, of 
gravity, 327, 328; centrifugal force, 329, 
354, 362; centripetal force, 335, 357,359, 
360; circle and ellipse, 360; colour 
(theory of), 181; comet, 366; composition 
of forces, 354, 358, 359; Deity, 353; 
deduction, 350; 'De Analysi' (1669), 364; 
dogmatic, 339; conics, 350, 360; corpus-

INDEX TO FOREWORD AND NOTES 
cular, theory, 319, 321; duration, 316; 
Earth-Moon test, 350; ellipse, 350, and 
circle, 
360; 
elliptical 
motion, 
354 ; 
expressions, 337; fall, 335; force, 324, 
328, 335, 344, 350, accelerative, 335, 
centrifugal, 329, 354, 362, centripetal, 
335, 357, 359, 360, composition, 354, 
358, 359, concept, 330, of gravity, 335, 
parallelogram of, 326, 358; French, 360; 
geometry, 352, and motion, 349; God, 
319,321, 373; gravitation, 343, 345, 350, 
362,363,364,366; gravity, 323, 335, 357, 
centre of, 322, 327, 328; inertia, (law of), 
324, 328, 339; infinitesimals, 349, 365; 
last 
words, 
(Spence), 
362; 
'Letters' 
(Edelston), 322, 323, 330, 345; lunar 
motion, 350; Manuscripts, (Cambridge), 
363; mass, 321, 325; 'Mathematical 
Principles' (Cajori), 308, 316, 319, 321, 
322,324,325,326,327,328,329,331,334, 
335,338,339,343,344,347,348,349,350, 
351,353,345,356,357,358,359,360,364, 
365, 367, (Davis), 361; mathematical 
notion, (of forces), 335; mathematics and 
physics, 329, 330, 344; matter, 319, 323, 
325,335; 'Method of Fluxions' (Colson), 
337, 349, 352, 364; Moon (distance of), 
361; motion, 358, and calculus, 349, 364, 
geometry, 349, laws of, 322, 324, 326, 
327, 339, lunar, 350, planetary, 354,357, 
quantity of, 325; 'Opticks' (1721), 319, 
(1730), 321; parallelogram of forces, 326, 
358; pendulum, 325, 331; perturbation, 
353; physics, 366, and mathematics, 329, 
330, 344; planetary motion, 354, 357; 
point, defmition, 349, mathematical, 329; 
precession of equinoxes, 367; projectile, 
354; 
'Quadratura curvarum' 
(1704), 
365; religion, 316; sensorium (of God), 
321; space: absolute, 308, infinite, 321, 
relative, 308; spectrum, 362; stone (in 
sling), 329; three body problem, 350; 
time: absolute, mathematical, relative, 
true, 316; velocity, 325, 335; Voltaire on 
362 
Nicholson, W., 346, 368 
Nicolai, C. F., 298 
Nicolim, F., 304, 305 
Nizze, E., 327 
node, (motion of), 369 
non-human beings, 299 
nova, 343 
Novalis, 300 
now (the), 314 
number, 317, 318 
nutation, 367 
Oberon, 372 
Oeben, H., 292 
Oettingen, A. von., 331 
Oken, L., 184,286 
Olbers, H. W. M., 310, 371 
Olmsted, J. W., 324 
orbit: heliocentric, 358, planetary, 358 
Oriani, B., 370 
oriental thinking, 303 
Osborn, J. M., 362 
Ostwald, F. W., 331 
oval line, 358 
Owen, J., 301 
Page, B. S., 300 
Pallas, 371 
Panofsky, E., 356 
pantheism, 300 
parallax, (of star), 343 
parallel lines, (theory of), 3 IO 
parallelogram of forces, 326, 339, 3S8 
Pasch, M., 312 
Paton, H. J., 295 
Patterson, L. D., 364 
Paulus, H. E. G., 289 
Pauly, A. F., von, 315, 347 
Peacock, G., 252 
Peletier, J., 312 
Pelseneer, J., 353 
Pemberton, H., 323, 352 
pendulum, 324, 325, 331, 358, 363, 373 
penetrability, 319, 320 
percussion (centre of), 326 
perpetual motion, 329 
Perrault, c., 286 
perturbation, 351,353 
Peuckert, W.-E., 302 
Pfaff, J. W. A., 340 
Pfeiffer, A. F., 299 
'Phenomenology of Spirit', 290, 398 
Phillips, J. P., 370 
Philo of Alexandria, 298, 299 
philosophy, 179, 182; and deduction, 183; 
education, 290; concern of, 179; German, 
182; history of, 288, 295, 298, 318; 

HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
limitation, 185; of identity, 296, nature, 
180, 183, 186, 284, 304, reflection, 179, 
285 
photometry (photographic), 343 
physics: and philosophy, 181,182; specula-
tive, 185 
physiophilosophy, 286 
Piazzi, G., 343, 370, 371 
Picard, J, 357 
Pigott, N., 343 
plane,3Il 
planet; motion, 354, 355, 357, 373; name, 
347; orbit, 358 
planetesimal hypothesis, 347 
plant, 181,.286 
Plato, 295, 298, 370 
Playfair, J, 312, 327, 331 
Plotinus, 300 
Pluto, 353 
Poggeler, 0., 304, 305 
point, 307, 3Il, 314, 326; culmination, 373 
pole (magnetic), 373 
Pomponatius, P., 300 
Pond, J., 343, 360, 364 
Pope, A., 292, 293, 299 
precession of equinoxes, 342,367 
Price, R, 320 
Priestley, J, 3 19 
Proclus, 3 II 
projectile, 354 
Proteus, 292 
proverbs (German), 307 
Prowe, L., 358 
Ptolemaic system, 365 
pulley, 331 
Pythagoras, 312, 313, 318 
quantitas motus, 325 
quantum, 318; mechanics, 304; theory, 304 
Quigly, I., 319 
radiometry, 343 
railway boom, 305 
Ramsey, A. S., 330 
Raphson, J, 352 
Rautner, C., 363 
Raven,J. E., 318 
Ravetz, J., 353 
Ray Society, 286 
reflection (philosophy of), 176, 285 
refraction tables, 357 
Reich, F., 361 
Reid, T., 331 
Reiff, R, 338 
'Religion, Philosophy of', 289, 302 
Rennie, G., 333 
retardation, 323 
revelation, 289 
'Revelation' (book of), 302 
Richer, J, 324 
Riemann, G. F. B., 338 
'Right, Philosophy of', 325 
Ritter, K., 287 
Robartes, F., 307 
Robertson, A., 342 
Robins, B., 331, 352 
Rohault, J, 361 
Rohde, P., 290 
Romer, 0., 357 
Roscher, W. H., 295 
Rosen, E., 356, 358 
Rosenberger, F., 364 
Rosenkranz,J K. F., 313, 314 
Ross, G. R T., 328 
Ross, W. D., 291, 294, 295 
rotation of Earth (and fall), 361 
Roth, F., 295 
Rousselet, X., 300 
Routh, E. J, 353 
Rudolphine, Tables, 357 
Russell, B., 306, 307, 309, 312, 319, 321, 359 
Rutherford, D. E., 333, 334 
Rutherforth, T., 334, 340, 354, 361 
Ryle, G., 320 
Saccheri, G., 310 
Salusbury, T., 339 
Sanderson, J B., 302 
Sanford, D. N., 317 
Santillana, G. de, 339 
Sarton, G., 295 
Saturn, 347, 353,369, 371, 373 
Scharling, C. I., 294 
Schelling, F. W. J., von, 179, 184, 188, 189, 
190, 284, 285, 286, 289, 290, 291, 294, 
296, 300, 373 
Schiller, F., von, 293,294,298, 315 
Schilling, K., 291 
Schlegel, F., von, 294, 303 
Schmidt, E., 293 
390 

INDEX TO FOREWORD AND NOTES 
Schmitt, E. H., 284 
Schoonhoven, E. J., 296 
Schroter, J. H., 372 
Schroter, M., 284, 286, 289, 290, 294 ,296,300 
Schultz, A., 294 
Scott, W. L., 326 
Seelig, c., 300 
sensorium (of God), 321 
Shapley, H., 359 
Shaw, G. B., 299 
Short, A. E., 323, 327 
Sibree, J., 291 
Sidgwick, J. B., 341 
Simon, M., 307 
Simrock, K., 307 
Simson, F. H., 288, 291, 294, 295, 298, 399, 
300, 304, 318, 373 
Singer, C., 327, 339 
sling, 329 
Small, R, 356, 358, 361 
Smart, J. J. C., 305, 306 
Smeaton, W. A., 369 
Smith, D. E., 313 
Smith, N. K., 3II 
Smith, R G., 296 
Snellius, W., 359 
Snow, A. J., 330 
solar system, 344, 373; origin, 346, 347 
Somerville, D. M. Y., 310 
Sommer, G. M., 342 
Sommer, J., 308 
Son of God, 302 
soul, 298,314,320 
Southey, R, 305 
space, 184, 305; absolute and relative, 308; 
Kant's views, 306, 309; kinds of, 311; 
Leibniz and Clarke, 309; Newton's view, 
321 
Spang, P. I., 290 
spectroscopy, 343 
spectrum, 362 
Speirs, E. B., 302 
Spence, J., 362 
Spielmann, J. K., 297 
spirit, 179 
Stace, W. T., 286, 304 
Stackel, P., 310 
Stahl, W. H., 370 
star, 340, 341; atlas, 342; brightness, 343; 
catalogue, 357; diameter, 343; distance, 
342; hierarchy, 343; figure, 342; move-
ment, 343 
statics, 327, 332 
Stehle, P., 345, 356 
stellar astronomy, 342, 343 
Sterne, T. E., 348 
Stevin, S., 339, 359 
Stewart, B. M., 317 
Stewart, J. A., 295 
Stolberg, F. L., zu, 293, 294 
Strauss, D. F., 289 
Stromgren, E., 356 
Struthers, L. G., 303, 322, 337, 341 
Sturm, J. c., 327 
Sulzer, J. G., 290 
Sun, 353, 366; worship, 368 
Sunday child, 294 
superposition (geometrical proof), 312 
Suphan, B., 293 
surface, 3 II 
synthetic judgement, 3 I I 
Tabor, D., 334 
Tannery, P., 374 
Taton, R., 338 
Taylor, A. E., 298, 370 
Taylor, B., 337 
Taylor, ]., 290 
Taylor, T., 3II 
teleology, 292, 293 
Thales, 370 
thing in itself, 295 
three body problem, 350 
'Timaeus', 298, 370, 373 
time, 184, 315-317; as fourth dimension, 
314 
Timoshenko, S., 326 
Tissot, J., 303 
Titania, 372 
Todhunter, r., 326, 364 
Townsend, E. ]., 312 
transition: logic-nature, 184, 286, 308; 
space-time, 314 
triangle, 312 
truth,362 
Tulk, A., 286 
Turnebo, A., 299 
Turner, H. H., 363 
Turnor, E., 362 
ubi,306 
Unger, R, 296 
391 

, 
HEGEL S PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE 
Uraniborg, 357 
Uranus, 353, 372 
Vanini, G. c., 300, 301 
Veith, D., 368 
velocity, 326 
Venus, 347, 369 
Vesta, 371 
Vierordt, c., von, 285, 286 
Vince, S., 317, 333, 354, 361, 369, 371 
Virchow, R., 291 
Virgil,292 
Virey, J. J., 337 
Voltaire, F. M. A., de, 360, 362 
Vucinich, A., 310 
Walden, J. H., 359 
Whitrow, G. J., 308, 317 
Whittaker, E., 289 
Wickstead, P. H., 291, 294 
WiedemaIm, C. R., 368 
Wieland, C. M., 297 
Wiener, G. A., 295 
Williams, A. M., 290 
Williamson, H., 367 
Wilson, J., 352 
Winter, H. J. J., 338 
Wisdom,J. 0., 352 
Wissowa, G., 315 
Wohlwill, E., 339 
Wolf, A., 327, 331, 332, 368, 373 
Wolff, c., 291 
Wolfson, H. A., 299 
wonder, 291, 
Woodger, J. H., 317 
Woodhouse, R., 352 
Wallace, W., 292, 294,306,312,315,318, 
Woodruff, A. E., 320, 366 
Wren, c., 326 
323,346 
Wallis, C. G., 365 
Wallis, J., 326 
Walton, J., 352 
Wander, K. F. W., 307 
Waterloo, 305 
Watson, J., 291 
Weber, H. M., 307 
Weierstrass, K., 338 
weight (and mass), 324 
Weiler, H., 334 
Weischedel, W., 322, 341 
Weldon, T. D., 295 
Wellstein, J., 307 
Whitaker, G. H., 299 
Wright, J. M. F., 350 
Wright, T., 342, 346 
Young, T., 329 
Zach, F. X., von, 373 
Zeno, 320 
Zerna, W., 326 
Zeuthen, H. G., 350 
Ziegler, K., 347 
Zinner, E., 343 
392 

