G.W.F. Hegel 
Introduction to 
The 
Philosophy 
of History 
Translated by 
Leo Rauch 
with an Appendix from 
The Philosophy 
of Right 

Introduction to 
The Philosophy of History 


Introduction to 
The Philosophy of History 
G.W.F. HEGEL 
with selections from 
The Philosophy of Right 
Translated, with Introduction, 
by LEO RAUCH 
Hackett Publishing Company 
Indianapolis & Cambriclne 

G. W. F. Hegel: 1770--18 3 1  
Copyright © 1988 by Leo Rauch 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
03 02 
56 7 8 
Cover design by Listenberger Design & Associates 
Interior design by Jared Carter 
For further information, please address 
Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. 
P.O. Box 44937 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46244-0937 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770- 18 3 1. 
[V orlesungen iiber die Philosophic der Geschichte. 
Einleitung. English] 
Introduction to The philosophy of history: with selections 
from The philosophy of right I G.W.F. Hegel; translated, with 
introduction, by Leo Rauch. 
p. 
em. 
Translation of: Vorlesungen iiber die Philosophic der 
Geschichte. Einleitung. Also includes selections translated 
from: Grundlinien der Philosophic des Rechts. 
Bibliography: p. 
ISBN 0-8 7220-057-4. 
ISBN 0-8 7220-056-6 (pbk.) 
l. History-Philosophy. 
I. Rauch, Leo. 
II Title. 
D16.8 .H47413 
1988 
901--dc 19 
88-2931 2  
CIP 

Contents 
Translator's Introduction 
Note on the Text and Translation 
Acknowledgment 
Selected Bibliography 
Introduction to 
The Philosophy of History 
Vll 
X 
Xlll 
XV 
3 
One: 
The Methods of History 
3 
Two: 
Reason in History 
12 
Three: Freedom, the Individual, and the State 
19 
I. The Nature of Spirit 
20 
II. The Means of Spirit 
23 
III. The State as Realization of Spirit 
40 
Four: History in its Development 
57 
Five: 
The Geographical Basis of History (excerpt) 83 
Six: 
The Division of History 
92 
Appendix: from Hegel's 
The Philosophy of Right (pars. 341-360) 
99 
v 


Translator's Introduction 
G
eorg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel ( 1770--18 31) lived in a time of 
startling changes. The American and French Revolutions, the 
Industrial Revolution, the Napoleonic Wars, the restructuring of 
European empires, and the rise of nationalism-all these, and more, 
inspired Hegel to look for a pattern, some order and meaning, in 
the diversity of historical events. 
Born in Stuttgart in 1770, Hegel was a nineteen-year-old sem­
inary student when the French Revolution sent its shock waves 
throughout Europe. Along with his two fellow students, Schelling 
and Holderlin, Hegel was caught up in the heady enthusiasm of the 
revolutionary period. Autocracy was being swept away. But would 
the French people take hold of genuine freedom at last, and rule 
themselves as a free people? What ultimate rationality lay behind 
such apparently irrational events as the Terror? These were some of 
the problems which motivated Hegel's reflections on history. 
After graduating from the seminary, Hegel briefly took a post 
as a family tutor, but in 1800 he joined his friend Schelling on the 
faculty of the University ofJena. At the time, this university was the 
philosophic center of Germany, and it was here that Hegel wrote his 
first major book, the brilliant Phenomenology of Spirit. In the Phenom­
enology, he sought to show how certain cultural outlooks or charac­
teristic world views (e.g., those of medieval Christianity, the 
Enlightenment, the Terror) followed one another with logical ne­
cessity, so that each one led inevitably to the next. Tradition has it 
that he completed the book while hearing the gunfire from the bat­
tle ofJena, in October of 1806. When Napoleon captured the city, 
the university closed down and Hegel was out of a job. 
VII 

vm 
Translators Introduction 
For two years he edited a newspaper in another city, and then 
accepted the post of headmaster and lecturer in philosophy at a high 
school in Nuremberg. He continued to be a keen observer of con­
temporary politics, reading avidly the English and French newspa­
pers, and writing articles on current issues. He did not hold another 
university post until 18 16, when he was appointed professor of phi­
losophy at the University of Heidelberg. He left there in 18 18 to 
become professor of philosophy at the University of Berlin. By then 
he had published his formidable Science of Logic ( 18 13; 18 16), his 
Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences ( 18 17), and was soon to pub­
lish his Philosophy of Right ( 1821). At the time of the Berlin appoint­
ment Hegel was universally acknowledged to be one of the 
intellectual giants of his time, and his wide-ranging lectures on the 
philosophy of art, the philosophy of religion, the history of philos­
ophy, and the philosophy of history won him an appreciative 
audience. 
He died unexpectedly in a cholera epidemic in 18 31, in the 
midst of an active and fruitful life devoted to the pursuit of reason. 
His contemporaries were stunned at the sudden loss, for it was felt 
that Hegel had many valuable contributions still to make to philos­
ophy-perhaps expressing an all-embracing vision which would 
combine the central insights of the works he had published in his 
lifetime. To forward his program, a number of his friends and col­
leagues convened soon after his death to produce an edition of his 
collected works. They went beyond the works Hegel himself had 
published, gathering up his hand-written lecture notes and combin­
ing them with transcriptions of his lectures made by his student lis­
teners. This resulted in his posthumous Philosophy of Art, the 
Philosophy of Religion, the History of Philosophy, and the Philosophy of 
History. 
Even though Hegel had not prepared these materials for pub­
lication, these posthumous volumes amply reveal Hegel's character­
istic keenness of insight, his penetrating awareness of life's 
paradoxical nature, and his deep sensitivity to the tortuous struggle 
of the human spirit in its concrete history. In the Philosophy of His­
tory, Hegel likens this struggle to the way an individual comes to 
maturity: in becoming self-conscious, one achieves full freedom, 
along with a responsibility to oneself. History, for Hegel, is the 
story of the development of the consciousness of freedom in the 

Translator's Introduction 
ix 
world-the development of the human spirit in time through the 
growth of its own self-consciousness. 
In the Philosophy of History Hegel speaks of three "worlds"­
actually three distinct world-outlooks: what Hegel calls the Orien­
tal, the Greco-Roman, and the Germanic. These are linked only ten­
uously to specific times and geographical areas. But precisely 
because these "worlds" are not moored in a specific time or place, 
we may the more easily see them as standing in a formal relation to 
one another. In the Oriental World [taken in the broadest sense­
e.g., ancient Egypt, China, etc.], only one person is free: the 
supreme monarch. In the Greco-Roman World, only some persons 
are free: those who are not slaves, women, aliens, et al. Finally in the 
Germanic World [i.e., the world of Christian Europe], all are free: 
by virtue of the spiritual identity accorded to all human individuals, 
all persons have the capacity for self-determination. In the relative 
degrees of freedom they permit, the three worlds stand in a dynamic 
relation to one another. History, for Hegel, is therefore a process of 
emancipation and enlightenment, with the aim of enabling us to 
construct a system of society wherein everyone can be regarded as 
free and autonomous, simply by virtue of being a person--con­
scious and rational. 
This goal is not necessarily seen by history's participants. What 
Hegel calls the "Cunning of Reason" can make use even of irrational 
drives in history's players in order to achieve history's rational goal. 
The major actors on the stage of history, the "world-historical indi­
viduals" (e.g., Napoleon), are not in the least aware that the World­
Spirit is using them for purposes of its own, not theirs. And when 
history has finished with them, it discards them. 
Hegel's doctrines may be difficult to accept. Can we agree that 
the insane ambition that has so often moved the world-historical 
figures always leads to the fulfillment of rational goals, to the pro­
moting of free and self-conscious social existencd Hegel was by no 
means blind to history's dark side, and indeed he spoke of history as 
a "slaughter-bench." Can we presume to say that some higher 
human goal is now nearer our grasp as a result of the universal suf­
fering we have seen in our time? 
If we adopt a wide enough perspective-say, we contrast our­
selves with the earliest Homo sapiens-then we must surely see signs 
of progress. But it is the narrower range of comparison that poses 

x 
Translators Introduction 
the haunting questions. Thus what troubles us is whether the death 
and misery suffered by countless millions in this century can be seen 
to have contributed to some positive outcome. Even to ask that 
question seems a piece of monstrous arrogance, as though all that 
pain and death could be justified by any cause. 
For Hegel, the goal of history can be said to be achieved when 
our individual and societal lives are fully in our control, so that we 
are able to give a conscious and rational shape to our lives as self­
determining members of human society-a goal which an ancient 
Egyptian could hardly have imagined, let alone have hoped to 
achieve. It is this ideal that Hegel expresses in the Preface to his 
1821 Philosophy of Right, with the phrase: "What is rational is real, 
and what is real is rational." The rational is real: Reason manifests 
itself in the world, and is "realized" in it in both senses of that word: 
reason is made real by fulfilling its own standard of rationality; and 
reason is grasped by reason itself-as in "I realize what I am say­
ing"-in the self-consciousness that constitutes its freedom. The real 
is rational: The fulfilled reality is fully rational in the twofold sense 
of being fully transparent to reason, and also in being the product of 
rational forethought. 
The highest fulfillment to human life on earth would be the 
harmonious synthesis of reason and society, so that the one princi­
ple shapes the other: "man is a rational animal" and "man is a social 
animal." The synthesis of these principles is an ideal as old as Plato. 
Hegel saw history as the struggle toward that end. 
NOTE ON THE TEXT AND TRANSLATION 
Hegel himself never published his Philosophy of History, but left only 
his lecture notes on the subject when he died. Afterward, these were 
combined with transcriptions that had been taken down by his stu­
dent listeners. The 1840 compilation, prepared by Eduard Gans and 
Hegel's son Karl, is the version I have used (as reprinted in the 
1928 Glockner edition of Hegel's Siimtliche Werke). The complete 
volume comprises over 500 pages, the greater portion being de­
voted to what we might call cultural history. In the 150-page Intro­
duction, however, Hegel presents his philosophy of history, and that 
is the text of this translation. 

Note on the Text and Translation 
Xl 
Three other English translations known to me are those of 
Sibree ( 1857), Hartman ( 1953), and Nisbet ( 1975). I believe that I 
have avoided many of the weaknesses and corrected many of the 
errors in all three, and that the present work is clearer, more read­
able, and truer to Hegel. 
In addition, this translation includes material not present in 
Hartman: Chapter Five, "The Geographical Basis of History'' (in­
teresting for what it says about America); and Chapter Six, "The 
Division of History." Finally, I have included as an Appendix 
paragraphs 341-360 of Hegel's Philosophy ofRight. This is especially 
important because it is Hegel's own sumary of the main themes of 
his philosophy of history. In his lectures, Hegel designates these 
paragraphs as the only substitute for a "textbook" he can offer to 
students of this subject. (See the footnote on the first page of Chap­
ter One.) I have also supplied a bibliography of some Hegel texts 
and recent commentaries. 
The division into chapters is my own doing. (Hartman's divi­
sions are similar, although our headings differ.) In the German text, 
the first four chapters run undivided. The separation, however arbi­
trary, is justified by the increased readability. 
It is by now traditional for Hegel's translators to refer to the 
difficulties of their task. I do so here only in order to shed light on 
Hegel as a thinker. In English, we like a word to have one and the 
same meaning throughout a given philosophic text. Hegel does not 
work that way. Some of his most salient words have entire clusters 
of meanings attached to them. Thus the problematic term 
''Aufhebung" means not only "negation" and "nullification" but also 
"elevation," "transcendence," and "retention"-among numerous 
other meanings. It would be bad enough if Hegel adopted a differ­
ent meaning from one usage to the next, for we might then get the 
word's meaning from the context. Unfortunately, Hegel often has 
ail of the various and even contradictory meanings in mind when he 
uses such a word. He works with positive as well as negative conno­
tations, and he exploits their ambiguities. Indeed, it is the very es­
sence of the Hegelian dialectic to show how a concept's meaning can 
be "negated" yet "retained" by being taken up to a higher order of 
meaning. That very negativity itself goes into the translation of a 
word such as ''Aufhebung." The translator must choose one English 
word for each instance of the word's appearance, and the other 

xi 
Note on the Text and Translation 
meanings are retained in his mind but lost in the translated text. 
Some translators resort to an obscure word such as "sublation" to 
stand for the entire cluster of meanings in a technical way, but such 
a word lacks intuitive force. And to stay with that one word 
throughout only compounds the problem. 
Another very troubling term is the notorious "Geist''-which 
means "spirit," but also "mind," "mentality," "soul," and "intellect." 
Most of the time, in the present text, Hegel uses "Geist'' in its uni­
versal sense-as in "national spirit," rather than in the individual/ 
subjective sense of "mind." (One could hardly speak of a "national 
mind.") Yet here, too, Hegel exploits the ambiguity: world history 
is a process of development which he likens to that of an individual's 
mind in growing up-and that metaphor could not work unless 
there were that ambiguity in the universal and individual senses of 
"Geist." Some translators of other works by Hegel have insisted on 
using the word "mind" throughout. I have almost always used 
"Spirit'' in this translation, to show that I take the term in its univer­
sal/objective sense, rather than in the individual/subjective sense of 
"mind"; and by capitalizing it I try to suggest that I intend it in the 
special sense unique to Hegel. 
Professor H.S. Harris made many remarks relating to my 
translation of other terms. Most often his comments pulled me in 
the direction of linguistic uniformity; at other times, his proposals 
argued for contextual elasticity. In a few of my translation-decisions 
I have quite deliberately departed from his thoughtful suggestions. 
For example, in regard to the terms "allgemein," "besonder," and 
"einzeln" (respectively: "universal" or "general"; "particular"; and 
"individual" or "singular"), my choices were dictated by what I be­
lieved would best serve the aims of clarity as well as ease of under­
standing, but at the minimal sacrifice of exactitude. They would not 
necessarily have been my choices had I been at work on a text such 
as Hegel's Science of Logic. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Acknowledgment 
xm 
My indebtedness to H.S. Harris of York University, in Toronto, 
goes far beyond what I have indicated in my remarks above, and 
deserves special acknowledgment. Professor Harris read the transla­
tion with his characteristically scrupulous care and insight. In almost 
every case, I was glad to follow his suggestions-backed as they al­
ways were by his matchless knowledge of Hegel's oeuwe. This vol­
ume is immeasurably better for his contribution to it. 
Boston 
Spring, 1988 
Leo Rauch 


Selected Bibliography 
BY HEGEL 
Philosophy of Right, trans. T. M. Knox. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1967. 
Philosophy of Mind, trans. W. Wallace and A.V. Miller. Oxford: Clar­
endon Press, 1971. 
Phenomenology ofSpirit, trans. A.V. Miller. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1977. 
ON HEGEL 
Avineri, S., HegePs Theory of the Modern State. Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1972. 
Inwood, M., ed. Hegel. (Oxford Readings in Philosophy.) Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1985. 
Kaufmann, W., ed. HegePs Political Philosophy. New York: Atherton, 
1970. 
Lowith, K. From Hegel to Nietzsche. New York: Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston, 1964. 
Macintyre, A., ed. Hegel: A Collection of Critical Essays. New York: 
Doubleday Anchor, 1972. 
Marcuse, H. Reason and Revolution. Boston: Beacon Press, 1960. 
The Monist. Vol. 48, no. 1 (January, 1964). "Hegel Today" issue. 
O'Brien, G.D. Hegel on Reason and History. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1975. 
Rauch., L. The Political Animal: Studies in Political Philosophy from 
Machiavelli to Ma1X. Amherst: University of Massachusetts 
Press, 1981. 
XV 

XVI 
I 
Selected Biblwgraphy 
Ritter, J. Hegel and the French Revolution. Cambridge, Massachu­
setts: MIT Press, 1982. 
Taylor, C. Hegel and Modern Society. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1979. 
Wilkins, B.T. Hegel's Philosophy of History. Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 1974. 

Introduction to 
The Philosophy of History 


One 
The Methods of History 
T
he philosophic history of the world-this is the subject of these 
lectures. Thus we do not aim to draw from history any general 
reflections on it, nor to elucidate it with examples from its own con­
tent. Rather, our concern is with world history itsel( * Before going 
any farther, we ought to clarity just what this is. To do so, we must 
go through the other methods of dealing with history. Altogether, 
there are three: 
I. Original history 
II. Reflective history 
III. Philosophic history 
I. FOR THE FIRST OF THESE, certain names will immediately 
conjure up a distinct picture of what I mean. Thus Herodotus, Thu­
cydides, and other such historians primarily describe the actions, 
events, and situations they themselves have witnessed, and whose 
spirit they shared in. They translate what is externally present into 
the realm of mental representation, thereby bringing the outer into 
the inner-just as the poet works up the stuff of his own sensation 
into images for our minds. Of course, such original historians rely 
on the reports and accounts of others, since it is not possible for one 
person to have seen everything. But they use these sources as ingre-
* I can provide no textbook as a basis for this subject, but in my Philosophy 
ofRight, paragraphs 341-360, I have presented the more precise concept of 
such a world history, along with the principles and periods that go into the 
consideration of it. [See Appendix, below.] 
3 

Chapter One 
dients only, (just as the poet already possesses the civilized speech to 
which he owes so much). These historians bind together what is 
vanishing down the stream of time, and place it all in the Temple of 
Memory to give it immortality. 
Legends, folksongs, traditions-these are to be excluded from 
original history, because they are obscure modes of memory, proper 
to the mentality of pre-literate peoples. On the contrary, in original 
history we are concerned with peoples who knew what they were 
and what they wanted. The foundation of observed and observable 
reality provides a firmer ground than the transient soil in which leg­
ends and epics have grown; these no longer make up the historic 
record of those peoples that have risen to a firm individuality. 
These original historians, then, transform the events, actions, 
and situations present to them into works of representation. The 
content of these histories, therefore, cannot be of great external 
scope. Think of Herodotus in his Persian Wars, Thucydides in The 
Peloponnesian War, Guicciardini in his History of Italy (1536): their 
essential material is what is present and alive in their surrounding 
world. The culture of the author and of the events in his work, the 
spirit of the author and of the actions he tells of, are one and the 
same. He describes more or less what he has seen, or at least lived 
through. Short spans of time, the individual patterns of men and 
events-these are the singular, unreflected features out of which he 
composes his portrait of the time, in order to bring that picture to 
posterity with as much clarity as it had in his own direct observation 
or in the accounts of other direct witnesses. He is not concerned 
with offering reflections on these events, for he lives within the 
spirit of the times and cannot as yet transcend them. And if the 
author-like Caesar-belongs to the class of military leaders or 
statesmen, then it is his goals themselves that are the topic of his 
history. 
We say that such a historian is not reflective, but that persons 
and nations themselves are directly present in his history. Yet 
against this there are the speeches, which we can read, for example, 
in Thucydides; these were surely not spoken as they are represented 
but were worked up by the writer of the history. Speeches, how­
ever, are actions among men, and indeed they are effective actions in 
their very essence. Of course, people often say that there were mere 
speeches and in so saying they want to show the innocuous nature 

The Methods of History 
5 
of mere talk. But that talk is mere babble-and babble has the im­
portant advantage of being innocuous itself. But the speeches of na­
tions to nations, or to nations and princes, are integral components 
of history. If such speeches -as, for example, those of Pericles, the 
most profoundly learned, the most genuine and noble statesman­
are surely worked up by Thucydides, they are at least not alien to 
Pericles. In these speeches the speakers express the maxims held by 
their people, their own personality, their awareness of the political 
situation, as well as their moral and spiritual nature and their princi­
ples, aims and modes of action. What the original historian presents 
as their speech is not a borrowed consciousness but the speakers' 
own culture. 
If one wishes to immerse oneself in the life of other nations, 
there are historians one must study deeply and devote time to. But 
there are not as many of them as one might think. They are the 
historians one might go to, not only for erudition but for deep and 
genuine enjoyment: we have already mentioned Herodotus, the Fa­
ther (i.e., the originator) of history, as well as Thucydides; Xeno­
phon's The Persian Expedition is an equally original book; Caesar's 
Commentaries are the simple masterwork of a great mind. In anti­
quity these historians necessarily were great captains and statesmen. 
In the Middle Ages, it was the bishops who were at the center of 
political activity, but it was the monks who wrote history (in the 
form of naive chronicles), and who were as isolated from events as 
the men of antiquity were involved in them. 
In modern times all this has changed. Our culture is essentially 
intellectual, and it immediately converts all events into reports for 
intellectual representation. We have some excellent examples of 
this-simple and exact--especially war reports, which deserve to be 
set beside those of Caesar, and are even more instructive in their 
wealth of content and their account of methods and conditions. To 
these we may add the French Memoires, written by clever heads 
about small matters, and containing much in the way of anecdote 
lacking in historical foundation. Yet often there are true historical 
masterworks, such as the Memoires of Cardinal de Retz (written 
1673-76), displaying a greater historical field. In Germany such 
masters are rare. Frederick the Great in his Histoire de mon Temps is a 
praiseworthy exception. These authors must actually be of high so­
cial standing. Only from a superior position can one truly see things 

6 
Chapter One 
for what they are and see everything, not when one has to peer up­
ward from below, through a narrow opening. 
II. THE SECOND METHOD OF WRITING HISTORY we can call 
the rejleaive. It is history whose presentation goes beyond the pre­
sent in spirit, and does not refer to the historian's own time. Here, 
too, we can distinguish different types: 
A. Universal history aims, in general, at an overview of the en­
tire history of a people or a country, or of the world. Here the main 
thing is the elaboration of the historical material, which the histo­
rian approaches with his spirit-this being different from the spirit 
contained in the content. Especially important are the principles the 
author sets up for himself, based in part on the content and goals of 
the actions and events, and in part on the way he constructs the 
history. With us Germans, historical writing shows a great variety of 
reflection and intelligence-each historian taking it into his head to 
go his own peculiar way. The English and French generally know 
how history must be written, because they stand more securely on a 
basis of general and national culrnre. With us, each one concocts his 
own peculiar characteristic-and instead of writing history, we keep 
on looking for the way history ought to be written. 
This first type of reflective history is linked directly to the fore­
going mode-i.e., original history-if it has no other purpose than 
to present the entire history of a country. Compilations of this 
kind-including histories of Livy, Diodorus Siculus, and the Swiss 
Histories ofJohannes von Muller (in 24 volumes, written from 1780 
to 1808)-are highly commendable if done well. Certainly it is best 
if these historians approach the first mode and write so vividly that 
the reader can have the impression of hearing the events recounted 
by contemporaries and eye-witnesses. But the singular tone-which 
an individual must have who belongs to a specific culture--often is 
not adjusted to accord with the times which the history covers, and 
the spirit that speaks through the author is different from the spirit 
of the times for which he speaks. 
Thus Livy lets the kings, consuls, and generals--of an older 
Rome-make speeches that are appropriate to a skilled lawyer of his 
own time, in glaring contrast to the received legends of antiquity, 
such as the crude fable of Menenius Agrippa. He also gives us de-

The Methods of History 
7 
scriptions of battles as though he had witnessed them. But the details 
of these battles might be used to describe the battles of any era; and 
the definiteness in their description contrasts with the lack of coher­
ence and with the inconsistency dominant in other writings of his. 
The difference between a compiler like Livy and an original historian 
such as Polybius can best be seen if we compare the two, and note 
how Livy makes use of the historical material preserved in Polybius 
by extending and shortening that material. Similarly, Johannes von 
Miiller, in striving to be true to the older times he describes, has 
given his history a hollow solemnity and a wooden, pedantic appear­
ance. One would much rather read of the same matters in the Swiss 
Chronicles of old Tschudy (who lived 1505-72), where everything is 
more naive and natural, without the artificial and affected archaism. 
A history of the kind that surveys long periods, or the entire 
history of the world, must in fact give up the individual presentation 
of particular reality, and make do with summaries and abridge­
ments. It is abstract not only in the sense that events and actions 
have to be omitted, but in the further sense that Thought is the 
mightiest epitomist. A battle, a great victory, a siege-these are no 
longer what they were, but instead are drawn together into simple 
statements. When Livy tells of the wars with the Volsci, he occa­
sionally says, shortly enough: "This year war was waged on the 
Volsci." 
B. A second type of reflective history is the pragmatic. When we 
are occupied with a remote world of the past, that world becomes 
present to the mind through the mind's own activity-and that re­
captured world is the mind's reward for its labor. The events vary, 
but they are connected into one pattern in their universal and inner 
meaning. This is what negates the event as past, and makes it pre­
sent. Pragmatic reflections, abstract though they might be are thus 
what is in fact present, and they bring the accounts of the past to life 
in our present-day world. But whether reflections of this kind are 
really filled with interest and vitality depends on the mind of the 
author. 
Here we must also mention, in particular, the moral reflections 
and moral instruction to be gained from history, when it is worked 
up for this purpose. While it is true that certain historical examples of 
goodness may be brought to bear for the moral education of children 

Chapter One 
and the elevation of their minds in order to impress them with what 
is morally admirable, it is also true that the destinies of nations and 
states-with their interests, situations, and complexities-are a differ­
ent field of knowledge. Rulers, statesmen, and nations are told that 
they ought to learn from the experience of history. Yet what experi­
ence and history teach us is this, that nations and governments have 
never learned anything from history, nor acted in accordance with the 
lessons to be derived from it. Each era has such particular circum­
stances, such individual situations, that decisions can only be made 
from within the era itself. In the press of world events, there is no 
help to be had from general principles, nor from the memory of simi­
lar conditions in former times-for a pale memory has no force 
against the vitality and freedom of the present. In this respect, noth­
ing is more trite than the repeated appeal to Greek and Roman exam­
ples, which was so commonplace at the time of the French 
Revolution. No difference could be greater than that between the 
nature of those ancient peoples and our own time.* 
Johannes von Muller had moral intentions of this sort in his 
universal history as well as in his Swiss history: he aimed to prepare 
moral "lessons" for the edification of princes, governments and na­
tions, particularly for the Swiss (he made his own collection of les­
sons and reflections, and he often notes in his letters the exact 
number of reflections he has written out that week); but this cannot 
be counted as a part of the best things he produced. The only thing 
that can give truth and interest to reflections is the thoroughgoing, 
free, and comprehensive view of different situations and the deep 
sense of the fundamental idea-as, for example, in Montesquieu's 
Spirit ofthe Laws (1748). For this reason, one reflective history su­
persedes another. Each author has the materials available, so that 
each can consider himself equally capable of organizing them and 
working them up, thus validating his own spirit in them as the spirit 
of the time. Wearied of such reflective histories, we all too often 
* See Burne's Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, Section VIII, 
Part I: "Would you know the sentiments, inclinations, and course of life of 
the Greeks and Romans? Study well the temper and actions of the French 
and English . . . .  Mankind are so much the same, in all times and places, 
that history informs us of nothing new or strange in this particular." 
[Translator's note.] 

The Methods of History 
9 
resort to the practice of describing an event from every vantage 
point. Such histories are in any case worth something, but for the 
most part they merely supply raw material. We Germans are satis­
fied with this; the French, on the contrary, ingeniously shape the 
past into a present and relate it to their present situation. 
C. The third type of reflective history is the critical. It must be 
brought up here because it is the particular way in which history is 
treated in Germany at present. What is here presented is not history 
itself, but a history of historical writing, and a critical evaluation of 
historical accounts together with an inquiry into their truth and 
trustworthiness. What is meant to be exceptional, here, consists in 
the ingenuity of the author in extorting something new from the 
historical accounts, not in the things themselves. The French have 
contributed much that is profound and thoughtful in this field. All 
the same, they have not sought to validate this critical procedure as 
historical, but have rather organized their evaluations in the form of 
critical monographs. 
Among us Germans, the so-called higher criticism has seized 
hold not only of philology in general but of historical literature. 
This higher criticism has supposedly justified the introduction of all 
the unhistorical abortions of an empty imagination. This is the 
other means of achieving "reality" in history: that is, by putting sub­
jective notions in place of historical data. The bolder these notions 
are-i.e., the scantier the evidence on which they rest, and the more 
they contradict the most definite facts of history-the more excellent 
they are taken to be. 
D. The final type of reflective history is that which directly 
presents itself as specialized, i.e., part of the greater whole. Although 
it does abstract from the whole, it does form a transition to philo­
sophic world history, by taking universal viewpoints (e.g., the his­
tory of art, of law, or of religion). In our time, this type of 
conceptual history has been more developed and has been brought 
into prominence. Branches of this kind are related to the totality 
that is the history of a people-and the only question is whether the 
coherence of the totality has been made evident or has merely been 
sought in external circumstances. In the latter case, they appear as 
entirely accidental oddities of different peoples. 

10 
Chapter One 
Accordingly, if reflective history has come to pursue general 
viewpoints, then we should notice where they are genuine. These 
viewpoints are not merely the outer thread, or an external order, but 
rather the inner guiding soul of the events and actions. For, like 
Mercury, the conductor of departed souls, the Idea is truly the guide 
of nations of the world. And Spirit, as its rational and necessary will, 
is what guides and has guided the course of events in the world. To 
recognize it-in the way it guides the world-is our present aim. 
And this leads to: 
III. THE THIRD METHOD OF HISTORY, the phiwsophic. The 
two previous methods had no need of clarification, since their con­
cept was self-explanatory. With the third method, however, there 
does seem to be a need for elucidation or justification. 
The universal principle, however, is that the term "philosophy 
of history'' signifies nothing other than the thoughtful consideration 
of history-[ that is, the application of philosophic thought to 
history]. 
We cannot ever give up thinking; that is how we differ from 
the animals. There is a thinking in our perception, in our cognition 
and our intellect, in our drives and our volition (to the extent that 
these are human). But for that reason, the appeal to thinking may 
seem unsatisfying here, because in history our thinking is subordi­
nated to the given and to what exists; it has al this as its basis and is 
governed by it. Philosophy, however, has thoughts of its own, 
brought forth by speculation from within itself and without refer­
ence to what is. 
If the philosopher approaches history with thoughts of this 
kind, then he is dealing with history as a raw material, not to be left 
as it is, but to be construed according to thoughts, a priori.* But 
since history has merely to take in information-i.e., of what is and 
has been, of events and actions-and since it remains all the truer 
the more it confines itself to what is given, this approach seems to 
be in conflict with the proper concern of philosophy. And this con­
tradiction, together with the reproach springing from it in regard to 
* See Kant's essay, ''The Idea of a Universal History from a Cosmopolitan 
Point of View'' as an outstanding example of the a priori construal of his­
tory that Hegel means. [Translator's note.] 

The Methods of History 
ll 
speculation, must here be clarified and resolved. But this is to be 
done without entering into the many corrections of the infinitely 
numerous and distorted views now held (or forever being 
reinvented) regarding the purpose, the interests and the handling of 
what is historical and its relation to philosophy. 

Two 
Reason in History 
T
he only thought which philosophy brings with it, in regard to 
history, is the simple thought of Reason-the thought that Rea­
son rules the world, and that world history has therefore been ra­
tional in its course. This conviction and insight is a presuppostion in 
regard to history as such, although it is not a presupposition in phi­
losophy itself. 
In philosophy, speculative reflection has shown that Reason is 
the substance as well as the infinite power; that Reason is for itself the 
infinite material of all natural and spiritual life, as well as the infinite 
form, and that its actualization of itself is its content. (And we can 
stand by the term "Reason" here, without examining its relation and 
connection with "God" more closely.) 
Thus Reason is the substance [of our historic world] in the 
sense that it is that whereby and wherein all reality has its being and 
subsistence. It is the infinite power, since Reason is not so powerless 
as to arrive at nothing more than the ideal, the ought, and to remain 
outside reality-who knows where-as something peculiar in the 
heads of a few people. Reason is the infinite content, the very stuff of 
all essence and truth, which it gives to its own activity to be worked 
up. For, unlike finite activity, it does not need such conditions as an 
external material, or given means from which to get its nourishment 
and the objects of its activity. It lives on itself, and it is itself the 
material upon which it works. Just as Reason is its own presupposi­
tion and absolute goal, so it is the activation of that goal in world 
history-bringing it forth from the inner source to external manifes­
tation, not only in the natural universe but also in the spiritual. That 
this Idea is the True, the Eternal, simply the Power-that it reveals 
12 

Reason in History 
13 
itself in the world, and that nothing else is revealed in the world but 
that Idea itself, its glory and majesty-this, as we said, is what has 
been shown in philosophy, and it is here presupposed as already 
proven. 
Those of you who are not yet acquainted with philosophy can 
at least be expected to come to these lectures on world history with 
the belief in Reason, with the desire, the thirst to know it. And 
indeed what must be presupposed as a subjective need in the study 
of the sciences is the desire for rational insight, for knowledge, not 
merely for a collection of facts. Thus, even if you do not bring to 
world history the thought and the knowledge of Reason, you ought 
at least to have the firm and unconquerable belief that there is Rea­
son in history, together with the belief that the world of intelligence 
and self-conscious will is not subject to chance, but rather that it 
must demonstrate itself in the light of the self-conscious Idea. 
But in fact I need not require this belief on your part in ad­
vance. What I have said so far, and will say again, is not just to be 
taken as a presupposition of our science, but as a summary of the 
totality-as the result of the discussion upon which we are embark­
ing, a result that is known to me because I already know that total­
ity. Thus it is the consideration of world history itself that must 
reveal its rational process-namely, that it has been the rational, 
necessary course of the World Spirit, the Spirit whose nature is in­
deed always one and the same, but which reveals this one nature in 
the world's reality. As I said, this must be the outcome of the study 
of history. 
Yet we must take history as it is, and proceed historically, i.e., 
empirically. Among other things, we must not be misled by the pro­
fessional historians, particularly the Germans, who possess great au­
thority, and do precisely what they accuse philosophers of doing, 
namely creating a priori fabrications in history. For example, there is 
a widespread fabrication that there existed an original, primeval 
people, taught directly by God and having complete insight and 
wisdom, with a penetrating knowledge of all the laws of nature and 
spiritual truth; or that there were such or such priestly peoples; or, 
to speak of something more specific, that there was a Roman epic 
from which the Roman historians drew their earliest history, and so 
on. Let us leave all such a priori constructions to the clever profes-

14 
Chapter Two 
sionals, for whom (in Germany) such constructions are not 
uncommon. 
As the first condition to be observed, we could therefore de­
clare that we must apprehend the historical faithfully. But with such 
general terms as "apprehend" and "faithfully" there lies an ambigu­
ity. Even the ordinary, average historian, who believes and says that 
he is merely receptive to his data, is not passive in his thinking; he 
brings his categories along with him, and sees his data through 
them. In every treatise that is to be scientific, Reason must not slum­
ber, and reflection must be actively applied. To him who looks at 
the world rationally, the world looks rational in return. The relation 
is mutual. But the various kinds of reflection, of possible view­
points, of judgment even in regard to the mere importance and 
unimportance of facts (the most basic category in historical judg­
ment)-all this does not concern us here. 
In regard to the general conviction that Reason rules and has 
ruled in the world and likewise in world history, I would like to 
draw your attention to just two versions of that conviction. These 
will enable us to get closer to that main point which is so difficult, 
and at the same time to point ahead to our further discussion. 
A. To begin with, there is the historical fact that the Greek, An­
axagoras, was the first to say that nous-understanding in general, or 
Reason-rules the world. By this he did not mean an intelligence as 
self-conscious reason, or a mind as such. We must take care to dif­
ferentiate nous and "mind" from one another. The movement of the 
solar system follows immutable laws. These laws are its Reason. But 
neither the sun, nor the planets that revolve around it according to 
these laws, have any consciousness of them. 
Such a thought-that there is Reason in nature, that nature is 
governed unchangeably by general laws--does not surprise us. We 
are accustomed to thinking in this way, and we do not make much 
of it. I have merely mentioned this historical fact to make you aware 
of what history shows: namely, that a thought which seems trivial 
to us was not always commonplace in the world, but rather was 
epoch-making in the history of the human spirit. Aristotle says of 
Anaxagoras, as the originator of this thought, that he appeared like 
a sober man among the drunken ones. From Anaxagoras, Socrates 
took it up, and it immediately became the dominant thought in phi-

Reason in History 
15 
losophy (except for the philosophy of Epicurus, which ascribed all 
events to chance). 
Plato has Socrates say: "I was delighted with this thought, and 
I was hoping to have found a teacher who would explain nature 
according to Reason, and show in each particular thing its particular 
purpose, as well as the universal purpose in the totality. Not for a 
great fortune would I have given up this hope. But how disap­
pointed I was when I so eagerly took up the writings of Anaxagoras 
himself, and I found that he brought in to his explanation merely 
external causes such as Air, the Ether, Water and the like-instead 
of Reason." [Phacdo, 97 c-98c] 
We can see that what Socrates found so unsatisfying in the 
principle of Anaxagoras was not the principle itself, but rather An­
axagoras' failure to apply it to concrete nature: that this nature was 
not understood or conceived on the basis of that principle, but that 
that principle was held to as s6mething abstract. Nature was not 
grasped as a development of Reason, not as an organic whole 
brought forth by Reason. At the very outset, therefore, I want to 
call your attention to the difference between maintaining a concep­
tion, a principle, a truth in a merely abstract way, and carrying it 
through to a fuller determination and a concrete development. This 
difference-i.e., between the abstract and the concrete-is basic to 
all philosophy as well. Thus at the end of our discussion of world 
history, we shall be returning i:o this point especially, in dealing 
with the most recent political situation. 
B. The second version of the thought that Reason rules the world 
is related to a further application of it, with which we are well ac­
quainted in the form of the religious truth that the world is not 
subject to chance and to external contingencies, but that it is ruled 
by a Providence. I explained earlier that I do not wish to make any 
demands on your belief in this principle of Providence. Yet I might 
appeal to your belief in it in this religious form-if, that is, the dis­
tinctive character of the science of philosophy allowed presupposi­
tions to count at all. To put it in another way, the appeal to your 
belief is not necessary because the science we wish to discuss will 
itself provide the proof of the correctness of that principle, if not the 
proof of its truth. The truth, then, that there is a divine providence 
presiding over the events of the world, corresponds to the stated 

16 
Chapter Two 
principle: for divine providence is wisdom with infinite power, real­
izing its own ends, i.e., the absolute, rational end-goal of the world, 
while Reason is Thought, quite freely determining itself. 
But now we also see a difference emerging. There is, indeed, a 
contradiction between this belief in providence and our principle­
rather like the difference between the dictum of Anaxagoras and the 
expectations of Socrates in regard to it. That belief in a providence is 
indefinite in the same way: it does not advance to any definite con­
clusion, as applied to the totality of things and to the all-encompass­
ing course of world history. To explain history, however, means to 
reveal the passions of human beings, their talents, their active pow­
ers. This definiteness of providence is what is usually taken for its 
plan. Yet it is this very plan that is supposed to be hidden from our 
view, so that we would be presumptuous to want to understand it. 
The ignorance of Anaxagoras, as to how Reason manifests it­
self in reality, was sincere. The awareness of that thought-whether 
in him or in Greece in general-had not yet gone any further. He 
could not yet apply his principle to the concrete events, and under­
stand concrete reality in terms of that principle. It was Socrates who 
took the first step towards grasping the union of the concrete with 
the universal. Anaxagoras, therefore, was not explicitly opposed to 
such an application of the universal to the concrete. But the belief in 
providence is opposed at least to the large-scale application of the 
principle, and to our comprehending the plan of providence. Here 
and there, in particular cases, the application is allowed: pious souls 
see in certain individual events not merely the workings of chance, 
but of God's hand-for example, when an individual in great dis­
tress and need receives help unexpectedly. But these purposes them­
selves are of a restricted sort, for they are only the particular 
purposes of this individual. 
In world history, however, we are concerned with "individu­
als" that are nations, with wholes that are states. Accordingly, we 
cannot stop at the (so to speak) "retail" version of the belief in prov­
idence-still less can we be content with the merely abstract, indefi­
nite belief which goes only so far as the general view that there is a 
providence, and says nothing of its more definite acts. On the con­
trary, we must seriously try to recognize the ways of providence, 
and to connect its means and manifestations in history-relating 
these to that universal principle. 

Reason in History 
17 
But in mentioning the possibility of our knowing the plan of 
divine providence in general, I have touched on a question that has 
become prominent in our own time: the question about the possi­
bility of our knowing God--or, inasmuch as it has ceased to be a 
question, there is the doctrine (which has now become a prejudice) 
that it is impossible to know God. Holy Scripture commands it as 
our highest duty not only to love God but also to know God. But in 
direct opposition to this, there now prevails the denial of what is 
there written: that it is the Spirit that leads us to truth, that the 
Spirit knows all things and penetrates even to the depths of the 
Godhead.* 
When the Divine Being is placed beyond the reach of our 
knowing and beyond human affairs altogether, we gain the conven­
ience of indulging in our own imaginings. We are thereby excused 
from having to give our knowledge some relation to the Divine and 
the True. On the contrary, the vanity of human knowledge and sub­
jective feeling receives a complete justification for itself. And when 
pious humility places the knowing of God at a distance, it knows 
full well what it has thereby gained for its arbitrariness and vain 
efforts. 
I could not avoid mentioning the connection between our the­
sis (that Reason rules the world and has ruled it) and the question 
about the possibility of our knowing God, since I did not want to 
dodge the accusation that philosophy shuns (or must shun) all dis­
cussion of religious truths due to a bad conscience about them. On 
the contrary, in modern times we have come to the point where 
philosophy has to take up the defense of religious truths against 
many types of theological doctrine. In the Christian religion God 
has revealed Himself: that is to say, He has allowed human beings 
to understand what He is, so that He is no longer hidden and se­
cret. With this possibility of our knowing God, the obligation to 
know Him is placed upon us. God wants no narrow-minded souls 
and empty heads for His children. Rather, He wants those who 
(however poor in spirit) are rich in the knowledge of Him, and who 
place the highest value in this knowledge of Him. The development 
* See I Corinthians 2:10. "God has revealed these things to us through the 
Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God." [Transla­
tor's note.] 

18 
Chapter Two 
of the thinking spirit, which began from this basis in the revelation 
of the Divine Being, must finally come to the point where what was 
originally present only to feeling and to the imagining spirit, can 
now be grasped by thought. And the time must finally come when 
we comprehend the rich product of creative Reason that is world 
history. 
For some time, it was customary to admire God's wisdom at 
work in animals, in plants, and in the destinies of individuals. If we 
grant that providence reveals itself in such objects and materials, 
then why not also in world history? Here, the material seems too 
great. Yet the divine wisdom, i.e., Reason, is one and the same on 
the large scale and on the small, and we must not consider God to 
be too weak to apply His wisdom on a large scale. In our knowl­
edge, we aim for the insight that whatever was intended by the 
Eternal Wisdom has come to fulfillment-as in the realm of nature, 
so in the realm of spirit that is active and actual in the world. To 
that extent our approach is a theodicy, a justification of the ways of 
God. Leibniz attempted a theodicy in metaphysical terms, using in­
definite abstract categories-so that when once the evil in the world 
was comprehended in this way, the thinking mind was supposed to 
be reconciled to it. Nowhere, in fact, is there a greater challenge to 
such intellectual reconciliation than in world history. This reconcili­
ation can be achieved only through the recognition of that positive 
aspect, in which the negative disappears as something subordinate 
and overcome. It is attained (on the one hand) through the aware­
ness of the true end-goal of the world, and (on the other) through 
the awareness that this end has been actualized in the world and that 
the evil has not prevailed in it in any ultimate sense. 
For this purpose, however, the mere belief in nous and provi­
dence is still quite inadequate. "Reason"-which is said to rule the 
world-is just as indefinite a term as "Providence." We hear Reason 
spoken of, without anyone being able to say just what its definition 
is, or its content (according to which we could judge whether some­
thing is rational or irrational). To grasp Reason in its definition­
that is of primary importance. If we merely stick to the bare term, 
"Reason", throughout, the rest of what we say is just words. With 
these declarations behind us, we can go on to the second viewpoint 
we wish to consider in this Introduction. 

Three 
Freecrom) the Individual) and the State 
I
f we think of Reason in its relation to the world, then the ques­
tion of the definition of Reason in itself coincides with the ques­
tion about the final goal of the world. Implicit in that latter term is 
the suggestion that the goal is to be realized, made actual. There are 
two things to be considered here: the content of that goal (i.e., the 
definition itself, as such), and its actualization. 
At the outset we must note that our object-world history­
takes place in the realm of Spirit. The term "world" includes 
both physical and mental nature. Physical nature impinges on 
world history as well, and from the very beginning we shall have 
to draw attention to the fundamental relations [between the two 
natures] in the definition. But it is Spirit, and the process of its 
development, that is the substance of history. Nature in itself, 
which is likewise a rational system in its particular and character­
istic element, is not our concern here, except as related to 
Spirit. 
Spirit is to be observed in the theater of world history, where 
it has its most concrete reality. In spite of this, however (or rather in 
order for us to grasp the universal aspect in this mode of Spirit's 
concrete reality), we must set forth, before all else, some abstract 
definitions of the nature of Spirit. These can, of course, be no more 
than mere assertions here. This is not the place to go into the Idea 
of Spirit in a speculative fashion, for what can be said in an intro­
duction is simply to be taken historically-as a presupposition 
which (as we said) has either been worked out and proven else­
where, or else is to receive its verification only as the outcome of the 
science of history itself. 
19 

20 
Chapter Three 
We have therefore to address the following topics: 
I. The abstract characteristics of the nature of Spirit 
II. The means Spirit uses in order to realize its Idea 
III. The shape taken on by Spirit in its complete realization in 
the world-the State. 
I. THE NATURE OF SPIRIT. This can be seen by looking at 
its complete antithesis-matter. Just as the essence of matter is 
gravity [that is, in being determined by a force outside it], so the 
essence of Spirit is its freedom [that is, in its self-determination]. 
Everyone will immediately agree that Spirit is endowed with 
freedom, among other characteristics. Philosophy, however, 
teaches us that all the characteristics of Spirit subsist only by 
means of freedom; that all of them are only the means to free­
dom, and that they seek and produce only freedom. This is one 
of the truths of speculative philosophy: that freedom is the only 
truth of Spirit. 
Matter has weight insofar as it strives toward a central point 
outside itself. It is essentially composed of parts which are separable. 
It seeks its unity, which would be its own negation, its opposite. If 
it were to achieve this, it would no longer be matter but would have 
perished. It strives toward the ideal, for in unity [i.e., in being self­
determining, self-moving], matter is idealized. 
Spirit, on the other hand, is that which has its center in itself. 
Its unity is not outside itself; rather, it has found it within its own 
self. It is in its own self and alone unto itself. While matter has its 
"substance" [i.e., its source of support] outside itself, Spirit is au­
tonomous and self-sufficient, a Being-by-itself (Bei-sich-selbst-sein). 
But this, precisely, is freedom-for when I am dependent, I relate 
myself to something else, something which I am not; as dependent, 
I cannot be without something which is external. I am free when I 
exist independently, all by myself. This self-sufficient being is self­
consciousness, the consciousness of self. 
Two things must be distinguished in consciousness: first, the 
fact that I know; and second, what I know. In self-consciousness, 
the two-subject and object-coincide. Spirit knows itself: it is the 
judging of its own nature, and at the same time it is the activity of 

Frmwm, Individual, & State 
21 
coming to itself, of producing itself, making itself actually what it is 
in itself potentially. 
According to this abstract definition, we can say of world his­
tory that it is the exhibition of the Spirit, the working out of the 
explicit knowledge of what it is potentially. Just as the germ of the 
plant carries within itself the entire nature of the tree, even the taste 
and shape of its fruit, so the first traces of Spirit virtually contain all 
history. 
In the world of the ancient Orient, people do not yet know 
that the Spirit-the human as such-is free. Because they do not 
know this, they are not free. They know only that one person is free; 
but for this very reason such freedom is mere arbitrariness, savagery, 
stupified passion; or even a softness or tameness of passion, which is 
itself a mere accident of nature and therefore quite arbitrary. This 
one person is therefore only a despot, not a free man. 
It was among the Greeks that the consciousness of freedom 
first arose, and thanks to that consciousness they were free. But 
they, and the Romans as well, knew only that some persons are free, 
not the human as such. Even Plato and Aristotle did not know this. 
Not only did the Greeks have slaves, therefore-and Greek life and 
their splendid freedom were bound up with this-but their freedom 
itself was partly a matter of mere chance, a transient and limited 
flowering, and partly a hard servitude of the human and the 
humane. 
It was first the Germanic peoples, through Christianity, who 
came to the awareness that every human is free by virtue of being 
human, and that the freedom of spirit comprises our most human 
nature. This awareness arose first in religion, in the innermost re­
gion of Spirit. But to introduce this principle into worldly reality as 
well: that was a further task, requiring long effort and civilization to 
bring it into being. For example, slavery did not end immediately 
with the acceptance of the Christian religion; freedom did not sud­
denly prevail in Christian states; nor were governments and consti­
tutions organized on a rational basis, or indeed upon the principle 
of freedom. 
This application of the principle of freedom to worldly real­
ity-the dissemination of this principle so that it permeates the 
worldly situation-this is the long process that makes up history 
itself. I have already drawn attention to the distinction between a 

22 
Chapter Three 
principle as such and its application, its introduction and implemen­
tation in the actuality of spirit and life. This distinction is fundamen­
tal to our science, and it must be kept in mind. Just as this 
distinction was noted in a preliminary way with regard to the Chris­
tian principle of self-consciousness and freedom, so it has its essen­
tial place in regard to the principle of freedom in general. World 
history is the progress in the consciousness of freedom-a progress 
that we must come to know in its necessity. 
Above, I made a general statement regarding the different 
levels in the awareness of freedom-namely, that the Orientals knew 
only that one person is free; the Greeks and Romans that some are 
free; while we know that ail humans are implicitly free, qua human. 
At the same time, this statement gives us the division of world his­
tory and the basis for our consideration of it. But this is noted 
merely provisionally and in passing. We must first explain some 
other concepts. 
The final goal of the world, we said, is Spirit's consciousness of 
its freedom, and hence also the actualization of that very freedom. 
This, then, is what characterizes the spiritual world-and this there­
fore is the substantially real world, to which the physical world is 
subordinate (or, to say this in speculative terms, the physical world 
has no truth as against the spiritual). But this "freedom," as so far 
described, is itself indefinite and infinitely ambiguous. As the high­
est of concepts it carries with it infinitely many misunderstandings, 
confusions and errors, and comprises all possible excesses within it. 
Never has all this been better known and felt than at the present 
time. For the time being, however, we must content ourselves with 
using it in that general sense. 
We have also drawn attention to the importance of the infinite 
difference between the principle, which is as yet merely implicit, and 
that which is real. But at the same time it is freedom in itself that 
contains the infinite necessity of bringing itself to consciousness (for 
in its very concept it is knowledge of itself) and thereby to reality. 
Freedom is for itself the goal to be achieved, and the only goal of 
Spirit. 
It is this final goal-freedom-toward which all the world's 
history has been working. It is this goal to which all the sacrifices 
have been brought upon the broad altar of the earth in the long 
flow of time. This is the one and only goal that accomplishes itself 

Freedom, Individual, & State 
23 
and fulfills itself-the only constant in the change of events and con­
ditions, and the truly effective thing in them all. It is this goal that is 
God's will for the world. But God is the absolutely perfect Being, 
and He can therefore will nothing but Himself, His own will. The 
nature of His will, however-i.e., His own nature, that is what we 
are here calling the Idea of freedom (since we are translating the 
religious image into philosophic thought). The question that now 
follows immediately, then, can be this: What means does this Idea 
of freedom use for its realization? This is the second point to be 
considered. 
II. THE MEANS OF SPIRIT. This question-as to the means 
whereby freedom develops itself into a world-leads us into the 
phenomenon of history itself. While freedom as such is primarily an 
internal concept, its means are external: namely, the phenomena 
which present themselves directly before our eyes in history. Our 
first look at history convinces us that the actions of human beings 
stem from their needs, their passions, their interests, their characters 
and talents. And it appears that the only springs of action in this 
theater of activity, and the mainsprings, are these needs, passions, 
and interests. Of course, the play also involves universal aims, be­
nevolence, noble patriotism, and so on. But these virtues and their 
universality are insignificant in their relation to the world and its 
doings. 
We might well see the ideal of Reason realized in these subjec­
tive individuals themselves and in their sphere of influence, but indi­
viduals are of slight importance compared to the mass of the human 
race; likewise, the scope of their virtues is relatively restricted in its 
range. Instead, it is the passions, the aims of particular interests, the 
satisfaction of selfish desire that are the most forceful things. They 
get their power from the fact that they observe none of the limits 
which the law and morality would seek to impose upon them-and 
from the fact that these forces of nature are closer and more immedi­
ate to human beings than the artificial and tedious discipline toward 
order and moderation, toward law and morality. 
When we look at this drama of human passions, and observe 
the consequences of their violence and of the unreason that is linked 
not only to them but also (and especially) to good intentions and 
rightful aims; when we see arising from them all the evil, the wick-

24 
Chapter Three 
edness, the decline of the most flourishing nations mankind has pro­
duced, we can only be filled with grief for all that has come to 
nothing. And since this decline and fall is not merely the work of 
nature but of the will of men, we might well end with moral outrage 
over such a drama, and with a revolt of our good spirit (if there is a 
spirit of goodness in us). Without rhetorical exaggeration, we could 
paint the most fearful picture of the misfortunes suffered by the no­
blest of nations and states as well as by private virtues-and with 
that picture we could arouse feelings of the deepest and most help­
less sadness, not to be outweighed by any consoling outcome. We 
can strengthen ourselves against this, or escape it, only by thinking 
that, well, so it was at one time; it is fate; there is nothing to be 
done about it now. And finally-in order to cast off the tediousness 
that this reflection of sadness could produce in us and to return to 
involvement in our own life, to the present of our own aims and 
interests-we return to the selfishness of standing on a quiet shore 
where we can be secure in enjoying the distant sight of confusion 
and wreckage. 
But as we contemplate history as this slaughter-bench, upon 
which the happiness of nations, the wisdom of states, and the vir­
tues of individuals were sacrificed, the question necessarily comes to 
mind: What was the ultimate goal for which these monstrous sacri­
fices were made? And from this there usually follows the question 
which we made the starting-point of our consideration. And in this 
perspective the events that present such a grim picture for our trou­
bled feeling and thoughtful reflection have to be seen as the means 
for what we claim is the substantial definition, the absolute end-goal 
or, equally, the true result of world history. 
From the outset we have altogether avoided taking the path 
that goes from that picture of the particular events to the universal 
meaning. In any case, it is no service to those emotional reflections 
to rise above those feelings and in that way to solve the riddles of 
providence which the mournful view has given up on. It is far more 
characteristic of such reflections to enjoy the misery of the empty 
and fruitless sublimities of that negative outcome. We must return, 
therefore, to our original standpoint; and the elements that we wish 
to adduce will also contain the essential determinations through 
which the questions arising from that picture of human suffering 
can be answered. 

Freedmn, Individual, & State 
25 
The first thing we note is what we have already remarked 
upon, but which cannot be repeated too often, since it concerns the 
matter at hand: namely, that what we have called the principle, the 
final goal, the determination, or the nature and concept of Spirit, is 
only something general and abstract. A principle, or rule, or law is 
something internal which, whatever truth it has within it, is not 
completely actual. Aims, principles, and the like are, to begin with, 
in our thoughts-only in our inner intentions but not yet to be 
found in reality. What is implicit in itself is a possibility, a potential­
ity, but it has not yet emerged from its own inwardness into outer 
existence. 
For actuality, there must be a second element added-and that 
is activity or actualization. The principle of this is the will, i.e., 
human activity in general. Only through this activity is the concept 
(along with its implicit determinations) realized, actualized-for 
these aims and principles are not immediately valid in and of them­
selves. The activity which puts them into operation and into exis­
tence is that which stems from human need, drive, inclination, and 
passion. I bring something into act and being because it suits me to 
do so: I must be involved in it; in acting on my desires I must be 
satisfied. A purpose for which I am to be active must in some way 
be my purpose as well. My own purpose must in some way be satis­
fied in it, even if the purpose for which I am active also has many 
other aspects that do not concern me. This is the infinite right of the 
subjective individual, to satisfy himself in his activity and work. If 
people are expected to have an interest in something, they them­
selves must be involved in it, and they must find their own sense of 
self satisfied in it. 
There is a misunderstanding to be avoided here. It may be said 
of an individual, reproachfully, that he is an "interested party''­
namely, that he is out for his private advantage, without regard for 
the common interest; he cloaks his own advantage in it, and even 
sacrifices the common interest in favor of his own. Yet one who is 
active in behalf of something is not merely "interested" but is inter­
ested in it. Language expresses this difference correctly. Nothing 
happens therefore, nothing is accomplished, unless the individuals 
involved are satisfied as well. They are particular persons, and this 
means that they have their own particular needs, drives, and inter­
ests. Among these needs there is not only one's own need and will, 

26 
Chapter Three 
but also one's individual insight, conviction, or at least one's own 
viewpoint (if the need for argument, for understanding, and for rea­
soning is at all aroused). Hence people demand, as well, that if they 
are expected to be active in behalf of something, then it should be in 
accord with their views-so that their opinions can be in sympathy 
with it, whether in regard to the utility of it, or their own rights or 
advantage. This is especially an essential aspect of our time, in which 
people are less drawn to something by their trust in authority, and 
would prefer to devote their activity to a cause on the basis of their 
own understanding of it, their independent conviction and 
opmtons. 
We say, therefore, that nothing at all has come to pass without 
the interest of those whose activity is involved in it. And since we 
call an interest a "passion"-when all of one's individuality, to the 
neglect of all other interests and purposes one might have, is placed 
in the service of some cause; and every fiber of one's being, every 
last ounce of will-power is committed to it, so that all of one's needs 
and forces are concentrated upon it-we must assert as a general 
proposition that nothing great has been accomplished in the world 
without passion. 
There are two elements that enter into our topic: the first is 
the Idea, the other is human passion; the first is the warp, the other 
the woof in the great tapestry of world history that is spread out 
before us. The concrete meeting point and union of the two is in 
ethical freedom in the state. We have already spoken of the Idea of 
freedom, as the essential nature of Spirit and the final goal of his­
tory. Passion is often seen as something that is not quite right, 
something more or less evil: the human being ought to have no 
passions; and the term "passion" is not quite the right word for 
what I want to express. What I generally understand by this word is 
human activity stemming from individual interests, from special 
goals or from self-seeking purposes if you like; but "passion" occurs 
when people place the entire energy of their will and character in 
these goals, sacrificing something else that might well be a goal, or 
even everything else. 
This particular "passionate" content is so bound up with a per­
son's will, that it is inseparable from it and comprises all that deter­
mines it; through it, the person is what he is. What is there is the 
individual, not Man in general. It is not Man that exists, but the 

Freedom, Individual, & State 
27 
specific individual. The term "character" expresses this uniqueness 
of will and intelligence as well; but "character" embraces all the par­
ticularities of the person, the modes of behavior in private relation­
ships, etc., and this very uniqueness is asserted in nothing other 
than a person's effectiveness and activity. 
I shall therefore use the term "passion" to signify the particular 
uniqueness of a person's character-to the extent that the unique­
ness of will does not have a merely private content, but is also what 
drives and motivates actions of a universal scope. "Passion" is pri­
marily the subjective and thus the formal aspect of energy, of will 
and activity, so that the content or goal remains as yet undeter­
mined. At the same time it is there in one's own conviction, one's 
own insight and conscience. What matters is always the content of 
my conviction, the aim of my passion, and whether the one or the 
other is more genuine. But conversely, whichever is more genuine 
will enter into existence and become actual. 
From this comment about the second essential element in the 
realization of a historical aim, it follows (if, for a moment, we look 
at the state) that a state is well constituted and internally strong if 
the private interest of the citizens is united with the universal goal of 
the state, so that each finds its fulfillment and realization in the 
other. This is a proposition of the highest intrinsic importance. But 
before this unity is brought into being, the state must undergo 
much struggle with private interests and passions, in a long and 
hard discipline of them. And the state needs many institutions, de­
vices and practical arrangements, together with long struggles of the 
understanding, before it arrives at an awareness of what is appropri­
ate to its goal. The era of such a unity constitutes the period of a 
state's flowering, the time of its excellence, power, and prosperity. 
But world history does not begin with any conscious goal, 
such as we find in the particular spheres of human life. The simple 
social instinct of human beings already involves the conscious goal 
of securing life and property; and insofar as this life in common has 
already come into being, that goal is extended further. World his­
tory begins with its universal goal: the fulfillment of the concept of 
Spirit-still only implicit (an sich), i.e., as its nature. That goal is the 
inner, indeed the innermost, unconscious drive; and the entire busi­
ness of world history is (as we said) the work of bringing it to 
consCiousness. 

28 
Chapter Three 
Thus, what we called the subjective aspect-needs, drives, pas­
sions, particular interests, as well as opinions and subjective views­
all this is immediately apparent to consciousness ifiir sich). It makes 
its entrance in the guise of a natural being, or of natural will. This 
imponderable mass of wills, interests, and activities-these are the 
tools and means of the World Spirit for achieving its goal, to elevate 
it to consciousness and to actualize it. And this goal is none other 
than to find itself, to come to itself, and to behold itself as actuality. 
But since those very life-forms of individuals and nations, in seeking 
to satisfy their own interests, are at the same time the tools and 
means of something higher and greater (of which they know noth­
ing and which they fulfill unconsciously), all this could well be ques­
tioned, and it has been questioned. It has been denied, decried, and 
scorned in many ways as mere dreaming, mere "philosophy." 
But on this question I have made my position clear from the 
very beginning. I laid down our presupposition (which is to appear 
only at the end, as the result of our investigation) and our belief, 
that Reason rules the world, which means that it has ruled history as 
well. Everything else is subordinate in relation to this universal and 
substantial Reason, in and for itself; it serves that Reason as its 
means. Moreover, this Reason is immanent in historical existence, 
and fulfills itself in and through it. The union of the universal, ex­
isting in and for itself, with the individual subjective aspect, so that 
this union alone is the truth-all this is speculative, and it is handled 
in this general form in metaphysical logic. But in the course of the 
world history itself, conceived as being still on the march, the pure 
end-goal of history is still not the content of need and interest; and 
although need and interest are unaware of the end-goal, the univer­
sal is still implicit in particular goals and fulfills itself in them. 
The question [as to the union of the universal and the subjec­
tive] also takes the form of the union of.freedom and necessity. For we 
regard the immanent development of Spirit as necessary because it is 
in and for itself, while we ascribe to freedom whatever appears in 
the conscious will of human beings as their interest. Since the specu­
lative metaphysical aspect of this connection belongs to the sphere 
of logic, we canot analyze it here. We can only mention the main 
points relevant to it. 
It is demonstrated in philosophy that the Idea proceeds to its 
infinite antithesis: on the one hand there is the Idea in its freely 

Freedom, Individual, & State 
29 
universal mode wherein it remains self-sufficient (bei sich); and on 
the other hand there is the Idea as pure abstract reflection into itself 
(in sich), which is formal being for itself ifur sich)-the ego or the 
formal freedom which belongs only to Spirit. Thus, on the one side, 
the universal Idea subsists as the substantial totality of things; and 
on the other side as the abstractness of arbitrary free will. This re­
flection into itself is the individual self-consciousness; it is the Other 
to the Idea in general, and thus it subsists in absolute finitude. For 
this very reason this Other is the finitude, the determinate element 
for the universal absolute: it is the side of the Absolute's existence, 
the ground of its formal reality, and the ground for the reverence 
due to God. 
To grasp the absolute bonding of this antithesis-that is the 
profound task of metaphysics. Moreover, with the general positing 
of this finitude, al particularity is posited. In a formal sense, the 
Will wills itself, asserting the [singular] ego in everything that it 
intends and does. Even the pious individual wants to be saved, to be 
blessed [thus asserting his selfhood] . This pole of the antithesis, the 
individual existing for himself, is a particular entity-in contrast to 
the absolute universal essence-and it is as such that he knows this 
particularity of his and wills it. He is altogether at the standpoint of 
appearance. This is the sphere of particular aims, where the individ­
uals assert themselves in their particularity, fulfilling it and actualiz­
ing it. 
This standpoint, then, is also the standpoint of happiness or 
unhappiness. That individual is happy who has accommodated his 
existence to his particular character, will, and arbitrariness, so that 
he enjoys himself in his existence. But world history is not the place 
for happiness. Periods of happiness are empty pages in history, for 
they are the periods of harmony, times when the antithesis is miss­
ing. As reflection into self, this freedom is altogether abstract, it is 
the formal element of the activity of the absolute Idea. Activity is 
the unifYing middle term of the syllogism: one pole is the universal, 
the Idea that rests in the inner pit of Spirit; the other pole is exter­
nality as such, objective matter. Activity is the middle term which 
translates the universal and internal into external objectivity. 
I will try to make what I have said more evident and clear by 
giving some examples. 

30 
Chapter Three 
Building a house is, to begin with, an inner goal and purpose. 
As the means to that end, there are particular materials-iron, 
wood, stone. The elements are applied, in order to work up these 
materials: fire to melt the iron; air to blow up the fire; water to turn 
the wheels for cutting the wood, etc. The result is that the air, which 
helped in building the house, is now shut out by the house, since it 
excludes the wind; similarly the house keeps out streams of water 
because it excludes the rain; and insofar as the house is made fire­
proof it excludes the destructiveness of fire. The stones and beams 
are obedient to earth's gravity, and because they press downward 
high walls are set up. Thus the elements are utilized according to 
their nature, and yet they cooperate toward a product by which they 
themselves are being limited. In a similar way the human passions 
satisfy themselves; they fulfill their goals according to their natural 
determination and they bring forth the edifice of human society, in 
which they have provided for law and order as forces against them­
selves (i.e., restraining those passions). 
The above-mentioned connection further entails the follow­
ing: namely, that in world history the outcome of human actions 
is something other than what the agents aim at and actually 
achieve, something other than what they immediately know and 
will. They fulfill their own interests, but something further is 
thereby brought into being, something which is inwardly involved 
in what they do but which was not in their consciousness or part 
of their intention. 
As an analogous example, let us consider the case of a man 
who, for revenge (and perhaps "justly," i.e., in return for an unjust 
injury) sets fire to another man's house. The immediate act is thus 
linked to further effects [on neighboring properties], i.e., effects 
which are in themselves external to the act and do not intrinsically 
belong to it. As such, the act involves merely the holding of a small 
flame to a small part of a roof beam. As yet, nothing more than this 
has been done-but further effects will follow of themselves. The 
ignited portion of the beam is connected to its other parts, and these 
to the woodwork of the entire house, this house to other houses 
nearby-and so a widespread conflagration ensues, which affects 
many more people than the one against whom the act of vengeance 
was directed, consuming their goods and property, and even costing 

Freet:Wm, Individual, & State 
31 
many of them their lives. This result lay neither in the act as such, 
nor in the intention of the man who started it all. 
But the action has yet another general aspect: the aim of the 
man who perpetrated the act of arson was to be revenged upon one 
individual through the destruction of his property; but arson is also 
a crime, and entails a punishment. This may not have been in the 
consciousness of the perpetrator, still less in his intention. But this is 
[entailed in] his act in itself-and these are the universal, substantial 
aspects of it that are brought about by it. It is precisely this that 
should be kept in mind in this example: that there can be something 
more involved in the immediate action than what is in the intention 
or the consciousness of the agent. The example has a further impli­
cation, however: the substance of an action, and thus the action it­
self, can turn against the agent, recoiling against him, to destroy 
him. 
This union of the two poles-the realization of the universal 
Idea in immediate actuality, and the elevation of the singular 
[agency] into universal truth-{)ccurs, first of all, under the presup­
position of the distinctness of the two sides and their indifference 
toward one another. In their actions, the agents have finite aims and 
particular interests, but they also know and think. The content of 
their aims is permeated by the universal and essential determinations 
of what is right, good, duty, etc. (Bare desire, volition in its crude 
and savage form, falls outside the theater and sphere of world his­
tory.) And these universal determinations, which are also the guide­
lines for aims and actions, have a specific content; for something as 
empty of content as the Good or the Good Will has no place at all in 
living actuality. If men are to act, they must not only will the good, 
but they must also know whether this or that is good. 
But as for the question of just what is good or not good, right 
or not right-in the ordinary situations of private life, that question 
is answered by the laws and customs of a state. There is no great 
difficulty in knowing what these are. Every individual has his station 
in life, and he knows, on the whole, what the right and honorable 
course of action is. To declare, in ordinary private relations, that it is 
so difficult to choose what is right and good; to see a superior mo­
rality in finding difficulties and raising scruples-all this rather indi­
cates an evil and perverse will. This is a will that seeks to evade its 
duties, which are not hard to know; or at best we may ascribe this to 

32 
Chapter Three 
an idleness of thought, a small-minded will that gives itself not 
much to do, and thus falls into self-indulgence and moral smugness. 
The situation is quite different in regard to the great historical 
relations. It is here that we find the great collisions between, on one 
hand, the system of established and recognized duties, laws and 
rights, and, on the other, the possibilities which stand opposed to 
that system. These are possibilities that are injurious to the estab­
lished order, destroying its foundations and its very existence-yet 
they have a content that can appear to be good, advantageous on 
the whole, even essential and necessary. These possibilities now be­
come historical. They involve a universal concept, but one of a dif­
ferent sort from that which serves as the basis for the continued 
existence of a people or a state. This universal concept is a moving 
force of the productive Idea, an element of the truth that is forever 
striving toward itself, pressing on toward itself. The historical 
men-the world-histarical individuals-are those whose aims embody 
a universal concept of this kind. 
Caesar was such a man. At one point he was in danger of los­
ing the position to which he had raised himself-a position, if not 
of predominance, at least of equality with the others who stood at 
the head of the state. Indeed, he was in danger of falling into the 
power of those who were about to become his enemies. These ene­
mies, though they were pursuing their personal aims, had the for­
mal state-structure on their side, with all the might of apparent 
legality. Caesar fought to retain his position, honor, and security­
and since his opponents held power over the provinces, Caesar's vic­
tory over these men amounted to the conquest of the entire Roman 
empire. Thus, although he left the form of the state-structure un­
changed, Caesar became the sole ruler of the state. The accomplish­
ing of his originally negative aim-i.e., the autocratic control of 
Rome-was at the same time an essential determination in the his­
tory of Rome and of the world. It was not only the achievement of 
his personal victory; it was also an instinct that fulfilled what the 
time intrinsically demanded. 
The great men in history are those whose own particular aims 
contain the substantial will that is the will of the World Spirit. The 
can be called heroes, because they have drawn their aim and their 
vocation not merely from the calm and orderly system that is the 
sanctified course of things, but rather from a source whose content 

Freedom, Individual, & State 
33 
is hidden and has not yet matured into present existence. This 
source is the inner Spirit that is as yet hidden beneath the surface; it 
knocks at the outer world as though that were a shell, and shatters it 
because that inner Spirit is a kernel that is different from the kernel 
in the outer world's shell. Thus, these men seem to create from 
within themselves, and their actions have produced a set of condi­
tions and worldly relations which seem to be only their interest, and 
their work. 
These heroic individuals, in fulfilling these aims of theirs, had 
no consciousness of the Idea at all. On the contrary, they were prac­
tical and political men. Yet at the same time they were thoughtful 
men, with insight into what was needed and what was timely: their 
insight was the very truth of their time and their world-the next 
species, so to speak, which was already there in the inner source. It 
was theirs to know it, this universal concept, the necessary next 
stage of their world-to make this their aim and to put their energy 
into it. The world-historical men, the heroes of an era, are therefore 
to be recognized as the insightful ones; their deeds and their words 
are the best of their time. Great men have worked to satisfy them­
selves, not others. Whatever they might have learned from others in 
the way of well-intentioned advice-all this would have been nar­
row-minded and distorted under the circumstances. For they were 
the ones who best understood what was right, and from them all the 
others learned it, and approved their actions, or at least accommo­
dated themselves to them. The advanced Spirit is thus the inner soul 
of all individuals; but this is an unconscious inwardness which the 
great men bring to consciousness for them. This is why the others 
follow these soul-leaders; for they feel the irresistible force of their 
own spirit coming out in the heroes. 
If we take another look at the final destiny of these world­
historical individuals who had the calling to manage the affairs of 
the World Spirit, we find that their destiny was by no means happy. 
They attained no calm enjoyment, their entire life was toil and trou­
ble; their entire nature was nothing but their master-passion. Once 
their goal is achieved they fall away like empty shells from the ker­
nel. They die young, like Alexander; they are murdered, like Caesar; 
they are exiled, like Napoleon to St. Helena. There is a horrible con­
solation in the fact that these historical men did not achieve what is 
called happiness-a happiness found only in private life, and under 

34 
Chapter Three 
very different external circumstances-and this is a comfort that can 
be drawn from history by those who need it. But those who need 
that consolation are also the envious, who resent greatness and emi­
nence, who seek to belittle greatness and to find fault with it. Thus, 
in modern times it has been demonstrated all too often that princes 
are not at all happy on their thrones-so that we are not to be­
grudge them their position, and are to be glad that it is they who are 
there, not we. The free man, however, is not envious, but gladly 
recognizes what is great and exalted, and rejoices in it. 
It is in the light of these general elements, therefore-elements 
that constitute the interest and thus the passions of individuals­
that these historical men are to be regarded. Men are great for hav­
ing willed and accomplished something great-not something 
based on conceit or presumptuousness, but rather something right 
and necessary. This standpoint excludes the so-called psychological 
view which best serves the interests of envy, for it explains all ac­
tions as coming from some subjective source, great or small, in the 
individual-some pathological craving for the sake of which all his 
actions are done, as though there never had been anyone who acted 
from moral motives. 
Alexander of Macedon conquered part of Greece, and then 
Asia-therefore he must have had a craving for conquest. Or he acted 
from a craving for fame, and the supposed proof that this is what 
drove him is that his actions did bring him fame. What school­
master has not demonstrated that Alexander the Great and Julius 
Caesar were driven by such passions, and that they were therefore 
immoral? And from this it immediately follows that he, the school­
master, is more admirable than they, since he has no such pas­
sions-the proof being that he has not conquered Asia nor defeated 
Darius and Porus, but that he is willing to live and let live. 
These psychologists are particularly fond of latching on to the 
peculiarities of great historical figures as private persons. A man 
must eat and drink, he enters into relations with friends and ac­
quaintances, he has feelings and moments of anger. As a familiar 
saying has it, "No man is a hero to his valet." To this I added-and 
Goethe repeated it ten years later-"but not because the former is 
no hero, but because the latter is a valet." He takes off the hero's 
boots, helps him into bed, knows that he likes his champagne, etc. 
Served by such psychological valets in historical writing, the histori-

Freedom, Individual, & State 
35 
cal personage comes off badly; he is degraded, brought down to the 
valet level, or even a few degrees below the morality of these fine 
connoisseurs of humanity. Homer's Thersites, who reproaches the 
kings, is a typical figure for all times. True, Thersites does not al­
ways get thumped with a stout stick, as he does in the Homeric era. 
But envy and egotism-these are the thorns in his flesh; and the 
undying worm that gnaws at him is the torturing thought that his 
admirable intentions and criticisms remain altogether ineffectual in 
the world. One may even take a certain malicious pleasure at the 
ultimate fate of Thersites. 
A world-historical individual is not so circumspect as to want 
this, that, and the other, and to take account of everything; rather, 
he commits himself unreservedly to one purpose alone. So it hap­
pens that such individuals treat other interests, even sacred ones, in 
a casual way-a mode of conduct certainly open to moral censure. 
But so great a figure must necessarily trample on many an innocent 
flower, crushing much that gets in his way. 
The particular interest linked to passion is thus inseparable 
from the actualization of the universal principle; for the universal is 
the outcome of the particular and determinate, and from its nega­
tion. It is the particular that is involved in the struggle with others, 
and of which one part is doomed to perish. It is not the universal 
Idea which involves itself in antithesis and struggle, exposing itself 
to danger; it remains in the background, and is preserved against 
attack or injury. 
This may be called the Cunning of Reason, that it allows the 
passions to work for it, while what it brings into existence suffers 
loss and injury. This is the phenomenal world, part of which is neg­
ative, part positive. Compared to the universal, the particular is for 
the most part too slight in importance: individuals are surrendered 
and sacrificed. The Idea pays the ransom of existence and tran­
sience-not out of its own pocket, but with the passions of 
individuals. 
Some might find it acceptable to see individuals sacrificed, 
along with their aims and fulfillments, consigning their happiness to 
the realm of chance (to which it belongs), and even to regard indi­
viduals altogether under the category of means to an end. Yet there 
is that aspect of theirs which we must refuse to see in this light, even 
for the sake of the highest goal, simply because there is that in indi-

36 
Chapter Three 
viduals which is not to be made subordinate, but is something in­
trinsically eternal and divine. This is morality, ethics, religious 
commitment. * Already when we spoke of the role of individuals in 
the actualization of the rational goal, we touched upon the subjec­
tive aspect, the interests of individuals, their needs and drives, their 
views and insights-and although we said that this was the formal 
aspect in them, it has an infinite right to be satisfied. In speaking of 
a "means", we at first imagine something merely external to the 
"end" and having no part in it. But in actuality even natural things 
in general, even the most common lifeless objects used as means 
must already be such as to be appropriate to their end and must 
have something in common with it. Humans do not see themselves 
as the "means" for the goals of Reason in that entirely external sense 
at all. On the contrary, not only do they use the occasion to satisfy 
their particular interests whose content is different from that goal, 
but they also have a part in that rational goal itself; for that very 
reason they are to be regarded as ends in themselves. 
They are not ends in themselves in the merely formal sense, 
like the world of living things in general-so that the individual life 
could be subordinated to human life in general, and might justifi­
ably be used as a means to it. On the contrary, humans are ends in 
themselves with respect to the content of the goal [of Reason]. This 
determines what we want to exclude from the category of means­
morality, ethics, religion. In other words, the human being is an end 
in himself only by virtue of the divine in him-by virtue of what, 
from the very outset, was called "Reason", and called "freedom" 
too, because Reason is self-activating and self-determining. And al­
though we cannot go into the further development of it here, we 
assert that morality, ethics and religion have their basis and their 
source in Reason and freedom, so that they are intrinsically exalted 
above necessity and chance. 
But it must be said here that individuals-to the extent that 
they are aware of their freedom-are responsible for any ethical and 
religious deterioration, and for the weakening of ethics and religion. 
* In this translation, Moralitiit is uniformly rendered as "morality'' and its 
cognates; Sittlichkeit is rendered as "ethics", "ethical life", or "the ethical"; 
Religiositiit is rendered as "religious commitment" or "religiosity''. [Transla­
tor's note.] 

Freer:Wm, Individual, & State 
37 
This is the seal of the absolutely high vocation of Man, that he or 
she knows what is good and what is evil, and that it is for him or her 
to will either the good or the evil. It is the mark of the human, in 
other words, to be capable of bearing such responsibility, not only 
for the evil but also for the good; and responsibility not only for 
this, that, or another thing, but responsiblity for the good and evil 
stemming from his or her individual freedom. Animals alone are 
truly innocent. (It would, however, take an extensive analysis-as 
extensive as that needed for the analysis of freedom itself-in order 
to rule out or avoid all the usual misunderstandings involved in say­
ing that what is called "innocence" means ignorance of evil itself.) 
When we contemplate the fate that virtue, the ethical, even 
religion have suffered in history, we must not fall into the litany of 
lamentation, about how the good and pious often (or even for the 
most part) fare ill in the world, while the evil and wicked prosper. 
By the term "prosperity'' one may understand a wide variety of 
things, including wealth, external honors, and the like. But when we 
speak of such things as though they were intrinsic goals, we still 
cannot make the so-called prosperity or misfortune of this or that 
single individual into an element of the rational world-order. To 
this world-goal there often goes the demand-with more of a justifi­
cation than any demand for the happiness or the good fortune of 
individuals-that good, ethical, and righteous goals should find 
their realization and security in that world-goal, and under its aus­
pices. What makes people morally dissatisfied (and this is a dissatis­
faction upon which they pride themselves) is that they do not see 
the present as measuring up to the goals they hold as right and 
good. This applies especially to contemporary ideal models of politi­
cal institutions *-thus contrasting the way things are with the way 
they ought to be. 
Here it is not the particular interest, not the passion, that de­
mands to be satisfied, but rather the demands of Reason, Justice, 
and Freedom. And once it is furnished with this title, the demand 
becomes haughty, and it is not only dissatisfied (all too easily) with 
world conditions, but even rebels against them. To appreciate such 
feeling and such purposes, one must examine the demands raised, 
* See Kant's essay, "Perpetual Peace". [Translator's note.] 

38 
Chapter Three 
the dogmatic opinions asserted. At no time so much as in our own 
have general principles and ideas been raised up with greater preten­
tiousness. History usually presents itself as a struggle of passions. In 
our time, although there is no lack of passion, history shows itself 
(to some) to be predominantly the struggle between justifiable ideas 
and (to others) to be essentially the struggle of passions and subjec­
tive interests that merely pretend to have a higher justification of 
this kind. In the name of the final destiny of Reason, these pre­
tended demands for justification are taken as absolute goals-in the 
same way as religion, ethics, morality. 
As was said, nothing is more common today than the com­
plaint that the ideals raised by fantasy are not being realized, that 
these glorious dreams are being destroyed by cold actuality. On 
their life-voyage, these ideals smash up on the rock of hard reality. 
They can only be subjective, after all; they belong to that individu­
ality of the solitary subject (I ndividualitiit des Einzelnen) which 
takes itself for the highest and wisest. Ideals of that sort do not 
belong here-for, what the individual (Individuum) spins out for 
himself in his isolation (Einzelheit) cannot serve as law for the uni­
versal reality, just as the world's law is not for the single individual 
(einzelnen Individuen) alone (who may come off much the worse 
for it). 
But by the term "ideal" we also understand the ideal of Rea­
son, of the good, the true. Poets such as Schiller have presented 
these ideals in very moving and emotional ways, with the feeling of 
deep sorrow at the fact that they may never be realized. If, on the 
contrary, we say that universal Reason does manifest itself in the 
world, then this certainly has nothing to do with any empirical de­
tail-for that can be better or worse, since the elements of contin­
gency, of particularity, receive from the Idea the power to exercise 
their tremendous authority in that sphere. 
There is much to find fault with, therefore, in the details of the 
world of appearances. This subjective fault-finding-which is con­
cerned only with the detail and its shortcomings, and does not rec­
ognize the universal Reason in it-is all too easy. Having the 
assurance of its good intentions for the well-being of the totality, 
together with the appearance of good-heartedness, it can give itself 
airs and make much of itself. It is easier to discern the shortcomings 
in individuals, in states, in providence, than to see their true signifi-

Freedom, Individual, & State 
39 
cance. For in negative fault-finding one stands above the thing, no­
bly and with a superior air, without being drawn into it, i.e., with­
out having grasped the thing itself in its positive aspect. Generally, 
the critic mellows with age; youth is always dissatisfied. That mel­
lowness of age is a ripeness of judgment-which not only accepts 
the bad, through disinterestedness, but is also led to what is sub­
stantial and solid in the matter in question by having been in­
structed more deeply by the seriousness of life. 
The insight to which philosophy ought to lead, therefore (in 
contrast to what happens to those ideals), is that the real world is as 
it ought to be, that the truly good, the universal divine Reason is 
also the power capable of actualizing itself. This good, this Rea­
son-in its most concrete representation-is God. God governs the 
world: the content of His governance, the fulfillment of His plan, is 
world history. Philosophy seeks to understand this plan: for only 
what is fulfilled according to that plan has reality; what is not in 
accord with it, is but a worthless existence. In the pure light of this 
divine Idea (which is no mere ideal) the illusion that the world is a 
mad or foolish happening disappears. Philosophy seeks to know the 
content, the actuality of the divine Idea, and to justify the despised 
reality-for Reason is the perception of God's work. 
As for the deterioration, the damage, and decline of religious, 
ethical, and moral aims and conditions in general, we must say this: 
Although these values are infinite and eternal in their inner essence, 
their external expressions can take on limited forms, which in their 
natural interrelatedness subsist under the command of contingency. 
This is why they are transitory, and exposed to deterioration and 
damage. Religion and the ethical-like any other inherently univer­
sal essences-have the characteristic of being present in the individ­
ual soul (according to their concept, and therefore truly), even if 
they do not have in that soul the advantage of the full extent of 
culture or of application to fully developed circumstances. The relig­
iosity or the ethics in a limited mode of life-of a shepherd, say, or 
of a peasant, limited in their concentrated inwardness to a few and 
altogether simple circumstances of life-has infinite value, the same 
value as the religiosity and ethics of a cultivated intellect, and of an 
existence that is rich in the scope of its relations and activities. 
This inner center, this simple region of the rights of subjective 
freedom; the seat of volition, resolution, and action, and of the ab-

40 
Chapter Three 
stract content of conscience, embracing the responsibility and worth 
of the individual-all this remains untouched, entirely removed 
from the loud noise of world history, removed not only from the 
external and temporal changes, but also from those changes that are 
entailed by the absolute necessity of the concept of freedom itself. In 
general, however, there is this point to be noted: that whatever can 
claim to be noble and grand in the world still has something higher 
above it. The claim of the World Spirit supersedes all particular 
claims. 
This may suffice in regard to the means used by the World 
Spirit for the realization of its concept. Simply and abstractly, the 
"means" is the activity of those in whom Reason is present as their 
intrinsically substantial essence-though primarily as a still obscure 
ground, one that is hidden from them. The matter becomes more 
complex and more difficult, however, when we regard individuals 
not merely as active, but more concretely, with the more definite 
content of their religion and ethics-for these factors have a part in 
Reason, and hence in its absolute rights. Here the bare relation of 
means-to-end falls away, and the principal points of view that have 
arisen regarding the bearing of the absolute goal of Spirit upon this 
aspect of life have been briefly considered. 
Ill. THE STATE AS REALIZATION OF SPIRIT. The third point 
to be considered is the goal to be achieved by these means, i.e., the 
form it takes in actuality. We have spoken of "means"; but in the 
fulfillment of a finite subjective goal there is also a material element, 
which is already there or must be provided for the actualization. On 
this analogy the question would be: What is the material in which 
the rational end-goal is to be realized? Again, it is primarily the 
human subject, human needs, subjectivity in general. The rational 
comes to existence in human knowing and willing, as its material. 
We have considered the subjective will-how it has an aim 
which is made the truth of a reality, and especially insofar as this is a 
great world-historical passion. As a subjective will, with limited pas­
sions, the human will is dependent; and it can only satisfy its partic­
ular aims within the limits of this dependency. Yet the subjective 
will also has a substantial life of its own, an actuality within which it 
moves among essences, and has the essential itself as the goal of its 
existence. 

Freedom, Individual, & State 
41 
This essential being is itself the union of two wills: the subjec­
tive will and the rational will. This is an ethical totality, the state. It 
is the reality wherein the individual has and enjoys his freedom­
but only insofar as he knows, believes, and wills the universal. Yet 
we ought not to understand this as though the subjective will of the 
individual came to its fulfillment and enjoyment by way of the com­
mon or universal will, with the common will serving as a mere 
means for the individual-as if the individual were to limit his free­
dom among other individuals, so that this mutual limitation and 
inconvenience would provide for each some small space for move­
ment. As against this negative concept of freedom,* it is rather law, 
ethical life, the state (and they alone) that comprise the positive real­
ity and satisfaction of freedom. The freedom which is limited in the 
state is that of caprice, the freedom that relates to the particularity of 
individual needs. 
The subjective will-passion-is the actuating element, the re­
alizing force [of Reason]. The Idea is the inner source. The State is 
the externally existing, genuinely ethical life. It is the union of the 
universal essential will with the subjective will-and this is ethics. 
The individual, living in this union, has his own ethical life, he has a 
value consisting in this substantiality alone. Sophocles' Antigone 
says: "The divine commands are not of yesterday, nor of today-no, 
they live forever, and no one can say whence they came." The laws 
of ethics are not accidental, but are the rational itself. The proper 
goal of the State is to make this substantiality count in the actual 
doings of human beings and in their convictions, making it present 
and self-sustaining there. 
It is the absolute interest of Reason that this ethical whole 
should be present. And herein lies the justification and the merit of 
the heroes who founded states, no matter how crude. In world his­
tory we are concerned only with those peoples that have formed 
states. For we must understand that the State is the realization of 
freedom, i.e., of the absolute end-goal, and that it exists for its own 
sake. We must understand, further, that all the value that human 
beings possess, all of their spiritual reality, they have through the 
* This is the "negative freedom" Isaiah Berlin discusses in his essay "Two 
Concepts of Liberty," reprinted in Four Essays on Liberty (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1969). [Translator's note.] 

42 
Chapter Three 
State alone. Their spiritual reality consists in the fact that their es­
sence-rationality-is objectively there for them as knowers, and 
that that rationality has an immediate objective existence for them. 
Only in that way is man a consciousness, with an ethical way of life, 
the legal and ethical life of the State. For the True is, as we said, the 
union of the universal (or general) will and subjective will; and the 
universal dimension is in the State's laws, in the universal and ra­
tional arrangements. 
The State is the divine Idea, as it exists on earth. In this per­
spective, the State is the precise object of world history in general. It 
is in the State that freedom attains its objectivity, and lives in the 
enjoyment of this objectivity. For the law of the State is the objecti­
fication of Spirit; it is will in its true form. Only the will that is 
obedient to the law is free, for it obeys itself and, being self-suffi­
cient, it is free. Insofar as the State, our country, constitutes a com­
munity of existence, and insofar as the subjective will of human 
beings submits to laws, the antithesis between freedom and neces­
sity disappears. The rational is the necessary, the substantiality of a 
shared existence; and we are free to the extent that we acknowledge 
it as law, and follow it as the very substance of our being. The objec­
tive and the subjective will are then reconciled, as one and the same 
serene whole. 
The ethical life of the State is not of the moral or reflective 
kind, wherein one's individual conviction rules supreme. This latter 
is more appropriate to the modern world; the true ethics of antiq­
uity is rooted in the principle of abiding by one's duty. An Athenian 
citizen did what was required of him as if by instinct. But if I reflect 
upon the object of my activity, I must have the consciousness that 
my will has been called upon. Ethical life, however, is the sense of 
duty (unquestioned, unconscious), the substantial law-a "second 
nature," as it has rightly been called (since the "first nature" of 
human beings is our immediate animal being). 
The detailed development of the concept of the State is for the 
philosophy of right to provide-although we must point out that in 
the legal theories of our time, various errors are current which are 
taken for established truths and have become prejudices. We will 
mention just a few, principally those related to the goal of our [phil­
osophical study of] history. 

Freedom, Individual, & State 
43 
A. The theory that confronts us first is the direct contrary to our 
concept of the State as the actualization of freedom: namely, the 
view that the human being is free by nature, but that in society and 
in the state (of which he is necessarily a part) he must limit this 
natural freedom of his. That the human being is free by nature is 
entirely correct, in the sense that he is free according to the concept 
of humanity; but for that very reason man is free only in terms of his 
implicit destiny (which is there to be fulfilled). The "nature" of a 
thing always amounts to the same thing as its "concept"; but it is 
true that the concept of humanity does include the way the human 
being exists in his merely natural immediate existence. 
The theory before us assumes, generally, a "state of nature." 
Man is represented as possessing natural rights and enjoying the un­
limited exercise of his freedom. This assumption is not directly 
taken for historical fact. There would also be some difficulty, if it 
were taken seriously, in providing a proof that any such a natural 
condition existed in the present or anywhere in the past. One can 
certainly point to the existence of savage conditions, but these are 
shown to be linked to the passions, to barbarism and acts of vio­
lence-and yet these are linked, however primitive they are, to social 
institutions involving so-called limitations of freedom. The assump­
tion is one of those nebulous images necessarily produced by the 
theory (i.e., the image of the noble savage) to which it ascribes exis­
tence, without historical justification. 
What we find such a "state of nature" to be, in its empirical 
existence, corresponds equally well to the concept of it. Freedom, as 
the ideal dimension of original nature, does not exist as an original 
and natural state. On the contrary, it must first be achieved and 
won, and indeed won through an endless process involving the dis­
cipline of knowledge and will. So, the "state of nature" is not an 
ideal condition, but a condition of injustice, of violence, of untamed 
natural drives, inhuman acts, and emotions. There is, to be sure, a 
limitation imposed upon this state of nature by society and the civil 
state, but it is no more than a limiting of blunt emotions and crude 
impulses, as well as the limiting of the reflective arbitrariness of ca­
price and passion. This limitation is part of the process through 
which the eventual consciousness of freedom and will to be truly 
free (according to the concept of freedom, i.e., as rational) is first 
brought forth. According to that concept, freedom involves law and 

44 
Chapter Three 
morality, and these are-in and for themselves-universal essences, 
objects and aims. These must first be found through the activity of 
self-developing thought, in opposition to sense experience. Then 
they must be absorbed and incorporated into the primarily sensuous 
will, even against its natural inclination. 
Freedom is forever misunderstood in this way, being known 
in only a formal, subjective sense, abstracted from its essential ob­
jects and aims. This is why the limiting of the impulses, desires, 
passions that are proper to the particular individual, as such-the 
limiting of arbitrary caprice-is taken to be a limiting of freedom. 
On the contrary, such limitation is simply the condition from which 
emancipation proceeds; and society and the State are the conditions 
wherein freedom is actualized. 
B. There is a second theory to be mentioned, and this denies the 
general development of [abstract] Right into the form of Law. The 
patriarchal condition (prevailing either in the entire human race, or 
at least in some single branches of it) is regarded as the situation in 
which the ethical and emotional element finds its fulfillment, along 
with the element of [abstract] Right. Only in connection with these 
ethical and emotional elements [says this theory] can justice be truly 
exercised in accord with its content. The patriarchal condition is 
based upon the family relation, in which the absolutely primitive 
form of ethical life is consciously developed, followed by the higher 
form in the state. The patriarchal relation is a transitional condition: 
the family having grown into a tribe or a people, the unifYing bond 
has ceased to be the bond of love and trust, and has become one of 
serviCe. 
Here we must speak primarily of the ethics of family life. 
The family may be seen as a single person: in that case, its mem­
bers have either surrendered their personal claims against one an­
other, along with their legal claims, their extended personal 
interests, and their selfishness (as in the case of parents); or else 
they have not yet arrived at the point of asserting such claims 
against one another (as in the case of children, who are initially in 
that state of nature discussed above) .  They are therefore immersed 
in a unity of feeling, of love, of trust and faith in one another. In 
this union of love, the individual has the consciousness of self in 
the consciousness of the other; the individual self is externalized, 

Freedmn, Individual, & State 
45 
and in this mutual externalization the individual has won self­
hood-and each has gained the other's self with his or her own, 
since each is at one with the other. 
The further interests involved in the needs and external con­
cerns of life (along with the internal development of those inter­
ests in regard to the children) constitute a common purpose for 
the family. The spirit of the family (e.g., in the Roman Penates) is 
as much one substantial entity as is the Spirit of a people in their 
state. In both, ethical life consists in the feeling, the consciousness, 
and the will-not of the individual personality and its interests, 
but of the common personality and interests of all the members in 
general. But in the family this unity is one of feeling, remaining 
within the limits of the natural order of things. This piety of fam­
ily-feeling has to be respected to the highest degree by the state. 
As a result of this family-feeling, the state has, as its members, 
individuals who are already ethical in themselves (which they 
would not be as self-interested persons) ;  and as its members they 
bring to the state its solid foundation, because each one feels him­
self to be united with the totality. But the extension of the family 
to a patriarchal whole goes beyond blood-ties (the natural aspect) ; 
and outside these ties, individuals must assume the status of [dis­
tinct] persons. 
If we were to consider the patriarchal relation in its wider 
scope, we would be led to a discussion of theocracy: the head of the 
patriarchal tribe is also its priest. Where the family has not yet been 
distinguished from civil society and the state, the separation of reli­
gion from the family has not yet happened either-and insofar as 
the piety of family-feeling itself remains an inwardness of feeling, it 
is not likely to happen. 
We have considered two aspects of freedom-the objective 
and the subjective. Now if freedom means that the individuals give 
their consent, then it is easy to see that only the subjective element is 
meant. What follows naturally from this principle is that no law can 
be valid unless everyone agrees to it. And immediately we come to 
the implication that the minority view must yield to the majority­
the greater number decides. But then, as Jean-Jacques Rousseau 
noted, there is no longer any freedom, since the will of the minority 
is no longer taken into account. In the Polish parliament, each indi­
vidual member had to consent before a law was passed-and for the 

46 
Chapter Three 
sake of that freedom the state collapsed. * Moreover, it is a false and 
dangerous assumption that only the people possess reason and in­
sight, and know what is right. Any faction of the people can put 
itself forward as standing for the People. But what really constitutes 
a state is a matter of trained intelligence, not a matter of "the 
people." 
If the only criterion of political liberty is the principle of the 
will of the individual-namely, that each individual is to give his or 
her consent to everything done by or for the state, and that without 
such unanimous consent no decision can be taken-then there is 
actually no such thing as an independent form of government operat­
ing autonomously. Presumably, the only arrangement that would 
then be needed would be, first, a neutral center (without any will) 
that would note what seemed (to it) to be the needs of the state, and 
would communicate its views; and, second, a mechanism for assem­
bling all individuals, and tabulating their votes for the various pro­
positions before them; in that way the decision would be already 
made. 
The state is an abstraction, having its merely general reality in 
its citizens; but it is actual, and its merely general existence must 
define itself as an individual will and activity. This creates the need 
for government and administration in general, involving the selec­
tion of individuals to take the helm in political affairs: they must 
take decisions about these matters, determine how those decisions 
are to be carried out, and direct the citizens in the implementation 
of them. Thus, even in a democracy, if the people decide to embark 
on a war, there must be a general to lead the army. 
Only by means of the state-structure does the abstraction that 
is the state acquire life and actuality-and in any such structure 
there is a difference between those who command and those who 
obey. Obedience, however, seems to be inconsistent with free­
dom-and those who are in command seem to be doing precisely 
what contradicts the concept of freedom, which is the very basis of 
the state. If, then, the difference between commanding and obeying 
is a necessary one, because otherwise nothing would get done 
(though indeed this seems only a matter of necessity, something ex-
* See Rousseau's Considerations on the Government of Poland (1770-71). 
[Translator's note.] 

Freedom, Individual, & State 
47 
ternal and contrary to freedom abstractly understood), then the in­
stitutions of government must at least be such that as few as possible 
of the citizens have merely to obey, and the authorities have as little 
arbitrary power as possible. The range within which commanding 
authority is necessary should be for the people to decide; in its main 
outline it should be determined by the will of the many or of every 
individual citizen, for in that way the state, as an actuality and as an 
individuated unity, will gain its force and strength. 
The primary consideration, above all, is the difference between 
those who govern and those who are governed. The forms of gov­
ernance have been correctly classified into monarchy, aristocracy, 
and democracy. Here we must note, however, that monarchy itself 
can be divided again into despotism and monarchy proper. In all 
these merely conceptual classifications, it is only the fundamental 
differences that are emphasized. These are therefore not to be taken 
as exhausting the concrete possibilities of forms, types, or modes of 
government. It is significant that the types of government admit of 
many variations, not only as sub-types of the above, but also as mix­
tures of these essential types of order, mixtures which are formless, 
untenable and inconsistent distortions of those forms. In this clash 
of forms, therefore, the question is: Which is the best form of gov­
ernment? That is, through what arrangements, organization, or 
mechanism of state power is the intrinsic purpose of the state ful­
filled most effectively? 
Of course, this purpose can be seen in a variety of ways-e.g., 
as the calm enjoyment of civil life, or as universal happiness. Goals 
of this kind have resulted in the formulation of so-called ideals of 
government, including ideals involving the education of princes 
(Fenelon) * or of the rulers, as the aristocracy in general (Plato). t  
The main emphasis was on the nature of those who stand at the 
head of the state-and in ideal accounts of this kind, no thought 
was given to the content of the state's organic institutions. The 
question as to the best form of government is often stated not only 
as though the theory about it is a matter of free subjective convic­
tion, but also as though the actual introduction of one form (as the 
* Francois Fenelon, Tilimaque ( 1694). 
t Plato, Republic, Books II-III (376e-405b); VII (52lc-535a). [Translator's 
notes.) 

48 
Chapter Three 
one recognized to be best or as a better one) were the consequence 
of an entirely theoretical decision-as though the type of govern­
ment were nothing more than a matter of free choice determined by 
reflection. In this altogether naive sense, the Persian leaders (though 
not the Persian people) deliberated about what form of government 
they wished to introduce into Persia. They had conspired to over­
throw the false Smerdis and the Magi; and after the success of the 
conspiracy they deliberated on the form of government because 
there was no heir to the throne, and Herodotus tells the story of 
that deliberation with the same naivete. *  
Nowadays, the form of government of a land or a people is 
not represented as being so entirely dependent on their free choice. 
The underlying conception of freedom, regarded abstractly, has led 
to the widespread acceptance of the theory that the republic counts 
as the only just and genuine form of government. And there are 
many men who-despite the fact that they occupy high posts in mo­
narchical systems of government-are not opposed to the idea of a 
republic and even support it. Yet they realize that although the re­
public may be the best of systems, it cannot be instituted every­
where. And so they realize that-people being what they are-we 
must be content with less freedom; and that under existing circum­
stances, given that moral condition of the people, the most useful 
form of government may be monarchy. Even in this view, although 
the necessity of a certain form of government is seen to be depend­
ent on the condition of a people, that condition itself is regarded 
only as the result of external contingency. Such a view is based on 
the intellectually reflective division between the concept and its real­
ity: either the intellect holds to a merely abstract (and hence untrue) 
concept; or it does not grasp the idea itself; or (what amounts to the 
same thing in terms of content, though not in formal terms) the 
intellect lacks a concrete awareness of what a people or a state is. 
Further on we shall show that a people's form of government 
comprises one substance--{)ne spirit-with its religion, its an, and 
philosophy, or at least with its thoughts and imaginings, its culture 
in general (not to mention other influences of an external son, such 
as the climate, its neighbors, its place in the world). A state is an 
* Herodotus, The Persian Wars, Book III, Ch. 80-83. [Translator's note.] 

Freedom, Individual, & State 
49 
individual totality, from which it is impossible to isolate all by itself 
a particular aspect such as its form of government (although that 
aspect is of the highest importance); no one aspect is to be deliber­
ated upon and voted upon in that isolated form. Not only is the 
form of government intimately connected with those other spiritual 
forces and dependent upon them, but the characterization of the 
entire spiritual individuality, including all its powers, is only one 
element in the history of the totality: it has been predetermined in 
the course of that history, and its history comprises the highest sanc­
tion of the constitution, as well as its highest necessity. 
The first formation of a state is authoritarian and instinctive. 
Yet even force, obedience, and fear of a despotic ruler already in­
volve some connection of wills. In the primitive state, it is already 
the case that the particular will of the individuals (Individuen) does 
not count; one's own particularity (Particularitiit) is set aside, and 
the universal will (allgemeine Wille) is what is essential. This unity of 
the universal and the individual (Einzelne) is the Idea itself, which is 
now present as the state and which goes on to develop itself further. 
The abstract (although necessary) course in the development of 
truly independent states, therefore, is that they begin with monar­
chy (whether it be patriarchal and pastoral or warlike). Then partic­
ularity (Besonderheit) and individuality (Einzelnheit) assert 
themselves-in aristocracy or democracy. The conclusion of the 
process is that this particularity is subjected to one power, which can 
be no other than [constitutional] monarchy -such that the particu­
lar spheres have their independence apart from it. Thus we must 
distinguish between a first and a second form of monarchy. This 
progression is a necessary one, such that each form of government 
in the sequence is not a matter of choice, but rather is such as to 
conform to the Spirit of the people. 
What is important in deciding on the form of a state, its con­
stitution, is the development of the rational condition, i.e., the po­
litical condition as such, the liberation of the conceptual elements­
so that the particular powers are separated from one another and 
become complete in themselves, yet in their very freedom cooperat­
ing toward one purpose and being sustained by it; in short, forming 
an organic whole. Thus the state is freedom subsisting on its own 
account, rationally self-conscious, and objectively knowing itself to 
be such. Its objectivity is in the very fact that its elements are not 

50 
Chapter Three 
merely present in a set of ideals, but are rather to be found in a 
characteristic reality. And in their effective self-relation, these ele­
ments pass over into that activity whereby the totality, the soul, the 
individual unity is produced as their result. 
The state is the Idea of Spirit in the externalized form of 
human will and its freedom. It is in the state, therefore, that histori­
cal change occurs essentially, and the elements of the Idea are re­
flected in the state as various political principles. The forms of 
government, in which the world-historical peoples have blossomed, 
are characteristic of those peoples. Thus the various forms do not 
present one universal basis of government-as though the differ­
ences consisted only in determinate modes of expression and devel­
opment [of this universal basis]. Rather, there is a difference, here, 
in the underlying principles themselves. 
Accordingly, when we compare the forms of government of 
ancient world-historical peoples, there is nothing they can tell us 
regarding the ultimate principle of the state, as a principle that 
would be applicable to our own time. In the fields of science and 
art, the matter is quite different: ancient philosophy provides the 
basis for modern philosophy to such a degree that the ancient is 
contained in the modern. The relationship that appears, here, is that 
of an unbroken development of one edifice, whose foundation, 
walls and roof have remained the same. And in art, that of the 
Greeks sets the highest standard just as it is. But in regard to the 
types of government the situation is quite different: the ancient and 
the modern have no essential principle in common. To be sure, 
there are abstract definitions and doctrines concerning lawful gov­
ernment, to the effect that intelligence and virtue should rule-these 
ideas are certainly shared. Yet nothing is more misguided than to 
look for models among the Greeks, the Romans, or Orientals for 
the constitutional structures of our own time. From Oriental culture 
we have fine pictures of patriarchal conditions, paternalistic govern­
ment, and devotion on the part of peoples; from the Greeks and 
Romans we have descriptions of popular freedom, where the consti­
tution admitted all citizens to participation in the deliberations and 
decisions concerning general affairs and laws. 
This is the general opinion in our time as well-but with the 
modification that since our states are so large and the population so 
multitudinous, the people must express its will, not directly but in-

Freedom, Individual, & State 
5 1  
directly, through its representatives, who contribute to decisions 
concerning public affairs and laws. The so-called representative sys­
tem of government is the logical form to which we link our image 
of a free system, and this link has become a firm prejudice. In it, the 
people are separated from the government. But there is something 
malicious in this antithesis: it is a trick of bad will, suggesting that 
the people are the totality of the state after all. Underlying this idea, 
moreover, is the principle of individuality, the absoluteness of sub­
jective will (which we discussed above) . 
The main point [against this mistake] is that this freedom, as 
defined by its concept, is not based on subjective will and caprice, as 
its principle, but on the insight into the universal will; and that the 
system of freedom is the free development of its elements. Subjec­
tive will is an entirely formal concept, which does not in any way 
entail what it is that is willed. Only the rational will is this universal 
will, which determines and develops itself in itself, and unfolds its 
elements as its organic parts. The ancients knew nothing of this 
"gothic" intellectual architecture of Reason. 
Earlier we set up two elements for consideration: the first was 
the Idea of freedom as the absolute end-goal; the second was the 
means to that end, the subjective aspect in knowing and willing, 
with all their vitality, movement, and activity. Then we went on to 
see the state as the ethical whole and the reality of freedom, and 
hence as the objective unity of both those preceding elements. For 
although we have distinguished the two sides for the purpose of our 
discussion, it must be carefully noted that they cohere together ex­
actly, and that this mutual entailment is to be found in each of the 
two elements when we examine each separately. 
On one hand we have recognized the Idea, in its determinacy, 
as the freedom that knows and wills itself, and has only itself as its 
goal. This is the simple concept of Reason-and at the same time it 
is what we called the subject, self-consciousness, the Spirit as it ex­
ists in the world. If, on the other hand, we consider subjectivity 
itself, we find that the process of subjective knowing and willing is 
[nothing other than] thinking. But insofar as I thoughtfully know 
and will, I will the universal object, the substance of what is in and 
for itself rational. 
Thus we see an intrinsic unification of the objective aspect, the 
concept, with the subjective aspect. The objective existence of this 

52 
Chapter Three 
unification is the state, which is therefore the basis and the center of 
the other concrete aspects of the life of a people-its art, its laws, its 
ethics, its religion, its science. All spiritual activity has this goal 
alone, to make itself aware of this unification, i.e., of its freedom. 
Among the different forms of this conscious unification [com­
bining the objective and the subjective], religion stands at the pinna­
cle. Here the existing worldly Spirit becomes aware of the absolute 
Spirit-and in this consciousness of the essence in and for itself, the 
human will renounces its particular interest. In devotion all this is 
set aside, and there is no longer any concern with particulars. 
Through [acts of] sacrifice we express our renunciation of our prop­
erty, of our will, and of our particular perceptions. The religious 
concentration of mind appears as feeling, yet it also goes over into 
meditation: [active] worship is meditation externalized. 
In art we have the second form of the unification of the objec­
tive and the subjective in Spirit. Art enters more into actuality and 
sense experience than religion does: in its noblest posture, it is there 
to present not the mind of God, of course, but the outer form of 
God, and thus the divine and the spiritual as such. Through art, the 
divine becomes visible: to fantasy and to sight. 
The True, however, does not just achieve representation and 
feeling (as in religion), and the visual (as in art); it also comes to the 
thinking Spirit-and we thereby arrive at the third form of the unifi­
cation: philosophy, the highest, the freest, and the wisest configura­
tion of Spirit. We can not propose to consider these three 
configurations here; all we can do is mention them, since they oc­
cupy the same ground as does the object of our study, the state. 
The universal [dimension] that manifests itself in the state and 
is known in it-the form which is to include all that is-comprises 
the culture of a nation, taken altogether. The specific content, how­
ever, which takes on the form of universality and which inheres in 
the concrete actuality that is the state, is the Spirit of the people 
itself. The actual state is animated by this Spirit in al its particular 
affairs, wars, institutions, etc. But man must also know of this Spirit 
of his, as his own essence, and create for himself the consciousness 
of his own unity with it, a unity that is fundamental. For we said 
that the ethical is the union of the subjective and the universal will. 
Spirit, however, must come to an explicit consciousness of this un­
ion, and the center-point of such knowing is religion. Art and phi-

Freedom, Individual, & State 
53 
losophy are only the different aspects and forms of this same 
content. 
In considering religion, the question is whether it knows the 
True, the Idea, in its division or in its true unity. As the Idea in its 
division, [religion knows] God as the abstractly supreme being, the 
Lord of heaven and earth, above and beyond all else, and excluded 
from human actuality. As the Idea in its unity, [religion knows] 
God as the unity of universal and individual (Einzelne), since in 
Him the individual is seen positively as well, in the idea of the Incar­
nation. Religion is the place wherein a people gives itself the defini­
tion of what it holds to be true. The definition comprises everything 
belonging to the essentiality of the object, and in it the nature of the 
object is reduced to a simple basic determination, as the mirror of all 
determinacy-the universal soul of all particular things. Thus the 
representation of God constitutes the general foundation of a peo­
ple [i.e., of its conscious unity]. 
In this aspect, religion stands in the closest connection to the 
principle of the state. There can be freedom only where individual­
ity (Individualitiit) is recognized as a positive [aspect] of the divine 
being. But there is a further connection between religion and the 
state: on the negative side, secular reality is seen as merely temporal, 
as motivating itself in individual interests (in einzelnen Interessen), 
and therefore as relative and having no justification. Secular reality is 
justified only insofar as its absolute soul, its principle, is justified 
absolutely; and it receives this justification only by being recognized 
as the manifestation of the essence of God. It is for this reason that 
the state rests upon religion. 
In our time we hear this repeated often-that the state rests on 
religion-and most of the time nothing more is meant than that 
God-fearing individuals are more inclined and ready to do their 
duty because obedience to the sovereign and the law is so easily 
linked to the fear of God. Certainly, the fear of God, by placing the 
universal aim above the particular individual, can also turn against 
the latter, * can become fanatical and act against the state, burning 
its buildings and destroying its institutions. So the received opinion 
* This is unclear unless we take "the latter" as a mistaken transcription of 
Hegel's lecture. Obviously, it should read "the former", since it is against 
the state (the universal) that the said actions are taken. [Translator's note.] 

54 
Chapter Three 
is that the fear of God should be moderated and should be held with 
a certain coolness, lest it turn against what is supposed to be pro­
tected and maintained by it, and overwhelm it in a storm. Religion 
has within it at least the possibility of doing just that. 
Having arrived at the correct conviction that the state rests on 
religion, religion can take the position that the state is already there, 
and that in order to maintain the state, religion must be brought 
in-in buckets and bushels-to be impressed on people's minds. It 
is entirely correct that people should be trained in religion, but not 
in something that is not yet there. For when we say that the state is 
founded on religion, that the state has its roots in religion, then we 
mean essentially that religion is prior, and that the state has arisen 
from it and continues to do so. Or, in other words, the state's prin­
ciples must be regarded as valid in and for themselves; and they can 
only be so regarded inasmuch as they are acknowledged to be deter­
minations of the divine nature itself. Thus whatever the nature of 
the shared religion may be, the nature of the state and its structure 
must agree with it. The State has truly arisen from religion in the 
sense that the Athenian or the Roman state, for example, was possi­
ble only in the context of the specific paganism of these peoples; 
similarly, a Catholic state will have a spirit and structure that are 
different from those of a Protestant state. 
That call-that urge and drive-to implant religion in the 
state, could be taken as a cry of fear and distress (as it so often seems 
to be), expressing the danger that religion is about to disappear 
from the state or has already done so. But in that case, the situation 
would be serious, even more serious than the call intends: for in it 
there is the belief that religion can be implanted and inculcated as a 
defense against evil. But religion is not at all such an instrument. As 
an instrument in the production of itself, the self-productive process 
goes far deeper. 
Another and quite opposite foolishness we meet with in our 
own time is that of trying to invent and institute types of govern­
ment without taking account of religion. The Catholic religion ( al­
though like Protestantism, it is a form of Christianity) does not 
ascribe to the state the inherent justice and ethical status that lie in 
the inwardness of the Protestant principle. That sundering of consti­
tutional law from the ethical arises necessarily from the very nature 
of Catholicism, which does not recognize law and the ethical as in-

Freedom, Individual, & State 
55 
dependent, as substantial. But these constitutional principles and in­
stitutions--once they are torn away from inwardness, from the last 
sanctuary of conscience, the quiet place where religion resides--do 
not have an actual [conscious] center, because they remain abstract 
and indefinite. 
Let us now sum up what we have said about the State: The 
vitality of the State in the individual citizens is what we have called 
its ethical life. The laws and institutions of the State are the rights of 
its citizens. Its nature, its soil, its mountains, air, and waters-these 
are their land, their country, their outward properry. The history of 
the state is in their acts, and what their ancestors have achieved be­
longs to the citizens of today and lives in their memory. All of this is 
their possession, just as they are possessed by it, for it constitutes 
their substance, their being. 
Their imagination is filled with al this, and their will is the 
willing of these laws and this country. It is the temporal whole that 
constitutes one being, the Spirit of one people. To it belong the 
individual citizens: each individual is the child of his people, and 
likewise the child of his time (insofar as the state is seen to be in the 
process of developing). No one is left behind by his time, nor can he 
overstep it. This spiritual entity is his very own, and he is its repre­
sentative. It is that context in which he stands, and from which he 
goes forth. Among the Athenians, Athens had a double meaning: 
first, it meant the totality of its institutions; but then also the god­
dess, who displayed the Spirit of the people, its unity. 
This Spirit of a people is a determinate spirit, and it is also 
determined by the historic stage of its development, as we have just 
said. This spirit therefore constitutes the basis and the content of its 
self-consciousness in the various forms of which we have spoken 
[i.e., art, religion, and philosophy]. For in its consciousness of itself, 
Spirit must be objective to itself; and objectivity immediately in­
volves the emergence of differences which subsist as the totality of 
al the differentiated spheres of objective spirit. In the same way, the 
soul exists only insofar as it is an organization of its members, 
which-by taking themselves together in its simple unity-produce 
the soul. Thus the people is one individuality in its essence: in reli­
gion it is pictured, worshipped and enjoyed as God in His essence; 
in art it is displayed in imagery and vision; in philosophy it is recog­
nized and comprehended as thought. Because of the fundamental 

56 
Chapter Three 
identity of their substance, their content and object, these configura­
tions stand in an indissoluble unity with the Spirit of the state. The 
form of the state as we know it can exist only in the context of a 
definite religion-just as only this philosophy and only this art can 
exist in this state. 
Moreover, the determinate National Spirit is only one individ­
ual in the course of world history- for world history is the display­
ing of the divine, the absolute development of Spirit in its highest 
forms. In this sequence of stages, it attains self-consciousness, which 
is its truth. The configurations of these stages are the world-histori­
cal National Spirits-the determinate shapes of their ethical life, 
their form of government, their art, religion, and philosophy. The 
boundless drive of the World Spirit, its irresistible thrust, is toward 
the realization of these stages-for this articulation of stages, to­
gether with their realization, comprise the concept of Spirit. 
World history only shows us how the World Spirit comes 
gradually to the consciousness of truth and the willing of it. This 
consciousness and will dawns in the Spirit; Spirit finds its main 
points, and in the end it arrives at full consciousness. 

Four 
History in its Development 
B
y now we have come to know the abstract characteristics of the 
nature of Spirit, the means it uses to realize its Idea, and the 
form that it takes in the complete realization of its existence: the 
State. What remains to be considered is the course of world history. 
Abstractly considered, historical change has long been under­
stood in general as involving a progress to something better, some­
thing more perfect. Changes in the world of nature-infinitely 
varied as these might be-reflect nothing more than an eternally re­
peated cycle. In nature there is nothing new under the sun, so that 
the many-sided play of natural forms carries with it a certain bore­
dom. Only in the changes that occur in the realm of Spirit is there 
anything new. This appearing of [novelty in] the spiritual realm 
lends man a nature altogether different from that which governs 
merely natural things. In nature, one and the same stable pattern 
reveals itself, and all change reverts to it. Humanity on the other 
hand, has an actual capacity for change, and change for the better, a 
drive toward perfectibility. 
This dynamic principle of development (which puts all change 
under law) has not been well received by religions, such as Catholi­
cism, nor by states which assert it as their genuine right to remain 
static or at least stable. If we do concede the general mutability of 
worldly things such as states, we might, first, make an exception for 
our religion, as the religion of truth; and second, it is always possi­
ble to ascribe changes, revolutions, and the destruction of legitimate 
conditions to the ineptitudes, and especially to the stupidity and evil 
passions of men. Perfectibility, indeed, is something almost as indef­
inite as the concept of mutability in general-it is without purpose 
57 

58 
Chapter Four 
or end, or without a standard for judging change. The notion of 
what is "better," the more perfect condition at which the "perfect­
ible" is to aim, remains quite indeterminate. 
The principle of development also implies that there is an in­
ner determination, an implicitly presupposed ground that is to 
bring itself into existence. In its essence, this formal determination 
is Spirit, which uses world history as its theater, its property, and 
the field of its actualization. Spirit does not toss itself about in the 
external play of chance occurrences; on the contrary, it is that 
which determines history absolutely, and it stands firm against the 
chance occurrences which it dominates and exploits for its own 
purpose. 
Development belongs as well to things in the world of organic 
nature. Their existence does not show itself to be merely passive, 
and subject to external changes. Rather, theirs is an existence that 
proceeds from an immutable inner principle-a simple essence, a 
simple germ at first, which then brings forth differentiations from 
within, so that it becomes involved with other things. Thus natural 
organisms live in a continuous process of change which goes over 
into their opposite, transforming it into the maintenance of the or­
ganic principle and its formation. In this way the organic entity pro­
duces itself, making itself into what it implicitly is. In its 
development the organism produces itself in an unmediated way, 
without opposition or hindrance: nothing can come between the 
concept and its realization, between the implicitly determinate na­
ture of the seed and the adaptation of its existence thereto. 
In the same way, Spirit is only what it makes of itself, and it 
makes itself into what it already is implicitly. * Yet in the realm of 
Spirit, things are entirely different [from things in nature] . The 
transition that is involved in the actualization of Spirit is mediated 
by consciousness and will. To begin with, human consciousness and 
will are immersed in their unmediated natural life; their aim and 
object, at first, is the natural determination as such. But this natural 
determination comes to be infinitely demanding, strong and rich, 
because it is animatied by Spirit. Thus Spirit, within its own self, 
stands in opposition to itself. It must overcome itself as its own 
* In the German text this sentence comes immediately before the preceding 
one. [Translator's note.] 

History in Its Development 
59 
truly hostile hindrance. The process of development, so quiescent in 
the world of nature, is for Spirit a hard and endless struggle against 
itself. What the Spirit wants is to arrive at the concept of itself; but 
it itself hides this concept from itself-and it is even proud and filled 
with joy in this self-estrangement. 
Accordingly, the process of development in the realm of Spirit 
is not the harmless and peaceful progress that it is in the realm of 
organic life. Rather, it is a severe and unwilling working against 
itself. Further, it is not a merely fonnal process of self-development 
in general. Rather, it is the fulfillment of an aim that has a specific 
content. What this aim is we established at the outset: it is Spirit, and 
indeed Spirit in conformity with its essence, the concept of freedom. 
This is the fundamental object, and thus the guiding principle of 
development as well. It is through this principle that the historical 
development receives its sense and meaning. For instance, Rome 
itself is the fundamental object in Roman history, and it is that 
which guides the consideration of all events for Roman historians. 
But that is because the events have proceeded from this object, and 
they only make sense in relation to it, for their content is in it. 
In world history there are many great periods that have 
passed, without any apparent notion of progressive development. 
Their entire accumulation of culture was destroyed, so that every­
thing had to be started again from the beginning, unfortunately, in 
order to reach one of the regions conquered long ago in that cul­
ture-perhaps with the incidental aid of fragments rescued from 
those old treasures, but with a renewed and immeasurable expendi­
ture of time and energy, and even at the cost of crime and suffer­
ing. * But there also are examples of continuing development, of 
cultural structures and systems richly built up in all aspects, and 
with their characteristic elements. The merely formalistic conception 
of development in general can give no preference to one view over 
the other; nor can it conceptualize the purpose in the decline of 
those older periods of development. Instead, it must regard prog­
ress of this kind, or more especially the regression in it, as a series of 
disconnected and external contingencies. That formalistic view of 
development can assess the advances only according to indefinite 
* It seems probable that Hegel is alluding here to the birth of Egyptology. 
[Translator's note.] 

60 
Chapter Four 
criteria--ends which are relative, and not absolute, precisely because 
development as such is the only aim that is taken to be significant. 
[So much, then, for the merely formal or abstract conception of de­
velopment. What about the more concrete and absolute view? Here 
we have a definite aim in sight.] * 
In this perspective, world history presents the stages in the de­
velopment of the principle whose content is the consciousness of 
freedom. The more exact determination of these stages, in their gen­
eral nature, belongs to logic; their concrete nature, however, is for 
the philosophy of spirit to provide. Here it is enough to say that the 
first stage is that immersion of Spirit in natural life which we dis­
cussed; the second stage is the emergence of Spirit into the con­
sciousness of its freedom. But the Spirit's initial tearing away from 
nature is incomplete and only partial, because it issues from the im­
mediacy of nature, and is therefore related to it, so that it is still 
burdened with it as one of its elements. The third stage is the eleva­
tion of Spirit out of this still particular form of freedom into its pure 
universality-into self-consciousness, the feeling of selfhood that is 
the essence of spirituality. These stages are the fundamental princi­
ples of the universal process. But just how each of these stages is 
itself a process of its own formation and the dialectic of its own 
transition in its turn-all that must be left to what follows later. 
Here we can only point out that Spirit begins from its own 
infinite possibility, but only from the possibility (which contains its 
absolute content implicitly). This is the purpose and the goal which 
it attains only as the end result, and which is only then its actuality. 
The process of history thus appears, in its existence, to be an ad­
vance from the imperfect to the more perfect, but one in which the 
imperfect stage is not to be grasped abstractly or merely as that 
which was imperfect, but rather as that which at the same time has 
its own opposite within itself-i.e., it has what is called "perfect" 
within it, as a germ or as the source of its drive. In the same way, 
the possibility points (at least in thought) to that which is to be­
come actual: more precisely the Aristotelian concept of potency 
(dynamis) is also potentia for it is force and power. Thus the imper­
fect, as its own opposite within itself, is the contradiction which 
* This short passage in brackets has been added by the translator. 

History in Its Development 
61 
certainly exists, but which is, by the same token, negated 
(aufgehoben) and resolved. This is the drive, the internal impulse of 
spiritual life, the drive to break through its own shell of naturalness, 
sensuality, and self-estrangement, in order to arrive at the light of 
consciousness, its own selfhood. 
The topic of how the beginning of history is to be conceived 
has generally been linked to the image of a "state of nature"-the 
condition in which perfect freedom and justice are supposed to exist 
or to have existed. Yet its historical existence was merely an assump­
tion made in the twilight of theorizing reflection. There is a preten­
sion of quite another sort that is quite widespread today. It is 
different because it is not an assumption proceeding from thought, 
but is assumed as a historical fact, one that is confirmed by a higher 
sanction. This pretense concerns the primordial condition of man­
kind in Paradise, of which the theologians spoke in their characteris­
tic way in an earlier time (asserting, for example, that God spoke to 
Adam in Hebrew). This view has been taken up again, but it is now 
made to serve other purposes. The high authority invoked here is 
that of the biblical account. But on the one hand this account 
presents the primitive condition only in terms of the few familiar 
traits; and on the other hand it presents it either as belonging to 
human nature in general, or (to the extent that Adam is regarded as 
an individual person, not a type) as manifested and fulfilled only in 
this one person or the primeval pair. 
Yet the biblical account neither justifies us in thinking of an 
entire people existing historically in that primitive situation; nor 
does it in any way justifY the supposition that this people developed 
a pure knowledge of God and nature. According to this fiction, na­
ture, in the beginning, stood as a mirror of God's creation and 
God's truth, open and transparent before the clear eye of man. * 
There is even the suggestion-although this is left in a vague obscu­
rity-that in this primordial condition man was already in posses­
sion of an indefinite but extended knowledge of God's truth, 
directly revealed. All religions are supposed to have developed (in a 
historical sense) out of this primordial condition-although they 
also corrupted and obscured that primordial truth in abortive error 
* Friedrich von Schlegel, Philosophy of History ( 1829) (Bohn's Standard Li­
brary) Vol. I, p. 91. [Translation of author's note.] 

62 
Chapter Four 
and perversity. In all the erroneous mythologies, moreover, there 
are traces to be seen of that primordial source and of those primitive 
religious truths. Hence the investigation of the histories of ancient 
peoples has as its essential concern the task of getting back to the 
point where fragments of that primitive revelation can be met with 
in a greater purity. * 
We have to thank the interest in these investigations for much 
that is valuable. Yet such investigation works directly against itself, 
for it aims only at giving historical verification to what has already 
been presupposed as historical. The supposed condition of man's 
knowledge of God; certain kinds of scientific knowledge (e.g., as­
tronomical knowledge that is fancifully attributed to the Hindus) ;  
the assertion that this condition prevailed at the very beginning of 
history, or that the traditions of the various religions began from 
this knowledge, and developed through a process of degeneration 
and corruption (like that which is pictured in the crudely conceived 
system of emanations, as it is called)-all these are presuppositions 
that have no historical foundation; and as soon as we contrast their 
arbitrary subjective source with the true concept of history, we 
know that they can never achieve one. 
It is only fitting and proper to philosophic contemplation for 
us to take up history at the point where rationality begins to enter 
into worldly existence, not where it is still merely an unrealized pos­
sibility; that is to say, history must begin where rationality makes its 
appearance in consciousness, will, and action. The inorganic exis-
* We have to thank this interest for many valuable discoveries in Oriental 
literature, and for a renewed study of known treasures of ancient Asia-its 
conditions, mythology, religions, and history. In cultivated Catholic coun­
tries, governments have ceased to deny the demands of thought, and have 
felt the need to associate themselves with learning and philosophy. Abbe 
Lamennais has made an eloquent and impressive case for the view that the 
true religion must be universal-i.e., "catholic" in the literal sense-and the 
oldest; and the Congregation in France has worked zealously and diligently 
to make such assertions more than merely the pulpit tirades and authorita­
rian dicta they once were. In particular, attention has been drawn to the 
religion of Buddha-a god/man-whose religion is enormously wide­
spread. The Indian Trimurti [the Hindu "Trinity": Brahma, Vishnu, Siva], 
as well as the Chinese abstraction of the Trinity, have been made clearer in 

History in Its Development 
63 
tence of Spirit-the unconscious ignorance of freedom, of good and 
evil, and hence of laws (or, if you like, the unknowing perfection of 
it)-is not itself an object of history. The natural (and at the same 
time religious) ethics is that of family piety. In a natural society, its 
ethical aspect consists in the fact that the members do not relate to 
one another as individuals of independent will, or as "persons" [i.e., 
as having legal rights and claims against one another]. For this rea­
son, the family is implicitly excluded from the development in 
which history first arises. But when spiritual unity begins to extend 
beyond this circle of feeling and natural love, and arrives at the con­
sciousness of personality, then a dark inflexible center is present, for 
which neither nature nor spirit is open and transparent. They be­
come open and transparent only through the further effort of cul­
ture, which still has far to go before it can form a will that has 
become self-aware. Consciousness alone is what is open in this 
sense-that to which God and anything else can be revealed. Noth­
ing can reveal itself in its truth, and in its intrinsic universality, ex­
cept to a consciousness that is aware of itself. Freedom is nothing 
but the knowing and the willing of substantial universal objects 
such as Right and Law, and the production of a reality that is ade­
quate to them-i.e., the state. 
A people may have lived a long life without having arrived at 
their destination by becoming a state-and they may well have de­
veloped a significant culture in some directions. As we said, this pre­
history lies entirely outside our concern-[ no matter] whether a 
genuine history comes after it, or the people involved never arrived 
at the formation of a state. It is only some twenty-odd years since 
their content. The scholars Abel Remusat and Saint-Martin have under­
taken praiseworthy research in Chinese literature, and have branched out 
into Mongoliari and as far as possible into Tibetan literature. On the other 
hand, Baron von Eckstein, in his journal Le Catholique-adopting superfi­
cial physical concepts from Germany and imitating Friedrich von Schlegel's 
manner of interpretation, although in a more clever way-has furthered the 
cause of this primordial Catholicism. In particular, however, he also gained 
government support for scholars to journey to the Orient in search of 
treasures that may still be hidden. These promise to reveal much about the 
deeper doctrines, and especially about the greater antiquity and sources of 
Buddhism-thus to promote the cause of Catholicism by these indirect 
means, however interesting they might be to scholars. [Author's note.] 

64 
Chapter Four 
the great discovery of Sanskrit, with its connection to European lan­
guages. This discovery-amounting to a new world-has given us a 
view of the tie between the Germanic [i.e., European] and the In­
dian peoples, with as much certainty as can be demanded in such 
matters. Hence we now know of peoples who had hardly formed a 
society, much less a state, but who are known to have existed for a 
long time. And there are others, whose civilized condition must in­
terest us above al, but whose tradition goes back beyond the history 
of the state's founding; and they must have undergone many 
changes prior to that epoch. The just-mentioned linguistic connec­
tion between peoples so widely separated demonstrates, as an incon­
testable fact, the dispersion of these peoples from their Asian center, 
and at the same time the disparate development of cultures that are 
related by a primeval kinship. This conclusion was not arrived at by 
means of the favorite method of combining all sorts of circum­
stances, big and little, and drawing inferences from them-a 
method that has enriched (and will continue to enrich) history with 
so many fictions put out as facts. But this great event, with its far­
reaching consequences, lies outside history, having happened before 
history began. 
In German, the term for "history'' (Geschichte) is derived from 
the verb "to happen" (geschehen). Thus the term combines the objec­
tive and the subjective sides: it denotes the actual events (in Latin, 
res gestae) as well as the narration of the events (in Latin, historiam 
rerum gestarum). This union of the two meanings must be regarded 
as something of a higher order than mere chance. We must there­
fore say that the narration of history is born at the same time as the 
first actions and events that are properly historical. A shared inner 
source produces history in both senses at the same time. Family 
memories and patriarchal traditions have an interest that is confined 
to the family and tribe. The uniform course of events (in tribal tradi­
tion) is not the proper matter for historical recollection. But distinc­
tive deeds or turns of fate may rouse the muse of memory 
(Mnemosyne) to give shape to its images-just as love and religious 
emotions provoke the imagination into giving form to impulses that 
had been formless. 
It is the state, however, which first presents a subject matter 
that is entirely appropriate to the prose of history; indeed, the state 
creates it as it creates itself. Instead of the subjective orders that suf-

History in Its Development 
65 
fice for the needs of a ruling power at a given moment, a commun­
ity that is in the process of shaping itself into a state requires rules, 
laws, universal and universally binding directives. And as it pro­
duces them it also produces an intelligent and definite record of 
(and interest in) actions and events whose results are lasting. Mne­
mosyne is thereby driven to give enduring remembrance to them, in 
the interest of the permanent purposes that are characteristic of the 
state as it forms. Deeper emotions generally-such as love and reli­
gious vision, together with their inner imagery-have an [eternal] 
presence and reward in themselves. The state, however, in the exter­
nal existence of its rational laws and customs, is only incompletely 
present. For an integrated understanding of itself it needs a con­
sciousness of the past. 
The time periods-whether we think of centuries or of millen­
nia-that have elapsed for peoples before the writing of history, 
may have been filled with revolutions, migrations, the wildest 
changes. But these peoples are without an objective history, because 
they have produced no subjective historical narratives. If the ac­
counts are missing it is not because they have accidentally disap­
peared, but because they never could have existed. Only in the state, 
with the consciousness of laws, are there clear actions-and with 
them the clarity of consciousness having the capability and the need 
to preserve them. Everyone who begins to become acquainted with 
the treasures of Indian literature finds it striking that this land-so 
rich in the most profound spirituality-has no history. In this re­
spect it contrasts most vividly with China, an empire which pos­
sesses such excellent historical records, going back to the earliest 
times. 
Not only does India have ancient religious texts and brilliant 
works of poetry, but ancient codes of law-the very thing that was 
set down just now as a precondition in the formation of history­
and yet it has no history. The organizing impulse that led to social 
differentiation was immediately ossified into caste distinctions inter­
preted as determinations of nature. Thus, although the laws concern 
civil rights, the rights themselves are made to depend on the natural 
distinctions. They are concerned, above all, with the reciprocal pre­
rogatives of these social classes-in terms of higher against lower, 
and of wrongs rather than rights. As a result, the ethical element is 
excluded from the splendor of Indian life and from its realms. Due 

66 
Chapter Four 
to the unfreedom arising from the natural permanence of the caste 
system, the cohesion of society is nothing but wild arbitrariness­
fleeting activity or rather blind rage-without any goal for progress 
or development. Hence there is no thoughtful remembrance, no ob­
ject there for Mnemosyne. And although there is a deeper fantasy, it 
is still wild; but to be capable of having a history this fantasy would 
have to have a purpose that relates both to the actual world and to 
substantial freedom. 
Because this is the precondition of history, much has hap­
pened without giving rise to history: the rich and immense 
growth of families into tribes, of tribes into nations; their conse­
quent spread, along with so many complications, wars, revolu­
tions, decline-all occurring with much noise and clamor, 
although all has remained in effect silent and has passed by stealth­
ily, unnoticed. 
A fact established by the study of ancient inscriptions is that 
the languages spoken by peoples in their crude stage were highly 
elaborate. Human understanding threw itself into this theoretical 
field, and developed itself thoroughly and intelligently. [The results 
are] extended and consistent systems of language that reflect the 
work of thought as it develops its categories. It is also a fact that 
with the advance of civilization, and the growth of society and the 
state, language becomes poorer and cruder as this systematic work 
of the understanding is worn away. It is a peculiar phenomenon that 
the progress toward greater spirituality and rationality should neg­
lect that intellectual exactitude and comprehensibility, finding it 
burdensome and superfluous. 
Language is the activity of theoretical intelligence in the true 
sense, since it is the outward expression of it. Without language, the 
activities of recollection and imagination are initially just internal 
utterances. * But this activity of theoretical intelligence, along with 
its further development and the more concrete events connected 
with it-the dispersion of peoples, their separation from one an­
other, their intermingling and wandering-all of it remains 
wrapped in the obscurity of a mute past. These are not the acts of a 
* Here we have accepted the reading given in Hegel's manuscript as printed 
by Hoffmeister. Karl Hegel's text reads: "immediate utterances [or manifes­
tations]." [Translator's note.] 

History in Its Development 
67 
will becoming self-conscious, nor of a freedom that is expressing 
itself in the otherness of a genuinely external actuality. Since they do 
not participate in this genuine element of freedom, these peoples do 
not achieve any history, in spite of their linguistic development. The 
premature growth of language, and the progress and dispersion of 
nations, have gained significance and interest for concrete historical 
Reason only in connection with states or with the beginnings of 
state formation. 
After these remarks on the beginnings of world history and the 
prehistory that is excluded from it, we must go on to consider the 
course of history more closely, though only in its formal aspect. The 
further delineation of its concrete content will be dealt with in the 
chapter on the division of history. 
World history, as we saw, presents the development of con­
sciousness, the development of Spirit's consciousness of its freedom, 
and the actualization that is produced by that consciousness. This 
development entails a gradual process, a series of further determina­
tions of freedom, that arise from the concept of world history. The 
logical nature, and moreover the dialectical nature of the concept in 
general is that it is self-determining: it posits determinations in it­
self, then negates them, and thereby gains in this negation 
(Aufheben) an affirmative, richer, and more concrete determination. 
This necessity, and the necessary series of the purely abstract deter­
minations of the concept, is dealt with in logic. Here we need only 
make the point that every stage has its own definite characteristic 
principle, and so it differs from the others. 
In history, any such principle is a distinct differentiation of 
Spirit-the particular Spirit of a People (Volksgeist). In this particu­
larity, Spirit expresses in concrete ways all the aspects of its con­
sciousness and will, its entire reality: the shared stamp of its religion, 
its political system, its ethics, its system of law, its customs, as well 
as its science, art, and technology. These special characteristics are to 
be understood in the light of the universal character that is the par­
ticular principle of a people. Conversely, that specifically universal 
character has to be sought in the factual details presented by a peo­
ple's history. 
That a distinct particularity actually constitutes the charac­
teristic principle of a people-this is the aspect which must be 
taken up empirically, and be demonstrated by historical means. 

68 
Chapter Four 
The performance of this task presupposes not only a practiced 
faculty of abstraction, but also a close familiarity with the Idea. 
One must be familiar with the entire circle of its principles on an a 
priori basis, as one might say. Thus-to name the greatest man in 
this a priori mode of cognition-Kepler had to have a priori ac­
quaintance with ellipses, cubes, and squares, and with the theory 
of how they are related, before he could invent-from empirical 
data-his immortal laws consisting of determinations of those 
concepts. One who is ignorant of the elementary concepts of that 
science could no more understand those laws than he could invent 
them-no matter how long he stared at the heavens and the move­
ments of the stars. 
Objections have been raised against the philosophic considera­
tion of a science that regards itself as empirical, objections against 
the so-called a priori approach: importing ideas into the empirical 
stuff of history, etc. But these objections stem from a similar unfa­
miliarity with the theoretical structure of the self-development of 
freedom. Such ideas then appear as something alien, something that 
has no place in historical objectivity. For one whose personal culture 
has not made him familiar with pure thought, it certainly is strange, 
for it is not to be found in the imagination or the understanding 
shaped by this ignorance of the matter. It is this ignorance that pro­
duces the statement that philosophy does not understand sciences 
such as history. And philosophy must indeed admit that it does not 
have the sort of understanding that prevails in such sciences, and 
that it does not operate according to the categories of that kind of 
understanding. Instead, it proceeds according to the categories of 
Reason, whereby it knows the true value and status of that under­
standing. But in the process of scientific understanding as well, it is 
necessary to separate the essential from the so-called inessential, and 
to give it proper emphasis. For this to be possible, however, one 
must be acquainted with what is essential. But what is essential in 
world history, when it is seen as a totality, is the consciousness of 
freedom, and the determinations of that consciousness in freedom's 
development. To direct attention toward this category is to direct it 
at what is truly essential. 
Particular instances are sometimes cited, in order to contradict 
a universal conception. [Thus, one might point to instances of irra­
tionality to contradict the principle that reason rules the world; or 

History in Its Development 
69 
instances of unfreedom to contradict the view that history is the 
development of freedom.] * But this is usually due, in part, to an 
inability to grasp and understand theoretical ideas. In natural his­
tory, a monstrosity, an unfortunate example of mongrel growth, 
might be brought in as an instance against the notion of clearly dis­
tinguished species and classes. But then we might rightly apply a 
saying, which is often uttered in a vague sense, that the exception 
proves the rule. That is to say, it is for the rule to show the condi­
tions in which it applies, and to point to the deficiency, the hybrid­
ism in any deviation from the normal. 
Nature, in its weakness, cannot maintain its general classes and 
species against other elementary influences. Thus, for example, we 
might think of the concrete organization of the human being, and 
say that a brain and a heart, etc., are essential in order for organic 
life to go on in a human; and then a wretched abortion might be 
brought up as a counter-example, something that has a human form 
(in general or in part), and which was produced in a human body, 
lived in it and breathed after it was born, but there is no brain in it 
and no heart. If we imagine such an instance being brought as a 
counter-example to the concept of the general structure of the 
human being (using that latter term in only the most superficial 
sense), then we can certainly say that a real, concrete human being is 
something different: it must have a brain in its head and a heart in 
its breast. 
Similarly, it may rightly be said that genius, talent, moral vir­
tues and feelings, piety-all can occur anywhere, in al political sys­
tems and conditions; and that there are abundant examples of this. 
If such assertions are meant to deny that these distinctions are im­
portant or essential, then thought has become stuck in abstract cate­
gories and is disregarding their specific content. Of course, no 
distinguishing principles for any such specific content are to be 
found in these abstract categories. The sophisticated mind that 
adopts formal points of view of this kind, enjoys a vast field for 
ingenious questions, erudite views, and striking comparisons, and 
for seemingly profound reflections and declarations-which can be­
come al the more brilliant the vaguer their subject; and they can be 
* This sentence was insened by the translator. 

70 
Chapter Four 
varied and renewed over and over, in inverse proportion to the cer­
tainty and rationality that results from them. 
In this sense, the well-known Indian epics can be compared 
with those of Homer-and can even be regarded as superior to 
them, if the wealth of fantasy is taken as an indication of poetic 
genius. And on the basis of the similarity of some fantastic features 
of individual deities, one might recognize certain figures of Greek 
mythology in those of Indian mythology. Along similar lines, Chi­
nese philosophy, by taking the concept of the One as its basis, has 
been held to be the same as the monistic philosophy of the Eleatics 
and the system of Spinoza. Further, its way of expressing itself in 
terms of abstract numbers and lines has led some commentators to 
see Pythagorean as well as Christian elements in Chinese philos­
ophy. Examples of bravery, enduring fortitude, traits of generosity, 
of self-denial and self-sacrifice-to be found among the most savage 
as well as the most weak-spirited nations-are taken as sufficient 
grounds for the view that there is as much public virtue and private 
morality to be found in these nations as in the most civilized of 
Christian countries, or even more. 
In this regard, doubt has been raised as to whether human 
beings have become better at all through the progress of history and 
civilization, whether their morality has improved: i.e., insofar as 
morality is seen to be based only on subjective intention and insight, 
on whatever the acting individual sees as right or wrong, good or 
evil-not on a principle concerning what is right and good, bad and 
evil, in and for itself (or on the basis of a religion regarded as being 
true). 
We can spare ourselves the trouble of illustrating the bare for­
malism and error of such a view, and of establishing the true princi­
ples of morality (or rather, of ethics) against this false morality. For 
world history moves on a higher level than that on which morality 
properly exists. (We shall take morality to refer to private sentiment, 
the conscience of individuals, their own personal wills and modes of 
action. These have their own independent value, responsibility, re­
ward or punishment.) Whatever it is that is demanded and achieved 
by the end-goal of Spirit, in and for itself, whatever it is that Provi­
dence does-all this transcends the obligations, the imputation of 
motives, the demands, etc., that fall upon individuals in regard to 
their ethical conduct. 

History in Its Development 
7l 
There are those who, on ethical grounds and with nobler feel­
ing, have resisted what the progress of the Idea of Spirit has made 
necessary. They stand higher in moral worth than those whose 
crime has-in the higher order [of historic Providence ]-been 
turned into a [mere] means to motivate the will toward that higher 
order. But in upheavals of this sort, both parties generally stand 
within the same circle of corruptibility; so it is thus only a formal 
right-abandoned by the living Spirit and by God-that is defended 
by those who regard themselves as formally justified. 
The deeds
, 
of the great men who are the individual agents of 
world history thus appear justified not only in the inner significance 
(of which they are unaware), but also from the standpoint of world 
history itself. But seen from this standpoint, moral claims must not 
be raised against world-historical acts and those who do them, as 
those claims do not apply here. The litany of private virtues-mod­
esty, humility, love of humanity, charity-must not be raised against 
them. World history could altogether ignore the circle comprising 
morality and the oft-mentioned difference between morality and 
politics. Not only could it abstain from making moral judgments 
(since the principles involved in world history, and the necessary 
relations of actions to these principles, are already the judgment in 
itself). It could also leave individuals entirely out of view and un­
mentioned. What world history has to record, rather, are the actions 
of the Spirit of peoples. The individual configurations assumed by 
Spirit in external reality could be left to limited histories, rather than 
to world history. 
The same sort of formalism [as that of the "subjective" moral­
ity discussed four paragraphs back] latches on to vague ideas about 
genius, poetry, and philosophy, and in similar fashion finds them 
everywhere and in all things. These vague ideas are the products of 
intellectual reflection. There is a general culture in such generalities, 
which bring out and designate essential differences with some dex­
terity, but without getting into the true depth of things; yet it is 
something formal, in the sense that it aims only at breaking things 
down into their component parts (regardless of their content) and 
at grasping them in intellectual definitions and forms. This is not 
the free universality which must on its own account be made an 
object of consciousness. 

72 
Chapter Four 
This kind of consciousness-directed at thought itself and at 
its forms in isolation from all matter-is philosophy, which certainly 
has general culture as the precondition of its existence. But this gen­
eral culture is the capacity to take up the given content and endow it 
with the form of universality, so that it possesses both-form and 
content-as an inseparable whole. Form and content are so insepa­
rable that a culture may regard its content as merely given, empiri­
cal, as "there"-as though thought had no part in it. But in the 
analysis of an idea into a multitude of ideas, the content is enlarged 
into an immeasurable abundance. And it is just as much an act of 
thought (and indeed of the understanding) to take an object which 
is of itself concrete and rich in content, and make it into a simple 
idea (such as Earth, Man, or Alexander and Caesar), designated by a 
single word-as it is to analyze the idea into its parts, to isolate 
them, and to give those parts particular names. 
It follows, therefore, that just as philosophic reflection brings 
forth the generalities of genius, talent, art, and science, so formal 
culture-at every stage of intellectual development-not only can 
but must grow and reach full bloom, when a given stage of develop­
ment forms itself into a state. On this foundation of civilization the 
cultural whole advances to intellectual reflection and to forms of 
universality in every other sphere, just as it does in constitutional 
law. Civil life, as such, entails the necessity of formal culture and 
with this rise of the sciences, as well as cultivated poetry and art in 
general. Everything included under the heading of plastic arts re­
quires (if only in its technological aspect) the shared civilized life of 
a human community. The poetic art-having less need of external 
means, and having the voice (the element of Spirit's immediate exis­
tence) as its medium-emerges with great boldness and cultured ex­
pression, even before a people is united into a civil life. As we 
remarked earlier, this is because language reaches a high level of in­
tellectual development long before civilization. 
Philosophy, too, must make its appearance in the life of the 
state. For the process through which a content becomes the stuff of 
culture is the proper form of thought, as we just said; and so philos­
ophy (which is only the consciousness of this form itself, the think­
ing of thinking) has the characteristic material that it needs for its 
own edifice available in the general culture. In the development of 
the state itself, there must be periods when spirits of a nobler nature 

History in Its Development 
73 
are driven to flee from the present into ideal regions, in order to find 
there the reconciliation with themselves that they can no longer en­
joy in the divided world. At such times, the reflective understanding 
attacks everything holy and profound that has been naively embed­
ded in the religion, the laws and customs of a people-it flattens and 
dissipates everything in abstract godless generalities. At such a time, 
thought is driven to become thinking reason, in order to attempt 
the restoration [of substantial truth] in its own element, out of the 
corruption to which it has been brought. 
Thus, among al world-historical peoples we are certain to find 
the art of poetry, the plastic arts, science, and philosophy. They dif­
fer, however, not only in style and general direction, but even more 
in content; and this content affects the highest mode of difference­
that of the rationality involved. It is of no help when some preten­
tious aesthetic criticism insists that what ought to please us in these 
things is not the material aspect, the substantial aspect of content­
but rather that it is the beautiful form as such, the greatness of the 
imagination and the like, which is the real goal of fine art; and that 
it is this that ought to be regarded and enjoyed by persons of liberal 
feeling and cultivated mind. Sound common sense, however, does 
not admit such abstractions and does not take to works of that kind. 
For instance, one might put the Indian epics on a par with the Ho­
meric ones, for any number of such formal characteristics: the great­
ness of invention and imagination, the vitality of imagery and 
feeling, the beauty of diction. But there still remains the infinite dif­
ference of content. This, then, is what is substantial here, along with 
the interest of Reason, which aims directly at the consciousness of 
the concept of freedom and its imprinting in the individual citizens. 
Not only is there a classic form; there is also a classic content. 
Moreover, in a work of art we see form and content so closely 
bound together, that the form can be classic only insofar as the con­
tent is classic. In the case of a fantastic content which does not set 
limits for itself -and it is the rational in itself that imposes measure 
and aim-the form also loses all measure and form, or else it be­
comes petty and painfully restricted. Similarly, in the equating of 
those philosophical systems that we mentioned earlier, what is over­
looked is the one important point: namely, the nature of the unity 
and difference to be found in the Chinese, the Eleatic, and the Spin­
ozistic philosophies. Is that unity to be grasped as abstract or as 

74 
Chapter Four 
concrete, and does the concreteness go so far as to become a unity in 
itself, so that it is Spirit? Putting these philosophies on a par just 
shows that the critic is only aware of the abstract unity; and who­
ever offers a judgment based on such an equation is ignorant of just 
what constitutes the interest of philosophy. 
But there are also spheres of culture that remain the same, de­
spite all the variety in their substantive content (in art, science, and 
philosophy). This cultural variety concerns the thinking Reason and 
freedom-the freedom which is the self-consciousness of Reason 
and which shares the same root with thought. Just as it is only the 
human being that thinks, and not the animal, so it is only the 
human being that has freedom; and then only because he is capable 
of thinking. His [thinking] consciousness entails this: that the indi­
vidual comprehends himself as a person; i.e., that he grasps himself 
as intrinsically universal in his very singularity, as capable of abstrac­
tion, of renouncing all particularity, and hence as being inherently 
infinite. Thus, spheres that are outside this individual understanding 
provide a shared basis for those substantive cultural differences. Mo­
rality itself, which is so closely dependent on the individual con­
sciousness of freedom, can be very pure despite the absence of that 
subjective consciousness: that is, insofar as it expresses only the gen­
eral duties and rights of the agent as objective commandments; or, 
also, insofar as it remains something merely negative, that involves 
the merely formal elevation [of consciousness], and the surrender of 
the sensuous and of all sensuous motives. 
Chinese morality has received the greatest praise and appre­
ciative recognition from Europeans committed to Christian mo­
rality, ever since they first became acquainted with Chinese 
morality and with the writings of Confucius. In the same way 
there is recognition of the sublimity with which Indian religion 
and poetry (of the higher sort), and especially its philosophy, de­
clare and demand that the sensuous must be set aside and sacri­
ficed. Yet both these nations, it must be said, are entirely lacking 
in the essential consciousness of the concept of personal freedom. 
To the Chinese, their moral laws are like the laws of nature, ex­
pressed as external positive commands, compulsory rights and du­
ties, or rules of courtesy toward one another. What is missing is 
the element of freedom, through which alone the substantive de­
terminations of Reason become moral conviction in the individ-

History in Its Development 
75 
ual. Morality, for them, is a matter for the state to rule on, and is 
handled by government officials and the courts. Their works on 
the topic (those which are not books of law but are rather directed 
at the subjective will and disposition) read like the moral writings 
of the Stoics: they offer a series of commandments which are nec­
essary to the goal of happiness, so that the individual can arbitrar­
ily decide to follow them or not; and, as in the Stoic moralists, 
there is the representation of the abstract subject, the sage, who 
stands as the culmination of Chinese moral doctrine. And in the 
Indian teaching about the renunciation of sensuality, the renuncia­
tion of desires and earthly interests, the aim and end is not affirm­
ative ethical freedom, but rather the negating of consciousness-in 
mental and even physical lifelessness. 
The concrete Spirit of a people-that is what we must come to 
know directly. And since it is Spirit it can only be known in spirirual 
terms, or through thought. It is Spirit alone that asserts itself in all 
the actions and tendencies of a people; it brings itself to its own acru­
alization, to self-enjoyment and self-knowledge, for it is concerned 
with the production of itself. The highest achievement of Spirit, how­
ever, is to know itself, to bring itself not only to the sight of itself but 
also to the thought of itself. This it must accomplish and will accom­
plish. But this accomplishment of Spirit is at the same time its de­
cline-to make way for another Spirit to come forward, another 
world-historical people, another epoch of world history. This transi­
tion and connection leads us to the interconnectedness of the whole, 
to the concept of world history as such. This we must now examine 
more closely, and give a presentation of it. 
World history in general is thus the unfolding of Spirit in 
time, as narure is the unfolding of the Idea in space. 
If we then cast a glance at world history in general, we see an 
enormous picrure of actions and changes, of infinitely varied forma­
tions of peoples, states, individuals-in restless succession. Every­
thing that can enter the mind of man and interest him-all feeling 
for the good, the beautiful, the great-everything has its part to 
play. On all sides, aims which we recognize are taken up and pur­
sued, aims whose accomplishment we wish for, hope for, fear for. In 
al these events and chance occurrences we see human activity and 
suffering uppermost; everywhere there is something we appropriate 
and make our own, thus rurning our interest toward or against a 

76 
Chapter Four 
thing. At times we are drawn to something by beauty, by freedom 
and the wealth of possibilities; at other times by the energy through 
which even vice can make itself significant. At times we see the more 
comprehensive mass of a general interest advancing slowly, only to 
see it utterly destroyed by an infinite complex of trifling circum­
stances. Then again we see tremendous forces producing small re­
sults, and enormous results following from seemingly insignificant 
causes. But everywhere the most variegated crush of events draws us 
into its sphere of interest; and when one such interest disappears, 
another immediately takes its place. 
This restless succession of individuals and peoples that are here 
for a time and then disappear suggests one general thought, one 
category above all, that of universally prevalent change. And what 
leads us to apprehend this change in its negative aspect is the sight 
of the ruins of some vanished splendor. What traveler, amidst the 
ruins of Carthage, Palmyra, Persepolis, or Rome, has not been led 
to contemplate the transiency of empires and of men, and to sorrow 
at a once vigorous and rich life that is now gone? This is not a sor­
row that dwells upon personal losses and the transiency of one's 
own aims; instead, it is a disinterested sorrow at the decline of a 
radiant and cultured life. 
But the next consideration that is linked to that of change is 
that this decline is at the same time the emergence of new life-for 
although life leads to death, death also leads to life. This is a great 
thought which the Orientals have grasped, and it is perhaps the 
highest thought in their metaphysics. This thought relates to the 
individual in the idea of the soul's reincarnation. But in relation to 
natural life in general, the idea is more familiar in the image of the 
Phoenix, continually preparing its own funeral pyre and being con­
sumed on it, so that a new, rejuvenated, and fresh life continually 
arises from its ashes. This image, however, is only Asiatic-it is 
Eastern, not Western. When Spirit consumes the outer shell of its 
existence, it does not merely go over into another shell, and it does 
not merely arise rejuvenated from the ashes of its embodiment; in­
stead, it emerges as a purer Spirit, exalted and transfigured. It does, 
indeed, go against itself, and consume its own existence. But in so 
doing, it reworks that existence, so that whatever went before is the 
material for what comes after, as its labor elevates it into a new 
form. 

History in Its Development 
77 
If we consider Spirit in this aspect-recognizing that its 
changes are not merely rejuvenating transitions returning to the 
same form, but rather elaborations of its own self, through which it 
multiplies the material for its own endeavors-then we can see how 
Spirit tests itself in any number of directions, exercising and en­
joying itself in an inexhaustible variety of ways. Each of the cre­
ations, in which Spirit has already achieved satisfaction, becomes 
raw material for it once more, and so presents a new challenge for 
elaboration. Thus the abstract thought of change transforms itself 
into the thought of Spirit, manifesting, developing, and perfecting 
its powers in al aspects of its full realization. We experience all the 
powers it possesses in itself, in the variety of its products and con­
figurations. In the joy of this activity, Spirit has only itself to deal 
with. It is, of course, involved with the conditions of nature, inter­
nal as well as external, but it does not merely encounter opposition 
and obstacles in them; it will often see its ventures fail because of 
natural conditions, and succumb to the resulting complications, 
through its own fault or nature's. But it perishes then through its 
own vocation and functioning-and thus it still presents the specta­
cle of having proven itself to be spiritual activity. 
It is the essence of Spirit to act, to make itself explicitly into 
what it already is implicitly-to be its own deed, and its own work. 
Thus it becomes the object of its own attention, so that its own 
existence is there for it to be conscious of. That is the case with the 
Spirit of a people too: it is a definite Spirit, one that builds itself up 
into an entire world, which subsists and persists, here and now, in 
its religion, its forms of worship, its customs, its form of govern­
ment and political laws, in the entire scope of its institutions, its 
deeds and events. This is its work-it is what this people is. A peo­
ple is what its deeds are. Every Englishman will say: We are the ones 
who go down to the sea in ships; ours is the commerce of the 
world, ours is India and its wealth; we are the ones who have a 
parliament, a jury system, etc. 
The relation of the individual to the Spirit of a people is such 
that he appropriates to himself this substantive being, so that it be­
comes his character and capability, enabling him to be something in 
the world. The individual discovers the being of his people as a firm 
world, already there, into which he must incorporate himself. The 

78 
Chapter Four 
Spirit of a people itself rejoices and finds its satisfaction in this work, 
its world. 
A people is ethical, virtuous, and strong, insofar as it brings 
forth what it wills, defending what it does against external force in 
the work of objectifYing itself. The dichotomy between what a peo­
ple is in itself (subjectively) in its inner purpose and essence, and 
what it actually is, is then removed: it is at home and self-sufficient, 
and it is there for itself (objectively). But then this activity of Spirit 
is no longer needed, because it has what it wants: a people can still 
do much in peace and war, internally and externally, but the living 
substantial soul is, as it were, no longer active; the fundamental, or 
the highest, interest has now gone out of life-for there is interest 
only where there is opposition. 
The people lives (at this stage) like an individual passing from 
manhood to old age, enjoying himself in being exactly what he 
wanted to be and could be. If his imagination once went beyond 
this, he gave up any such aim because it did not suit reality, and he 
restricted his aim accordingly. Habit (like the watch wound up and 
going by itself) is what brings on natural death. Habit is activity 
without opposition: only formal duration is left to it, in which the 
fullness and depth of one's purpose no longer needs to be given 
voice--one leads an external sensory existence, so to speak, no 
longer immersed in the object. In this way, individuals as well as 
peoples die a natural death. And although a people may go on ex­
isting, it is an existence without life or interest, without need of its 
institutions because the need has been satisfied-a political nullity 
and boredom. For a truly universal interest to arise, the Spirit of a 
people must come to the point of wanting something new. But 
where could this new thing or purpose come from? It would be as if 
the people had a higher, more universal idea of itself, going beyond 
its present principle-but in this there would be a new and more 
determinate principle, a new Spirit. 
Such a new principle does indeed come into the Spirit of a peo­
ple which has attained its actualization and fulfillment. That Spirit 
does not die a merely natural death, since it is not merely a single 
individual but is a universal spiritual life. What appears in it as a natu­
ral death is closer to being national suicide. The reason why it is dif­
ferent from the case of the single natural individual is that the Spirit 
of a people exists as a genus or type, i.e., as a universal, and so its 

History in Its Development 
79 
negative dimension comes to exist within it, in its very universality. A 
people can die a violent death only when it is already naturally dead 
within itself-as, for example, in the case of the German Imperial 
cities of the Holy Roman Empire, or the German Imperial system. 
The universal Spirit does not die a merely natural death at all. 
It does not simply subside into the senility of habit. On the con­
trary, because it is the Spirit of a people and a part of world history, 
it also comes to know what its special work is, and so to think of 
itself in that light. For it is only world-historical at all insofar as a 
universal principle is seated in its basic element, its basic goal. Only 
to that extent is the work which such a Spirit produces an ethical 
and political organization. If [natural] desires are what drive the 
peoples to their actions, then the actions vanish without a trace--Dr 
rather, the traces left are in corruption and ruin. 
Thus (according to Greek mythology) it was Chronos (Time) 
who ruled first-in that golden age, without ethical works-and what 
was produced, the children of Time, were devoured by time. Only 
Zeus-from whose head Athene was born, and whose circle included 
Apollo and the Muses-conquered Time and set a goal to its passing. 
Zeus is the political God who produced an ethical work, the state. 
The universality of a work is itself entailed in its element, as a 
determinate dimension, the dimension of thought. Unless thought 
is its basis, the work has no objectivity. The highest point in the 
culture of a people, then, is this thought-the thought of its life and 
condition, its laws, its system of rights and its ethical way of life, all 
seen in a scientific light. For in this unity (of the inner and the outer 
dimensions: inner thought and outer culture) there is that inner­
most unity in which Spirit can be at home with itself. The concern 
of Spirit in its work is to have itself as its own object. But it is only 
by thinking itself that Spirit has itself as object in its most essential 
nature. 
At the level of thought, therefore, Spirit knows its own princi­
ples, the universal dimension of its actions. But at the same time this 
work of thought, as universal, is different in form from the actual 
workings of culture and from the effective life through which this 
work of culture has come into being. This dichotomy involves an 
ideal existence as well as a real existence. For example, if we want to 
arrive at a general representation and thought of what the ancient 
Greeks were, we shall find it in Sophocles and Aristophanes, in Thu-

80 
Chapter Four 
cydides and Plato. These are the individuals in whom the Greek 
Spirit has apprehended itself in representation and thought. This is 
the deeper satisfaction of Spirit, although it is also ideal and thus 
distinct from what is effectively real. 
In such a time, therefore, we necessarily see a people finding 
satisfaction in the idea of virtue: and its talk about virtue is in part 
associated with actual virtue itself; but in part the talk of virtue takes 
the place of it. But just because it is universal, the simple universal 
thought knows how to relate to what is particular, and what has not 
been reflected upon-faith, trust, ethical custom-and to make 
thought about them lead to reflection about itself and its own sim­
ple immediacy. In that way it shows up the unreflected life for its 
limited content. For, on the one hand, that simple thought can give 
reasons for denying its obligations; and on the other, it can also 
demand to be given reasons that cohere logically with universal 
thinking-and not finding them, it seeks to make out that duty itself 
is unfounded and shaky. 
In this time of critical enlightenment there comes the isolation 
of individuals from one another, and from the community as a 
whole; the individual's destructive selfishness and vanity break in with 
the search for personal advantage and satisfaction at the expense of 
the whole. But in addition to this subjectivity of content, the divisive 
inner principle is also subjective in form: egoism and corruption 
through the gratification of unstrung passions and self-interest. 
Thus Zeus set a limit to the devouring activity of Time and 
stayed its transience by establishing something of lasting value-the 
State. Yet Zeus and his race were themselves devoured by that pro­
ductive principle itself: the principle of thought and of cognition, 
the principle of knowledge, of reasoning, of insight based on rea­
sons and on the demand for reasons [all of which undermined cus­
tomary obedience to the gods in the course of history].* 
Time is the negative element in the sensory world: thought is 
this same negativity; but it is the innermost infinite form itself 
wherein everything that exists is, in principle, dissolved-and chiefly 
the finite being, the determinate form. But the existent is in princi­
ple determined as objective; and therefore it appears as something 
* The phrase in brackets was added by the translator. 

History in Its Development 
81 
given and immediate, as authority. It subsists either as finite and 
limited in its content, or as a limit for the thinking subject and its 
infinite reflection in itself. 
But first we must note that the life that proceeds from death is 
only another individual life once more; and if the species is seen as 
the substantial element in this alternation, then the death of the in­
dividual is a regression of the species into individuality. In this light 
the preservation of the species is only in the uniform repetition of 
the same mode of existence. 
And secondly, we must note that cognition-which is the 
thoughtful apprehension of being-is the source and birthplace of a 
new form, a higher form whose principle is in part to preserve, in 
part to transfigure its material. This is because thought is the univer­
sal, the species which does not die but retains its self-identity. The 
determinate form of Spirit does not merely pass away naturally in 
time, but is negated (au.fiJehoben) in the self-activating, self-reflecting 
activity of self-consciousness. Since this negation is an activity of 
thought, it is (at one and the same time) a preservation and a 
transfiguration. 
Thus on one hand, Spirit negates the reality, the subsistence of 
whatever it is; and on the other hand it gains the essence, the 
thought, the universal concept of that which it merely was. Its princi­
ple is no longer the immediate content and purpose that it previ­
ously was, but is its own very essence. 
The result of this process, therefore, is that in objectifYing it­
self and thinking of its own being, the Spirit first of all destroys the 
particular determinacy of its being, and secondly it grasps its own 
universality, and by doing that it gives a new determination to its 
principle. In this way, the substantial determinacy of this National 
Spirit has transformed itself-i.e., its principle has risen to another 
and in fact a higher principle. 
To have the thought of this transition, and to be acquainted 
with it, is the most important point for our grasp of history and our 
comprehension of it. An individual, as a single entity, goes through 
various stages of development and remains that individual. The 
same is true of a people: it, too, goes through a series of stages, until 
it reaches the one which is the universal stage of its Spirit. In this 
last stage lies the inner necessity, the conceptual necessity, of the 
change. This, then, is the very soul, the distinguishing element, in 

82 
Chapter Four 
the philosophic grasp of history: namely, that the transitional or fi­
nal stage is what defines that people. * 
In essence, Spirit is the result of its own activity: its activity is 
the transcending of what is immediately there, by negating it and 
returning into itself. We can compare it with the seed of a plant: the 
plant begins with the seed, but the seed is also the result of the plant's 
entire life. Yet the vulnerability of life is shown when the beginning 
and the result fall asunder. The same is true in the life of individuals 
and of peoples. The life of a people brings a certain fruit to ripeness­
since its activity aims at fulfiling its nascent principle. Yet this fruit 
does not fall back into the womb of the people that produced and 
matured it. On the contrary, it becomes a bitter draught for this peo­
ple: because of its unquenchable thirst for it, the people cannot let the 
cup pass from it, even though the drinking means its own destruc­
tion-and this leads to the rise of a new principle. 
We have already explained the end-goal of this progression. 
The principles of the various National Spirits, progressing in a nec­
essary series of stages, are themselves only phases of the one univer­
sal Spirit: through them, that World Spirit elevates and completes 
itself in history, into a self-comprehending totality. 
Because we are concerned only with the idea of Spirit-and 
we regard the whole of world history as nothing more than the 
manifestation of Spirit-when we go over the past, however exten­
sive it may be, we are really concerned only with the present. This is 
because philosophy, which occupies itself with the True, is con­
cerned with what is eternally present. Nothing in the past is lost to 
philosophy: the Idea is ever present, Spirit is immortal, i.e., Spirit is 
not the past, nor the non-existent future, but is an essential now. 
This is as much as to say that the present form of Spirit con­
tains all the earlier stages within itself. Certainly, these stages have 
unfolded themselves successively and independently; yet what Spirit 
is, it has always implicitly been. The difference lies only in the de­
gree of development of this implicit nature. The life of the ever­
present Spirit is a cycle of stages: on one hand [for philosophy] the 
stages co-exist side by side; on the other hand [for history] they 
appear as past. But the phases which Spirit seems to have left behind 
it, it also possesses in the depth of its present. 
* This last phrase was added by the translator. 

Five 
The Geographical Basis of History 
(excerpt) 
T
he Spirit of a people has now been seen in its universality as an 
ethical whole, acting as a single individual. In contrast to this 
perspective, the natural coherence of Spirit is something external. 
But insofar as we must regard that natural coherence as the ground 
upon which the Spirit is active, it is an essential and necessary basis 
for its activity. We began with the assertion that in world history the 
idea of Spirit appears in the actual world as a series of external 
forms, each of which manifests itself as an actually existing people. 
That existence falls not only in time but in space as well, in the man­
ner of any natural being. And the particular principle which every 
world-historical people carries in itself it has within it as a natural 
characteristic as well. 
By dressing itself thus in this natural garment, Spirit allows its 
particular configurations to go their separate ways-for separation is 
the form of naturalness. In the first place, these natural differences 
must also be regarded as offering the particular possibilities out of 
which the Spirit of a people emerges-and thus they provide the 
geographical basis for that emergence. It is not our task to get to 
know that ground as an external locale, but only as the natural type 
of the locality which corresponds to the type and character of the 
people that is the child of such ground. This national character is 
the very manner and mode in which these people make their appear­
ance in world history, taking their special position and place in it. 
Nature ought not to be rated either too high or too low in all 
this. The mild Ionian sky surely contributed much to the charm of 
Homeric poetry; yet that sky alone could produce no Homers after 
83 

84 
Chapter Five 
the one, and if it could such poets would not always be coming 
forth, for under Turkish domination no such bards arose. 
To begin with, we must take note of the natural factors that 
must be excluded, once and for all, from our consideration of world 
history. For example, we could never find the ground for world­
historical peoples in the torrid wne or in the frigid wne. This is 
because the awakening consciousness is initially involved only in the 
natural environment; and every development of that consciousness 
is a reflection of Spirit back into itself, out of the immediacy of na­
ture (and extremes of heat and cold would not permit such an es­
cape). Thus the element of nature enters into the individuation of 
humanity. It is the first standpoint out of which humanity can wring 
a certain freedom for itself-and this liberation must not be 
overburdened by the power of nature. 
In contrast to Spirit, nature is a quantitative power; and its 
force must not be so great as to be overpowering all by itself. In the 
outer wnes, the human being can achieve no freedom of move­
ment-since heat and cold are forces too powerful there to allow the 
human spirit to build a world for itself. Aristotle said: "When press­
ing needs are satisfied, the human being turns to what is higher and 
more general."*But in the extreme wnes, those needs can never 
cease, and can never be evaded: the human being is constantly com­
pelled to give his attention to nature, to the glowing rays of the sun, 
and the icy frost. 
The true theater of world history is therefore the temperate 
wne--or rather its northern part, since the earth presents itself in 
continents and has, as the Greeks said, a broad breast. In the south­
ern part, on the other hand, it divides itself into many parts and 
disperses itself in many directions. The same difference is evident in 
the products of nature: the north has many species of animals and 
plants, but with common characteristics; in the south, where the 
land is divided into many points, natural forms are more individual­
ized in contrast to one another. 
The world is divided into the Old and the New-and the latter 
is called "new'' because America and Australia became known to us 
comparatively recently. But these are new not only in a relative sense 
* Metaphysics, 1:2 (982b23). 

Geographical Basis of History 
85 
but new altogether, in respect of their whole physical and spiritual 
make-up. We are not concerned with their geological antiquity. I 
will not deny the New World the honor of having risen from the 
seas together with the Old World, at the time of the earth's creation. 
And yet the archipelago between South America and Asia shows a 
certain physical immaturity: most of the islands are merely a cover­
ing of earth over rocks, as it were; they have welled up from the 
bottomless depths and have a character of late origin. New Holland 
(Australia) shows a geography no less immature-for if we go from 
the English possessions deeper into the country, we discover im­
mense rivers that have not yet dug a riverbed for themselves but 
empty out into marshes. 
About America and its original culture, namely that of Mexico 
and Peru, we do have some information, but only to the effect that 
this culture was entirely immersed in Nature, and that it had to go 
under at the approach of Spirit. America has always shown itself to 
be physically and spiritually impotent-and it still does so-for after 
the Europeans landed, the natives gradually perished at the mere 
breath of European activity. In the separate states of North America 
all the citizens are of European descent; the old inhabitants could 
not intermingle with them but were pushed back. There are some 
arts that the natives certainly adopted from the Europeans, includ­
ing the drinking of whiskey, which had a destructive effect on them. 
In the south the natives were treated far more violently, and 
were exploited for hard work, for which their strength was hardly 
adequate. The main character of the native Americans is a placidity, 
a lassitude, a humble and cringing submissiveness toward a Creole, 
and even more toward a European-and it will take a long time for 
the Europeans to produce any feeling of self-confidence in them. 
The inferiority of these individuals in every respect, even in regard 
to size, is very apparent. Only the extremely southern tribes, in Pata­
gonia, are stronger by nature, but they are still in the natural condi­
tion of barbarism and savagery. 
As we know, the Jesuits and other Catholic clergy established 
a state in Paraguay, as well as monasteries in Mexico and California. 
Since they wished to accustom the Indians to European culture and 
morals, they mingled with them, and prescribed their duties to them 
for the day as though they were under age. Lazy though they were, 
the Indians bowed to the authority of the fathers. These prescrip-

86 
Chapter Five 
tions-and at midnight a bell had to remind them of their matrimo­
nial duties-have quite properly led to further needs, which are the 
mainsprings of human activity in general. 
The weakness of the native American physique was a major 
reason for bringing Negroes to America, through whose strength 
the necessary work could be done. The Negroes are far more recep­
tive to European culture than the Indians. An English traveller has 
provided examples of Negroes becoming gifted ministers, physi­
cians, etc. (It was a Negro who first discovered the use of quinine.) 
On the other hand, this Englishman knew of only one single native 
American who was sufficiently developed to engage in study, but he 
soon died in consequence of an overindulgence in whiskey. Their 
weakness of physique is accompanied by a lack in the instruments of 
progress-horses and iron-which is the main reason why the na­
tive Americans were conquered. 
Since the original nation has vanished, or nearly so, the effec­
tive population comes for the most part from Europe. And what 
happens in America has its origins in Europe. Europe has thrown its 
surplus population to America-in much the same way that in the 
Imperial cities (where the guilds were dominant and became exclu­
sive and inflexible) many people fled to other towns that were not 
so restricted and where the burden of taxes was not so great. That 
was how many of the major cities came to have subsidiary towns 
associated with them: Hamburg has Altona, Frankfurt has Offen­
bach, Nuremberg has Furth, and Geneva has Carouge. 
North America relates itself to Europe in the same subsidiary 
role. Many Englishmen have settled there, where there are no bur­
dens or taxes, and where the accumulation of European means and 
European skill have succeeded in winning something from the 
broad and still empty soil. This emigration does indeed offer many 
advantages, since the emigrants have rid themselves of much that 
restricted their activity at home, and they bring with them the treas­
ure of European self-awareness along with their abilities. For those 
who are ready to work hard, and have not found the opportunity in 
Europe, America has opened a new theater of action. 
As we know, America is divided into two parts, joined by a 
narrow isthmus-although this has not led to a commercial bond 
between them. Instead, the two parts are very decisively divided. 
North America, when we approach it from the east, shows a broad 

Geographical Basis of History 
87 
coastline. Behind this there is a mountain range: the Blue Moun­
tains or Appalachians; and further north there are the Alleghenies. 
Streams flow from them to irrigate the coastal lands, which has been 
most advantageous for the American free states that were first estab­
lished in this region. Behind that mountain range the St. Lawrence 
river flows from south to north, linking a series of enormous lakes; 
the northern colonies of Canada lie along this river. Farther west we 
encounter the basin of the vast Mississippi, with the riverbeds of the 
Missouri and the Ohio whose waters it receives, after which it emp­
ties into the Gulf of Mexico. 
On the western side of this region there is another long moun­
tain range which runs through Mexico and the isthmus of Panama; 
and under the name of the Andes or Cordilleras it cuts off the entire 
western side of South America. The coastal border thus formed is 
narrower and offers fewer advantages than the coastline of North 
America. On that western side of South America lie Peru and Chile. 
On the eastern side, flowing east there are the enormous Orinoco 
and Amazon rivers. These form great valleys, which are not suitable 
for cultivation since they are merely wide steppes. The Rio de Ia 
Plata flows south; its tributaries originate in part in the Cordilleras, 
and in part in the northern mountain range separating the Amazon 
region from its own. To the region of the Rio de Ia Plata belong 
Brazil and the Spanish republics. Colombia is the northernmost 
coastal land of South America. At the western side of Colombia, the 
Magdalena empties into the Caribbean. 
Except in Brazil, republics have generally arisen in South 
America as in North America. If we now compare South America 
(including Mexico) with North America, we can perceive an as­
tounding contrast. 
In North America we see prosperity growing from an increase 
in industry and population, from civil order and firm freedom. The 
entire federation comprises but one state, and has its various politi­
cal centers. In South America, on the other hand, the republics rest 
only on military force. Their entire history is a continuing upheaval: 
federated states fall asunder, others reunite, and all these transforma­
tions are established through military revolutions. The more specific 
differences between the two parts of America show them moving in 
two opposed directions. There is a political difference on one hand 
and a religious one on the other: 

88 
Chapter Five 
South America, where the Spaniards settled and asserted their 
hegemony, is Catholic; North America, although a land of different 
denominations, is fundamentally Protestant. The further divergence 
is that [politically] South America was conquered, North America 
was colonized. The Spaniards took possession of South America in 
order to rule and to become rich, by means of political offices as 
well as extortion. Dependent upon a very remote mother country, 
their arbitrariness found greater scope; and through force, ability, 
and confidence, they gained a great ascendancy over the Indians. 
The North American states, on the contrary, were entirely colo­
nized, and by Europeans. Since, in England, the Puritans, Epis­
copalians, and Catholics were involved in constant conflict, and first 
one, then the other had the upper hand, many people emigrated in 
order to seek freedom of religion in foreign pans. 
It was industrious Europeans who devoted themselves to agri­
culture, to raising tobacco and cotton. The general attention was 
soon directed to labor. The substance of the totality was comprised 
of the needs, peace, civil rights, security, freedom, and a community 
that arose from the aggregation of atomic individuals, so that the 
state was only an external institution, set up for the protection of 
property. From the Protestant religion came the trust of individuals 
in one another, their reliance on their convictions-for in the Prot­
estant church religious works are the concern of one's entire life and 
activity. Among Catholics, on the other hand, there is no basis for 
such trust, because in secular matters only force governs and volun­
tary subjection-and the forms called constitutions are merely emer­
gency remedies, and offer no protection against mistrust. 
In further comparing North America with Europe, we find in 
the former the perennial example of a republican system of govern­
ment. There is an inner unity in it, for there is a president as head of 
state who is elected for only four years (as security against any possi­
ble monarchical ambitions) .  The general protection of property and 
the almost total absence of taxes are continually commended. This 
shows us the basic character of the society: it is marked by the pri­
vate person's striving for acquisition and profit and by the predomi­
nance of a private interest which devotes itself to the community for 
personal benefit alone. There is, to be sure, a legal system, and a 
formal code of laws; but this legality has nothing to do with integ-

Geographical Basis of History 
89 
rity-and so the American merchants have the bad reputation of 
cheating with the protection of the law. 
We said that the Protestant church evokes in its members the 
essential principle of confidence in others; but this gives importance 
to the element of feeling, which may lead to every sort of capricious­
ness. From this standpoint, if every person may have his own world­
outlook, he may also have his own religion. This explains the 
proliferation of sects, to the point of sheer craziness: many of the 
sects have a form of worship that involves convulsive motion as well 
as the most sensual excesses. This total arbitrariness is such that the 
various communities hire and fire ministers as they please: the 
church is not something that subsists independently, in and for it­
self, with a substantial spirituality of its own and an external estab­
lishment; instead, religious matters are handled according to the 
particular views of the congregation. In North America the wildest 
freedom of imagination prevails. What is missing is the religious 
unity found in European states, where deviations are limited to a 
few denominations. 
As for the political situation in North America, its general goal 
has not yet been settled upon as something fixed. There is as yet no 
firm coherence in the political structure. A genuine state and a genu­
ine government arise only when there is a difference in classes, with 
great wealth and great poverty-so that a great mass of people can 
no longer satisfy its needs as it used to do. But America is not yet 
approaching such tension-for, to a great extent, there is the con­
stant outlet of further colonization open to it, with a constant 
stream of settlers into the plains of the Mississippi. In this way the 
main source of discontent is removed, thereby guaranteeing the 
continuation of the present civil condition. 
It is impossible, therefore, to compare the individual states in 
the United States with European countries, for in Europe there is 
no such natural outflow of population, despite al the emigration: if 
there had still been great forests in Germany, the French Revolution 
would certainly not have flared up. Only after the imeasurable 
spaces of America are filled, and the population of this civil society is 
pressed together, only then will it be possible to compare North 
America to Europe. In the meantime, North America is still in the 
condition of being able to add to the land under cultivation. Only 
when, as in Europe, the increase in the farming population is 

90 
Chapter Five 
checked by lack of available land, only then will the population press 
back upon itself in cities, with their industry and trade, to build a 
compact system of civil society and so develop the need for an or­
ganized state. 
The United States has no neighboring states to mistrust, as 
the European states do, against which they must maintain a stand­
ing army. Canada and Mexico are nothing to be feared by the 
United States; and England has learned, through the experience of 
the last fifty years, that a free America is more useful to her than the 
America that depended on her. In the American war of independ­
ence, the militias of the separate states showed themselves to be as 
brave as the Dutch in their revolution against the Spanish Philip. 
But in general, where independence is not at stake, there is less force 
exerted; hence the American militias withstood the English less suc­
cessfully in 1814. 
America is therefore the land of the future. In the time to 
come, the center of world-historical importance will be revealed 
there-perhaps in a conflict between North and South America. It 
is the land of longing for all those who are weary of the historic 
arsenal that is old Europe. Napoleon is reported to have said, "Certe 
vieille Europe m'ennuie." America has to separate itself from the 
ground upon which the world's history has taken place until now. 
What has taken place in America so far is a mere echo of the Old 
World, and the expression of an alien vitality. As a land of the future 
it does not concern us here: for in the historical perspective we are 
concerned with what has been and with what is; and in regard to 
philosophy our concern is neither with what was nor with what is 
yet to be, but with what is as eternal Reason-and that is enough to 
keep us occupied. 
Let us therefore set the New World aside, along with its asso­
ciated dreams, and return to the Old World, the theater of world 
history. 
We must first draw attention to natural elements and natural 
determinants. Just as America is divided into two parts, so the Old 
World is divided by the Mediterranean. But the three continents 
around it are related to one another and comprise a totality. The 
Mediterranean is a means of communication between them; indeed, 
rivers and seas are not to be seen as divisive but as unifying: e.g., 
England and Brittany, Norway and Denmark, Sweden and Livonia 

Geographical Basis of History 
9l 
were united by the waterways between them. The Mediterranean, 
therefore, is the center of world history. Greece lies here, the focal 
point of history. In [what is nominally] Syria there is Jerusalem, the 
center of Judaism and of Christianity. To the southeast are Mecca 
and Medina, the source of Islam. To the west are Delphi and Ath­
ens; and farther west there is Rome, with Alexandria and Carthage 
on the south side of the sea. Thus the Mediterranean is the heart of 
the Old World, that which conditions it and gives it its life. Without 
it we could not imagine world history -any more than we could 
think of Rome or Athens without the forum where all things con­
verged. The Far East is outside the course of world history-as is 
northern Europe, which entered world history history onJy later and 
had no part in that history in ancient times. Ancient history limited 
itself throughout to the countries around the Mediterranean. Julius 
Caesar's crossing the Alps-the conquest of Gaul and the relation 
the Germans thereby entered into with the Roman Empire-there­
fore marks an epoch in world history, which thus crosses the Alps as 
well. Eastern Asia and the land beyond the Alps are the extremities 
of that mobile center around the Mediterranean-the beginning and 
the end of world history [in ancient times] ,  its rise and its 
decline . . . .  

Six 
The Division of History 
T
he course of history in general was presented in the geographical 
survey. The Sun, the Light, rises in the East. Light, however, is 
simple self-relatedness: and the light that is universal in itself is also 
a self-enclosed subject, in the sun. 
The scene has often been pictured in which a blind person 
suddenly gains sight, sees the dawn, the growing Light, and then 
the Sun as it blazes up. At first, in his complete amazement, he for­
gets himself utterly, in this pure clarity. But when the sun has fully 
risen, his amazement is lessened; he looks at the objects around him, 
and from them he goes on to see his own inwardness, and then the 
relation of outer to inner. He proceeds from inactive contemplation 
to activity: by evening he has constructed some sort of building, by 
the use of his own inner sun-and when he contemplates it in the 
evening, he values it higher than that first external sun. For he now 
stands in relation to his own creative spirit and hence in a relation of 
freedom [because that spirit is related to itself]. If we keep this im­
age before us, we can see the course of world history in it, the great 
daily work of the Spirit. 
World history goes from East to West: as Asia is the begin­
ning of world history, so Europe is simply its end. In world history 
there is an absolute East, par excellence (whereas the geographical 
term "east" is in itself entirely relative); for although the earth is a 
sphere, history makes no circle around that sphere. On the contrary, 
it has a definite East which is Asia. It is here that the external physi­
cal sun comes up, to sink in the West: and for that same reason it is 
in the West that the inner Sun of self-consciousness rises, shedding a 
higher brilliance. 
92 

The Division of History 
93 
World history is the process by which the uncontrolled natural 
will is disciplined in the direction of the universal, the direction of 
subjective freedom. The East knew (and knows) only that One per­
son is free; the Greek and Roman world knew that Some are free; 
the Germanic world of Europe knows that All are free [as persons] .  
Accordingly, the first political form to be seen in world history is 
that of Despotism, to be followed in turn by Democracy and Aris­
tocracy, and finally by Monarchy. 
To understand this division we must note the following: the 
state is the universal spiritual life, to which the individuals who are 
born into it relate with trust and habitual acceptance, so that they 
have their essence and their actuality in it. This being so, we must 
ask above all else whether their actual life involves them in the unity 
of unreflective habit and custom, or whether the individuals are per­
sons who reflect, as independent subjects. In this connection, we 
must make the distinction between substantive (i.e., objective) free­
dom and subjective freedom. Substantive freedom is the intrinsic 
rationality that is implicit in the will of a people, which then devel­
ops itself within the state. But at this stage of Reason's develop­
ment, we do not as yet have individual insight and personal will, 
i.e., subjective freedom. This only defines itself in the individual 
[consciousness], where it constitutes the individual's reflection in his 
own conscience. In the merely substantive (or objective) freedom, 
on the other hand, the commandments and laws are [seen as] intrin­
sically fixed, and the individual subjects relate to them in total servi­
tude. These laws need not correspond to the will of the individual; 
and thus the subjects are like children who obey their parents but 
are without will or insight of their own. 
But when subjective freedom arises, and the person goes from 
the external reality back down into his own mind, the antithesis of 
reflection makes its entrance, carrying within it the negating of real­
ity. Thus the reflective withdrawal from the surrounding world al­
ready constitutes an implicit antithesis: on one side there is God and 
the divine; on the other side the human subject as particular. In the 
unmediated and unreflective consciousness of the East, the two 
sides are undivided. The substantive world does distinguish itself 
from the individual, but the antithesis is not yet present to his mind. 
The first stage of world history, therefore, is that of the Orien­
tal World. Its basis is in the unmediated consciousness, the substan-

94 
Chapter Six 
tive spirituality to which the subjective will relates itself primarily in 
terms of faith, trust, and obedience. In its political life we find a 
realized rational freedom that develops, without advancing to sub­
jective freedom. This is the childhood stage of history. 
The splendid structures of the Oriental empires form substan­
tial configurations in which all the categories of rationality are pre­
sent-but in such a way that the human subjects remain merely 
incidental. The subjects revolve around a center, the ruler, who 
stands at the head like a patriarch, though not as a despot in the 
sense of imperial Rome. It is his task to see that the substance of 
custom is maintained, and to uphold the essential commandments 
that are already established. That which in our world belongs to the 
sphere of subjective freedom proceeds there from the universal to­
tality. The splendor of the Oriental vision is the One Individual, as 
the substantial being to which everything belongs, so that no other 
subject can distinguish itself as individual and reflect upon itself in 
its subjective freedom. Al the wealth of fantasy and nature is appro­
priated to that substantial being, in whom the subjective freedom 
[of all individuals] is immersed-so that their status is not in them­
selves but in that absolute being. Al the elements of the state, in­
cluding subjectivity, are certainly there, but they are not as yet 
reconciled with the substantial being. For outside the One Power, 
before which nothing can constitute itself independently, there is 
nothing but horrible despotism that sweeps over everything de­
structively. We therefore see wild hordes breaking forth from the 
highlands, falling upon these countries, and either devastating them 
or settling in them and giving up their wild life; but in all cases they 
are dispersed without a trace in the substantial culture. 
This substantiality-because it has failed to take up its antithe­
sis into itself and overcome it-splits directly into two elements. On 
the one side we see duration, stability; we see empires of space, as it 
were-an unhistorical history [i.e., a history without development 
in time ]-as, for example, in China, with its state based on the fam­
ily relation and on a paternal government. This government main­
tains the institution of the totality through providential care, with 
its admonitions, punishment, and disciplinary actions. It is an alto­
gether prosaic realm, because in it the antithesis of form (in regard 
to infinitude and ideality) has not yet arisen. On the other side, this 
spatial durability is countered by the form of time: the states, with-

The Division of History 
95 
out changing in themselves or in principle, undergo endless change 
with regard to each other; they are ceaselessly in conflict, which 
soon brings them to ruin. 
In this turn outward, toward strife and struggle, a first hint of 
the principle of individuality enters-but it comes in an unconscious 
and merely natural universality: it is the Light that is not yet the 
light of the personal soul. Here, too, history is predominantly un­
historical, for it is merely the repetition of the same majestic demise. 
The new element-through acts of bravery, prowess, and generos­
ity-has come to replace the previous splendor; yet it undergoes the 
same cycle of decline and fall. So the fall is not genuine, because in 
all this restless change there is no progress. 
At this point history passes over to central Asia, but only in 
externals, without connection to what went before. If we continue 
with the comparison of history to human growth, we can say that 
this is the boyhood stage of history, no longer behaving with the 
calm and trust of childhood, but rather in a rowdy and aggressive 
way. 
The Greek World may then be compared to the period of ado­
lescence, for here we see individualities being formed. This is the 
second main principle in world history. Just as in Asia, ethical custom 
is the principle; but in Greece it is the ethical life that is impressed 
on individuality, so that it signifies the free volition of individuals. 
Here, then, we have the union of ethical custom with the subjective 
will. This is the realm of Beautiful Freedom. Its Idea is combined 
with plastic form: it is not yet there for itself as an abstraction, but is 
directly bound up with the real-just as in a work of fine art the 
sensible matter carries the imprint and expression of the spiritual. 
Accordingly, this is the realm of true harmony-the world of 
the most charming but evanescent and quickly fading blossom: not 
yet a conscious morality, but a spontaneously ethical life in which 
the will of the individual stands firm upon the unmediated custom 
and habit that prescribes what is right and lawful. The individual is 
thus in a naive unity with the universal aim of society. That which, 
in the Orient, is divided into two extremes-into the substantive 
being, as such, and the individuality which grinds itself down 
against it-is here brought together. But the union of these divided 
principles is only an immediate one and for that reason it is also the 
highest contradiction in itself. For this beautifUl ethos has not yet 

96 
Chapter Six 
been wrung out in the struggle of subjective freedom, a freedom 
reborn; the ethos has not yet been raised up, pure, to the free sub­
jectivity of ethical life. 
The third stage of world history is the realm of abstract 
universality: this is the Roman World, the hard work of history's 
manhood. The mature man does not act with a despotic arbitrari­
ness, nor according to his own caprice (however attractive that ca­
price may be) ;  instead, he works for the common good, in which 
the individual is submerged, attaining his own ends only in what is 
shared. The state begins to emerge in an abstract way, and to work 
toward a goal of its own. Individuals have a share in this end, but 
their part is not yet an exhaustive and concrete one. Free individuals 
are sacrificed to the rigid demands of the common goal, to which 
they must surrender in their service of the abstract universal. 
The Roman world is no longer a world of individuals in the 
way that the Athenian polis was. Here there is no joy and cheer, but 
only hard and bitter work. The common interest is detached from 
that of individuals, although in working for it they gain an abstract, 
formal universality for themselves. The universal end subjugates in­
dividuals; they must surrender themselves to it. But in return they 
receive a universal version of themselves: the status of persons. They 
become legal personae, having a private status. 
In the same sense in which individuals are incorporated into 
the abstract concept of the person, the "individuals" that are inde­
pendent nations will have to experience this fate as well: that is to 
say, their concrete form will be crushed by this universality, the Ro­
man state, and they will be incorporated into the greater mass. By 
incorporating these different cultures, Rome becomes a pantheon of 
al gods and al things spiritual-although these gods and their spiri­
tuality do not retain their characteristic vitality. 
The development of this world has two significant sides to it. 
On one hand, it has an express and declared antithesis within itself, 
an antithesis based on reflection, or upon abstract universality itself: 
that is, the Roman world displays within itself the struggle of that 
very antithesis [i.e., between universality and individuality]. The 
necessary outcome of al this is that an arbitrary individuality even­
tually gets the upper hand over the abstract universality. Rome 
passes into the utterly contingent and thoroughly worldly power of 
one overlord, the emperor. Originally there is the antithesis between 

The Division of History 
97 
the common good of the state (as the abstract universal) and the 
abstract person. But then, in the course of history, the element of 
personality becomes predominant; the community then begins to 
break up into its component atoms, so that it is only held together 
by means of external power. And then the subjective force of sover­
eign domination comes forward, as though sumoned to this task. 
For abstract legality cannot be concretely real in the individual, and 
his life is not genuinely organized around compliance with the law; 
and inasmuch as abstract legality has come to power, this power is 
merely arbitrary, as the contingent subjectivity of one mover, one 
ruler. And then the individual subject seeks consolation for his lost 
freedom through the development of private right. This is the 
purely worldly reconciliation of the antithesis. 
There is also a spiritual reconciliation (which is the second side 
to the development of the Roman world). With the fragmentation 
of the outer political world, held together only by external force, the 
pain of the despotism begins to be felt. And the spirit, driven back 
into its innermost depths, abandons the world that has lost its gods. 
Spirit then looks to itself for the reconciliation that it needs. Now 
there begins the life of its inwardness, a fulfilled concrete inward­
ness, which at the same time possesses a substantiality that is not 
rooted in outer experience. In the inwardness of the soul, therefore, 
there arises that spiritual reconciliation, in the fact that the individ­
ual personality is purified and transfigured into universality, or into 
its own implicitly universal subjectivity-transfigured into divine 
personality. Now the merely secular world is more readily opposed 
by the spiritual; it is the world of those who know themselves in 
their own subjectivity, and know that inwardness as their very es­
sence, the world of the actual Spirit. 
With this we enter the fourth [stage] of world history, that of 
the medieval Germanic World-history's old age (if we continue the 
comparison to the cycle of aging in the individual). In nature, old 
age is weakness; but the old age of the Spirit is its complete ripe­
ness, in which Spirit returns to unity with itself, but as Spirit. 
This world begins with the reconciliation that has occurred in 
Christianity. But this is a fulfillment that is only implicit, not fully 
present in the external world. Accordingly, its beginning is really in 
the enormous antithesis between the spirituaUreligious principle 
within, and the barbarian reality outside. For to begin with, Spirit 

98 
Chapter Six 
itself, as the consciousness of an inner world, is still abstract. Conse­
quently, the secular world is given over to arbitrariness and brutal­
ity. At first this barbarism is opposed by the Mohammedan 
principle, the enlightenment of the oriental world. This develops 
later and more quickly than Christianity-which needed all of eight 
centuries before it grew into a worldly form [with Charlemagne]. 
The principle of the Germanic world became a concrete reality only 
through the Germanic nations. 
The antithesis-between the spiritual principle in the ecclesias­
tical world and the brutal barbarism in the secular world-is present 
here as well. The secular world ought to conform to the spiritual, 
but that "ought'' contains the recognition that in fact it does not: at 
first, the mere worldly power must disappear in the face of the eccle­
siastical authority; yet ecclesiastical authority, by immersing itself in 
secular power, loses its spiritual character and force. Through this 
corruption of the spiritual aspect-i.e., the Church-there emerges 
a higher form of rational thought: Spirit, having once again been 
forced back into itself, produces its work in the form of thought, 
and becomes capable of realizing the principle of rationality from 
the principle of secularity alone. 
That is how it comes about that the realm of thought is 
brought to birth in actuality through the efficacy of universal deter­
minants which have the principle of Spirit as their basis. The antith­
eses of Church and State disappear. Spirit now finds itself in the 
secular world, and builds up that world as an implicitly (in sich) 
organic outward being. The State is no longer inferior to the 
Church, and no longer subordinated to it. The Church retains no 
priority; spirituality is no longer foreign to the State. Freedom has 
now found the tools with which to realize its concept, its truth, in 
the world. 
This is the goal of world history-and we have now to trav­
erse, in detail, the long road which we have presented here only in 
summary. But the length of time is something entirely relative, 
whereas Spirit belongs to the dimension of eternity and has no ac­
tual length. 

Appendix 
From Hegel's Philosophy of Right 
WORLD HISTORY 
341 . Universal Spirit comes into existence through a variety 
of elements: in art it is through the element of vision and image; in 
religion it is through feeling and representational thinking; in phi­
losophy it is through thought pure and free. In world history it is 
through the element of spiritual actuality in its entire scope of inter­
nal and external expression. World history is a court of judgment­
because in its implicit and explicit universality, the particular is pre­
sent only as ideal (whether it be the Roman Penates, civil society, or 
the different national spirits in all their diversity). And the activity 
of Spirit in this element has to make this plain. 
342. Moreover, world history does not just render a verdict 
of might-i.e., it is not the abstract and non-rational necessity of a 
blind fate. On the contrary-since Spirit is implicitly and explicitly 
Reason, and becomes explicit to itself only in knowledge-world 
history is the necessary development of the elements of Reason out 
of the concept of Spirit's freedom alone, along with the self-con­
sciousness and freedom of Spirit. It is the display and actualization 
of the universal Spirit. 
343. Spirit's history is its act. Spirit is only what it does, and 
its act is to make itself the object of its own consciousness, to appre­
hend itself as Spirit, explaining itself to itself. This self-apprehension 
is Spirit's very being and principle; and the folfillment of this appre­
hension is at one and the same time the externalization of Spirit and 
99 

l 00 I 
Appendix 
the transition beyond it. To say it in formal terms, we can speak of 
our apprehending that apprehension anew; and then the return of 
Spirit into itself after its externalization is Spirit at a higher stage 
than the initial apprehension. 
[Remark:] The question that arises here is that of the perfect­
ibility of mankind-as discussed, for example, in Lessing's Education 
oftheHuman Race ( 1 780). Those who have argued for such perfect­
ibility have a notion of the human spirit: that it is in man's nature to 
have "Know Thyself" as a law of his being; and that to the extent 
that he grasps what he is, he has risen to a higher form than that 
which constituted his mere being, earlier. But to those who reject 
this thought, "Spirit" has remained an empty word-just as history 
has remained, for them, a superficial play of accidental, "merely 
human" strivings and passions (as they are called). Even if these crit­
ics speak of history in terms of Providence and its Plan, and thus 
express a faith in a higher power, the plan of Providence remains an 
empty idea for them, since they expressly declare that it is unknow­
able and incomprehensible. 
34. In this activity of the World Spirit, states, nations and 
individuals arise with their particular determinate principle. This prin­
ciple is displayed and actualized in their form of government and in 
the entire range of their conditions. These states, nations, and indi­
viduals are aware of al this, and are deeply committed to the inter­
ests involved. Yet at the same time they are the unconscious tools 
and organs of the World Spirit in its deep activity, wherein these 
forms pass away, while the Spirit implicitly and explicitly prepares 
and works out its own transition to its next higher stage. 
345. The concepts of justice and virtue; wrongdoing, force, 
and vice; talents and their achievements; passions, great and small; 
guilt and innocence; grandeur in individual and national life; inde­
pendence, happiness and unhar.piness for states and single individu­
als-all these have their distinct meaning and value in the sphere of 
conscious actuality. In that sphere they are judged and find their 
justification (however incomplete it may be). World history falls 
outside these viewpoints. In it, the necessary element of the Idea of 
the World Spirit is its present stage; and this receives its absolute le­
gitimation in history. And the nation which expresses that Idea in 
its own achievements receives its fulfillment, happiness, and fame. 

The Philosophy of Right 
101 
346. History is the configuration of Spirit in the form of 
what happens, i.e., in the form of immediate natural actuality. For 
this reason, the stages of its development are out there as immediate 
natural principles. And these principles, because they are natural, are 
a multitude of independent units, so that only one of them pertains 
to any one nation. This is its geographic and anthropological existence. 
347. The nation-to which such an instance of the Idea per­
tains as a natural principle-is entrusted with implementing it as the 
World Spirit progresses in developing its self-consciousness. This 
nation is predominant in world history for this epoch-and only once 
can it be predominant and epoch-making in history. (See paragraph 
346) This nation has an absolute right as the vehicle of the World 
Spirit in the present stage of its development. Against it, the spirits 
of other nations have no rights-and they, along with those whose 
epoch has passed, do not count at that time in world history. 
[Remark:] The specific history of a world-historical nation 
comprises, on the one hand, the development of its principle from 
its infantile condition in the husk, to the time when it blossoms into 
its free ethical self-consciousness, and it forces its way into universal 
history. But on the other hand it also comprises the period of that 
nation's decline and fall-for that is how the emergence of a higher 
principle is marked upon it as the negating of its own. This signifies 
the transition of Spirit to that higher principle, and therefore the 
passing of world history to another nation. The declining nation has 
by then lost its absolute interest; and even if it adopts the higher 
principle for itself as something positive, this is not something im­
manently vital for it. It may lose its independence; or it may drag on 
as a particular state or part of a group of states, involving itself, 
according to circumstances, in various enterprises at home or wars 
abroad. 
348. At the actual point of al actions, including world-his­
torical ones, individuals are the agents that give subjectivity to what 
is substantial. They are the vitalizing force behind the substantial 
deed of the World Spirit, and are thus directly identical with it, al­
though its aim and object is hidden from them. (See paragraph 344) 
For this they receive no honor or gratitude from their contemporary 
world, nor from the public opinion of the later world-but their 
share at the hands of that public opinion is undying fame as the for­
mal subjective agents of those deeds. 

102 I 
Appendix 
349. At its beginning, a nation is not yet a state. The transi­
tion from a family, a horde, a tribe, a multitude, etc., to the condi­
tion of being a state-this constitutes the fonnal realization of the 
Idea in general, in that nation. A nation is, implicitly, an ethical sub­
stance. But without the formal condition of statehood it lacks a uni­
versal and universally valid objectification in laws as its conscious 
characteristics-and therefore it is not recognized, either by itself or 
by others. Without objective legality and rationality explicitly estab­
lished (by means of government), a nation's independence is merely 
formal, and is not yet sovereignty. 
[Remark:] Even in the ordinary view of things, no one calls a 
patriarchal condition a government, or a nation in this condition a 
state, or its independence sovereignty. Prior to actual history, there­
fore, we have either a condition of dull innocence, without all inter­
est, or the bravery of formal struggle for recognition and revenge. 
350. It is the absolute right of the Idea to manifest itself in 
legal determinations and objective institutions, beginning with laws 
of marriage and agriculture. Whether that actualization takes the 
form of divine legislation and favor, or of force and wrongdoing­
this right is the right of heroes to establish states. 
351 . In the same light, it happens that civilized nations re­
gard and treat other nations as barbarian when these others lag be­
hind and so lack the substantial elements of statehood. (Thus cattle­
raising people might regard a nation of huntsmen as barbarians, 
while an agricultural people might regard both as barbarian, etc.) 
The civilized nation is aware of the disparity in rights, between its 
own and those of barbarian peoples, whose independence they re­
gard and treat as something merely formal and lacking all 
foundation. 
[Remark:] In the wars and quarrels that arise in these circum­
stances, what makes them significant for world history is that they 
are struggles for recognition related to a specific cultural value. 
[Thus nomadic herdsmen have a different concept of the land from 
that held by crop-growers, etc.] 
352. The different concrete ideas, which are the spirits of var­
ious peoples, have their truth and determinacy in the concrete Idea 
which is absolute universality: the World Spirit. Around its throne 
they stand as executives of its actualization, and as witnesses and 
ornaments to its grandeur. As Spirit, its only activity is to know 

The Philosophy of Right 
103 
itself in absolute terms-and in that way to free its consciousness 
from the form of natural immediacy, and to come to itself. Hence 
the principles of the various configurations of this self-consciousness, 
in the course of its liberation, are the world-historical realms, of 
which there are four: 
353. In the first, or as an immediate revelation, the World 
Spirit has the form of substantial Spirit as its principle: the identity 
wherein individuality remains sunk in its essence, and unjustified on 
its own account (for sich). 
The second principle is this substantial Spirit in its knowing, so 
that this substance is its positive content, but it is also conscious of 
itself. This beingfor-self is the living form of Spirit-the beautiful 
ethical individuality. [This is an individuality combining the Beauti­
ful and the Good as primary values (in Greek: kalokagathia).] 
The third principle is the inward deepening of this knowing 
self-consciousness, to the point of abstract universality, and thus to 
the point of Spirit's infinite opposition to the objective world which 
has abandoned spirituality in the process. 
The principle of the fourth configuration is the reversal of this 
opposition by Spirit: by going into its own inwardness for its truth 
as well as its own concrete essence, it finally comes to be at home in 
objectivity and reconciled to it. In thus returning to the earlier sub­
stantiality, Spirit has returned from its infinite oposition. Spirit now 
creates and knows its truth as its own thought, and as a world of 
lawlike actuality. 
354. In accordance with these four principles, there are four 
world-historical realms: the Oriental, the Greek, the Roman, and 
the Germanic. 
355. A. The Oriental World. This first realm is the substantial 
world which is emerging from a natural patriarchal totality. In the 
perspective of this world, which is inwardly undivided, the worldly 
government is a theocracy; the ruler is a high priest or is even God 
himself; the state structure and legislation are at the same time reli­
gion-just as the religious and moral commandments, or rather cus­
toms, are state decrees. In the splendor of this totality, the 
individual personality has no rights and is suppressed. External na­
ture is directly divine or is God's ornament. The history of the actual 
world is poetry. Various distinctions develop between classes of 
people, according to the different aspects of custom, government 

104 I 
Appendix 
and state; and these distinctions, operating by simple custom in 
place of laws, become ponderous, elaborate and superstitious cere­
monies. The contingencies of personal power, of arbitrary rule, and 
of class differences, take on the natural rigidity of castes. The Orien­
tal state, therefore, is alive only in the outward movement of con­
quest, or in elemental frenzy and devastation. Inner calm occurs 
only in private life, sunk into weakness and exhaustion. 
[Remark omitted here.] 
356. B. The Greek World. Here we have cultural life which 
still possesses the substantial unity of the finite and the infinite-but 
only as a mysterious foundation, repressed into an obscured mem­
ory, in cult practices carried on in caves, and in images retained by 
tradition. This background-gradually emerging out of self-differ­
entiating Spirit into individual spirituality, and rebirth in the full 
daylight of knowing-is moderated and transfigured into beauty 
and the ethical life of freedom and happiness. It is therefore in this 
sort of world that we see the principle of personal individuality aris­
ing, although it is still not fully autonomous but is kept within its 
own ideal unity instead [e.g., the individual identifies with the city.] 
& a result of this inadequate individuation, the [Greek] totality falls 
apart into a group of individual national spirits on the one hand 
[e.g., Athens, Sparta, Corinth, etc.] ;  and, on the other hand, the 
ultimate resolution of the will is not yet placed in the subjectivity of 
independent self-consciousness but in a higher external power [e.g., 
Alexander]; the satisfaction of particular needs, moreover, is not yet 
a task accepted by free men but is rather relegated to a class of 
slaves. 
357. C. The Roman World. Here the process of social differ­
entiation is carried to the point where ethical life is absolutely torn 
asunder into its extremes: [private life versus public life], personal 
self-consciousness against abstract universality. This opposition be­
gins with the antithesis between the substantive outlook of an aris­
tocratic class and the principle of free personality in its democratic 
form. On the aristocratic side it deteriorates into superstition and 
the assertion of cold, greedy force; the democratic side sinks into 
the depravity of a rabble. The dissolution of the social totality ends 
with universal misfortune and the death of ethical life. National in­
dividualities die off and fade into the unity of a Pantheon [i.e., with 
the deification of emperors]. Al individuals are degraded to the sta-

The Philosophy of Right 
lOS 
tus of private persons, as equals having formal rights, and are held 
together by nothing more than abstract self-will driven to mon­
strous extremes. 
358. D. The Germanic World. Spirit has thus inflicted injury 
on itself and its world-followed by the infinite grief for the Cruci­
fied God, for which the Jewish people was held in readiness. Out of 
al this, the Spirit driven back into itself, grasps the absolute turning 
point in the extremity of its absolute negativity: the infinite positivity 
of its own inwardness, the principle which asserts the unity of the 
divine and the human natures. This reconciliation (of divine and 
human) as the objective truth and freedom-that appears within 
self-consciousness and subjectivity-is a reconciliation entrusted to 
the northern principle of the Germanic peoples to fulfill. 
359. 
In its inwardness, the principle is still abstract. Existing 
in the inner sense as faith, hope and love, it reconciles and resolves 
all antitheses. The principle unfolds its content, elevating it to actu­
ality and self-conscious rationality-to a secular realm that proceeds 
from the heart, from loyalty and the fellowship of free men. In the 
subjectivity of its source, that secular realm is also a realm of crude 
arbitrariness and barbarous custom. It stands opposed to the world 
beyond, an intellectual realm-whose content is certainly that truth 
of its Spirit; but since this Spirit still does not think, that intellectual 
realm remains veiled in barbarous imagery. And as spiritual power 
over the actual heart and mind, this other-worldly realm acts against 
it as an unfree [i.e., authoritative] and frightful force. 
360. 
Despite the hard struggle between these absolutely op­
posed realms-i.e., the other-worldly vs. the this-worldly; or 
Church vs. Empire-they nevertheless are rooted in a single unity 
and Idea. Thus the spiritual realm degrades its heaven to the earthly 
here-and-now, and to a common worldliness, both in actuality and 
in representation. The worldly realm, on the other hand, raises its 
abstract independence to the level of thought and to the principle of 
rational being and knowing, i.e., to the rationality of right and law. 
Thus the antithesis between them withers away to nothing. The pre­
sent world has stripped off its barbarism and unjust arbitrariness, 
and truth has put aside its world of beyond and its casual power. 
Thus the genuine reconciliation has become objective fact, revealing 
the State to be the image and the actuality of Reason. The State is 
where self-consciousness finds the actuality of its substantive know-

l 06 I 
Appendix 
ing and willing, as an organic development; in religion, similarly, 
self-consciousness finds the feeling and image of its own truth as an 
ideal essence; but in philosophy it finds the freely grasped cognition of 
this truth to be one and the same in its complementary manifesta­
tions-in the state, in nature and in the ideal world. 

LEO RAUCH is Professor of Philosophy, Babson College, Welles­
ley, Massachusetts. He has taught also at the University of Cincin­
nati, Ohio State University, the University of Texas at Austin, and 
Haifa University. His previous publications include Hegel and the 
Human Spirit (Wayne State University Press, 1983), Readings in 
Contemporary Analytic Philosophy: Essays from Russell to Rawls (Tel 
Aviv: Yachdav Publishers, 1983), The Political Animal: Political Phi­
losophy from Machiavelli to Mar.x (University of Massachusetts Press, 
1981), and Faith and Revolution: The Philosophy of History from Au­
gustine and Before to Toynbee and After (Tel Aviv, Yachdav Publish-
ers, 1978). 

