Lectures on the Philosophy 
of 
WORJLJD 
JBIJI §TORY 
Introduction 
Iii 
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich 
·;·HrJEGJEJL 
Translated by 
H. B. NISBET 
with an introduction by 
DUNCAN FORBES 

GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH 
HEGEL 
LECTURES ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
WORLD HISTORY 
INTRODUCTION: REASON IN HISTORY 
translated from the German edition of Johannes Hoffmeister by 
H. B. NISBET 
Professor of German, University of St Andrews 
with an Introduction by 
DUNCAN FORBES 
Fellow ofClare College, Cambridge 
.. )i ..... CAMBRIDGE 
::: 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 

PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYND!CA TE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE 
The P1tt Bllllding, Trumpmgton Street, Cambridge CB2 I RP, United Kingdom 
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, United Kingdom 
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA 
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia 
© Cambridge University Press 1975 
This book 1S in copyright. Subject to statutory exception 
and to the provisions of relevant collect1ve licensing agreements, 
no reproduction of any part may take place Wlthout 
the written permission of Cambridge University Press 
Fir<t publi<hed 197 5 
First paperback edition 1980 
Reprinted 1982, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1992, 1993, 1995, 
1996, 1998 
Printed in the United States of Amenca 
Typeset in Bembo 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
Library rif Congress Cataloguing-i"-Publication Data is available 
ISBN 0-521-28145-8 paperback 

Preface 
CONTENTS 
Introduction by Duncan Forbes vii 
Translator's preface xxxvii 
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel 
Lectures on the Philosophy of World History 
Introduction: Reason in History 
edited by Johannes Hoffmeister 
FIRST DRAFT (1822 and 1828) 
The varieties of historical writing 
SECOND DRAFT (183o) 
The philosophical hiJtorJ• of the world 
A Its general concept 
B The realisation of spirit in history 
a. The determination of spirit 
b. The means of its realisation 
c. The material of its realisation 
d. Its reality 
c The course of world history 
a. The principle of development 
b. The beginning of history 
c. The course of development 
APPENDIX 
1 
The natural context or the geographical basis of 
page 5 
II 
27 
44 
47 
68 
93 
II6 
124 
124 
131 
138 
world history 
152 
a. General determinations 
I 52 
b. The New World 
162 
c. The Old World 
171 
a. Africa 
173 
v 

CONTENTS 
{3. Asia 
y. Europe 
2 
The phases of world history 
3 Additions from the winter semester of 1826-7 
page 190 
194 
196 
209 
Note on the composition of the text (by Georg Lasson) 221 
Notes to the First Draft 
227 
Notes to the Second Draft 
230 
Notes to the Appendix 
233 
Suggestions for further reading 
Index of names 
Index of subjects 
\'I 

INTRODUCTION 
1. The Cloud of Unknowing and die Sache selbst1 
The English reader is given here a translation not of the whole of 
Hegel's philosophy of history, but 'of Johannes Hoffmeister's edition of 
Hegel's own Introduction to his lectures on the philosophy of world 
history. Since for Hegel philosophy is the science without presuppositions, 
through and through self-critical, and thus a self-developing whole or 
circle whose end is its beginning, any introduction to any section of it 
can only be a preliminary sketch of what is to come in the light of the 
whole. Hegel's Introdm.tion therefore contains his whole philosophy in 
epitome. 
There is no danger in this for those who know the other main texts. 
But because the philosophy of history is by far the easiest of these- Hegel 
himself seems to have thought of these lectures as a popular introduction 
to his philosophy- it is liable to be used as a substitute rather than an 
introduction, especially as a substitute for the Philosophy of Right, and 
one suspects that much of the misunderstanding and misrepresentation 
of Hegel has been due to this.2 1t contains the notorious phrases about the 
state being the divine Idea on earth, reason ruling the world and so on, 
which have been made to mean precisely the opposite of what Hegel 
intended. Even those who have spent years of suffering as well as enjoy-
ment on this mountain can slip badly at times, and this should be 
sufficient warning to those critics and quick-reading, quick-judging able 
men - from whom God defend the history of ideas - who, taking a quick 
look through the telescope, usually someone else's, feel competent to 
lecture the crowd, always ready to enjoy the deflating of large balloons, 
1 I am not using this term with Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit in mind (Das geistige 
Tierreich ... oder die Sache selbst) but in the hope that it can mean simply the heart 
of the matter or "the real Mackay". Another heading for this section could be 
"The philosophy oflife and love and the dead critics". 
I cr. Walter Kaufmann, Hegel, p. IS. "The Philosophy of History is probably Hegel's 
best known book; but in the more demanding sense of that word, it is scarcely 
'known' at all ... " 
vii 

INTRODUCTION 
on the iniquities of a system which they have not begun to understand 
properly. And there are the sly innuendoes of otherwise learned men, 
which are difficult to nail because the nature and depth of the ignorance 
involved cannot be properly established. It is not easy to gauge how much 
of the old Hegel legend still survives; judging by the remarks still liable 
to be made by highly placed academic persons it is by no means defunct, 
even in the most scholarly circles. But an Introduction of this sort 
cannot put this right; one must take a lot for granted and hope for the best. 
Another difficulty is that Hegel's philosophy of history is nowadays 
generally regarded as the prime example of what philosophy of history 
is not, without being adequately understood. Those who do philosophy 
of history in the contemporary analytical style do not fully understand 
Hegel - why should they? Those who know Hegel do not as a rule care 
for his philosophy of history, and do not think it worthy of intensive 
study in the light of modern developments- to appreciate it properly, 
moreover, one would need to be something of a historian and a historian 
of history as well. The qualities demanded are not likely to be combined 
these days. 
So Hegel's philosophy of history is largely unexplored, and indeed, 
in spite of the enormous literature, one is tempted to say the same for 
the whole of his mature philosophy. Nothing like the amount of detailed 
thorough scholarship which has been expended on his early writings, up 
to and including the Phenomenology of Spirit, has been used for most of 
this century to illuminate the texts of his maturity. This is brought home 
by the fact that it is precisely the philosophy of history that raises some 
of the most crucially difficult central questions - perhaps the most crucial 
and difficult of all - in connection with Hegel's mature philosophy, which 
in a sense transcends time and historical specificity and yet is tied down to 
its own age; the philosopher cannot "leap over Rhodes"; he can only 
describe what is given: indeed, "Science", that is Hegel's philosophy, is 
only possible at all, Spirit or Geist is only able to be fully self-conscious, 
as the result of the culmination of a process in ti.me in the Europe of 
Hegel's day. Thus philosophy is limited and tied down, and yet unlimited 
and free-ranging; able to survey the whole of reality, it is final and 
closed in one sense, wholly open in another, in a way that is not easy to 
grasp. For the philosophy of history is not simply a temporal ladder to 
"Science" which can be dispensed with once one has arrived, if the result 
includes the process of getting there, hoth logical and historical - other-
wise why should the philosopher bother "ith history at all, since that is 
not an eternal recurrence? There must be a philosophy of history for 
Vlll 

INTRODUCTION 
Geist to be fully self-conscious, but this can only become explicit at a 
certain point in time. And in one sense this point is the fullness of time, 
but in another sense it is not, because it is not the end of history, and 
some commentators are fond of drawing attention to those passages which 
show Hegel pointing towards an unknown future and the possibility of 
further developments even in philosophy. To take refuge in the Logic 
alone and ignore the historical manifestations of Spirit; alternatively, to 
historicize the whole philosophy1 is to shirk the issue in one way or 
another. Somehow Hegel's Absolute has to be comprehended as a unity 
of finite and infinite, in which the finite and contingent are necessary as 
such to the philosophy which "overcomes" them. 
This can be gone into no further here. 2 Enough has been said to suggest 
that all the classical misunderstandings of Hegel are due to failure to get 
as far as the point where the difficulties begin; they all seem to have one 
root cause: viz., failure to really grasp the central idea of identity in 
difference, what Hegel calls the 'Notion' (which modern translators prefer 
to call the 'concept', because 'notion' gives a misleading impression of 
cloudiness or vagueness; on the other hand it must be always remembered 
that a very peculiar kind of' concept· is involved). Every kind of seriously 
mistaken interpretation of Hegel seems to spring in one way or another 
from the belief that this philosophy of the Absolute involves the absorp-
tion of reality in the Idea: it is an "absolute idealism" which "resolves", 
meaning abolishes, the contradictions of existence, absorbs the other 
phases of reality into the Absolute in such a way that they are rendered 
meaningless and "unreal". But if this were so, there would be no reality 
left at all. The principle of negativity is given full play, and finally "over-
reached" in an affirmation that will therefore be total, but for that very 
reason "overreached" does not mean abolished. 
What is required therefore is some understanding of what Hegel meant 
when he said that the basis of" Science" was pure self-recognition in 
absolute otherness, or that the true infinite was the unity of itself and the 
finite, or that identity was the union of identity and non-identity (an 
earlier form of this was that union was the union of union and non-union), 
and the clue to this is provided by his claim that the content of his philo-
sophy is Christianity. This in fact is the most direct route to the heart of 
Hegel's philosophy (and its central difficulties); it has the advantage of 
1 See, for example, K. Lowith, Meaning in History, p. 58: "since he transposed the 
Christian expectation of a final consummation into the historical process as such, he 
saw the world's history as consummating itself". 
1 The reader is referred to Emil Fackenheim, The Religious Dirnmsion iu Hegel's 
Thought. 
IX 

INTRODUCTION 
allowing one to dispense with labels like "romantic" or "child of the 
Enlightenment", which probably do more harm than good and are 
certainly in the initial stages of understanding wholly misleading; and, 
as is now well established and well known, it happened to be Hegel's 
own route to philosophy in so far as that emerged out of his double quest 
for the true and the historical Christianity and for a living religion. 
Christianity as false religion was a flight from the world, a pathological 
symptom of a society and a consciousness divided against itself; Chris-
tianity as true religion, the Christianity of Hegel's mature philosophy, 
was the union of divine and human, in which the divine remained wholly 
divine but for that needed and was dependent on the human, and the 
human remained fully human but for that needed and depended on the 
divine. Christianity was the perfection and completion of religion because 
in Christianity God fully reveals himself as the union of finite and infinite. 
Philosophy is the wholly rational expression of this truth. Spirit finds 
itself in its other, and is a perpetually re-enacted process of seeking and 
finding itself in its other which cannot mean abolishing the otherness of 
the other: the other must remain other for Spirit to be at all. As Hegel 
wrote in one of his early fragments, Reason is analogous to love; both 
go out and lose themselves but also find themselves in the other, in the 
Not-J.l 
Whatever philosophers and theologians may think of this, it is clearly 
wrong to regard Hegel's philosophy as a variety of transcendental, 
reality-behind-appearance metaphysic, or optimistic pan-rationalism in 
the eighteenth-century mode ("reason rules the world") reflected in 
philosophy of history as a unilinear progress, or a kind of cosmic Toryism 
("the real is the rational"), or a closed super-system of reasoning deducing 
the whole of reality from arbitrarily asserted a priori first principles by the 
use of the only too famous formula, never in fact used by Hegel, of 
thesis-anti-thesis-synthesis, shunning experience and rendering super-
fluous the work of the natural scientist and historian. Views of this kind, 
commonly held, miss the whole point of Hegel's philosophy, which is 
precisely that it does not shun or in any way devalue the objective world, 
of fact and contingency and finitude, the historian's world and the natural 
scientist's world and the world of every-day experience; its whole object 
is to show how necessary all this is to the life of Spirit. If reality, which is 
not just substance but active subject as well, is a perpetually re-enacted 
process of self-realization, and the result includes the process, then 
Spirit's other, which is necessary to the process, must always remain 
1 Sec H. S. Harris, Hegel's Development, p. 143, and elsewhere. 
X 

INTRODUCTION 
other_ its being "overreached" by Spirit means just that. This is a 
point which Emil Fackenheim insist~ on again a~d again: " ... the entire 
Hegelian philosophy, far from denymg the contmgent, on the contrary 
seeks to demonstrate its inescapability ''; "The system can be comprehen-
sive of the world only by means of total self-exposure to it"; "Hegel 
asserts an Understanding which confronts, analyses and keeps separate 
facts, not merely beside a Reason which speculatively unites them but 
rather ... within a Reason empty without it";" Hegel's life-long endeavour 
was to find the Absolute not beyond, but present in the world, the world 
in which men suffer and labor ... "; "The Absolute, if accessible to 
thought at all, is accessible only to a thought which remains with the 
world of sense, not to a thought which shuns it in 'monkish fashion'. " 1 
Hegel's philosophy can be seen as an exhaustive working out, in ever-
increasing fullness and complexity, of every possible variation, each 
growing out of its predecessor, on this theme of the unity of universal 
and particular. Any manifestation of the one contains and needs the other, 
which, if it is denied, will assert itself as alien, as, to give just two examples, 
the neglected universal stands over against the wholly selfish self of pure 
hedonism as an alien "fate" which is yet its own, and the neglected 
particular self reasserts itself in the wholly "self-less" man so that in 
reality, 'art for art's sake' means art for Jones' sake, the 'pure' scholar is 
wholly selfish, etc.; and this is the negativity which is the principle of 
dialectical progression. 
Holderlin, who was Hegel's close friend, wrote, towards the end of 
Hyperion, "Wieder Zwist der Liebenden, sind die Dissonanzen der Welt. 
Versohnung ist mitten im Streit und alles Getrennte findet sich wieder",2 
and this has been regarded as a suitable motto for the dialectic. If so, it 
must not be taken to mean that love and reconciliation and harmony 
abolish pain, strife and separation, but only their meaninglessness. 
Spirit's "pathway of despair", of self-diremption and self-overcoming, 
is not solely a temporal process; if it were, either it would never be 
complete (and "Science" accordingly impossible) or else it would be 
completed once and for all (but Spirit is perpetually active, always 
alive - death for Hegel means the absence of opposition, the absorption 
of the particular in the universal).3 Pain, suffering, conflict, the contingent 
1 Op. cit. pp. 4, 18, 19, 79, So. Cf. p. 107. Spirit's conquest of the contingent and finite 
"requires the persistent reality of what is conquered by it. For this conquest is a 
'result' which is nothing hut the perpetually re-enacted 'process' of conquering it". 
2 "The dissonances of the world are like the quarrels of lovers. Reconciliation is in the 
midst of strife, and everything that is separated finds itself again". 
3 Encyclopaedia of tlze Philosophical Sciences, §§ 375-6. 
XI 

INTRODUCTION 
and the particular in all its particularity remain; there is no love, harmony, 
reconciliation, true unity or true universality without them. This is the 
most profound meaning of the 'concrete universal', inspired by Chris-
tianity and inconceivable without it. Seen from this central point, Hegel's 
philosophy looks very different from the 'idealist system' scorned by 
Kierkegaard and Nietzsche, misunderstood by Feuerbach, Marx and 
countless others, and presented as 'Hegelian' by the British and American 
Idealists. It is one of Hegel's most constant themes from his earliest 
writings onwards, that all varieties of reality-behind-appearance meta-
physic and religion are pathological, a symptom of alienation in man and 
society which must be aufgehoben. But that does not mean simply done 
away with: alienation is Spirit's self-alienation, the negation of Spirit is 
ever present. It is profoundly mistaken therefore to think that the serenity 
of Hegel's philosophy means the final resolution of conflict or that the 
"overcoming" of negation means the abolition of suffering and contin-
gency and otherness. This would be precisely the sort of night in which 
all cows are black which Hegel said his philosophy was not, and which 
he himself presented in his lectures on the history of philosophy as 
marking more primitive phases of philosophical insight. 
This, then, is the truth grasped by Reason; this is the 'rationality' 
of the universe; this is how 'reason' rules the world; this is the 'rationality' 
of the idea of the modern state: it contains the strains and tensions and 
conflicts of the world of self-seeking individuals which destroyed the 
simple, undifferentiated unity of the Greek polis, negates its negations. 
The state which such a Spirit creates for itself must be a pluralistic state, 
which allows the particular, the private quest for self-satisfaction, full 
play, but not to the extent and in such a way that it defeats or destroys 
itself; a state in which freedom is a concrete living reality, not an abstract 
'right', or mere 'ought'; a state in which the universal and particular sides 
of the will are in harmony, an organic unity of differences, and the greater 
the differentiation, the greater the unity. Similarly the World-Spirit or 
Weltgeist would be neither "real" nor rational, if it were what it is so 
often taken to be: a wholly supra-empirical, supra-individual objective 
entity, or super puppet-master. 
Clearly the Reason that rules the world is not the reason of the ordinary 
rationalist, for that is more properly called the' Understanding', and the 
truths of Reason are opaque to the 'Understanding', the sort of thinking 
that is especially appropriate to natural science and history, that must 
analyse and separate: "everything is what it is and not another thing". 
What is rational and true or" adequate to its notion" is what has brought 
XII 

INTRODlJCTION 
forth, developed and "overcome" its inherent contradictions, that is, 
contains them in "might" and "love " 1 and is mature, in an individual 
or truly civilized state. It is something that has objectified itself, brought 
itself forth; it cannot be true to itself otherwise- indeed the pith and 
marrow of Hegel might be said to be contained in the Gaelic proverb, 
"if it is in, it will out". 2 That is the truth in the description of Hegel as 
one of the most anti-metaphysical of philosophers.3 
By the same token the philosophy of the Absolute is absolutely open 
to experience, "tough-minded" in William James' sense, as empirical 
as any empiricist should wish, which is why so much of its content is now 
closed to us. It is not a question of Feuerbach or Marx or anybody else 
"rescuing" sense experience from its "humble place" in Hegel, or 
standing his philosophy right way up, but sense experience, in itself and 
as such, the most immediate and therefore most abstract form of ex-
perience, cannot be the full truth about reality, and if one tries to make it so, 
the result is self-contradiction. The same holds good for every partial, 
more or less abstract form of experience. None of them by itself is able 
to make the world fully intelligible; they all negate themselves in the 
attempt to do so. But if we are thereby provided with one of the world's 
most fully stocked medicine chests of scepticism and mental and moral 
hygiene, nevertheless all the rungs on the ladder of experience which 
ends with philosophy are rungs in the ladder of philosophy, and that 
means that they are all in themselves perfectly valid, necessary aspects of 
truth. 
It is wrong therefore to think of the dialectic as functioning as a process 
of logical demonstration or deduction in a closed system. This could be 
called 'vulgar Hegelianism'. The best example in English is the well-
known and otherwise not unhelpful exposition by W. T. Stace. Stace is 
worried by what he regards as logical lapses or breaks in the chain of 
reasoning. But the dialectic is not like that at all. It was the result of 
Hegel's desire" to think life"; it is a way of thinking concretely and seeing 
things whole, whose conclusions cannot be proved or disproved, but 
which can be seen to be more or less true to life; its purpose is to provide 
insight. The only way to appreciate it or understand what it is is to watch 
it at work. And one must watch intelligently and without pedantry (which 
1 See Hegel's Science of Logic (trs. Johnston and Struthers), 11, p. 237. 
• "If it is in, it will our, as the Gaelic old-word says". Neil Munro, The Lost Pibroch. 
3 J. N. Findlay, Hegel, aRe-Examination, p. 348. "despite much opinion to the contrary, 
Hegel's philosophy is one of the most anti-metaphysical of philosophical systems, 
one that remains most within the pale of ordinary experience ... " One should, how-
ever, read Fackcnheim, op. cit., in order not to oversimplify the issue. 
X Ill 

INTRODUCTION 
is not possible to anyone in a hostile, fault-finding mood), because although 
Hegel insisted that "Science" was wholly public and a discipline of 
thinking, and talked of "the seriousness, the pain and labour of the 
negative", nevertheless his philosophy is best approached in the spirit of 
Plato's, as something that is in danger of being destroyed or distorted if 
it is written down. Hegel in fact was extremely reluctant to publish; he 
only published two books, because the Encyclopaedia and the Philosophy 
of Right are compendia for courses of lectures. The present edition of the 
introductory lectures on the philosophy of history has the advantage of 
bringing home the fact that so much of Hegel's philosophy was talked, 
not without humour and anecdote and personalities and contemporary 
reference- Haldane's "dry man" is quite wrong- and also constant 
tacking and changes of course. 
Croce has good things to say about the "Bacchic delirium" which for 
Hegel is the movement of reality. "Reality seems mad, because it is life: 
philosophy seems mad, because it breaks up abstractions and lives that 
life in thought. It is a madness which is the highest wisdom, and the true 
and not metaphorical madmen are they who become mad with the empty 
words of semi-philosophy, who take formulas for reality, who never 
succeed in raising themselves to that clear sky whence they can see their 
work as it really is ... " 1 More recent exponents of the dialectic have 
insisted that it must not be approached with unintelligent rigidity. 2 
Kaufmann makes much of the influence on Hegel of Schiller's Letters on 
the Aesthetic Educatzon of Man,3 and the theory of freedom as 'play', 
and Miiller quotes Hegel's description of the Reichenbach Falls, written 
about the same time as the publication of Schiller's Letters, as an antici-
pation of the dialectic of the mature philosophy, in which Hegel delights 
in the spectacle of" free play" (das Bild eines freien Spieles). 4 Indeed 
Hegel's description of the Falls is as good a Vorstellung or pictorial 
representation of his philosophy as one is likely to find, though he does 
not seem to have used it himself as such. The artist, he says, cannot 
1 What is Living and What is Dead oft he Philosophy of Hegel {trs. Douglas Ainslie), p. 29. 
• G. R. G. Mure, The Philosophy of Hegel, p. 38. The reader "must not be tempted 
by the display of triadic notation to ask if dialectic has the cogency of mathematical 
deduction. It certainly has not, but the comparison is inept ... In deduction one false 
step ruins the argument. If dialectic errs it is because its freedom degenerates to a 
capricious and arbitrary movement ... There is no possible external test of dialectic, 
no applicable rule of formal logic ... What matters is whether Hegel's general con-
ception of spirit is justified, and whether he shows a deeper insight than other thinkers 
into man's nature and destiny." 
• Op. cit. pp. 46-58. 
' G. E. Muller, Hegel, Denkgeschichte eines Lebendigen, p. 79· 
XIV 

INTRODUCTION 
capture the essential thing: das ewige Leben, die gewaltige Regsamkeit; 
the fact that what one sees is always the same and yet always different ... 
Those who profess to see in Hegel's philosophy only a lifeless mechanical 
system or intellectual gymnastic had better first make sure that they are 
not themselves 
the hollow men 
the stuffed men. 
2. Hegel and the historians 
The Philosophy of History is where professional historians have made 
contact with Hegel's philosophy, if they can be said to have come into 
contact with it in any real sense at all. From Ranke onwards, they and 
their philosophical allies have denounced and criticized it with an enviable 
self-confidence not shared by those who really have "fought at Arques ", 
and the result of what can in most cases only be described, to borrow a 
phrase of Tovey's, as ''encyclopaedic inattention" to the texts.1 Ranke 
had only the most rudimentary notion of what he made such a show of 
rejecting, and the professional historians, as one might expect, tend to 
range themselves behind him without further ado.• Acton, in his famous 
essay on German Schools of History, is magisterially staccato, cryptic and 
quite wrong; Geyl fulminated against Hegel's "abuse of history with a 
vengeance" and his "presumptuous, egocentric system" ;3 one could heap 
up an imposing pile of such misrepresentations. They have their main 
source in the unquestioned, and mistaken, belief that Hegel's philosophy 
of history is a ready-made scheme, not drawn from observation of the 
facts but imposed on them, thus making a mockery of the conscientious 
spade work about which historians are, rightly, so sensitive; that it shows 
no respect for or grasp of the individual fact as such, because the Idea is 
prior to the facts, so that the historian is turned into the merest under-
labourer at best, even if he is not rendered altogether superfluous. 
But if Logic (the Idea)-Nature-Spirit is, like everything 'rational', 
a threefold union or syllogism, in which each of the members takes the 
place both of one of the extremes and of the mediating middle, if "truth 
1 Essays in Mr1sical Analysis, IV, p. 74· "The impregnable fortress of Berlioz's encyclo-
paedic inattention" to Byron's poem. 
8 E.g. H. Butterfield, Man on his Past, p. 104. Von Laue, Leopold Ranke, p. IZ3. 
A. D. Momigliano, Studies in Historiography, p. 105. P. Geyl, Debates 71Jith Historians, 
p. 7· F. Engel-Janosi, The Gro71Jth of German Historicism, p. 47· F. Meinecke, 
Machiavellism (trs. D. Scott), p. 383. 
3 P. Geyl, Use and Abuse of History, pp. 35-9. 
XV 

INTRODUCTION 
is its own self-movement" and "the true is the whole" and "its own 
becoming", and philosophy a circle, so that nothing 'comes first', except 
for purposes of exposition, and there is no a priori, and the Idea has no 
existence apart from the world of experience, any a priori scheme of 
history would be a non-entity and inconceivable. And as has been seen, 
in the full circle of experience, the 'Understanding' in natural science 
and history as well as the 'common sense' view of the world, the "vulgar 
consciousness" in the light of which we daily live, have their vital roles 
to play and are in no way rendered superfluous or disvalued by Reason 
or philosophy, that "Science" which views the whole in the light of the 
whole. The historian's world in all its phases and modes and varieties of 
historical explanation is, as such, absolutely intact, philosophy of history 
presupposes it, as philosophy of nature presupposes natural science. But 
did not Hegel attack Niebuhr, one of the fathers of modern scientific 
historiography? He did so because he was so anxious to champion the 
historians on their own ground that he failed to appreciate the value of 
Niebuhr's reconstruction of early Roman history; he thought that 
Niebuhr was sacrificing the documentary evidence to a priori subjective 
intuition, thus illegitimately interpreting the past in the light of the 
present. And not only did Hegel have a respect for and appreciation of 
fact, an insatiable appetite for sheer information in every subject, that is 
almost unique in the history of philosophy, but, as has been seen, his 
philosophy is such that sheer fact and contingency are given a unique 
philosophical status; 'Reason' is such that 'Reason in history', properly 
understood, must, among other things, mean precisely that grasp of the 
particular fact and appreciation of the uniqueness of historical indivi-
duality which Hegel has been accused of lacking, regarding them only as 
steps to a pre-ordained goal. 
Croce however would have none of this. He was so anxious to take up 
the cudgels on behalf of "actual history" and the professional historian, 
that the insight shown earlier in his book, when he explains why it is 
grossly misleading to describe Hegel's philosophy as "optimistic '',1 
fades when he comes to the application of the dialectic in history. He sees 
Hegel's idea of history as operating on two mutually exclusive planes- the 
plane of empirical fact and that of a priori speculation - and therefore as 
self-contradictory. Hegel himself, he says, divides history into "reflective" 
1 Op. cit. pp. 58-9. "Hegel cancels neither the evil nor the ugly, nor the false, nor the 
vain: nothing could be more alien to his conception of reality, so dramatic, and in a 
certain sense so tragic. What he sets himself to do is to understand the function of evil 
and of error; and to understand it as evil and as error is surely not to deny it as such, 
but rather to strengthen it." 
XVI 

INTRODUCTION 
and "philosophical" history, but you cannot have two different methods 
for the same set of facts; one of them must be rendered nugatory and 
meaningless, so that Hegel's "various declarations of the great respect 
due to actual fact" are a fraud, although "Hegel never dared to declare 
the empirical and positive method altogether erroneous so that it could 
be wholly replaced by the speculative method" (p. 169). In effect "he 
had to negate, as he did negate, the history of the historians" (p. I 38). 
But Croce, like the professional historians, thought that" philosophical" 
history in Hegel means a priori history, "history of a second degree", 
having "the character of an a priori construction", "a history already 
complete which needs only to be clothed in names and dates", or "nothing 
but a rough anticipation of what is given by actual history" (see Chapter 
7). The wine of historical fact is poured into previously existing bottles, 
and if most of it spills over, as Croce thinks it does, then it is not 'real 
and rational' and doesn't matter (p. 145). The historian in fact is being 
asked to hand over his work to the philosopher to be revised and com-
pleted, and he rightly rebels. "It is just as if a painter or musician were 
told to consign to the philosophers his picture or his score when he had 
completed it, so that they might raise it to the second power ... " (p. 138). 
Croce's powerful criticism has obviously been very influential, but what 
it amounts to is a failure to sustain and deepen his understanding and 
appreciation of the dialectic when he comes to Hegel's philosophy of 
history. He writes as though there were a hard and fast line in Hegel 
between the realm of actual historical fact and that of a priori philoso-
phical deduction, and in the final analysis this misunderstanding may be 
traced to his belief that Hegel's philosophy "resolves religion into itself 
and substitutes itself for it" (p. 71). Thus he supported the instinctive 
reaction of the professional historians with a more sophisticated version 
of the fundamental error previously noted. 
Hegel's account of the three kinds of history at the beginning of his 
lectures on the philosophy of history is well known. What is not perhaps 
so well known is that it is an interesting example of the dialectic in action, 
as anyone familiar with Hegel's treatment of any other subject would 
expect, though the dialectical movement is not so obvious here as else-
where, perhaps because it has been rather blurred in the processes of 
editing (and translating). To ignore it is to miss the point of much of 
what Hegel says, but it can be roughly reconstructed, and a free and 
abridged version would run somewhat as follows. 
The first, most primitive (that is logically primitive) kind of history, 
"original" history, is barely history at all in so far as it represents an 
xvu 

INTRODUCTION 
immediate unity between the historian's consciousness or Geist and the 
Geist of what he is describing; this sort of contemporary history is 
necessarily limited. When this sort of chronicle, seen at its most sophis-
ticated in Thucydides, is extended to meet the need for a view of the 
whole history of a people or even for a history of the world, we get the 
first primitive phase of what Hegel calls" reflective" history, "reflective" 
in so far as now the historian's consciousness and what he is describing 
have fallen apart; the past is now outside and different from the historian's 
consciousness, past and present are separate spheres and the past has to 
be consciously retrieved and made present in a way that doesn't happen 
in "original" history. This is therefore the phase of "mediacy ", the 
special province of the 'Understanding'. At the first, most unsophis-
ticated stage of" reflective" history, which is still very close to "original" 
history, when a historian like Livy, for example, aims to present an 
account as circumstantial as that, it is the Geist of the historian's present 
that prevails and the result is no more than a one-dimensional extension 
of" original" history backwards in time. But "reflective" history proper 
means abridgement; here we have another meaning of' reflection', when 
one reflects and tries to understand, and the' Understanding' is the great 
epitomiser (der Verstand ist der miichtigste Epltomator). In its most 
primitive and immediate form this sort of "reflective" history, which 
one can also see in Livy, is so abridged as to be wholly lifeless, a dry and 
abstract record of events, qualitatively undifferentiated. But at the other 
extreme, the effort to immerse the reader wholly in the past by heaping up 
antiquarian detail is lifeless in so far as it is wholly particular: there is 
nothing universal, no unifying principle in such mere catalogues. Anti-
quarian detail as an end in itself, the study of the past for its own sake, 
ceases to be history and comes into its own in the historical novel. Sheer 
antiquarianism, and its nemesis, for the attempt to 'live' and make the 
reader 'live' in a past regarded as wholly alien by putting lots of pieces 
of it together in a manner that is necessarily wholly external and mechani-
cal ends in a dead pedantry,1 can be taken as providing the dialectical 
transition to the next stage of "reflective" history, viz., "pragmatic" 
history. All historical writing is pragmatic in so far as a past is present in 
a mind which gives the events a unity which they do not possess in 
themselves, so that the past is au(gehoben: taking it up into the present 
means that it is abolished as sheer past, \\hatever antiquarians may try 
1 Presumably the Gei<t of the historical novel, what is alive in it, is not truly historical, 
and what is historically accurate in the historical novel is not truly alive. What belongs 
to the present and what belongs to the past never cohere in a living unity. 
XVlll 

INTRODUCTION 
to think. But nemesis follows the attempt to make it wholly present and 
of general import: the pulsing life of the present spurns the pale, power-
less generalizations that are the 'lessons' of a past that can never be 
exactly similar or truly relevant, and the reader, bored by these general 
reflections alleged to be of universal validity but which must in fact differ 
from writer to writer and from age to age, turns back with relief to sheer 
chronicle, which has no particular point of view. "Critical" history, the 
next logical step and a reaction against utilitarian history or pragmatic 
history as such, is not so much history as a preliminary history of history; 
it prides itself especially on extracting more from the records of the past 
than is apparently contained in them, but carried to the point where 
. subjective fancies are substituted for historical data, it is simply another 
way of importing the present into the past; the so-called "higher 
criticism" ceases to be properly historical or critical. S pezialgeschichte, 
the final phase of "reflective" history, is an abstraction from the living 
whole of a culture or cultures of a single topic for historical study, as in 
constitutional history or legal history or the history of art, or science or 
religion, etc. In so far as this apparently 'external' approach, when 
properly pursued, however, yields the inner connection or leitmotiv of 
events (die innere leitende Seele der Begebenheiten), and in so far as its 
point of view is general, it forms the transition to the third stage; philo-
sophy of history, the realm no longer of the 'Understanding', but of 
Reason. The point of view here is no longer abstract and special, as in 
the highest stage of" reflective" history, but truly concrete and universal; 
in philosophy of history past and present are re-united, but no longer as 
in the immediate, unreflective unity of "original" history. Geist is ever 
present and has no past, yet it comes to full self-consciousness in history; 
it is ever the same, but, as manifested in each unique Volksgeist or culture, 
ever different. 
Critics however like Croce cannot see why the dialectic has to proceed 
beyond "reflective" history, for what does philosophical history do which 
cannot be done by "reflective" history? The answer is nothing, qua 
history. The situation is much the same here as in the Philosophy of 
Right, where critics like M. B. Foster' can see no need for the transition 
from "civil society", the dialectic of which, like that of "reflective" 
history, moves from a world of fragmentation and particularism to a kind 
of unity, which is not, however, that of philosophy, to the" state". This 
transition, argues Foster, Hegel only brings about in the sinister interests 
of the ruling class. In" civil society" everything necessary for the realiza-
1 The Political Philosophies of Plato a11d Hegel. 
XIX 

INTRODUCTION 
tion of Sittbclzkeit (objective ethical life), and in" reflective" history every-
thing necessary for true 'history are said to be already present; the pro-
gress of the dialectic means the superseding and destruction by philosophy 
of the possibility of democracy and the historian's history respectively. 
And the answer to the objection applies in both cases: neither at the 
level of "reflective" history, nor in "civil society", both of which arc 
fragmented worlds of the 'Understanding', is the universal "seen in 
the light of the universal". The administration of justice in "civil 
society", for example, can only be an end in itself from a pragmatic 
point of view; however well administered it cannot be always or truly 
just: it is, however, necessary to the proper functioning of the whole, and 
in time of war, for example, many aspects of it may have to be dispensed 
with; however, what appears arbitrary, external and unjust at the level of 
"civil society" will not be so when seen in the light of the whole. When I 
view the administration of justice, which as such is the universal (the 
law) applied in my particular case, in the light of the whole, I can sec that 
it cannot be an end in itself, that in time of crisis, for instance, it may have 
to be suspended in the interests of the state and therefore in the final 
analysis in the interest of the freedom maintained by the state. "Civil 
society" is therefore "the state as envisaged by the 'Understanding'." 
Its freedom cannot be the last word about freedom in the state. 
Similarly, in "reflective" history every historian has more or less 
consciously and adequately a 'philosophy of history', some preconceived 
ideas without which he cannot function as a historian at all. They are 
necessary hypotheses, and there may be as many of them as there are 
historians, and one cannot be said to be any more true than another at 
this level. Which is the point made by modern analytical philosophers of 
history. Mandelbaum, for example, in The Problem of Historical K11oro-
lcdge, is anxious to show that an empirical philosophy of history is 
impossible and a contradiction in terms. This is Hegel's point, and it 
brings out the sceptical and analytical side of the dialectic which the 
critics are prone to overlook. The dialectic shows that history as such 
cannot be 'useful' ; the past as studied by the historian has no 'lessons' -
Hegel's saying to this effect is well known. 
In the realm of" reflective" history the history of Geist as the realization 
of freedom is just one more hypothesis among many. As such it is purely 
formal and abstract and its content is purely arbitrary. There is nothing 
to decide which particular version of the history of freedom or which 
particular 'philosophy of history' is true - any criterion of truth will 
appear to be a universal imposed arbitrarily from without, with no 
XX 

INTRODUCTION 
generally recognized or public claim to be in any way superior or quali-
tatively different from any other. This is the true historian's attitude, qua 
historian, to the phiiosophy of history, but the historian's experience, as 
such, is not the last word about the whole of experience (in art, religion 
and philosophy, the sphere of Absolute Geist, history and historical 
development as such cease to have importance or meaning), and historians 
who act as though they were claiming that it is simply fall to quarrelling 
among themselves: the assertion is self-negating; what was a useful 
working hypothesis becomes a menace to the discovery of the (histo-
rian's) truth. And this is the negation which philosophy negates. 'Com-
pleting' "reflective" history does not mean negating it, but negating its 
negations; in the same way, the state negates the negations of "civil 
society", a world of self-interest which in itself, regarded as an absolute, 
is self-destructive. The true historical content of the philosophy of history 
is not therefore solely a matter for "reflective" history as such. 
Only philosophy can provide the true 'notion; of freedom which 
'reflective' history as such cannot comprehend, that is, it provides the 
content of the idea of freedom (and therefore the content of the philosophy 
of history), because to think freedom philosophically, that is concretely, 
not abstractly, is to think the organized life described in the Philosophy of 
Right, viz. the 'Idea' of the modern democratic state in which alone 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
realization and self-satisfaction made any sort of reality. (And it is already 
some sort of historical reality because otherwise it could not be thought 
by philosophy, where merely describes the given, and cannot describe 
something which does not exist.) This gives one the criterion of truth 
lacking in history as such and the content without which the philosophy 
of history as such is purely formal and abstract. A history of freedom at 
the level of "reflective" history might be a history of 'totalitarian 
freedom', or of anarchism; it is open to all the manipulated interpretations 
and newspeak of the men of I g84 or anybody: its content is wholly 
arbitrary. A true history of freedom presupposes the philosophy of Recht, 
and philosophy of history is the logical conclusion of that. The history of 
freedom cannot be divorced from the political organization and law and 
the idea of law without which freedom is a mere abstraction and unreal. 
(To say that for Hegel, true freedom "in typical idealist fashion, is 
possible only through discipline " 1 is just silly; either .a pale relic of the 
1 W. H. Dray, Philosophy of History, p. 70. A remark which spoils one of the better 
attempts by a modern philosopher of history to give a brief account of Hegel's 
philosophy of history. 
XXI 

INTRODUCTION 
old nonsense about Hegel being "anti-liberal", or a timid half-conscious 
professorial bow in the direction of some noisy but mindless 'permissive-
ness'. Only if one is an anarchist can one reject Hegel's philosophy of the 
state, and Hegel himself in the Phenomenology of Spirit shows what logical 
and moral absurdities the anarchist gets into if he thinks his beliefs right 
through.) 
This means that the philosophy of history will not be universal history 
or world-history as that is conceived by the 'Understanding': viz., 
everything in the bag, but highly selective, and it is badly off target to 
criticize Hegel's philosophy of history for being selective,! or for treating 
the whole of history as though it were' political', which was Collingwood's 
main criticism.2 "The moral", wrote Collingwood, "is that political 
developments should be conceived by the historian as integrated with 
economic, artistic, religious and philosophical developments, and that the 
historian should not be content with anything short of a history of man 
in his concrete actuality." Although Hegel was not doing history qua 
historian, this in principle is what his philosophy of history is, even if his 
lectures on the history of art, religion and philosophy formed separate 
courses. But in the lectures that are called "the philosophy of world 
history", Hegel is dealing with the ground of these activities, without 
which they are impossible, hence the" central position of the state", which 
Collingwood objected to and called an "anachronism". But Hegel's idea 
of the state is comprehensive, like Aristotle's, and a philosophy of history 
in which it is central, or rather fundamental, is not "political" in the 
sense criticized by Collingwood, but a history of civilization. (To be 
more precise, a history of civilization, from one point of view, of civili-
zations, from another- a synthesis, as some would describe it, of 
'rationalist' and 'romantic' historiography.) And since Hegel's philosophy 
is not the 'idealist' photographic negative, which Marx thought he was 
developing into a true picture, and since "civil society", which incor-
porates what Hegel called the "system of needs", is an essential aspect 
of the 'Idea' of the modern state, and therefore of freedom properly 
conceived, Hegel's philosophy of history, in principle at any rate, incap-
sulates and postulates a materialist or economic interpretation of history. 
And if the task of the philosopher is to think experience concretely 
1 It is also fashionable to display one's broadmindcdness by criticizing Hegel for being 
arrogantly Europo-centric or Western-orientated. The latest example is W. H. Walsh 
in Hegel's Politu·a/ Philosophy, Problems and Perspectives (ed. Z. A. Pelczymki). But 
isn't Hegel's perspective broadly the right one? Or at least should one not wait until 
world history has shown its hand a bit more clearly? 
2 R. G. Colling\\ood, The Idea of History, p. 122. 
XXll 

INTRODUCTION 
and to describe the given, the philosophy of history cannot be an a pnori 
scheme, thought out prior to observation of the facts and the work of the 
historian as such. The Geist of modern man, his claim to freedom, is real 
enough, and must have come about in history. Hegel does not say that 
this was ineluctably necessary, but that it can be seen to have happened. 
This is the "outline" or "skeleton plot" which W. H. Walsh says must be 
an a priori deduction. 1 But this "outline", surely, is precisely "hat is 
most obviously and palpably given to observation? Men know and have 
and want freedom as they once did not, just as they know and have and 
want electricity as they once did not. This fact or event or process is 
the meaning of history: the fact is the meaning. One could object to the 
way in which Hegel presents the details of this development, though one 
should always remember that it is wrong to think of the dialectic as a 
rigid pattern of ultimate and unchangeable truth. 
Hegel was concerned in the Philosophy of Right and in the philosophy 
of history with the inherent 'rationality' of the modern state an·d of 
world-history respectively; in neither case was he, so to speak, simply 
photographing the facts. The Philosophy of Right is not a description of 
any one actual state, although it is full of empirical detail, but of the 
inherent rationality of the modern state as such. In both cases one has a 
rational' deduction', or logical core, with a great deal of empirical content. 
The difficulty therefore does not concern the 'outline' or 'skeleton plot' 
or sheer logic of freedom but, since the dialectic is neither wholly deduc-
tive nor wholly inductive, how far into empirical detail must the philo-
sopher venture? How does one draw the line, and where, between what 
is an object for philosophy (like the state, which clearly is) and what is not 
(like Jones' red hair, which clearly is not)? The jury, for example, is 
part of the rational state; but philosophy is not concerned with its size 
or composition. The decision seems arbitrary. But if the 'truth' of 
philosophy is the 'truth' of a portrait, not of a photograph, then to some 
extent what goes in, the empirical content, cannot be guided by any rigid, 
mechanical rule. The dialectic is essentially flexible, though there is a 
hard core: the logic of freedom. 
Obviously there has been a development as a historical fact in man's 
consciousness of freedom, though to regard this as akin to a rationalistic 
idea of progress does scant justice to the depth of Hegel's insight and 
subtlety of his analysis. In describing it in detail, the philosopher is 
wholly dependent on the historian, and the state of contemporary histo-
rical knowledge, which will grow and alter and also reflect changing social 
A11 Introduction to Philosophy of History (1951), p. r;r. 
XXlll 

INTRODUCTION 
conditions etc., as Hegel was very much aware. The empirical detail 
therefore of the philosophy of history must be regarded as tentative and 
subject to change. Detailed criticism of the content of Hegel's philosophy 
of history seems for this reason somewhat otiose. It is based on a miscon-
ception of what a "unitary view of history" means in Hegel. There can, 
of course, be only one philosophy of history, as there can be only one 
philosophy of the state, because there cannot be alternatives to reality, 
but the detailed pattern is subject to change in conformity with the basis 
of fact provided by the professional historians or political scientists (or 
for that matter the philosopher himself qua professional historian or 
political scientist in so far as that is practicable). There is more than one 
pattern of the philosophy of history in Hegel's own work, especially if 
one takes into account the Phenomenology of Spirit and the writings prior 
to that. Hegel with his insatiable appetite for information was apt to 
delve deeply into the empirical realm of observed fact, thereby dangerously 
extending his lines, in so far as he was dependent on the state of knowledge 
in his day, though for thus showing his appreciation of what Croce calls 
historian's history he has had nothing but abuse from the historians 
themselves, because they have regarded as a menace to their profession 
what is really a compliment. The more genuinely concrete a philosophy is, 
the more dead wood it is presumably fated to carry as time and research 
proceed, and the more purely antiquarian knowledge is required to 
properly appreciate and understand it. One of the difficulties in under-
standing Hegel, especially the philosophy of nature, is precisely that he 
was so deeply immersed and well informed in all the sciences of his time. 
Critics of the philosophy of history do not, as a rule, possess enough 
knowledge of the history of history and other sciences, or the historical 
imagination, to be able to make the necessary allowances; e.g., if anthro-
pologists had discovered the 'state' among primitive peoples, still a 
somewhat controversial matter, Hegel would presumably have had to 
begin with them. As it is he begins with the East, and the development of 
freedom is given a geographical East-West movement. This sort of thing, 
emphasis, for instance, on the role of world-historical individuals, natural 
to someone who had lived under the shadow of Napoleon and admired 
him, for reasons usually misunderstood, belongs to the flexible, adjustable 
sector of the philosophy of history. And this belongs to the body of the 
lectures, so that anyone wanting to judge how far the dialectic applied 
to history did lead to new insights must go to them (and the full, critical 
edition has not been translated from the German). As in the Philosophy of 
Right so here, one must go behind the empirical description to the inherent 
XXIV 

INTRODUCTION 
rationality, or see the latter in the former, to distinguish "hat is liYing 
and what is dead in Hegel's account. 
And if freedom and the idea of the modern state are in some sense 
objective realities of the modern world - they could not be thought by 
philosophy otherwise - then to this extent and in this sense the process 
of world-history relevant to the philosopher is complete, and the argument 
that a philosophy of history is impossible because history is open-ended, 
and therefore no human being can survey the whole scene, does not 
apply. The philosopher can survey the whole scene of the development of 
freedom; though this does not mean anything so absurd as that history 
comes to an end with Hegel. 
Nearly all modern writers who discuss the nature of hiswrical thinking 
feel obliged to take issue with Hegel, and some are more adequately 
equipped to do so than others. Thus W. H. Dray, for example, is aware 
of the difficulties involved in Hegel's alleged a priorism, but he ends up 
subscribing to a version of the "two level" interpretation.1 Hegel does 
not show in general, he complains, that the passions of individuals are 
such as to bring about a situation in which there can be a dialectical 
development of Spirit. But what Hegel does is what numerous thinkers 
in the previous century had done, that is, point to two 'facts': on the 
one hand the progress of civilization; on the other the prevailingly 
selfish passions of men, so that something like what Hegel called the 
"cunning of reason" has to be posited as an explanation. Dray's short 
account is fairly full; more often the references to Hegel in recent writers 
are too brief and cryptic to be worth attempting to answer. Thus Danto 
in his Analytical Philosophy of History says that Hegel never asked what 
was the significance of the Absolute's final self-awareness, or if he had, 
he would doubtless have moved to a quite different sense of' significant' 
than that applied to the ordinary events of history. 2 W. B. Gallic accuses 
Hegel of monstrously distorting the ideal of generous-minded ness which 
he glimpsed to meet the needs of his system.3 After a survey of the 
literature one is left wondering why modern philosophers of history bother 
with Hegel at all. Mostly they only muddy the waters of interpretation 
without advancing the cause of the philosophy of history. 
1 Philosophy of Hi.< tory, p. 81. "The Hegelian account of history recognizes two levels 
at which the course of events can be described, each with its own kind of mechanism. 
The two levels, however, never really mesh." 
1 A. C. Danto, A1uzlytical Philosophy of History, p. 14. 
3 Philosophy and tht Historical Understanding, pp. 225-6. 
XXV 

INTRODUCTION 
3· Hegel and the political theorists 
An adequate grasp of Hegel's idea of the state as the realization of the 
concept of freedom has until quite recently been an esoteric rarity. It was 
suggested earlier that the most fundamental cause of all the misunder-
standing is the failure to appreciate properly the "religious dimension" 
of Hegel's philosophy, its heart and centre in his idea of Christianity. 
If one knows what Hegel means by "divine" one can see that his 
"deification" of the state means just the opposite of what it is usually 
taken to mean, and that Maciver's view of Hegel's state as "a sort of 
God whose thoughts are not our thoughts and whose ways are not our 
ways '',1 for example, is for Hegel quite literally a kind of blasphemy. 
It is blasphemy for a Christian to think of God as in any way unknown, 
a concealed object acting on mankind from without in a manner humanly 
unknown and unknowable. This constitutes the unholy alliance of ration-
alist agnostics and pietists (like Ranke, one might say): both think of 
God as an unknowable object. The 'totalitarian' interpretation of 
Hegel's political philosophy, according to which the state is said to be 
all-in-all and the individual nothing, has not as a rule gone deep enough 
nor realized that such a view is made totally impossible by the religious 
ground of his whole philosophy so that his rejection of it could not 
possibly be more sincere or deep-seated. 
And the 'Idea' of the state, its 'rationality' properly understood, 
quickly disposes of the many varied accusations that Hegel's theory of the 
state endorses nationalism, relativism, and Mar:htpolitik. The state is 
the "overreaching" universal, which both needs and makes possible the 
particularity of the Volk, the unique culture of the 'nation' (which is 
an unfortunate word in this context, unless one realizes that it applies 
to the Greek polis, for example: 'culture-state' would be less apt to 
mislead than 'nation-state'), as it needs and makes possible the private 
satisfactions of the individual of"civil society", at the same time curbing 
the self-destructive excesses of self-seeking particularity in the light of 
principles of universal validity. Any 'nationalism' which is wholly 
particular is thus one-sided and self-destructive, like the self-seeking 
particularism of "civil society" in itself and as such. 
It was because Meinecke failed to understand what he called Hegel's 
"philosophy of identity", in which he thought "the irrationality and 
uncleanness of historical reality as a whole" was" mere dissonance, which 
1 R. M. Maciver, The Modern State, p. 450. 
xxvi 

INTRODUCTION 
is resolved in the (ultimate) harmony", and "all the rich and variegated 
activity of history re-interpreted as being merely the play of marionettes ... 
guided by a higher hand", that he could see Hegel as an unholy com-
pound of Machiavellian razso11 d' it at and Historismus, the "doctrine of 
individuality", for whom national power was the supreme aim of the 
"deified" "supra-individual entity" of the state, whose right was all-in-
alJ.l Meinecke historicized Hegel's philosophy: Hegel "reinterpreted the 
concept of reason, from being the static force it was before, into the fluid 
developmental process of historical humanity"; he equated the actually 
existing with the rational, so that "everything, absolutely everything", 
served to promote the progressive self-realization of divine reason. 2 
Meinecke's complete failure to see the universal, natural law side of 
Hegel's philosophy vitiates his whole powerful-seeming denunciation of 
it as the evil culmination of Machiavellism. 
But history is only the temporal and objective dimension of Spirit's 
self-realization; the philosophy of history is itself a stage in the dialectic. 
The Philosophy of Right does not in fact end with the state. The achieve-
ment of f[eedom in the rational state is not an end in itself; the politi-
cal/moral freedom possible in the state is only a relative freedom: the 
sort of "manly, moral freedom" which Burke said must be limited in 
order to be possessed. It is a one-sided freedom, the freedom of Geist qua 
objective, not the absolute freedom of Absolute Geist, that is, the realiza-
tion of truth in art, religion and finally and fully in philosophy. There 
must, therefore, be a transition from Objective Geist to Absolute Geist, 
and this is provided by world-history, the arena in which states achieve 
their self-hood as individuals and the recognition by others which 
individuality implies. Accordingly we move from the "Idea" of the 
rational state to the arena of world-history, in which states meet their 
doom, where their finitude qua particular nation-states is made manifest, 
a finitude and particularity brought home to man's consciousness by the 
fact of war. The "earthly God" is seen to suffer the fate of everything 
mortal and finite in what appears at first glance to be a realm wholly 
given over to the play of the contingent and the unforeseen. International 
law between sovereign states is no more than an "ought"; there is no 
higher court of judgment than history- the world's court. 
It has been argued that Hegel finds himself in a logical dilemma at 
this point because any mere "ought" represents a retrogression after the 
1 F. Meinecke, Machiavellism (trs. by Douglas Scott of Die Idee der Staatsrii.wn), 
pp. 355, 363, 367. But see the whole chapter on Hegel. 
• Op. cit. pp. 363, 349· Carlo Antoni followed Meinecke. See L' Historisme (French trs. 
by A. Dufour), pp. 64-75. 
xxvu 

INTRODUCTION 
ethical synthesis achieved by the rational state,1 but this is to forget that 
the synthesis is not final: the unity of universal and particular achieved 
in the state is logically and empirically precarious in so far as the state 
belongs to the world of contingency and empirical fact. History as the 
world's court is not called in to mend a break in the progress ofthe dialectic: 
it is an essential and typical aspect of it; a typical example of the "labour 
of the negative", leading to a truer unity, a higher spirituality. The state's 
finitude in history forms the dialectical transition to Absolute Geist as 
the death of the animal organism is the transition from Nature to Sub-
jective Geist. The onward march of the dialectic demands not, as Russell 
thought, a World-State, because such a thing does not exist and cannot 
be an object for philosophy, but a falling apart once again of universal 
and parti~ular, subject and object, and this happens in world-history, 
where on the one hand we have the actions of states and individual 
historical persons promoting an end which was no part of their intention, 
and on the other, that end itself. It is fully in accord with the dialectic 
that Spirit, on its way to the absolute freedom of full self-consciousness, 
should plunge into another phase of self-diremption; "let itself go" into 
the world of contingency and particularity and externality and unfreedom; 
and find itself again in this world, the world of Volney and Gibbon, of 
Les Ruines and the dissolution of states and empires, of Shelley's Ozyman-
dias and the chorus in He/las, which is seen to be not just that but a 
transition to another, truer, phase of freedom and life more abundant. 
Universalo..and particular fallen apart, we have a world of particular states, 
each with its own unique Geist and culture, externally related, with no 
principle of unity, apparently, other than the purely formal universality 
of the "S ollm" of international law. And in war the particular individual 
is wholly absorbed in and by the universal (the state) and sacrifices his 
private satisfactions and self in whole or in part. In this self-sacrifice, as 
in the death of the physical organism, the universal triumphs over the 
particular, only death is now filled with a meaning lacking at that purely 
natural level of experience. 
And when all the variety and individuality of the world of Historismus 
is seen to be also the working out of a single process, the universal (the 
Weltgeist) appears to stand above the ethos of particular nations and the 
particular passions of world-historical individuals, and direct them, 
through the "cunning of reason", to its own end, unknown to them, as 
though it were separate and apart, a transcendental object. And that is 
how it must appear to the 'Understanding', but since the diremption of 
1 H. A. Reyburn, Hegel's Ethical Theory, chapter Xlll. 
XXVlll 

INTRODUCTION 
Spirit is a self-diremption, _this cannot b~ th~ ~ruth of_the matter .. I~ the 
Absolute is wrongly conce1ved as supra-md1v1dual obJect, a fortwn the 
Weltgeist is no such thing. It is Geist, the human spirit, in history, in its 
process of self-realiza~ion ~n :ime; th~ _tempo~al dimension _of Sp_irit's 
coming-to-be and bemg; It 1s the cnt1cs, usmg the one-d1menswnal 
'Understanding', who are guilty of 'reification', seeing the Weltgeist as 
an external object. 
The Philosophy ofRight ends, not with the state, but with the higher 
right, the higher justice of world-history, and this does not mean the 
justification of the historical process as such and with it the sanctification 
of state power as such, the criterion of judgement being the mere survival 
or success of the state, but what is "rational and real" in that process, 
viz., the development of freedom. It is in this sense that world-history is 
a 'court' delivering 'judgement' according to a 'law', which is not the 
law of self-preservation and Machtpolitik, but belongs to Recht, as world-
history is a section of the philosophy of Recht. Everything else is not 
wirklich, not 'real', not alive in the world, but so much lifeless husk 
deprived of Spirit. This applies to anything that stands in the way of 
the Geist of modern man, which is the 'reality' which the philosopher 
describes and cannot overleap, and would apply therefore to the Restora-
tion, in so far as it did so. That is why it is inept to describe Hegel as a 
conservative or even conservative,! let alone as a kind of official apologist 
of the Restoration, unless one means to assert that everyone who is not 
an anarchist is 'conservative'. 
Marx, at least, kl'ew what he was doing when he undertook the criticism 
of Hegel's philosophy of the state, and curiously enough it was Marx 
who first refuted or anticipated later refutations of the 'totalitarian' 
interpretation of Hegel's idea of the Reclztsstaat. This was because in his 
critique of the state in Hegel's Philosophy of Right he was attacking the 
idea of the Rechtsstaat as such, and trying to show that the modern 
democratic state is a contradiction in terms: "true democracy" and the 
state are incompatible. 
1 As a great many have done and do. G. A. Kelly's account of Hegel in Idtalism, 
Politics and History is vitiated by the notion of Hegel as "a conservative". As a 
corrective one could read Jacques d'Hondt, Hegel m son temps. 
XXIX 

Coda: Marx's critique of Hegel's "Philosophy of 
Right" and the emergence of a new legend 
With Marx's critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right1 another Hegel 
legend emerged, according to which not the state but "civil society" is 
all in all, the state being a mystical idea of unity veiling the empirical 
reality of the divisions of bourgeois society, and Hegel's philosophy is the 
owl of Minerva which appears at dusk to survey and sum up a civilization 
that has had its day. This interpretation has been endorsed by some 
modern scholars and is seen for instance in Shlomo Avineri's Hegel's 
Theory of the State. 2 
Marx's object was to demolish the idea of the modern democratic 
state as such by showing how it is illogical and inconsistent, as any true 
account, and Hegel's account was true in an important sense, even if 
"upside down", was bound to be, because it was the product of an 
alienated society. That is, Marx thought that if he could destroy the logic 
of the connection between the logic and the empirical content of the 
Philosophy of Right, he would have destroyed the logic of the modern 
state. And the commentators, Hippolyte, Rubel, Avineri, Kamenka and 
O'Malley, for example,3 seem all more or less agreed that Marx succeeded 
in showing that Hegel does not manage to deduce his empirical content 
satisfactorily from his logical premisses: his own logic breaks down. In 
fact this happens less frequently than the commentators appear to 
suppose.' That however is not the important thing. The important thing 
is that to suppose that there should be strict logical links in the movement 
of the dialectic is to miss its real meaning and significance and value as a 
device to enable one to think concretely about the state, freedom, etc. 
As has been seen, the whole point about Hegel's dialectic as a device of 
philosophical explanation is that it is not a process of rigid logical deduc-
tion: it moves freely, it is to be used flexibly, its purpose is to provide 
insight and understanding of the human condition. Free interpretation 
1 An English translation of the complete text was published by the Cambridge Univer-
sity Press in 1970: Critique of Hegel's' Philosophy ofRight' by Karl Marx (ed. Joseph 
O'Malley). 
• See my review of Avineri in Cambridge Re'L-iew (March 1973). 
3 J. Hippolyte, Etudes sur Marr d Hegel, p. 128. M. Rubel, Karl Marr, essai de 
biographie inttllectuel, ch. 111. S. Avineri, The Social and Political thought of Karl 
Marr, pp. 28-30. E. Kamenka, The Ethical Foundations of Marrism, ch. 4· J. O'Malley, 
op. cit., Introduction. 
4 For example, Hegel's deduction of hereditary monarchy is usually misunderstood. 
XXX 

INTRODUCTION 
of the Philosoph_y of Right is in the spirit of the dialectic; rigidly strict 
interpretation violates it. And a strict interpretation, looking for logical 
lapses, being a misunderstanding of the dialectic, will not be powerful 
criticism either of Hegel's method or of what he is describing, in this case 
the modern state as such. It is Marx's great mistake to treat the logic of 
Hegel's account of the state as something brittle, broken up by formal 
contradictions; so that even if some of Marx's shells do fall on Hegel's 
rather exposed front-line, they are liable to miss the rational reality 
which on a more free, but perfectly legitimate interpretation, i.e. legiti-
mate according to the spirit of the dialectic, constitutes Hegel's reserve 
line. There is a rationale of the modern state behind the front line onto 
which Marx directs all his artillery. And Marx's whole purpose is to 
criticize the modern Rechtsstaat; in criticizing Hegel he thinks he is doing 
this, but his critique is such that even when he has apparently played 
havoc with Hegel's alleged contradictions, the deeper rational meaning of 
the modern state suggested by Hegel's dialectic still stands. And therefore 
Marx's own alternative of "true democracy" is not established by a 
genuine critique of the modern state. 
The fact is that Hegel's front-line is more advanced than it need be, 
beyond the sheer logic of freedom and into the region of actual empirical 
fact. This is the fascination of the Philosophy of Right, but there was the 
risk of incorporating institutions which, though they were a norm of 
civilized society in Hegel's day, might be difficult to defend in a rationale 
of the modern state as such. In his search for empirical content, Hegel's 
linking of logic and actuality was liable to feel the gravitational pull of 
contemporary European norms too strongly, and the more empirical 
actuality is incorporated, the greater the risk of rationalizing the merely 
contingent and laying oneself open to the charge of political conservatism. 
Obviously the philosopher has to be guided by the actually existing, if he 
cannot "leap over Rhodes"; equally obviously he cannot surrender to it 
wholesale, as he would if he were to be a political gazetteer or almanack, 
photographing the political institutions of any one particular state, unless 
of course that state was an exact representation of the rational state. And 
no actual state was.l And since Hegel was describing the inherent 
rationality or essential logic of the existing situation of modern post 
French-revolutionary civilization it is misleading to talk of his subservient 
attitude to existing political institutions unless one is very clear what one 
means by that." He is committed a priori to the principle that the empirical 
1 Those who think that Prussia was have only to compare the Philosophy ofRight with 
Prussian institutions at that time - or lack of them. 
XXXI 

INTRODUCTION 
order is in the last analysis rational", says O'Malley.1 Q!l.ite so, provided 
one leaves out the a priori; but neither Marx nor O'Malley manages to 
penetrate to the last analysis. 
For example, in Hegel's account of the idea of the modern state there is 
(a) what seems the archaic institution of primogeniture and entailed 
landed estates guaranteeing the existence of what Hegel called the 
"agricultural class", rooted in landed property and family tradition, 
and (b) a rationale of which (a) was the contemporary expression: that 
is, the need to ensure that there are some people in the state, apart from 
the" universal class" or bureaucracy, who are under some sort of obliga-
tion to devote themselves to public service, because otherwise there is 
nothing to guarantee it, who are free from the pressures and temptations 
that lead to political corruption etc. Burke had put forward powerful 
reasons for the political existence of such a class; and at that time such a 
class actually existed. In our time (a) might take the form of payment to 
M.P.'s, Life-Peers, etc., institutions equivalent to the old hereditary 
aristocracy and necessary to the realization of freedom in the modern 
state. But even if one removed the" agricultural class" bodily from Hegel's 
state it would not make much difference to the rationale of the modern 
state as such. It takes up three paragraphs in the Philosophy of Right. 
Marx however regarded it as crucial because he saw in it the political 
expression of alienated private property: the fact that landed property 
could not be alienated, in the legal sense, was the ultimate expression 
of alienation in the economic and social sense: these men are dominated 
by what they own. (One sees here the germ of what later became the 
theme of 'reification' and 'fetishism of commodities'.) A critique of 
primogeniture was a critique of private property as such, and hence of the 
modern state based on it. And Marx tries to show that this is in violent 
contradiction with Hegel's own definition of private property as such, as 
something essentially alienable at the will of its owner, which belongs to 
the private person to do what he likes with. Whereas landed property as a 
pillar of the state is essentially inalienable, and is as independent of the 
state as of the will of its owner, taking on a life of its own, with its "social 
nerves" cut, severed from civil society as well as from the family, whose 
principle of love it violates. "What kind of philosophy of right is this in 
which the independence of private property has diverse meanings in the 
spheres of private and state rights?", asks Marx. And primogeniture 
contradicts the principle of the family which Hegel says is the substantia!' 
basis of this class, because the family is a 'substantial unity' based on 
1 O'Malley, op. cit. p. xxxv. 
xxxii 

INTRODUCTION 
love and here one of the children has to inherit the whole estate. Avineri 
endorses Marx's success in this critique of Hegel's account of primogeni-
ture: Marx shows how property has become man's master and "this 
radical conclusion exposes the whole Hegelian political structure".1 
But the whole point of Hegel's logic of the state is that any of its 
"moments" by themselves are abstract; they cannot be ends in them-
selves. Private property as such, as an abstract right of the individual, is 
socially divisive; the rational state controls it and modifies it to ensure 
that it is not. Indeed in so far as Marx does not want the abolition of 
property per se, but the Aufhebung of private property, i.e. negation of its 
negations or social control and modification of property in the interest 
of the truly human life, one could say that Hegel's state is doing precisely 
what Marx wants communism to do. "Derivation from the concept" 
means that private property is the creature of the state, apart from which 
it is a mere abstraction. As to the family, one could point out that it is not 
only primogeniture that encroaches on or breaks up the family unity 
as such, but also, for example, compulsory public education, or for that 
matter, divorce, which is only 'ethical' in so far as the family is not an 
end in itself but a member of the state. Primogeniture and the law of 
entail are an invasion of private property and the family in the interest of 
the state as a whole, and in the light of the whole will not appear as an 
assault on property or the family because it is only in the state that these 
institutions have any reality at all. Marx admits that for Hegel primogeni-
ture is not an end in itself; the reason for it is political; but then goes on 
to say that this "decency" of Hegel's makes no difference. But it makes 
all the difference, because it brings out the fact that there is no logical 
inconsistency between Hegel's account of primogeniture and his account 
of property, and to see one is a grievous misunderstanding of the dialectic 
and the idea of the state as prior to its abstract "moments". 
If it is to the advantage of the state to have a class of people whose 
position in the state is determined by inalienable landed property and birth, 
this does not mean that the state or any particular individual is subservient 
to property. On the contrary. The deepest level of meaning behind the 
apparent anachronism of primogeniture is that private property as such 
is not an absolute; it is the state that makes it a reality, but this involves 
whatever modification of the abstract right of property may be necessary 
in the interests of the whole. 
If Marx's critique of primogeniture is the crux of his critique of Hegel's 
1 S. Avineri, The Social and Politual Thought of Karl Marx, pp. 28-30. 0'1\-lalley 
follows Avineri, op. cit. p. xxxvii. 
XXXlll 

INTRODUCTION 
Idea of the state, as some commentators think, that critique fails. If it is 
not, what has just been said about it applies in principle to Marx's critique 
of the other agents which mediate between "civil society" and the state: 
the corporations, the bureaucracy, the Estates. The logic of the modern 
state demands something like them, as it demands some head of state like 
Hegel's hereditary monarch, if not as exactly described by Hegel. This 
mediation may be difficult to realize in practice: to say that it is impossible, 
which in effect is what Marx says, is dogmatic: viz. that the bureaucracy 
must necessarily be a self-interested, closed corporation; the Estates can-
not represent the interests of society as a whole and cannot have any real 
effect on the bureaucracy and so on. In so far as Marx deduces these 
impossibilities logically as inherent contradictions in the modern state, 
his logic is more rigid then Hegel's. There is only one solution: what 
Marx calls "true democracy". Hegel's philosophy of the state allows for 
practical flexibility, though empirical adjustment is not the concern of the 
philosopher as such. Marx wants the empirical realization of perfection, 
which means the abolition of the state and achievement of communist 
society or " true democracy". 
In fact this critique of Hegel, which reads superficially like a devastating 
blow-by-blow destruction of the Hegelian philosophy of the state, is in 
fact a deadly boomerang. No text of Marx or Engels brings into relief 
so sharply the fundamental weakness in their whole system as this one -
which they did not publish. It spotlights the notorious weakness of their 
theory, or rather non-theory, of the state: that they recognize the need 
for political authority without having to call it 'political' or the 'state'. 
(As the Communist manifesto has it: "The public power will lose its 
political character.") In other words we are back to Hegel's base-line: 
the problem of freedom and control. One could in fact argue that Hegel's 
philosophy of the state is the truth of Marx's "true democracy", not 
vice-versa, in so far as Hegel is concerned with the eternal problem of 
liberty and authority: wherever two or three are gathered together it is 
there, as Marx and Engels had to more or less admit. Only Hegel did 
not shirk the issue, but tried, risky venture as it is, to work it out in con-
crete detail in the complex messy world of actual society and politics, 
which is what one would expect, provided one understands his philosophy 
properly. Marx couldn't, because having recently been mystified by 
Feuerbach's alleged de-mystification of Hegel's philosophy, he committed 
the classical mistake of thinking that the Absolute abolishes the tensions 
and conflicts of the real world in a world of thought, alleged to be the 
reality behind appearance. But the tensions and conflicts are of the essence 
XXXIV 

INTRODUCTION 
of the human situation, and the democratic state is a standing contradic-
tion in terms, and a perpetual tension and never-ending dialogue between 
freedom and order. But Marx too seems to have thought that struggle was 
the essence of the human situation; what ends is class-struggle, not 
conflict and tension as such. If this is so, and in so far as Marx admits 
the need for some authority and control, then the difference becomes a 
matter of degree. Hegel wants as much liberty as possible, and so does 
Marx. Hegel wants as little authority as is absolutely necessary, and so 
does Marx. And both want the maximum development of the individual. 
Marx's tragedy, and the tragedy of not only Marx, was his failure to 
realize this. 
DUNCAN FORBES 
XXXV 

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
In the following translation, I have attempted to follow the style and 
substance of the original text as closely as possible. For example, on those 
occasions when Hegel's own manuscript of the lectures lapses into note 
form, I have preserved its disjointed character as far as this could be done 
without prejudice to the sense. Johannes Hoffmeister, on whose edition 
the prc;sent translation is based, enclosed in square brackets all words and 
phrases which he had himself supplied in order to complete Hegel's 
sense or syntax, and, wherever possible, I have reproduced these brackets 
at the appropriate points in the English translation. On a few occasions, 
I was compelled to omit some of Hoffmeister's notes on minor linguistic 
details - such as German word endings and prepositional usage - which 
Hoffmeister thought necessary to correct or alter; I have done so, how-
ever, only in cases where a translation of Hegel's original word or words 
would have made no sense in relation to my rendering of Hoffmeister's 
corrected version. 
At relevant points in the text, I have supplied footnotes on some of the 
main terms on which translators of Hegel have tended to disagree in the 
past. (These translator's notes, keyed by superior symbols, appear at the 
foot of the appropriate pages, whereas Hoffmeister's editorial notes, and 
notes by Hegel himself, are keyed by superior numerals and are printed 
at the end of the appropriate sections of the text.) I need only add here 
that, in the case of Hegel's well-known distinction between Moral and 
Sittlichkeit, I have followed the practice of several earlier translators of 
Hegel, such as T. M. Knox (in his edition of the Philosophy of Right, 
Oxford, 1942), in rendering Moral as 'morality' and Sittlichkeit as 
'ethical life' whenever Hegel appears to be differentiating between the 
two. Similarly, I have translated the adjective sittlich as 'ethical' in all 
such contexts. But on those few occasions where it seemed that a distinc-
tion of this kind was unnecessary, I have translated both Moral and 
Sittlichkeit as 'morality'. 
XXXVIl 

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
In translating those passages from Hoffmeister's (greatly enlarged) 
edition which overlapped with the earlier (and much shorter) edition 
by Karl Hegel from which J. Sibree translated the Lectures on the 
Philosophy of History in 1857, I was grateful for the opportunity to com-
pare my renderings with those of my predecessor, and at times to borrow 
individual turns of phrase. But Sibree's now archaic style precluded any 
wholesale imitation. I was not able to consult the more recent transla-
tion of Hegel's Introduction to his lectures by Robert S. Hartman, 
entitled Reason in History (New York, 1953; Library of Liberal Arts, 
35). Like Sibree's translation, it antedates Hoffmeister's edition, and is 
much shorter, being only 95 pages in length. 
Since Hoffmeister's edition first appeared (in 1955), a new German 
edition of Hegel's lectures, by Eva Moldenhauer and Karl Markus 
Michel, has been published as Volume xn of the Suhrkamp edition of 
Hegels Werke (Frankfurt a. M., 1970). Although it incorporates a few 
of Hoffmeister's additions, the text of this latest version is essentially 
that of Karl Hegel as published in 1840. It accordingly lacks a great deal 
of the material subsequently included by Hoffmeister, whose edition 
remains easily the most comprehensive to date. 
Finally, I wish to acknowledge my great debt of gratitude to Professor 
Hans Reiss of the University of Bristol for his immense care and patience 
in checking my translation against the original; his many valuable sugges-
tions repeatedly enabled me to improve the accuracy of my formulations. 
I am alone responsible for all remaining inadequacies. 
DECEMBER 1974 
H. B. NISBET 
xxxvm 

GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH 
HEGEL 
LECTURES ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF 
WORLD HISTORY 
INTRODUCTION: REASON IN HISTORY 
EDITED BY 
JOHANNES HOFFMEISTER 

JOHANNES HOFFMEISTER'S EDITION 
Contents 
Preface 
page 5 
FIRST DRAFT (18:z:z and 182.8) 
The varieties of historical writing · 
II 
SECOND DRAFT (183o) 
The philosophical history of the world 
25 
A Its general concept 
27 
B The realisation of spirit in history 
44 
a. The determination of spirit 
47 
b. The means of its realisation 
68 
c. The material of its realisation 
93 
d. Its reality 
II6 
c The course of world history 
124 
a. The principle of development 
124 
b. The beginning of history 
I3I 
c. The course of development 
I38 
APPENDIX 
I The natural context or the geographical basis of world 
history 
152 
a. General determinations 
I 52 
b. The New World 
I62 
c. The Old World 
171 
a. Afr~a 
In 
fl. Asia 
I90 
y. Europe 
194 
2 The phases of world history 
I96 
3 Additions from the winter semester of 1826-7 
209 
Note on the composition of the text (by Georg Lasson) 
221 
Notes to the First Draft 
227 
Notes to the Second Draft 
230 
Notes to the Appendix 
233 
Suggestions for further reading 
234 

Preface 
The present editor is the fourth to edit Hegel's lectures on the philosophy 
of world history. They were originally edited by Eduard Gans in I 837 as 
part of the' Comp~ete Edition' [' Vollstandige Ausgabe '] of Hegel's works 
produced 'by an association of friends of the deceased'; they were 
re-edited in I 840 by Karl Hegel; and the last edition, which underwent 
three impressions (I9I7, I92o, and I93o), was prepared by Georg Lasson 
as part of the 'Critical Edition' [' Kritische Ausgabe '] of Hegel's works 
in the 'Philosophical Library' [' Philosophische Bibliothek '] series. The 
text was modified by each of these editors in turn, and although the last 
of them, Georg Lasson, reproduced his version of the text unaltered in 
the second and third impressions of the 'Philosophical Library' edition, 
he expanded it to such an extent in the light of subsequently discovered 
manuscripts and lecture notes, from which he incorporated several 
important sections, that the manner in which he presented the work as a 
whole could no longer be justified and yet another revised edition became 
necessary. 
Hegel held this course of lectures at two-yearly intervals, with four 
hours of lectures per week, from the winter semester of I822-3 onwards; 
he delivered them for the last time during the winter semester of I830-1; 
so that the course was given five times in all. But over the years, Hegel 
accumulated so much new empirical historical material of so varied a 
kind that, by the winter semester of I 830-I, he was no longer able to 
cope with it in its entirety and accordingly announced only 'The Philo-
sophy of World History: Part One' as the title of his course for that year. 
The first editors, however, failed to do justice to this wealth of historical 
material; in both the first and the second edition, this lecture course, as 
compared with those of Hegel's other courses which, as in the present case, 
were not laid out in book form or in paragraph sections, occupies only a 
slim volume. One of the main achievements of my predecessor was that 
he remedied this deficiency and was the first to give Hegel's 'Philosophy 
5 

PREFACE 
of World History' a shape in some measure commensurate with its weighty 
substance, its formal organisation, and above all, with its empirical breadth. 
In his postscript 'On the Composition of the Text', Lasson himself 
gives an adequate account of how he achieved these ends by returning to 
the sources, i.e. to Hegel's own manuscripts and the rough lecture notes 
and fair copies made by his students. Those sections of the postscript 
which are still relevant and which show the ways in which both Lasson's 
text and the present version deviate from those of Eduard Gans and Karl 
Hegel are reproduced at the end of this volume; Lasson's other remarks, 
however, have been deleted or abridged. 
Lasson's edition first appeared at a time of general lack of interest in 
Hegel, and it accordingly placed pedagogic and didactic considerations 
uppermost. Since tQ.en, however, the demands on editors of Hegel's 
works have become considerably more exacting. Nowadays, we expect a 
more rigorous philological approach in matters of detail, especially where 
students' lecture notes and fair copies are concerned, for much of what 
was taken down or subsequently enlarged upon by Hegel'spupilsisdemon-
strablyinaccurateor beside the point. In particular, we expect exact infor-
mation on the provenance of individual expressions, sentences, and para-
graphs, which certainly cannot always be pieced together like a mosaic, but 
at times vary considerably over the different years in which the course was 
delivered. And finally, we expect a closer overall insight into the thought 
structure of each set of lectures on which the complete text is based. 
In my foreword to the introductory volume of Hegel's 'History of 
Philosophy' (Philosophische Bibliothek vol. xva, 1940, second impression 
1944), I have discussed at length the philological and methodological 
consequences which the peculiar character of Hegel's thought has for 
any edition of his lectures. These consequences are such that they ought 
really to have transformed the shape of the present volume. But since I 
have not yet had a chance to evaluate the original or newly discovered 
source material with a view to producing a more authentic version of the 
text as a whole, the existing version, which Lasson constructed from the 
lecture notes he had at his disposal, had to be retained in essence. I have 
not been able to determine the exact manuscript sources and years of 
origin of these portions of the text. This meant that I also had to dispense 
with checking or altering the order in which they may have occurred in 
Hegel's original version. And it was not possible either to integrate the 
additions which Lasson took from two sets of lecture notes of the winter 
semester of r826-7 after he had completed his text, and which he pub-
lished as an appendix to his edition (although the material on which his 
6 

PREFACE 
main text was based had included another set of notes of the same year). 
These additions had once more to be placed at the end of the volume. 
It was nevertheless possible to set out the volume in a more uniform 
manner, firstly, by restoring Hegel's own subdivisions. For closer 
inspection showed that the section numbers in the margins of Hegel's 
main manuscript (that of the 'Second Draft' in this edition), which 
Lasson had taken for nothing more than marks made by Hegel to aid his 
memory during lectures, correspond very closely to the methodological 
progression of the treatise as a whole, whereas Lasson's subdivisions are 
largely derived from the material he collected from students' lecture notes. 
I have accordingly restored Hegel's own divisions- at times supplying 
appropriate section headings in square brackets- and have left spaces 
and inserted asterisks* at points where Lasson considered further 
subtitles necessary to bring greater order into the mass of material. In 
addition, I have omitted Lasson's note on variants' On the Text of Hegel's 
Manuscript' (i.e. of the 'Second Draft'); everything of value in it 
concerning Hegel's own subdivisions, remarks, and textual idiosyncrasies 
has been included in this edition in the form of notes to the appropriate 
parts of the text. And finally, the second respect in which the present 
edition is better integrated than its predecessor is that the chapter on 
'The Varieties of Historical Writing' has been brought back into the 
main text, from which Lasson had excluded it. 
When Lasson set about reconstructing the text of Hegel's Introduction 
in 1917, the only evidence he could find that Hegel had ever begun his 
lectures with this chapter was that of the old edition and some sets of 
students' notes. This did not seem conclusive enough, especially since the 
one original manuscript of Hegel's at his disposal - the 'Second Draft' 
of the winter semester of 183o-1 -quite clearly indicated a different 
beginning; he therefore simply relegated this chapter to the end of the 
volume as the first part of a' Separate Introduction'. But soon afterwards, 
two different sheets of manuscript from this chapter, in Hegel's own 
handwriting, were discovered (one in private ownership in Zurich, the 
other in the Schiller Museum in Marbach), and from entries by Hegel on 
the first of these, it emerged that the lectures had begun with this section 
on at least two occasions, in 1822 and 1828. Admittedly, there was still 
every justification for continuing to use Hegel's second, fuller and more 
definitive draft of the Introduction as the main basis of the text and for 
leaving the lecture notes 'On the Varieties of Historical Writing' - along 
" No asterisks appear in the German edition of this volume, and it would appear that 
Hoffmeister omitted to add them. 
7 

PREFACE 
with the reflections on 'The Natural Context or the Geographical Basis 
of World History'- at the end of the volume. But it would nevertheless 
have been worth using these notes, along with the other material, to 
prepare a new critical text of this particular chapter. Instead, Lasson 
retained them unaltered as part of his' Separate Introduction' in the form 
in which he had taken them from his original sources and ftom the old 
edition, and printed Hegel's manuscript observations separately as 
'Addenda'. The same material therefore appeared twice, at two different 
places in his edition. A further complication was that the editor succeeded 
only partially in overcoming the difficulties with which the second 
(Marbach) sheet confronted him in his efforts to decipher it. 
The real reason why it was imperative to prepare a new critical text 
of this chapter was, of course, that Lasson had failed to notice that the 
two newly discovered sheets were not merely, as he thought, 'originally 
fairly closely connected, probably separated by half a sheet at most', but 
in fact followed on in unbroken sequence from one word ('its') to the next 
('consciousness'). I have marked the point at which the two manuscripts 
meet in a note to the text. Given the intimate connection between these 
sections, of which Lasson's predecessors were likewise ignorant, along 
with the missing concluding paragraphs, which had to be supplied once 
again from students' notes or from earlier editions, it is possible to piece 
together a self-contained treatise based almost entirely on Hegel's own 
manuscripts. This can legitimately be called the 'First Draft', since, on 
the evidence of Hegel's entries on the Zurich sheet, it really does contain 
the ideas with which he began his first lecture course on the philosophy 
of world history; and for the same reason, it deserves to be restored to 
the position the earlier editors accorded it in their editions. And finally, 
as can be seen even from the present table of contents, the content of the 
'Second Draft' also follows on immediately from that of the first; but I 
did not consider it either necessary or justifiable to make any kind of altera-
tion to the source material as it occurred in the original documents (as, for 
instance, Karl Hegel did on pp. I I f. of his edition} in order to make the 
direct connection between the ideas expressed in thetwodraftsclearerstill. 
The third newly discovered sheet of manuscript which Lasson pub-
lished had to be excluded from the present volume; it belongs in content 
to the chapter on 'The Oriental World', and hence to the second half-
volume in this edition of the lecture course. • 
• Hoffmeister refers, of course, to his own German edition of Hegel's lectures. The 
present volume contains, in English translation, only the Introduction to the Philo-
sophy of History, not the detailed survey of world history which followed it. 
8 

PREFACE 
Hegel's original text is printed in italics, whereas the passages which 
Lasson added from students' notes appear in Roman type. Finally, I am 
greatly indebted to Dr Rolf Bachem for helping me to read the proofs 
and for preparing new indexes to the text. 
Bonn 
JOHANNES HOFFMEISTER 
15 January 1955 
9 

First Draft (1822 and 1828) 
The Varieties of Historical Writing 
[begun] 31. x. 1822; 
[repeated] 30. x. 1828 
Gentlemen, 
The subject of these lectures is the philosophical history of the world. We shall 
not occupy ourselves with general reflections abstracted from world h1stor)' 
and illustrated by concrete historical examples, but rather with universal 
world history itself 
I have no text bookl on which to base my lectures; but in my 'Eleme11ts of 
the Philosophy of Right' ['Grundlznien der Philosophic des Rechts'], §§341-
360 (i.e. the conclusion), I have already defined the concept of world history 
proper, as well as the principles or periods mto which its study can be di·vided. 
This work should enable you to gain at least an abstract knowledge of those 
moments of world history with which we shall be concerned here. 
By way of an Introduction, I shall begin these lectures wzth a (gmeral, 
determinate"') representationt of what constitutes a philosophical 
history of the world; with this provisional object in mind, [I shall] first of all 
enumerate and describe the other methods of dealing wzth historJ' and compare 
them with the philosophzcal method. 
• bestimmte. Here and on most other occasions, I have followed the usual practice of 
writers on Hegel in the English-speaking world in rendering best1mmt as 'deter-
minate', Bestimmtheit as 'determinateness', and Bestimmung as 'determination', 
except in those few cases where the more common senses of 'definite', 'definition', 
etc., seem intended. The noun Bestimmung, it should also be remembered, often 
carries with it the associations of the English "ord 'destiny'. 
t Vorstellung. On the meaning of this term for Hegel, cf. J. !\". Findlay, Hegel, a 
Re-Examination, second impression, London, 1964, p. 3~3: 'It [Vorste/lung] is not 
exactly the same as an image or mental picture. . but is an image "raised to the form 
of universality, of thinking". What Hegel means is that Representations are thoughts 
which, despite their essential differences from mental pictures, none the less have 
some of the properties of the latter.' It can also denote the faculty or mode of repre-
sentational thinking. The term, except when Hegel uses it in the more general 
sense of 'idea' or • impression', is translated throughout this volume as 'represen-
tation', 'representational thinking', or 'faculty of representation'. 
II 

FIRST DRAFT (I 822 AND I 828) 
I distinguish three different modes of historicalmritzng:2 
a. origina I htstory 
fl. reflective history 
y. philosophical history 
a. As to the first mode, the mentton of a Jew names should give a definite 
picture of what I mean. Herodotus, Thucydides and thezr like belong to 
this class- that is, to the class of hzstortans who have themselves witnessed, 
experienced and lived through the deeds, e·vents and sttuations they describe, 
who have themselves participated m these events and in the spirit which 
informed them. They have compiled a written record of these deeds and events, 
thereby transferring what were previously mere extraneous happenings into 
the realm of zntellectual representation. What was originally mere existence 
thereby takes on an intellectual aspect and becomes a representation of the 
internal and external faculties of mind. In the same way, the poet works on 
the material supplied by his emotions, creating from it an object which can 
be represented to the senses. Admittedly, such hzstorians also make use of the 
narratives and reports of others; 3 but these are simply the more scattered, 
fortuitous and sub;ective of their raw materials, of less significance than the 
rest. The poet has a ready-made mother tongue [as an ingredient of his work 
and] owes much to the knowledge he has gained through education, but the 
greater part of his achievement is nevertheless his own; in the same way, the 
historian in question fashions a whole out of material from the past, of material 
scattered here and there in subjective and fortuitous reminiscences, or indeed 
preserved [only] in the shape of jleetmg recollections, and sets it up in the 
Temple of Mnemosyne, thereby investing it with immortal life.4 Such his-
torians transplant [the past] mto a better and more exalted soil than the soil 
of transience in which it grew, into the realm of the departed but now immortal 
spirits (as the Ancients describe thezr Elysium), so that their heroes now 
perform for ever the deeds they performed but once wht!e they !ired. 
From this category of original history I would exclude all legends, folk-
songs, traditions, and poems; 5 for legends and tradttions are but obscure 
records r of actual events], and are accordingly the product of nations- or 
parts of them- whose consciousness is still obscure. But I shall return later 
to the relationship between nations and their history. Nations whose con-
sciousness is obscure, or the obscure lustory of such nations, are at any rate 
not the object of the philosophical history of the world, whose end is to attain 
knowledge of the Idea in history - the spirtts of those nattons which [ ha·ve] 
become conscious of their mherent principle, and have become aware of what 
they are and of what their actions signify,6 are its object. 
12 

THE VARIETIES OF HISTORICAL WRITING 
[We shall] later examine [the relationship between] historia [and] res 
gestae; the real objectn·e history of a natimz cannot he said to have begun 
until it possesses7 a wrztten hzstorical record. A culture rPhzch does not J•et 
have a history has made 110 real cultural progress [, and this applies to the 
pretended history] of India over three and a half thousand years. 
Such original historians, then, transmute the eunts, deeds and situations 
they have witnessed into a work of representatzonal thinking/or the represen-
tational faculty.* 
[Serer a/] conclusiom [follow directly] from this: 
aa. The contmt of such historical 11arratius cannot therefore be ury 
comprehensh·e in scope. 8 Thezr proper subject matter includes all that is of 
living and immediate interest zn the personal experiences and external 
m·vironment of men. 
The author 9 describes events m which he has himself plaj•ed some part, or 
which he has at least witnessed as a contemporary. He covers short perzods 
of time, and depicts tndh:idual human beings and events. He works from the 
immediate imuitzonst of lzzs experience, assemblmg a series of separate, 
unreflected elements into a composzte pzcture, m order to gzre to posterity a 
representation as determinate as that which he experimced through his 
own intuition or through the intuitive! narratiu of someone else. 
{3{3. With historians of this kind, the author's personal development and 
the et•ents on which his work is based, or the spirit of the writer and the spirit 
of the actions he relates, are one and the same. His first concern, therefore, 
will not be to reflect upon his subject; for he is immersed in the spirit of the 
events he describes, and does not rzse above it to reflect upon it. This unity of 
author and events also means [that, if] the historian /ius tn 011 age in mhich 
the social classes hat·e become more clear(y differentiated [and in which] the 
culture and maxzms of each mdividual are related to hzs social class, he will 
himself have to belong to the class of statesmen, generals, and the lzke, 
whose azms, intentions, and deeds are part of the political morld he describes. 10 
When the spirzt of evmts is fully dereloped, it becomes aware of itself; one 
of the main characteristzcs of zts life and actirity is its11 consciousness of its 
own ends and znterests and of the principles mhich underlie them- and 
another is the waJ• m mhich it interprets itself to others and acts on thetr 
powers of representation§ in order to manipulate their will. 
" ein Werk der Vorstellung fur dze Vorstel/u1zg. 
t Anschauungen. The usual Fnglish translation of the term Anschauung as used in 
German philosophy is 'intuition', although the word An.<chauu11g also carries with 
it the idea of direct t•isual perception of external reality. 
! anschau/ich. 
§ auf ihre Vorste/lu11g. 
13 

FIRST DRAFT (I 822 AND I 828) 
Speeches are actions among human beings; indeed, they are extremely 
important and momentous actions12• Admittedly, one often hears those 
whose utterances have been badly received protestmg that what they said was 
'only words'. If they are right m this judgement, [they] must certainly be 
pronounced not guilty; for words which are no more than words are merely 
empty chatter, which at least has the advantage of being innocuous. But 
speeches on a national or international plane, issumgfrom nations themselves 
or from their sovereigns, are actions, and, as such, are an essential object 
of history (and particularly of earlier history). 13 
The writer, then, does not depict and interpret this consciousness by 
means of personal reflections; on the contrary, he must allow the 
individuals and nations themselves to express their aspirations and 
their awareness of what their aspirations are. He has no need to explain their 
motives (and emotrons) on his own initiative, or to assrmilate them into his 
personal consciousness.14 He does not put hrs words or those of others 
into their mouths; and even if he does enlarge on what they orrginally said, 
the substance of his narrative and his own culture and consciousness are in 
equal measure the substance and consciousness of those whose words he 
renders. In the work of Thucydides, we read the speeches of Pericles, the 
truest, noblest, and most profoundly cultured of statesmen, and those 
of other orators, national ambassadors, etc. 15 In their speeches, these men 
express the maxims of their nation and of their own personality, 
their consciousness of their political position and of their moral and 
spiritual nature, and the principles which underlie their designs and conduct. 
The historzan has left himself little or no room for personal reflections, and 
what he makes his characters say is not the expression~( an alien conscrousness 
projected into them, but of their own culture and consciousness. 
Anyone who seeks to study the substance of histor_y, the spirit of nations, to 
live in it and with it, must immerse himself in such original historians 
and spend much time on them; indeed, it is impossible to spend too long on 
them. For the history of a nation or government as they relate it comes to us 
fresh, alive, and at first hand. Anyone whose arm ts simply to enjoy history 
and not to become a learned historian can afford to limit himself almost 
entirely to the works of these writers. 16 
17 And besides, such historians are not as common as one might suppose. 
I have already mentioned Herodotus, the father (i.e. the originator) of 
history- and at the same time the greatest historian- and Thucydides. 
[They are both] to be admzred for their naivety. Xenophon's 'Anabasis' 
is an equally original work- Polybius; Caesar's 'Commentaries' are 
also a masterpiece of great simplicity - the product of a mighty spirit. But 

THE VARIETIES OF HISTORICAL WRITING 
such works are not the exclusive prerogative of antiquity. For a nation to 
possess such historians, it must not only enjoy a high level of culture;18 
it must also have a culture which is not just the isolated privilege of clerics, 
scholars, and the like, but which is shared by the leaders of the state and 
of the armed forces. In the Middle Ages, for example, there were plenty of 
naive chroniclers, but they were monks rather thau statesmen. Admittedly, 
there were learned bishops among them who had been at the centre of affairs 
and were familiar with the business of state, and who [were therefore] 
themselves statesmen; but in other respects, [there was] no fully developed 
political consciousness.19 In modern times, all this has changed. Our culture 
is such that all events are at once recorded and transformed directly 
into historical representations. • We have excellent modern accounts of 
military and other events which are simple, lively, and clear, and which can 
stand comparison with those of Caesar; and indeed, the richness of their 
content- i.e. the detailed information they supply on methods employed 
and other attendant circumstances- makes then even more informative. 
Works of this kind include numerous French memoirs. Many of them 
are lively enough, but full of trivialities and anecdotes- their content 
and sphere of reference are petty; many others, however, are not only lively 
but also written by men of great ability and set in a grander and more 
interesting context; the memoirs of Cardinal de Retz [are a] masterpiece 
[of this kind]. In Germany, such masterpieces by writers who themselves 
took part in the events they describe are rare, although Frederick the 
Great's 'Histoire de mon temps' is in some ways a notable exception. 
It is not enough for the writer to have been a contemporary of such events, 
or [to have] witnessed them at first hand and had the opportunity to obtain 
reliable information about them; the writer must himself be of the same 
rank, circle, attitudes, mentality, and culture as those whose actions he 
describes. Only from an elevated position can one view the subject properly 
and see everything in its correct place- but not if one squints up at it from 
the 11arrow confines of some moral dogma or other restrictive system. In the 
present age, [it is] even more imperative [for us to free ourselves] from the 
restrictive attitudes of our social class [and] to let those on whom the 
authority of the state and the power of government rests speak 
for themselves. For those classes which are more or less excluded from 
political activity console themselves with moral principles which they use to 
compensate for their position and to set themselves up as superior to the higher 
classes: in short, they do not leave their own circumscribed province.20 
• Berichte [iir die Vorste/lung (literally, 'reports for the faculty of representation'). 
IS 

FIRST DRAFT (I 822 AND I 828) 
{3. The second mode of history may be called reflective. It covers more than 
just those events which were actually present to the writer; it depicts not 
only what was present and alive in this or that age, but that which is present 
in spirit, so that zts object is in fact the past as a whole.21 It is practised 
by a wide variety of writers- indeed by all those whom we generally call 
historians. The most important thing about it is the way in which it treats 
the historical material,Jor the writer approaches it in his own spirit, which is 
d~tfemzt from the spirit of the object 'itself; everything therefore depends 
on the maxims, ideas, and principles which the author applies both to the 
contmt of his work (i.e. to the motives behind the actions and events he 
describes) and to the form of his narrative. Here in Germany, this reflec-
tive history- and the skill with which it is practised- varies greatly; each 
historian has his own peculiar aims and idiosyncrasies. The English and 
French, as a rule, know how history should be written; much more than the 
Germans, they share the attitudes of a common culture, whereas with us, each 
writer laborzously works out his individual point of ·view. For this reason, the 
English and French have excellent historians; but here in Germany, if one 
looks at reviews of historical works over the last ten or twenty years, 
one finds that nearly every review begins with an individual theory of how 
hzstory should be written, a theory which the reviewer sets up against that 
of the historian he is discussing. We are still in the position of continually 
struggli11g to find out how to write history. 
aa. There is always a demand for complete surveys of the history 
of a nation or country, or indeed of the world in genera/;22 and to 
satisfy this demand, history books must be written. These are necessarily 
compilations from the works of original historians proper, from other 
written reports, and from scattered items of information. They are 
not based on intuition"' and the language of intuition•; [they do not possess 
the character] of eye-witness accounts. This first variety of reflective history 
approaches closest to the preceding kind when its exclusive aim is to present 
the entire history of a country or of the world. The character of any 
such compilation will depend primarily on how exhaustive the history is 
intended to be.23 It often happens that such historians try to write in a 
manner so directly expressive of personal experiencet that the 
reader has the impression of listening to contemporaries and eye witnesses 
recounting the events. But such attempts must always be more or less unsuccess-
ful. - The whole work should and indeed must be uniform in tone; for 
the author is a single indi·vidual with a definite culture of his own; 
" Anschauung. 
t The last five words are a free translation of Hegel's adverb ans.haulidz. 
r6 

THE VARIETIES OF HISTORICAL WRITING 
but the various ages covered by a history of this kind lza·ve widely differzng 
cultures, as do the historians on whose work the wrzter draws, and the spirt! 
which speaks through them in the words of the author is different (rom the 
spirit of the ages he describes. When the historian tries to depict the spirit 
of bygone times, it is usually his own spirit which makes itself heard.* Thus 
Livy puts into the mouths of the old kings of Rome, the consuls and 
gmerals of ancient times, speeches which only an accomplished ad·vocate (or 
factious orator) of Livy's own times could have delivered, and which contrast 
glaringly with genuine traditions passed down from antiquity (such as 
Menenius Agrippa'sfable of the belly and the members). He likewise gives us 
extremely thorough and detailed descriptions of battles and other 
events in such a tone and with such distinct perception of detail that 
he appears to have witnessed them himself; clearly, such narratives cannot ha·ve 
their roots in the ages in which they are set. They have features which could 
well be used to describe the battles of any age, yet on the other hand, their 
distinctness contrasts with their lack of coherence and the inconsis-
tency which often prevails elsewhere in the main sequence of events. The 
difference between compilers of this kind and original historians can best be 
appreciated by comparing the narrative of Polybius with the way 
in which Livy uses, selects from and abridges his accounts of the period 
covered by the surviving portions of Polybius' work -Johannes von 
Muller, in an attempt to give a faithful portrait of the times he describes, 
has given his history'IA a stilted, pompous and pedantic air. The 
old chronicle of Tschudy26 related the same e·vents in a much more 
endearing, naive and natural way than Muller's contrived and affected 
archaisms. 
[marginal addition in MS] 
This is an attempt to transport us completely into the past as something im-
mediate and alive,- [which] we [can] no more achieve than can the writer himself; 
the writer is one of us, he is part of his own world with all its needs and interests, 
and he hunours the same things which it esteems. For example, whatever [the age] 
we live in, we can [immerse ourselves] as fully as we like in the life of A11cient 
Greece- which is congenial to us in so many import alit respects -yet we will11ever 
be able to sympathise with the Greeks and to share their feelings in the most important 
issues of all. For instance, however much the city of Athens capt11res our interest, 
• Hegel is here quoting freely the lines of Faust to Wagner in Goethe's Fau.<t: 
• The spirit of the times, I've long suspected, 
Is but the spirit of the men- that's all-
In which the times they prate of are reflected.' 
(Goethe's Faust, translated by Sir Theodore Martin, revised, with an introduction 
and notes, by W. H. Bruford, London, 1954, p. zo.) 
17 

FIRST DRAFT (I 822 AND I 828) 
and however much we may sympathiu [with] the actions and perils [of its citizens]-
and it is undoubtedly the worthy fatherland of a cultured people- [we nevertheless 
can]not share their feelings when they prostrate themselves before Zeus, Minerva, 
etc., [or when they] toil over their sacrifices on the anniversary of the battle of 
Plataea- slavery. The deficiency- tone, atmosphere- Just as [we] cannot share 
the sensations of a dog, [even if we] have a clear impression of a particular dog, know 
it well, and can predict its mannerisms, attachments, and idiosyncrasies. 
But there are other ways in which historians have tried to bring the past closer 
to us, not by writing in a tone designed to enlist our sympathy, but at least by 
eliciting intuitive and lively emotional responses, responses as lively as those of 
immediate experience, entering into all the details of the events, -location- mode of 
perception - distinct presentation. 
[continuation of the main text] 
This kind of thing inevitably happens with any historical work which tries 
to cover long periods or indeed the whole of world history; it is compelled 
to dispense more or less with individual accounts of reality and to 
make do with abstractions, summaries, and abridgements. This [means] 
not only that many events and actions must be omitted, but also that thought 
or understanding, the most effective means of abridgement, mmt intervene. 
For example, a battle was fought, a great victory was won, a town was 
unsuccessfully besieged, and so on. -A battle, a great victory, a siege-
these are all general representations which condense a complex indi-
vidual whole into a simple specification for the faculty of representation. 
If we are told that, at the beginning of the Peloponnesian War, Plataea 
was besieged over a long period by the Spartans, and that, after some of the 
inhabitants had fled, the town was taken and the remaining citizens executed, 
this is a short summary of what Thucydides describes in full with so 
much interest and in so much detail- and the same applies if we are told 
that an Athenian expedition to Sicily came to an unfortunate end. But as I 
have already observed, we have to make do with such reflect[ive] represen-
tations if we wish to obtain an overall view,· and an overall view is also 
necessary.26 But it inevitably makes for a correspondingly drier narrative. 
How can it possibly interest us when Livy, after describing a hundred wars 
with the Volscians, repeats for the hundredth time such phrases as: 'In this 
year, war was successfully waged against the Volscians, Fidenates, etc.'.-
Such historical'RJTiting is lifeless; such formulas and abstract representations 
make the content of the work dry. 
To counteract this mode of writing, [certain historians attempt to attain] 
at least an intuitive or representational liveliness, if not an emotional liveli-
ness, by depicting each individual trait in a faithful and lifelike manner: 
I8 

THE VARIETIES OF HISTORICAL WRITING 
in short, they do not seek to reproduce past ages by means of a personal 
interpretation of them, but to create a faithful and accurate portrait 
of them. [They] gather the materials for this from every conceivable source 
(Ranke). 27 A motley assortment of details, petty interests, actions of 
soldiers, private affairs, which have no influence on political interests,-
they are incapable [of recognising] a whole, a general design. [A] series of 
individual characteristics- as in one of Walter Scott's novels- collected 
from every quarter, painstakingly and laboriously assembled, - charac-
teristics drawn from historical wrztings, correspondence and chronicles, - such 
a procedure involves us in numerous fortuitous details, [which are] histo-
rically no doubt authentic; yet the main interest [is] in no way clarified 
[by them], but rather confused,- and thus [it is] immaterial whether such 
and such a soldier called- -,precisely the same effect. [They ought to] leave 
this sort of thing to Walter Scott's novels, th1s detailed portraiture 
incorporating all the minutiae of the age, zn which the deeds and fortunes of a 
single individual constitute the work's sole futile interest and wholly 
particular matters are all put forward as equally important; but in 
works which portray the central interests of states, such particulars 
of individual lives disappear altogether. Each szngle trait should be charac-
teristic, and of significance for the spirit of the age,- the work should be 
executed in a grander and worthier manner, [so that] the political deeds, 
actions and sit[ uations] themselves [come to the forefront, and] matters of 
universal interest [are depicted] in a determinate form. 
f3f3. The first variety of reflective history leads directly to the second, 28 
i.e. to pragmatic historJ'· [This second variety actually has] no specific 
name; nevertheless, it is the end to which historians in general aspire: 
[namely to provide] a fully developed [impression] of a past age and its life. 
[For if we29] have no such totality before us and have no living experience of 
it, but are dealing instead with a reflective world, i.e. with a past stage in 
the spirit, interests, and culture of the society in question, [we at once fee/30] 
the need for a present. This present [is] not [to be found] in history; [it 
arises out of] the insights of the understanding, the subjecti·ve activity and 
efforts of the mind itself Tlze external aspect of[ the events31] is pale and wan; 
their end- the state, the fatherland- thezr meaning, their inner con-
tinuity, the universal aspect of their inner relationships is what endures, 
for it is as valid and present now as it was in the past and always will be. 
Every state is an end in itself, - external self-preservation; - zts 
internal development and evolution fo!loJV a necessary progression 
whereby the rational, i.e. justice and the consolidation of freedom, 
gradually emerges. 32 [It ts a] system of institutions, a) as a system the 

FIRST DRAFT (I 822 AND I 828) 
constitution, {3) its content likewtse, * through which the true interests of 
the state become conscious and fight their way to reality. In every advance 
which the objeCt makes, [there zs] not only an external coherence and necessary 
continuity; there is also a necessity at work within the object itself, 
within the concept.t This [is] the true substance of history. For example, 
[a] modern state, [the history of the] Holy Roman Empire, great individuals33 
or great individual events- the French Revolutzon, - any great necessity, -
thzs [is] the object and end of the historian, but also the end pursued by the 
nation, by the age itself Everything [is] related to this. 
Such pragmatic reflections, although highly abstract, thus indeed 
belong to the present, and should ammate the records of the past and fill 
them with the life of today. 34 Whether such reflections are in fact interesting 
and enlivening depends on the spirit of the writer himself 
The worst kind of pragm[atic hzstorian zs the] petty psychologist who 
looks for subjectzve motives, derzvzng these not from a concept [but]}rom par-
ticular inclznations and passions, [and who] does not regard the object 
itself as the effective motive force; then there is the mora/ising pragm[atist, 
who] is also a compiler [but] one who sporadically awakens }rom his weary 
ramblings to utter edifying Christtan reflections, attacking events and 
individuals in the flank with his moral onslaughts, and throwing m 
an edifying thought, a word of exhortation, a moral doctrine, or the like. 
The second variety of reflective35 history, then, is the pragmatic one. 
When we study the past and occupy ourselves with a remote world, a 
present opens up before the mind, a present created out of the mind's 
own activity and bestowed upon it as a reward for its exertions. The 
events are various, but their general significance, their inner quality and 
coherence, are one. This circumstance cancels out! the past and raises 
the event into the present. (The general relationships, the concatenation 
of circumstances, are no longer, as before, bound up with a series of 
separate, individual events; they themselves become the event, so that the 
" The preceding portion of this sentence is translated literally; its sense is no clearer 
in Hegel's cryptic anrl fragmentary notes than in the English translation. 
t Begriff: cf. Hegel's Philosophy of Right, translated with notes by T. M.Knox, Oxford, 
I952, p. viii: 'The concept is the thought in so far as the thought determines itself 
and gives itself a content; it is the thought in its vivacity and activity. Again, the 
concept is the universal which particularises itself, the thought which actively creates 
and engenders itself.' (The words are those of Knox, not of Hegel.) 
! The verb Hegel uses here is aufheben, which has several meanings- e.g. to raise up, 
to preserve, and to cancel or overcome. Hegel frequently uses the word to describe 
the workings of the dialectical process, to which it can apply in several or indeed all 
of its main senses: cf. Findlay, op. cit., p. 47· 
20 

THE VARIETIES OF HISTORICAL \\'KITING 
general, not the particular, is presented. If purely individual occurrences 
are interpreted in as general a fashion as this, the undertaking is fruitless 
and ineffectual; but if the event is expounded in its wider context, the 
writer's own spirit is revealed.)36 
A word must be said at this point about moral reflections in particular, 
and the moral lessons we can supposedly learn from history- indeed 
histories are often written for this very purpose. It must be conceded that 
examples of virtue elevate the soul, especially with young people, and 
that they can be used for the moral instruction of children as concrete 
representations of general truths, in order to impress excellence upon their 
minds. But the destinies of nations, the convulsions of states and their 
interests, predicaments, and involvements are of a different order from 
that of morality. (Moral methods are very unsophisticated; Biblical history 
is adequate for this kind of instruction. But the moral abstractions of his-
torians are completely useless.) 
Rulers, statesmen and nations are often advised to learn the lesson of 
historical experience. But what experience and history teach is this- that 
nations and governments have never learned anything from history or 
acted upon any lessons they might have drawn from it. Each age and each 
nation finds itself in such peculiar circumstances, in such a unique 
situation, that it can and must make decisions with reference to itself 
alone (and only the great individual can decide what the right course is). 
Amid the pressure of great events, a general principle is of no help, and 
it is not enough to look back on similar situations [in the past]; for pale 
recollections are powerless before the stress of the moment, and impotent 
before the life and freedom of the present. (The instruction to be gained 
from history is not to be found in any reflections we may base on it. 
No two instances are exactly alike; they are never sufficiently identical 
for us to say that what was best on one occasion will also be best on 
another. Each nation has its own problems, and there is no need to look 
to history to discover the correct course.) In this respect, there is nothing 
so insipid as the constant appeals to Greek and Roman precedents we 
hear so often, as for example during the French Revolution. Nothing 
could be more different than the character of those nations and that of 
our times. Johannes von Muller, in his General History37 and his Histo~y 
of the Swiss Cmzftderation, had moral aims of this sort in mind, and laid 
down appropriate doctrines for the instruction of princes, governments, 
and nations, particularly for the Swiss. He compiled his own collection 
of maxims and reflections, and he frequently mentions in his corres-
pondence38 the exact number of reflections he has managed to put together 
21 

FIRST DRAFT (1822 AND 1828) 
in a given week. (He then proceeded to pepper his narrative at will with 
his sayings; but they can only come to life when they are applied to a 
concrete instance. His thoughts arc very superficial; he thus becomes 
tedious, and) this portion of his work certainly cannot be classed as his 
greatest achievement. (Reflections must be concrete.) Only a thorough, 
open-minded, comprehensive view of historical situations and a profound 
sense for the Idea* and its realisation in history can endow such reflec-
tions with truth and interest. This is the case with Montesquieu's Spirzt 
of Laws,39 which is both thorough and profound. 
Accordingly, one reflective history gives way to another; each writer 
has the same materials before him, each believes himself capable of 
arranging them and of fashioning a work out of them, and each will 
infuse his own spirit into them in the guise of the spirit of the age he 
depicts. This has produced a general reaction against such reflective 
histories, and readers have often turned back to precise descriptions which 
look at an event from every possible angle. These are certainly not without 
value, but they usually consist only of raw materials. We Germans are 
content with this; but the French show particular ingenuity in creating 
an imaginary present and in relating the past to the present situation. 
yy. The third kind of reflective history is critical history; it deserves 
to be mentioned since it is the principal method employed at present by 
historians in Germany. It does not constitute history as such, but rather 
the history of history; it evaluates historical narratives and examines their 
authenticity and credibility. (Niebuhr's Roman History40 is written in 
this manner.) Its distinguishing characteristic and intention are to be 
found not so much in the subjects it deals with, but rather in the acuteness 
with which the writer wrests new information from the narratives he 
examines. (He scrutinises every circumstance to test the credibility of 
the whole.) The French have done much thorough and discriminating 
work in this field. They have not claimed, however, that this critical 
procedure is itself a form of history, but have presented their judgements 
in the form of critical treatises. Here in Germany, the so-called 'higher 
criticism' has invaded not only the whole realm of literary studies, but 
also that of historical writing (in which, by abandoning the basic task of 
history, i.e. judicious historical studies, writers have left the way open 
for the most arbitrary ideas and combinations). This higher criticism has 
been the pretext for introducing all the un-historical monstrosities a vain 
• The word Idee is translated with a capital on all occasions when it denotes that 
ultimate, ideal principle 1\<hich, according to Hegel, progressively realises itself in 
history. 
22 

THE VARIETIES OF HISTORICAL WRITING 
imagination could suggest. It tou is a method of bringing a present into 
the past,u namely by substituting subjective fancies for historical data-
fancies which are considered the more excellent the bolder they are, that 
is the less they have to substantiate them, the scantier the details on 
which they are based, and the more widely they diverge from the best 
established facts of history. 
88. The last kind of reflective history is specialised history. It can 
readily be recognised by its fragmentary and particular character, for it 
selects a single general perspective (for instance, the history of art, of 
law, or of religion) from the wider context, i.e. from the whole of national 
life. It is admittedly abstract, but since its perspectives are general, it also 
provides a point of transition to the philosophical history of_ the world. 
(When we form a picture of a nation, our faculty of representation* 
commands a wider range of perspectives than the Ancients could encom-
pass, for we realise that spiritual determinants must also be taken into 
consideration. Such general perspectives include the history of art, of 
religion, oflearning, constitutions, law, property relations, and navigation. 
The culture of today is such that this variety of history has received more 
attention and become more highly developed than before. 42 Legal and 
constitutional history have been particularly conspicuous in our times. 
Constitutional history is already more closely related to universal history, 
for it has no sense or significance unless it is based on a survey of the state 
as a whole. If it is conducted in a thorough and interesting manner, and 
does not confine itself merely to externals or insignificant superficiali-
ties - as does Hugo's History of Roman Law43 - it can be really excellent. 
Eichhorn's History ofGerman Law44 is a more substantial work in this 
respect.) 
Such branches of national activity are directly related to the history of 
the nation as a whole, and everything depends on whether this wider 
context is brought fully to light, or merely glossed over in favour of 
external relationships. In the latter event, the activities in question appear 
as purely contingent national peculiarities. But it must be emphasised 
that, if reflective history has reached the stage of adopting general 
perspectives, and if these perspectives are valid ones, such activities 
appear not just as an external thread, a superficial sequence, but as the 
inward guiding spirit of the events and deeds themselves. 
y. The third kind of history, the philosophical history of the world, 
is related to this last variety of reflective history in that it also adopts a 
• Vorstellung. 
23 

FIRST DRAFT (1822 AND 1828) 
general perspective, but without focussing on a single aspect abstracted 
from national life to the exclusion of the rest. The general perspective 
of philosophical world history is not abstractly general, but concrete and 
absolutely present; for it is the spirit which is eternally present to itself 
and for which there is no past. [Or it is the Idea.] Just like Mercury, the 
guide of departed souls, the Idea is truly the leader of nations and of the 
world; and it is the spirit, with its rational and necessary will, which has 
directed and continues to direct the events of world history. To gain an 
understanding of it and its guiding influence is the aim of the present 
investigation. 

Second Draft ( 1 8 3 o) 
The Philosophical History of the World 
[begun] 8. xi. I8Jo 
Gentlemen, 
The subject of these lectures is the philosophy of world historJ'· 
As to what is meant by history or world history, I need say nothing; 
the common conception of it is adequate, and we are more or less agreed on 
what it is. But what may strike you about the title of these lectures and call 
for a word of elucidatzon, or rather of justification, is that we are here con-
cerned with a philosophy of world history, and are about to consider 
history from a philosophical point of view. 
But the philosophy of historJ• is nothing more than the appltcation of 
thought to history; and thinking is something we cannot stop doing. For 
man is a thinking being, and it is this which distinguishes him from the 
animals. All that is truly human, as distinct from animal- feeling, know-
ledge, and cognition- contains an element of thought, and this applies to all 
historical studies. But to appeal in this way to the participation of thought 
in all human activities may seem inadequate, for it could be argued that 
thought is subordinate to being, to the data of reality, and is based upon and 
determined by the latter. Philosophy, on the other hand, is credited with 
independent thoughts produced by pure speculation, without reference to 
actuality; speculation, it might further be contended, approaches history as 
something to be manipulated, and does not leave it as it is, but forces it 
to conform to its preconceived notions and constructs a history a priori. 
History, however, is concerned with what actually happened. Its 
methods would therefore seem completely at variance with the essentially 
self-determining activity of conceptual thought. It is, of course, possible 
to present events in such a way that we can imagine they are taking place 
directly before our eyes. Even then, however, the links between the events 
must be taken into account; in other words, our procedure must be 
pragmatic, for we have to discover the causes and reasons behind the 
events. But as one can imagine, this will require the assistance of concepts, 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
which does not, however, imply that the conceptual thought involved 
will be at odds with its own nature. Nevertheless, in a procedure of 
this kind, the events will always remain basic, and the activity of the 
concept will be limited to the formal and general aspects of the factual 
material, i.e. to rules, fundamentals, and principles. It is generally 
accepted that logi<:al thinking is required for all such deductions from 
history; their justification, however, must come from the world of ex-
perience. But what philosophy understands by conceptual thinking is 
something quite different; in this case, comprehension is the activity 
of the concept itself, and not a conflict between a material and a form 
of separate origin. An alliance of disparates such as is found in pragmatic 
history is not sufficient for the purposes of conceptual thinking as 
practised in philosophy; for the latter derives its content and material 
essentially from within itself. In this respect, therefore, despite the 
alleged links between the two, the original dichotomy remains: the 
historical event stands opposed to the independent concept. 
But [even if we disregard philosophy,] the same relationship emerges 
in the study of history itself as soon as we look at it from a higher vantage 
point. For on the one hand, we have in history ingredients and higher 
determinants which are remote from the conceptua~ world - i.e. all kinds 
of human arbitrariness and external necessity. On the other hand, we set 
up against this the idea of a higher necessity, an eternal justice and love, 
the absolute and ultimate end which is truth in and for itself. In contrast 
to natural being, this second, opposite pole is based on abstract elements, 
on the freedom and necessity of the concept. This opposition contains 
many interesting features; it comes to our notice once again in the Idea 
of world history. Our present aim is to show how it is resolved in and for 
itself in the world-historical process. 
The sole end of history is to comprehend clearly what is and what has been, 
the events and deeds of the past. It gains in veracity the more strictly it 
confines itself to what is given, and - although this is not so immediately 
evident, but in fact requires many kinds of investigations in which thought also 
plays a part- the more exclusively it seeks to discover what actually hap-
pened. This aim seems to contradict the function of philosophy; and it is this 
contradiction, and the accusation that philosophy imports its own ideas into 
history and manipulates it accordingly, that I wish to discuss in the Introduc-
tion to these lectures. In other words, we must first obtain a general 
definition of the philosophy of world history and then consider its 
immediate implications. As a result, the relationship between thought and the 
events should automatically appear in the correct light.1 For this reason, and 
:z6 

THE PHIJ.OSOPIIIC'\1. HISTORY OF TilE WORLD 
since I do not wzsh the introduction to become too long-rvinded(for the material 
of world history itself is so abundant), there ts no need for me to spend time 
refuting and correcting the endless individual misconceptions and mzstaken 
reflections- some of which are current now, others of which are periodzcally 
resuscitated- regarding perspectives, principles, and opmions on the azm 
and interests of historical studies, and in particular on the relationship of 
conceptual thought and philosophy to historzcal fact. 2 I wn omit all this 
entirely, or merely touch on zt m passing. 
[Its general concept] 
The first thing I wish to say concerning our prot•isional concept of world 
history zs thzs. As already remarked, the mam objectwn levelled at philosophy 
is that it imports its own thoughts mto history aud comiders the latter in the 
light of the former. But the only thought which philosophy brzngs wtth zt zs 
the simple idea of reason- the idea that reason go·verns the world, and that 
world history is therefore a ratzonal process.4 From the point of view of history 
as such, this conviction and insight zs a presupposition. Within philosophy 
itself, however, it is not a presupposztzon; for it is proved in philosophy by 
speculative cognztion that reason - and we can adopt this expression for the 
moment wzthout a detailed discussion of zts relatzonship to God- is sub-
stance and infinite power; it zs itself the infinite material of all 
natural and spzritual life, and the infinite form which activates this 
material content. It is substance, i.e. that through wluch and m which all 
reality has its being and subsistence; It is infimte power, for reason is 
sz~fficiently poTPerful to be able to create somethzng more than JUSt an ideal, 
an obligation which supposedly exzsts in some uuknomn region beyond rea !tty 
(or, as is more likely, only as a particular idea in the heads of a few indivi-
duals); and it is the mfinite content, the essence aud truth of everythmg, 
itself constztutmg the material on whzch zt operates through its own activzty. 
Unlike fiwte actions, it does not requzre an external material as a condition 
of its operation, or outside resources from mhzch to derrve its sustenance and 
the objects of tts actzvzty; zt is self-supporting, and zs itself the material ofzts 
own operations. On the one hand, zt ts its own sole precondztzon, and its end 
is the absolute and ultzmate end of eurything; and on the other, it is itself 
the agent which mzplements and realzses this end, translating it from poten-
tiality into actuality both in the natural universe and in the spiritual world-

SECOND DRAFT (I 830) 
that is, in world history. That this Idea is true, eternal, and omnipotent, that 
it reveals itself in the world, and that nothing is revealed except the Idea 
in all its honour and majesty - this, as I have said, is what philosophy has 
proved, and we can therefore posit it as demonstrated for our present 
purposes. 
The sole aim of philosophical enquiry is to eliminate the contingent. 
Contingency is the same as external necessity, that is, a necessity 
which originates in causes which are themselves no more than 
external circumstances. In history, we must look for a general design, 
the ultimate end of the world, and not a particular end of the subjective 
spirit or mind; and we must comprehend it by means of reason, which 
cannot concern itself with particular and finite ends, but only with the 
absolute. This absolute end is a content which speaks for itself and in 
which everything of interest to man has its foundation. The rational is 
that which has being in and for itself, and from which everything else 
derives its value. It assumes varying shapes; but in none of them is it 
more obviously an end than in that whereby the spirit explicates and 
manifests itself in the endlessly varying forms which we call nations. 
We must bring to history the belief and conviction that the realm of the 
will is not at the mercy of contingency. That world history is governed 
by an ultimate design, that it is a rational process - whose rationality is 
not that of a particular subject, but a divine and absolute reason- this is 
a proposition whose truth we must assume; its proof lies in the study 
of world history itself, which is the image and enactment of reason. The 
real proof, however, comes from a knowledge of reason itself; for reason 
appears in world history only in a mediate form. World history is merely 
a manifestation of this one original reason; it is one of the particular forms 
in which reason reveals itself, a reflection of the archetype in a particular 
element, in the life of nations. 
Reason is self-sufficient and contains its end within itself; it brings 
itself into existence and carries itself into effect. Thought must become 
conscious of this end of reason. The philosophical method may at first 
strike us as odd; bad habits of thinking may even lead us to imagine that 
it is itself contingent or no more than an arbitrary whim. But anyone who 
does not accept that thought is the sole truth and the highest factor in 
existence is not in a position to pass any judgement whatsoever on the 
philosophical method. 
Some of you gentlemen, ma_y not )'et be acquainted wzth philosophy. I 
could easi(y appeal to all such persons to approach these lectures on world 
history with a faith m reason and a thirst for knowledge of tt; - and we must 
28 

ITS GE!\:LRAL CONCEPT 
surely assume that 11 desire for ratzonal insight, for knowledge, and not JUst 
for a collectron of assorted information, zs the subjective motlre zvhzch inspires 
those who seek to stud;· the learned disciplmes. But /need not, in fact, make 
any such claims upm1_your fatth. 5 These pronswnal remarks and the obser-
t•atiom I shall subsequently add to thern are not, even withm our onm 
dzsciplme, to be regarded simply as prior assumptwns, but as a prelunmar,} 
survey of the zvhole, as the result of the enmmg enquiry; for th.e result 1s 
already known to me, as I hare coured the whole field m tu!rauce. It has 
already been shown and will agam emerge m the course oftlm enqwrJ• that the 
history of the world IS a ratwual process, the rational and necessary evolution 
of the world spzrtt. Tim spzrit [zs] the substance of history; zts nature is 
ailvays one and the same; and zt d1scloses this nature zn the exzstence of the 
world. (The world spzrit is the absolute spirzt.)6 This, as I hau said, must be 
the result of our study of history. But we must be sure to take history as zt is; 
in other words, we must proceed histoncally and emptrically. For example, 
we must not allow ourseh:es to be mzsled by the professzonal historians; fur 
certazn of them, at least m Germm~y (and they eun znclude some leadzng 
authorities who pride themselves 011 what they call their study of the sources), 
are guilty of preczsely what they accuse the philosophers of dozng- of zntro-
duczng a priorr fictions mto hzstory. Thus it is a widely accepted fictiOn (to 
quote one example) that there was an ortginal primeval people, dzrectly 
instructed by God, livi1zg zn perfect understanding and wisdom, and possessing 
a thorough knowledge of all natura/laws and spiritual truth; or again, that 
various nations of priests at one time existed; or (to take a more specific 
example) that the Roman htstorzans based their accounts of ancient history 
on a lost Roman eptc, etc. Let us lea<:e such a przori im:mtions to those 
zngemous professional historzans, among whom (at any rate m Germany) 
they are not uncommon. 
We can therefore lay zt down as our first condztion7 that histor_y must be 
apprehended accurately. But gmeral expressions such as apprehend and 
accurately are not wttlwut amb1gwty. Eun the ordinary, run-of-the-mill 
historian who belzeres and professes that his attitude is entzrely receptn:e, that 
he is dedzcated to the facts, zs b_y no means passn•e in his thinkzng; he brings" 
his categories with hun, and they mfluence Ius vision of the data he has before 
him. The truth zs not to be found on the superficzal plane of the senses; for, 
especially tn subjects whrch clamz a scientific status, reason must alwa_ys 
rematn alert, and conscwus deliberation zs zndzspensable. Whoever looks at 
the world ratzonal(y will find that tt tn turn assumes a rational aspect; the 
two exzst zn a reetproca/ relatimzslzzp. 
It is perfectly correct to say that the design of the world should be 
29 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
distinguishable by observation. But to recognise the universal and the 
rational, it is necessary to use reason too. The objects are stimuli to 
thought; otherwise, we find that the world takes on an aspect corres-
ponding to the way in which we look at it. Anyone who views the world 
purely subjectively will see it in terms of his own nature; he will know 
everything better than everyone else, and see how things ought to have 
been done and what course events ought to have taken. But the overall 
content of world history is rational, and indeed has to be rational; a 
divine will rules supreme and is strong enough to determine the overall 
content. Our aim must be to discern this substance, and to do so, we must 
bring with us a rational consciousness. Physical perception and a finite 
understanding are not enough; we must see with the eye of the concept, 
the eye of reason, which penetrates the surface and finds its way through 
the complex and confusing turmoil of events. Yet people say that this 
approach to history is an a priori procedure, and intrinsically wrong. 
Whether they do so or not is a matter of indifference to philosophy. In 
order to perceive the substance, we must apply our own reason to it. 
This does not mean, however, that one-sided reflections are admissible; 
for they distort history and arise out of mistaken subjective opinions. But 
philosophy is not concerned with these. Sure in the knowledge that 
reason governs history, philosophy is convinced that the events will 
match the concept; it does not pervert the truth after the fashion which is 
now prevalent- especially among the philologists, who employ their 
so-called acumen to introduce wholly a priori ideas into history.9 Admit-
tedly, philosophy does follow an a priori method in so far as it pre-
supposes the Idea. But the Idea is undoubtedly there, and reason is fully 
convinced of its presence. 
The perspective adopted by the philosophical history of the world is 
accordingly not just one among many general perspectives, an isolated 
abstraction singled out at the expense of the rest. Its spiritual principle 
is the sum total of all possible perspectives. It concentrates its attention 
on the concrete spiritual principle in the life of nations, and deals not 
with individual situations but with a universal thought which runs through-
out the whole. This universal element is not to be found in the world of 
contingent phenomena; it is the unity behind the multitude of particulars. 
The object of history is the most concrete of all, for it comprehends every 
aspect of existence; the world spirit is its individuality. What philosophy 
is therefore concerned with in its treatment of history is the concrete 
object in its concrete form, and it traces the necessary development of this 
object. Thus the destinies, passions, and energies of nations are not its 
30 

ITS GENERAL CONCEPT 
prime consideration, with the events following on in second place. On the 
contrary, its chief concern is the spirit of the events themselves, the moving 
spirit within them, for this is the true Mercury, the leader of nations. 
We must therefore not imagine that the universal object of the philoso-
phical history of the world is only one aspect of history (no matter how 
important this aspect might be), with other alternative determinants 
existing independently of it. On the contrary, the universal object is 
infinitely concrete, all-comprehending and omnipresent, for the spirit is 
eternally present to itself; it has no past, and remains for ever the same 
in all its vigour and strength. 
The understanding must always be brought to bear on history in order 
that we may comprehend the causes and effects at work in it. In this way, 
we try to discover what is essential in world history and to disregard what 
is inessential. The understanding brings out everything that is important 
and inherently significant. Its criteria of the essential and the inessential 
will vary according to the end it is pursuing in its examination of history, 
and the ends it sets itself can also vary enormously. Whenever a particular 
aim is chosen, further considerations at once present themselves, and we 
are compelled to distinguish between principal and secondary aims. 
Accordingly, when we are comparing the facts of history with the ends of 
the spirit, we will ignore everything which might otherwise be of interest 
and stick to essentials. Thus the historical content which presents itself 
to reason is not simply equivalent to the entire events of the past. Some 
ends are of essential interest to the intellect, and others to the emotions, 
so that we can be moved to sorrow, admiration, or joy when we read 
about them. 
But it is not our busmess to discuss the various types of reflection, attitudes, 
and judgements, not even the ways of distinguishing the important from the 
unimportant (and these are the most obvious categories), or [of deciding what 
to emphasize most] zn the unlimited material at our disposal. 
[Nevertheless, we ought to give a brief account of the categories under 
which the historical process generally presents itself to thought.] The 
first category comes from our observation of the changing individuals, 
nations, and states which flourish for a while, capture our interest, and 
then disappear. This is the category of change. 
We witness a vast spectacle of events and actions, of infinitely varied 
constellations of nations, states, and individuals, in restless succession. 
Everything that can occupy and interest the human mind, every sensation 
of the good, the beautiful and the great, comes into play; everywhere we 
see others pursuing aims which we ourselves affirm and whose fulfilment 
31 

SECOND DRAFT (I 8 3 0) 
we desire, and we share their hopes and fears. In all these events and 
contingencies, our first concern is with the deeds and sufferings of men; 
we see elements of ourselves in everything, so that our sympathies 
constantly oscillate from one side to the other. Sometimes we are capti-
vated by beauty, freedom, and riches, sometimes we are impressed by 
human energy, which can invest even vice with greatness. Sometimes we 
see the accumulated weight of a popular cause lose its impetus and finally 
disintegrate, to be sacrificed to an infinite complex of minor exigencies. 
Sometimes we see how a huge expenditure of effort can produce only a 
trifling result, or conversely, how an apparently insignificant thing can 
have momentous consequences. Everywhere we see a motley confusion 
which draws us into its interests, and when one thing disappears, another 
at once takes its place. 
The negative aspect of the idea of change moves us to sadness. It 
oppresses us to think that the richest forms and the finest manifestations 
of life must perish in history, and that we walk amidst the ruins of 
excellence. History cuts us off from the finest and noblest of our interests: 
the passions have destroyed them, for they are transient. It seems that all 
must perish and that nothing endures. Every traveller has experienced this 
melancholy. Who has stood among the ruins of Carthage, Palmyra, 
Persepolis or Rome without being moved to reflect on the transience of 
empires and men, to mourn the loss of the rich and vigorous life of bygone 
ages? It is not a sorrow like that which we experience at the graves of 
those dear to us, when we lament our personal losses and the transience 
of our own aspirations; it is rather a disinterested sorrow at the downfall 
of the brilliant cultures of the past. 
But the category of change has another, positive side to it. For out of 
death, new life arises. The Orientals have understood this idea; it is 
perhaps the greatest idea they have ever produced, and it is certainly the 
most sublime of their metaphysical doctrines. It is implicit, but with 
individual reference, in their notion of metempsychosis: but an even 
more celebrated example is the image of the Phoenix, of natural life, 
which for ever constructs its own funeral pyre and is for ever consumed 
upon it, only to rise again from the ashes as fresh and rejuvenated life. 
This, however, is only an image of the East; it applies to the body, but 
not to the spirit. Its Western counterpart is the realisation that the spirit 
too rises up again, not only rejuvenated but also enhanced and trans-
figured. Admittedly, it becomes divided against itself and destroys the 
form it earlier occupied, but in so doing, it rises up to a new stage of 
development. But when it abandons the shell of its former existence, it 
32 

ITS GENERAL CONCEPT 
does not merely migrate into a new shell; it emerges as a purified spirit 
from the ashes of its earlier form. This is the second category of the 
spirit, the category of rejuvenation. The rejuvenation of the spirit is 
not just a return to an earlier shape; it is a purification or further elabora-
tion of itself. The solution of its problem creates new problems for it to 
solve, so that it multiplies the materials on which it operates. Thus we 
see how the spirit in history issues forth in innumerable directions, 
indulging and satisfying itself in them all. But the only result of its labour 
is that its activity is once more increased, and it is again consumed. Each 
of the creations in which it found temporary satisfaction presents itself 
in turn as a new material, challenging the spirit to develop it further still. 
The forms it produced become the material on which it labours to raise 
itself up to new forms. It manifests all its powers in every possible way. 
We learn what powers it possesses from the very wealth of forms it 
produces. In this sheer delight in activity, it is entirely absorbed in itself. 
Nature admittedly imposes internal and external limitations on it, and 
these not only resist it and place obstacles in its path but can even cause 
it to fail completely in its endeavours. But even when it is frustrated, it 
remains true to its character as a spiritual being, a being whose end is 
not the finished product but the activity of production, so that it still affords 
the spectacle of having exhibited its active nature. 
But the immediate result of these intriguing speculations is that we grow 
weary of particulars and ask ourselves to what end they all contribute. We 
cannot accept that their significance is exhausted in their own particular 
ends; everything must be part of a single enterprise. Surely some ulti-
mate end must be promoted by this enormous expenditure of spiritual 
resources. We are compelled to ask whether, beneath the superficial din 
and clamour of history, there is not perhaps a silent and mysterious inner 
process at work, whereby the energy of all phenomena is conserved. 
What may well perplex us, however, is the great variety and even incon-
sistency of the content of history. We see complete opposites venerated as 
equally sacred, capturing the attention of different ages and nations. 
We feel the need to find a justification in the realm of ideas for all this 
destruction. This reflection leads us to the third category, to the question 
of whether there is such a thing as an ultimate end in and for itself. This 
is the category of reason proper; it is present in our consciousness as a 
belief that the world is governed by reason. Its proof is to be found in the 
study of world history itself, which is the image and enactment of reason. 
I only wish to mention two points concerningl0 the general conviction that 
reason has ruled and continues to rule the world11 and hence also world 
33 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
history; for these should give us an opportunity to examine more closely the 
main difficulty which confronts us, and to touch provisionally on matters which 
will have to be discussed later. 
The first point is as follows. As history tells us, the Greek Anaxagoras 
was the first to declare that the world is governed by a 'no us', i.e. by reason 
or understanding in general. This does not signify an intelligence in the sense 
of a self-conscious reason or a spirit as such, and the two must not be confused. 
The movement of the solar system is governed by unalterable laws; these laws 
are its inherent reason. But neither the sun nor the planets which revolre 
around it in accordance with these laws are conscious of them. It is man who 
abstracts the laws from empirical reality and acquires knowledge of them. 
An idea of this kind, that there is reason in nature or that it is governed by 
unalterable general laws, does not strike us as in any way strange, and 
Anaxagoras had as yet applied it only to nature. We are accustomed to such 
ideas, and do not find them at all extraordinary. One of the reasons why I 
mentioned this historical fact at all was to show how we can learn from history 
that what may now seem trivial was once unknown to the world, and that 
such ideas were in fact of epoch-making significance in the history of the 
human spirit. Aristotle says of Anaxagoras, as the originator of this idea, 
that he stood out like a sober man in a company of drunkards. 
This idea was taken over from Anaxagoras by Socrates, and it then became 
the ruling principle in philosophy- except in the case of Epicurus, who 
attributed everything to chance. We shall see in due course what other 
religions and nations came to accept it. Plato (Phaedo, Stephanus edition 
pp. 97-8) makes Socrates say of this discovery that thought (not conscious 
thought but thought of a nature as yet undefined, equivalent to neither con-
scious nor unconscious reason) governs the world: 'I was delighted with it and 
hoped I had at last discovered a teacher who would explain nature to me 
rationally, who would reveal the particular end of each particular pheno-
menon and also the ultimate end, the good, in nature as a whole. It was a 
hope which I was not at all eager to relinquish. But how very disappointed I 
was', Socrates continues, 'when I turned,full of anticipation, to the writings 
of Anaxagoras himself! I discovered that, instead of reason, he dealt only 
with external causes such as air, ether, water, and the like.' It is evident from 
this that what Socrates took exception to was not Anaxagoras' principle as 
such, but his failure to apply it adequately to concrete nature, and to interpret 
nature in the light of the principle; for this principle was never anything more 
than an abstraction, or more precisely, nature was not presented as a 
development of the principle, as an organisation produced by it, with reason 
as its cause. 
34 

ITS GENERAL CONCEPT 
I wish, from the outset, to emphasise this distinction between a definition, 
principle, or truth which remains abstract, and one whose specific deter-
mination and concrete de-z:elopment are also explained. This distinction is to 
be found throughout our subject, and one of the principal occasions on which 
we shall encounter it will be at the end of our survey of world history when 
we come to examine the political situation zn recent times. 
Another of the main reasons why I have cited this earliesi12 instance of 
the idea that reason rules the world and discussed its inadequacf3 is because 
it has also been applied more fully to another subject with which we are all 
familiaru and of whose truth we are personally con·vinced- I refer, of 
course, to the religious truth that the world is not a prey to chance and exter-
nal, contingent causes, but zs governed by providence. I declared earlier 
that I did not wish to make any demands on your faith in the above-mentioned 
principle. I might, however, have appealed to your faith in it in this religious 
form, if it were not that the peculiar nature of philosophy forbids us to attach 
authority to prior assumptions; or, to put zt differently, I cannot do so, 
because the discipline we are studying must itself furnish the proof of the 
principle's correctness (if not of its actual truth), and display its concrete 
reality. The truth, then, that the world's events are controlled by a pro-
vidence, indeed by divine providence, is consistent with the principle in 
question. For divine providence is wisdom, coupled with infinite power, which 
realises its ends, i.e. the absolute and rational design of the world; and reason 
is freely self-determining thought, or what the Greeks called 'no us'. 
But15 there is also a difference, indeed a contradiction, between this faith in 
providence and our original principle, a difference akin to that between the 
principle of Anaxagoras and the expectations with which Socrates approached 
it. For this general faith in providence is likewise indeterminate, and Jacks 
a determinate application to the whole, to the entire course of world events. 
[Instead of giving it this] application [men are content] to explain history 
[by natural causes. They confine themselves to] human passions, the relati·ve 
strengths of armies, the abilities and genius of this or that individual, or the 
lack of such an individual in a given state - in short, to so-called natural 
causes of a purely contingent nature, such as Socrates [criticised in the work 
of Anaxagoras. They conceive of providence as an] abstraction [and] make 
do with a general idea of it [without discussing its determinate application]. 
The determinate aspects of providence, the specific actions it performs, 
constitute the providmtial plan (i.e. the end and means of its destiny and 
aims). But this plan is supposed to be hidden from our vieu>, and we are told 
that it is presumptuous to try to comprehend it. The ignorance of Anaxagoras 
35 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
as to how understanding manifests itselfin realzty was unfeigned; the derelop-
ment of thought, and man's awareness of its development, had not progressed 
beyond this point either in him or in Greece as a whole. He was as yet unable 
to apply his general principle to concrete reality, or to imerpret reality in 
terms ofthe principle. It was Socrates who took the first step towards finding 
a means of combining the concrete with the universal, if only m a subjective 
and one-sided way; thus his polemics were not directed against concrete 
applicatzons of the pnnciple. But those who believe zn providmce are hostile 
to all attempts to apply the idea on a large scale, i.e. to any attempts to 
comprehend the providential plan. No-one objects to it being applied in 
isolated cases, and pious souls discern in numerous particular occurrences, 
where others see only the agency of chance, not just dispensations of God 
himself, but of divine providence - i.e. the ends which providence pursues 
by means of such dispensations. But this usual(y happens on(y in isolated 
instances; and when, for example, an individual in great perplexity and 
distress receives unexpected help, we must not hold it against him if his 
gratitude at once leads him to see the hand ofGod at work. But the design of 
providence in such cases is of a limited nature; its content is merely the 
particular end of the individual in question. In world history, however, the 
individuals we are concerned with are nations, totalities, states. We cannot, 
therefore, be content with this (if the word be permitted) trivial faith in 
providence, nor indeed with a merely abstract and indeterminate faith which 
conceives in general terms of a ruling providence but refuses to apply it to 
determinate reality; on the contrary, we must tackle the problem seriously. 
The concrete events are the ways of providence, the means it uses, the 
phenomena in which it manifests itself in history; they are open to our inspec-
tion, and we only have to relate them to the general principle referred to above. 
But in mentioning the possibility of comprehending the plan of divine 
providence, I have touched on a question which is of central importance today: 
I mean the question of whether it is possible to obtain knowledge of God- or 
rather, since it has ceased to be a question- the doctrine, now hardened into 
a prejudice, that it is impossible to know God, notwithstanding the teaching 
of the Scriptures that it is our highest duty not only to love God but also to 
know him. This prejudice goes against the Scriptural saying that the spirit 
leads into truth, searches all things, and penetrates even into the deep things 
of God.• 
Simple faith can well dispense with a fuller understanding of history 
and make do with the general notion of a divine world order; and we 
" Cf. I Corinthians 2, ro. 

ITS GENERAL CONCEPT 
ought not to condemn those who take this course, so long as their faith 
does not become a polemical one. But it is also possible to defend such 
views in a spirit of prejudice, and the general proposition, by virtue of its 
very generality, can also be given a specifically negative application, so 
as to suggest that the divine being is remote from all human things and 
transcends human knowledge. Those who adopt this attitude reserve 
the right to dismiss the claims of truth and rationality, with the added 
advantage of being able to indulge their own fancies at will. Seen from 
this point of view, all ideas of God are reduced to empty talk. If God is 
placed beyond the reach of our rational consciousness, we are no longer 
obliged to trouble ourselves about his nature, or indeed to look for reason 
in world history; the way is then open for any arbitrary hypotheses. 
Pious humility knows very well what it stands to gain from its sacrifices. 
I could have refrazned from menttoning that our principle (i.e. that 
reason govems the world and always has done so) has a religtous equivalent 
in the doctrine of a ruling pro"Z)idence; this would ha·ve allowed me to avoid 
the question df whether it is possible to obtazn knowledge of God. But I did not 
wish to do so, partly in order to bring out some further implications of these 
questions, and partly also to allay any suspicions that philosophy has or 
should have any cause to fear discussing religious truths, or that it circumvents 
them because tt does not, so to speak, have an easy consctence about them. 
On the contrary, we have recently reached the point where philosophy has 
had to defend the content of religion against certain kinds of theology. 
As I have said, we are often told that it is presumptuous to try to fathom 
the plan of providence. This is a direct consequence of the idea (which 
has now become an almost universally accepted axiom) that it is impossible 
to obtain knowledge of God. And when theology itself is in so desperate a 
position, we must take refuge in philosophy if we wish to learn anything 
about God. Certainly, reason is often accused of arrogance in presuming 
to attain such knowledge. But it would be more accurate to say that true 
humility consists precisely in recognising and revering God in everything, 
especially in the theatre of world history. Furthermore, the traditional 
view that God's wisdom is manifest in nature has not yet been altogether 
abandoned. It was indeed fashionable at one time to admire the wisdom of 
God as manifested in animals and plants. But to marvel at human destinies 
or products of nature is already an indication that we have some know-
ledge of God. If we admit that providence reveals itself in such objects 
and materials, why should "c not do the same in world history? Is it 
because history seems too vast a subject? It is certainly customary to 
conceive of providence as taking a hand only in minor matters, to picture 
37 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
it as a wealthy benefactor who distributes alms among men and furthers 
their ends. But it is a mistake to think that the material of world history 
is too vast for providence to cope with; for the divine wisdom is one and 
the same in great things and in small. It is the same in plants and insects 
as in the destinies of entire nations and empires, and we must not imagine 
that God is not powerful enough to apply his wisdom to things of great 
moment. To believe that God's wisdom is not active in everything is to 
show humility towards the material rather than towards the divine wisdom 
itself. Besides, nature is a theatre of secondary importance compared with 
that of world history. Nature is a field in which the divine Idea operates 
in a non-conceptual medium; the spiritual sphere is its proper province, 
and it is here above all that it ought to be visible. Armed with the concept 
of reason, we need not fear coming to grips with any subject whatsoever. 
The contention that we should not attempt to know God in fact 
requires closer examination than is possible within the scope of these 
lectures. But since this matter has so close a bearing upon our present aim, 
it is essential that we should consider at least the general perspectives 
involved. Thus if knowledge of God is impossible, the only thing left for 
the mind to occupy itself with is the non-divine, the limited, the finite. 
Of course it is necessary for man to occupy himself with finite things; but 
there is also a higher necessity which requires that there should be a 
sabbath in his existence, a time when he can rise above his daily labours 
to occupy his mind consciously with truth. 
If the name of God is to be more than an empty word, we must consider 
God as benevolent, or at least as in some way communicative. In the 
earlier phases of Greek thought, God was seen as subject to envy, and 
there was much talk of the envy of the gods; it was said that the divinity 
is hostile to greatness, and that it is the mission of the gods to humble 
the great. Aristotle says, however, that poets are much given to lying, 
for envy cannot be an attribute of God. And if we were to maintain in 
turn that God does not reveal himself at all, this would amount to an 
allegation that he is envious. But God cannot lose anything by com-
munication any more than a light can be diminished when a second one is 
lit from it. 
It is often said that God does reveal himself, but only in nature on 
the one hand, and in the heart, in the feelings of men, on the other. We 
are usually told nowadays that this is the point at which we must draw a 
halt, for God is present only to our immediate consciousness or intuition. 
Intuition and emotion, however, arc both unreflecting forms of conscious-
ness, and we must insist in reply to such arguments that man is a thinking 

ITS GENERAL CONCEPT 
being, for it is thought which distinguishes him from the animals. He 
behaves as a thinking being even when he is himself unaware of it. 
When God reveals himself to man, he reveals himself essentially through 
man's rational faculties; if he revealed himself essentially through the 
emotions, this would imply that he regarded man as no better than the 
animals, who do not possess the power of reflection - yet we do not 
attribute religion to the animals. In fact, man only possesses religion 
because he is not an animal but a thinking being. It is a trivial common-
place that man is distinguished from the animals by his ability to think, 
yet this is something which is often forgotten. 
God is the eternal being in and for himself; and the universal in and 
for itself is an object of thought, not of feeling. It is true that all spiritual 
things, all data of the consciousness, all products and objects of thought -
and above all religion and morality -· must also come to us through the 
medium of feeling, and indeed primarily through this medium. Feeling, 
however, is not the source from which they are derived, but only the form 
which they assume in man; and it is the basest form they can assume, a 
form which man shares in common with the animals. All substantial 
things must be able to assume the form of emotion, yet they can also 
assume a higher and worthier form. But to insist on translating all morality 
and truth and every spiritual substance into feeling, and to endeavour to 
preserve them in this form is tantamount to saying that their proper 
form is the animal one- although the latter is in fact incapable of com-
prehending their spiritual content. Feeling is the lowest form which any 
such content can assume, for its presence in feeling can only be minimal. 
So long as it retains this form, it remains inchoate and completely 
indeterminate. The content of our feelings remains entirely subjective, 
and is only subjectively present to us. To say' I feel such and such' is to shut 
oneself up within oneself. Everyone else is equally entitled to say 'But I 
feel differently', and then all common ground is lost. In purely particular 
matters, feelings are perfectly justified. But to maintain that a given content 
is present in the feelings of everyone is to contradict the emotional point 
of view one has adopted, the point of view of personal subjectivity. As 
soon as the emotions have a content, everyone is placed in a position of 
subjectivity. And if one person should choose to say unpleasant things 
about another who has acted only on his feelings, the second is entitled 
to say the same of the first, and both would be equally justified - from 
their own point of view- in taking offence. If one man says that he has 
religious emotions, and another says that he cannot feel God, they are 
both right. If the divine content- i.e. the revelation of God, the relation-
39 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
ship between man and God, and the being of God for mankind - is 
reduced in this way to mere emotion, it is thereby confined to the level 
of individual subjectivity, of arbitrariness, of random inclinations. In 
fact, this has been a convenient way of getting round the problem of the 
truth which exists in and for itself. If I rely only on my emotions, which 
are indeterminate, and have no knowledge of God and his nature, I have 
nothing to guide me except random inclinations; the finite alone has 
validity and is the dominant power. And if I know nothing whatsoever of 
God, there can be no serious talk about the limits of such knowledge 
either. 
The truth is inherently universal, essential, and substantial; and as 
such, it exists solely in thought and for thought. But that spiritual 
principle which we call God is none other than the truly substantial, 
inherently and essentially individual and subjective truth. It is the source 
of all thought, and its thought is inherently creative; we encounter it as 
such in world history. Whatever else we describe as true is merely a 
particular form of this eternal truth, which is its sole foundation; it is but 
a single ray of the universal light. If we know nothing of this truth, we 
must remain ignorant of all truth, rightness, and morality. 
But what, we may ask, is the plan of providence in world history? 
Has the time come for us to understand it? [I shall confine myself for the 
present to] the following general remarks. 
God has revealed himself through the Christian religion; that is, he has 
granted mankind the possibility of recognising his nature, so that he is no 
longer an impenetrable mystery. The fact that knowledge of God is possible 
also makes it our duty to know him, and that det•elopment of the thinking 
spirit which the Christian re1'elation ofGod initiated must eventually produce 
a situation where all that was at first present only to the emotional and 
representational faculties can also be comprehended by thought. Whether 
the time has yet come for such knowledge will depend on whether the ultimate 
end of the world has yet been realised in a universally valid and conscious 
manner.16 
Now the distinctive feature of Christianity is that, with its advent, this 
time has indeed come. Its significance for the history of the world is 
therefore absolutely epoch-making, for the nature of God has at last 
been made manifest. If we say that we know nothing of God, Christianity 
becomes something superfluous, a belated arrival, or even a symptom of 
decay. But this is not the case, for Christianity does give us knowledge of 
God. Its content, admittedly, appeals to our emotions too. But since the 
feeling it evokes is a spiritual one, it at least brings into play the faculty of 

ITS GENERAL CONCEPT 
representation- and not just sensory representation either, but also 
representational thought, the true medium through which man perceives 
God. Christianity is the religion which has revealed the nature and being 
of God to man. Thus we know as Christians what God is; God is no 
longer an unknown quantity: and if we continue to say that he is, we are 
not Christians. Christianity demands that humility to which we have 
already referred, a humility which makes us seek to know God not through 
our own unaided efforts but with the help of divine knowledge and wis-
dom. Christians, then, are initiated into the mysteries of God, and this 
also supplies us with the key to world history. For we have here a definite 
knowledge of providence and its plan. It is one of the central doctrines of 
Christianity that providence has ruled and continues to rule the world, 
and that everything which happens in the world is determined by and 
commensurate with the divine government. This doctrine is opposed 
both to the idea of chance and to that of limited ends (such as the preser-
vation of the Jewish people). Its end is the ultimate and absolutely 
universal end which exists in and for itself. Religion does not go beyond 
this general representation; it remains on the level of generality. But we 
must proceed from this general faith firstly to philosophy and then to the 
philosophy of world history- from the faith that world history is a product 
of eternal reason, and that it is reason which has determined all its great 
revolutions. 
We can therefore conclude that, even in the absolute sense, the time has 
come in which this conviction and inner certainty need no longer remain 
a mere representation, but can also be thought, developed, and recognised 
as a definite piece of knowledge. The original faith makes no attempt to 
elaborate its content further or to gain any insight into historical necessity-
for only knowledge can do that. The fact that the spirit never stands still 
guarantees that such a time must eventually come; the culminating phase 
of the spirit - thought or the concept- insists on its rights, and it alone, 
in its most general and essential being, constitutes the true nature of the 
spirit. 
A distinction is often made between faith and knowledge, and the two 
have come to be commonly accepted as opposites. It is taken for granted 
that they are different, and that we therefore have no knowledge of God. 
People are affronted if we tell them that we seek to know and understand 
God, and to impart such knowledge to others. But if it is defined correctly, 
the distinction between faith and knowledge is in fact an empty one. For 
if I have faith in something, I also know it and am convinced of it. In 
41 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
religion, we have faith in God and in the doctrines which explain his 
nature more fully; but this is something we know and of which we are cer-
tain. To know means to have something as an object of one's conscious-
ness and to be certain of it; and it is exactly the same with faith. 
Cognition, however, perceives that the content of knowledge- and indeed 
of faith- is necessary, and discerns the reasons behind it; it does so 
without reference to the authority of the Church or of feeling, which is 
something immediate, and goes on to analyse this content into its various 
determinate elements. These determinate elements must first become 
objects of thought before we can obtain a true cognition of them and 
perceive them in their concrete unity within the concept. And if there is 
any further suggestion that it is presumptuous to seek such cognition, 
we might then reply that all this fuss is unnecessary, since cognition 
merely takes note of necessity and watches the inner development of the 
content unfold before its eyes. As a further reason why such cognition 
cannot be branded as presumptuous, one might also maintain that it 
differs from faith only in its greater knowledge of particulars. But this 
argument would be misplaced, and indeed inherently false. For the 
spiritual is not by nature abstract, but a living thing, a universal indivi-
vidual, a subjective, self-determining, decision-making being. We cannot 
therefore truly know the nature of God unless we recognise its determinate 
elements. Christianity too speaks of God in this way, for it recognises him 
as a spirit, and this spirit is not an abstraction, but the process in itself; 
and this in turn presupposes the existence of absolute distinctions- in 
fact, the very distinctions which Christianity has made known to mankind. 
God does not wish to have narrow-minded and empty-headed children. 
On the contrary, he demands that we should know him; he wishes his 
children to be poor in spirit but rich in knowledge of him, and to set the 
highest value on acquiring knowledge of God. History is the unfolding 
of God's nature in a particular, determinate element, so that only a 
determinate form of knowledge is possible and appropriate to it. 
The time has now surely come for us to comprehend even so rich a product 
of creative reason as world history. The aim of human cognition is to under-
stand that the intentions of eternal wisdom are accomplished not only in the 
natural world, but also in the realm of the [spirit] which is actively present 
in the world. From this point of view, our itlvestigation can be seen as a 
theodicy, a justification of the ways of God (such as Leibniz attempted in his 
own metaphysical manner, but using categories which were as yet abstract 
and indeterminate). It should enable us to comprehend all the ills of the world, 
including the existence of evil, so that the thinking spirit may be reconciled 

ITS GENERAL CONCEPT 
with the negative aspects of existence; and it is tn world hiStOI)' that n>e 
encounter the sum total of concrete evil. (Indeed, there is no departnzmt nf 
knowledge in which such a reconciliatzon zs more urgently requtred tha11 m 
world history, and we shall accordingly pause for a moment to co1zsider tim 
question further.) 
A reconciliation of the kind just described can only be achiered through a 
knowledge of the affirmative side of history, in which the negati·ve zs reduced 
to a mbordinate positzon and transcended altogether. In other words, me must 
first of all knom what the ultzmate design of the world real(y ts, and secnnd(y, 
we must see that this deszgn has bem realised and that evil has not been able 
to maintain a position of equality beside it. 
In order to justify the course of history, we must try to understand 
the role of evil in the light of the absolute sovereignty of reason. We are 
dealing here with the category of the negative, as already mentioned, and 
we cannot fail to notice how all that is finest and noblest in the history of 
the world is immolated upon its altar.17 Reason cannot stop to consider 
the injuries sustained by single individuals, for particular ends are sub-
merged in the universal end. In the rise and fall of all things it discerns an 
enterprise at which the entire human race has laboured, an enterprise 
which has a real existence in the world to which we belong. Phenomena 
have become real independently of our efforts, and all that we need to 
understand them is consciousness, or more precisely, a thinking conscious-
ness. For the affirmative element is not to be found merely in emotional 
enjoyment or in the imagination, but is something which belongs to 
reality and to us, or to which we ourselves belong. 
Reason, it has been said, rules the world. But 'reason' zs just as indefinite 
a word as 'providence'. People continually speak of reason, without bemg 
able to define it correctly, to specify its content, or to supply a criterion by 
which we might judge whether somethmg is rational or irrational. Reason in its 
determinate form is the true substance; and the rest- zf we confine our-
selves to reason in general- is mere words. ll"ith thz• information* before us. 
we may proceed to the second point which, as earlier remarked, has to be 
considered in this introduction. 
• The text reads .4usgabe ('edition', 'emission' or 'expense') It seems much more 
likely that the word Hegel intended was either .4uj~abe ('task'. 'problem' I or 
Angabe ('indication', 'information'). Lasson's edition of the tnt (third ednioo. 
Philosophische Bibliothek, 1930) in fact gi' es the reading Angabe. "hich Hofrmeis-
ter appears to ha\ e altered in favour of the unmtclligihlr A.usgabe 
43 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
B 
[The realisation of spirit in history] 
To try to define reason in itself- if we consider reason18 in relation to the 
world- amounts to asking what the ultimate end of the world zs; and zve 
cannot speak of an ultzmate end without implying that tim end 1s destmed 
to be accomplished or realised. We therefore hare tzvo points to consider: 
firstly, the content of the ulttmate end itself- i.e. its definition as mch- and 
secondly, its realisation. 
We must first of all note that the object we have before us, i.e. zvorld historJ', 
belongs to the realm of the spirit. The world as a whole comprehends both 
physical and spiritual nature. Physical nature also plays a part in world 
history, and we shall certainly include some initial remarks on the basic 
outlines of this natural influence. But the spirit and the course of its dez·elop-
ment are the true substance of history. We do not hau to consider nature 
here as a rational system in its own right- although it is indeed tl rtltional 
system, operating in its own distinct element- but only in relattmz to spint. 19 
After the creation of the natural universe, man appears on the scene as 
the antithesis of nature; he is the being who raises himself up into a second 
world. The general consciousness of man includes two distinct provinces, 
that of nature and that of the spirit. The province of the spirit is created 
by man himself; and whatever ideas we may form of the kingdom of God, 
it must always remain a spiritual kingdom which is realised in man and 
which man is expected to translate into actuality. 
The spiritual sphere is all-embracing; it encompasses everything that 
has concerned mankind down to the present day. Man is active within it; 
and whatever he does, the spirit is also active within him. Thus it may be 
of interest to examine spiritual nature in its real existence- that is, spirit 
in combination with nature, or human nature itself. The expression 
'human nature' is usually taken to represent something fixed and con-
stant. Descriptions of human nature are meant to apply to all men, past 
and present. The general pattern is capable of infinite modifications, but, 
however much it may vary, it nevertheless remains essentially the same. 
Reflective thought must disregard the differences and isolate the common 
factor which can be expected to behave in the same way and to show itself 
in the same light under all circumstances. It is possible to detect the general 
type even in those examples which seem to diverge most widely from it, 
and we can recognise human nature even in the most distorted of forms. 
44 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
We can derive a kind of comfort and reassurance from the knowledge 
that such forms still retain a vestige of humanity. Those who look at 
history from this point of view will tend to emphasise that men are still 
the same as they always were, and that vices and virtue~ have remained 
constant despite changing circumstances. One might fittingly add "ith 
Solomon that there is nothing new under the sun. • 
For example, if we see someone kneeling in prayer before an idol, and 
the content of his prayer is contemptible in the eyes of reason,\\ e can still 
respect the feelings which animate it and acknowledge that they are just 
as valuable as those of the Christian who worships truth in symbolic 
form, or of the philosopher who immerses himself in eternal truth through 
rational thought. Only the objects of such feelings are different; but the 
feelings themselves are one and the same. If we call to mind the history 
of the Assassins, and their relationship with their ruler, the Old Man of the 
Mountains, we find that they sacrificed themselves for him in order to 
perpetrate his crimes. In a subjective sense, this sacrifice is no different 
from that of Curtius, who leaped into the abyss to save his fatherland. 
Once we have accepted this, we might even say that there is no need to 
refer to the great theatre of world history at all. According to the well 
known anecdote, Caesar found in a small municipality the same ambitions 
and activities he had encountered in the wider context of Rome. The 
same motives and aspirations can be found in a small town as in the great 
theatre of world events. It is obvious that this way of looking at history 
abstracts from the content and aims of human activity. Such sovereign 
disregard of the objective situation is particularly common among French 
and English writers, who describe their works as 'philosophical history'. 
Nevertheless, no fully formed intellect can fail to distinguish between 
impulses and inclinations which operate in a restricted sphere and those 
which are active in the conflict of interests of world history. This objective 
interest, which affects us both through the general design and through the 
individual who implements it, is what makes history attractive. Such 
designs and individuals are the ones whose downfall and destruction we 
most lament. When we contemplate the struggle of the Greeks against the 
Persians, or the momentous reign of Alexander, we are fully aware of 
where our interests lie: we wish to see the Greeks liberated from the 
barbarians, and feel concern for the preservation of the Greek state and 
for the ruler who subjugated Asia at the head of a Greek army. Let us 
imagine for a moment how we would feel if Alexander had failed in his 
• Cf. Ecclesiastes I, 9· 
45 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
enterprise. We would certainly have no sense ofloss if we were interested 
only in human passions, for we would still not have been denied the spec-
tacle of passions in action. But this would not have satisfied us: for we are 
interested in the material itself, in the objective situation. 
But what, we may ask, is the nature of the substantial end in which the 
spirit acquires its essential content? Our interest is of a substantial and 
determinate kind, and its object is some determinate religion, knowledge, 
or art. But how does the spirit acquire such a content, and where does this 
content come from? The empirical answer is simple. Each individual, 
at any given moment, finds himself committed to some essential interest 
of this kind; he exists in a particular country with a particular religion, 
and in a particular constellation of knowledge and attitudes concerning 
what is right and ethically acceptable. All that is left for him to do is to 
select particular aspects of it with which he wishes to identify himself. 
But when we realise that whole nations are occupied with such objects 
and immersed in such interests, we are once again faced with the problem 
of world history, whose content we are trying to define. The empirical 
approach is not adequate for our purposes, and we must pass on to the 
more specific question of how the spirit- i.e. the spirit as such, whether 
it is present in ourselves, in other individuals, or in nations as a whole-
acquires such a content. We must define the content solely in terms of 
specific concepts. What has been discussed hitherto is part of our ordinary 
consciousness. But the concept to which we now turn is of a completely 
different order (although this is not the place for us to analyse it systemati-
cally). Philosophy is by no means ignorant of the popular conception, 
but has its own reasons for departing from it. 
Our business here is to consider world history in relation to its ultimate 
end; this ultimate end is the intention which underlies the world. We 
know that God is the most perfect being; he is therefore able to will only 
himself and that which is of the same nature as himself. God and the 
nature of the divine will are one and the same thing; it is what we call in 
philosophy the Idea. Thus it is the Idea in general which we have to 
consider, and particularly its operation within the medium of the human 
spirit; in more specific terms, it is the Idea of human freedom. The Idea 
reveals itself in its purest form in thought, and it is from this angle that 
logic approaches it. It expresses itself in another form in physical nature, 
and the third form which it assumes is that of spirit in the absolute 
sense. 
But in the theatre i11 wluclz we are about to wit11ess zts operations - i.e. 
tlze theatre of world history- the spzrit attazns its most concrete reality. 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
Despite this- or rather precisely so that we may comprehend the general 
characteristics of the spirzt in its concrete reality - we must begin with a few 
abstract definitions of its nature. I must also point out that these remarks 
camwt claim to be anything more than simple assertzons, for this is 110t the 
time or place for a speculatzve exposition of the Idea of the spirit. It is more 
importa11t that these deliberatzons should be presented in such a way as to 
suit the level of education and outlook which can be expected among the present 
audience. For anything that is said in an introduction should, as already 
remarked, be seen as purely historical, as a provisional assumptzon which has 
either been explained and demonstrated elsewhere, or which will at least be 
confirmed at a later stage in the course of the treatise itself. 
a. [The determination* of spirit] 
The first thing we must do is to define the abstract determination of 
spirit.20 It must, however, be pointed out that the spirit is not in itself 
abstract, for it is not an abstraction invented by man; on the contrary, 
it is entirely individual, active, and absolutely alive: it is consciousness, 
but it is also the object of consciousness- for it is in the nature of the 
spirit to have itself as its object. The spirit, then, is capable of thought, 
and its thought is that of a being which itself exists, and which thinks 
that it exists and how it exists. It possesses knowledge: but knowledge is 
consciousness of a rational object. Besides, the spirit only has conscious-
ness in so far as it is conscious of itself; in other words, I only know an 
object in so far as I know myself and my own determination through it, 
for whatever I am is also an object of my consciousness, and I am not 
just this, that or the other, but only what I know myself to be. I know 
my object, and I know myself; the two are inseparable. Thus the spirit 
forms a definite conception of itself and of its essential nature. It can only 
have a spiritual content; and its sole content and interest are spiritual. 
This, then, is how the spirit acquires a content: it does not find its content 
outside itself, but makes itself its own object and its own content. Know-
ledge is its form and function, but its content is the spiritual itself. Thus 
the spirit is by natun:. self-sufficient or free. 
The nature of spirit can best be understood if we contrast it with its 
direct opposite, which is matter. Just as gravity is the substance of matter, 
so also can it be said that freedom is the substance of spirit. It is im-
mediately obvious to everyone that freedom is one of the various attributes 
of spirit; but philosophy teaches us that all the attributes of spirit exist 
• Bestimmung. As already remarked, this word also has associations akin to those of 
the English tenn 'destiny'. Cf. note top. 11 above. 
47 

SECOND (DRAFT 1830) 
only by virtue of freedom, that all are merely means of attaining freedom, 
and that the sole object which they all seek and to whose realisation they 
all contribute is freedom. Speculative philosophy has shown that 
freedom is the one authentic property of spirit. Matter possesses gravity 
in so far as it is impelled to move towards a central point; it is essentially 
composite, and consists entirely of discrete parts which all tend towards a 
centre; thus matter has no unity. It is made up of separate elements and 
aspires to a condition of unity; it thus endeavours to overcome itself and 
seeks its own opposite. If it were to succeed, it would no longer be 
matter, but would have ceased to exist as such; it strives towards ideality, 
for unity is its ideal existence. Spirit, on the other hand, is such that its 
centre is within itself; it too strives towards its centre, but it has its centre 
within itself. Its unity is not something external; it always finds it within 
itself, and exists in itself and with itself. Matter has its substance outside 
itself; spirit, on the other hand, is self-sufficient being, • which is the 
same thing as freedom. For if I am dependent, I am beholden to some-
thing other than myself, and cannot exist without this external point of 
reference. If, however, I am self-sufficient, I am also free. 
When the spirit strives towards its centre, it strives to perfect its own 
freedom; and this striving is fundamental to its nature. To say that spirit 
exists would at first seem to imply that it is a completed entity. On the 
contrary, it is by nature active, and activity is its essence; it is its own 
product, and is therefore its own beginning and its own end. Its freedom 
does not consist in static being, but in a constant negation of all that 
threatens to destroyt freedom. The business of spirit is to produce itself, 
to make itself its own object, and to gain knowledge of itself; in this way, 
it exists for itself. Natural objects do not exist for themselves; for this 
reason, they are not free. The spirit produces and realises itself in the 
light of its knowledge of itself; it acts in such a way that all its knowledge 
of itself is also realised. Thus everything depends on the spirit's self-
awareness; if the spirit knows that it is free, it is altogether different from 
what it would be without this knowledge. For if it does not know that it 
is free, it is in the position of a slave who is content with his slavery and 
does not know that his condition is an improper one. It is the sensation 
of freedom alone which makes the spirit free, although it is in fact always 
free in and for itself. 
The most immediate knowledge spirit can have of itself when it assumes 
the shape of a human individual is that it is capable of feeling. It does 
• Beisichselbstsein, which can also mean 'the state of being conscious'. 
t aufheben. 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
not as yet have an object, and the individual simply feels himself deter-
mined in some particular way. He then tries to distinguish between 
himself and this determinate quality, and sets about creating an internal 
division within himself. Thus, my feelings are split up into an external 
and an internal world. My determinate nature thereby enters a new phase, 
in that I have a feeling of deficiency or negativity; I encounter a contradic-
tion within myself which threatens to destroy me. But I nevertheless 
exist; this much I know, and I balance this knowledge against my 
feeling of negation or deficiency. I survive and seek to overcome* the 
deficiency, so that I am at the same time an impulse. The object tmvards 
which my impulse is directed is accordingly the means by which I can 
attain satisfaction and the restoration of my unity. All living things are 
endowed with impulses. We are therefore natural beings, and all our 
impulses are of a sensuous character. Objects, in so far as I am drawn to 
them by impulse, are means of integration, and this is the entire basis of 
theory and practice alike. But in our intuitionst of the objects to which 
our impulses are drawn, we are dealing directly with externals and 
are ourselves external. Our intuitions are discrete units of a sensuous 
nature, and so also are our impulses, irrespective of their content. By 
this definition, man would be no different from the animals; for impulses 
are not conscious of themselves. But man has knowledge of himself, and 
this distinguishes him from the animals. He is a thinking being. Thought, 
however, is knowledge of universals, and it simplifies the content of 
experience, so that man too is simplified by it so as to become something 
inward and ideal. Or, to be more precise, this inwardness and simplicity 
is inherent in man, and the content of our experience only becomes 
universal and ideal if we proceed to simplify it. 
What man is in reality, he must also be in ideality. Since he possesses 
ideal knowledge of reality, he ceases to be merely a natural being at the 
mercy of immediate intuitions and impulses which he must satisfy and 
perpetuate. This knowledge leads him to control his impulses; he places the 
ideal, the realm of thought, between the demands of the impulse and their 
satisfaction. In the animal, the two coincide; it cannot sever their 
connection by its own efforts - only pain or fear can do so. In man, the 
impulse is present before it is satisfied and independently of its satis-
faction; in controlling or giving rein to his impulses, man acts in accord-
ance with ends and determines himself in the light of a general principle. 
It is up to him to decide what end to follow; he can even make his end a 
completely universal one. In so doing, he is determined by whatever 
* aufzuheben. 
t Anschauungm. 
49 

SECOND DRAFT ( 18 3 0) 
conceptions he has formed of his own nature and volitions. It is this 
which constitutes man's independence: for he knows what it is that deter-
mines him. Thus he can take a simple concept as his end - for example, 
that of his own positive freedom. The conceptions of the animal are not 
ideal and have no true reality; it therefore lacks this inner independence. 
As a living creature, the animal too has its source of movement within 
itself. But it can only respond to those external stimuli to which it is 
already inwardly susceptible; anything that does not match its inner 
being simply does not exist for it. The animal is divided from itself and 
within itself. It cannot interpose anything between its impulse and the 
satisfaction of its impulse; it has no will, and cannot even attempt to 
control itself. Its activating impulses come from within itself, and their 
operation presupposes that they contain the means of their own fulfilment. 
Man, however, is not independent because he is the initiator of his own 
movement, but because he can restrain this movement and thereby master 
his spontaneity and natural constitution. 
· 
The fundamental characteristic of human nature is that man can think 
of himself as an ego. As a spirit, man does not have an immediate existence 
but is essentially turned in upon himself. This function of mediation is an 
essential moment of the spirit. Its activity consists in transcending and 
negating its immediate existence so as to turn in again upon itself; it has 
therefore made itself what it is by means of its own activity. Only if it is 
turned in upon itself can a subject have true reality. Spirit exists only as 
its own product. The example of the seed may help to illustrate this point. 
The plant begins with the seed, but the seed is also the product of the 
plant's entire life, for it develops only in order to produce the seed. We 
can see from this how impotent life is, for the seed is both the origin and 
the product of the individual; as the starting point and the end result, it 
is different and yet the same, the product of one individual and the 
beginning of another. Its two sides fall asunder like the simple form 
within the grain and the whole course of the plant's development. 
Every individual has an example even closer to hand in the shape of 
his own person. Man can only fulfil himself through education and 
discipline; his immediate existence contains merely the possibility of 
self-realisation (i.e. of becoming rational and free) and simply imposes 
on him a vocation and obligation which he must himselffulfil. The animal's 
education is soon complete; but this should not be seen as a blessing 
bestowed on the animal by nature. Its growth is merely a quantitative 
increase in strength. Man, on the other hand, must realise his potential 
through his own efforts, and must first acquire everything for himself, 
so 

Rf.ALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
precisely because he is a spiritual being; in short, he must thro\\ off all 
that is natural in him. Spirit, therefore, is the product of itself. 
The most sublime example is to be found in the nature of God himself; 
strictly speaking, this is not a genuine example in the sense of one casual 
instance• among others, but rather the universal truth itself, of which 
all other things are examples. It is true that the older religions also 
referred to God as a spirit; but this was no more than a name which could 
as yet contribute nothing towards explaining the nature of spirit. In the 
Jewish religion too, the spirit was at first conceived only in general terms. 
Christianity, however, contains a revelation of God's spiritual nature. 
In the first place, he is the Father, a power which is universal but as yet 
enclosed within itself. Secondly, he is his own object, another version of 
himself, dividing himself into two so as to produce the Son. But this 
other version is just as immediate an expression of him as he is himself; 
he knows himself and contemplates himself in it - and it is this self-
knowledge and self-contemplation which constitutes the third element, 
the Spirit as such. In other words, the Spirit is the whole, and not just 
one or other of the elements in isolation. Or, to put it in terms of feeling, 
God is eternal love, whose nature is to treat the other as its own. It is this 
doctrine of the Trinity which raises Christianity above the other religions. 
If it did not have this doctrine, the other religions might well provide 
more material for thought than it does. The Trinity is the speculative 
part of Christianity, and it is through it that philosophy can discover the 
Idea of reason in the Christian religion too. 
The essence of spirit, then, is self-consciousness. Let us now proceed 
to examine it more closely, and not just as it expresses itself in the 
individual human being. The spirit is essentially individual, but in the 
field of world history, we are not concerned with particulars and need 
not confine ourselves to individual instances or attempt to trace every-
thing back to them. The spirit in history is an individual which is both 
universal in nature and at the same time determinate: in short, it is the 
nation in general, and the spirit we are concerned with is the spirit of 
the nation. But the spirits of nations differ in their own conceptions of 
themselves, in the relative superficiality or profundity with which they 
have comprehended and penetrated the nature of spirit. The right which 
governs the ethical existence of nations is the spirit's consciousness of 
itself; the nations are the concepts which the spirit has formed of itself. 
Thus it is the conception of the spirit which is realised in history. The 
• The term Hegel uses here is Bei-her-spiel, a compound constructed by himself out 
of beiher (adverb, 'on the side', 'alongside') and Beispiel ('example'). 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
national consciousness varies according to the extent to which the spirit 
knows itself; and the ultimate phase of its consciousness, on which every-
thing depends, is the recognition that man is free. The spirit's own con-
sciousness must realise itself in the world; the material or soil in which 
it is realised is none other than the general consciousness, the conscious-
ness of the nation. This consciousness encompasses and guides all the 
aims and interests of the nation, and it is on it that the nation's rights, 
customs, and religion depend. It is the substance which underlies the 
spirit of the nation, even if individual human beings are unaware of it and 
simply take its existence for granted. It is a form of necessity, for the 
individual is brought up within its atmosphere and does not know any-
thing else. But it is not to be identified with education or with the results 
of education; for this consciousness emanates from the individual himself 
and is not instilled into him by others: the individual exists within this 
substance. This universal substance is not of a worldly nature and no 
worldly agency can successfully oppose it. No individual can transcend 
it, and although the individual may be able to distinguish between himself 
and others of his kind, he can make no such distinction between himself 
and the spirit of the nation. He may surpass many others in resourceful-
ness, but he cannot surpass the spirit of the nation. Only those who know 
the spirit of the nation and shape their actions in accordance with it can 
be described as truly resourceful.* They are the great ones of the nation; 
they lead it in accordance with the dictates of the universal spirit. Thus, 
individuality falls outside our province, except in the case of those 
individuals who translate the will of the national spirit into reality. If we 
wish to treat history philosophically, we must avoid such expressions 
as 'this state would not have collapsed if there had been someone who ... ' 
etc. Individuals fade into insignificance beside the universal substance, 
and it creates for itself the individuals it requires to carry out its ends. 
But no individuals can prevent the preordained from happening. 
On the one hand, the spirit of the nation is in essence particular, yet 
on the other, it is identical with the absolute universal spirit- for the 
latter is One. The world spirit is the spirit of the world as it reveals 
itself through the human consciousness; the relationship of men to it is 
that of single parts to the whole which is their substance. And this world 
spirit corresponds to the divine spirit, which is the absolute spirit. Since 
God is omnipresent, he is present in everyone and appears in everyone's 
• Hegel's term is geistreich (literally, 'rich in spirit'). It is impossible to reproduce in 
English the relationship between gcirtreich and Gei.•t ('spirit') which Hegel is here 
exploiting. 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
consciousness; and this is the world spirit. The particular spirit of a 
particular nation may perish; but it is a link in the chain of the world 
spirit's development, and this universal spirit cannot perish. The spirit 
of the nation is therefore the universal spirit in a particular form; the 
world spirit transcends this particular form, but it must assume it in so 
far as it exists, for it takes on a particular aspect as soon as it has actual 
being or existence. The particular character of the national spirit varies 
according to the kind of awareness of spirit it has attained. In everyday 
parlance, we say: 'This nation had such and such a conception of God, 
such and such a religion or system of justice, and such and such views on 
ethics.' We treat all these things as if they were external objects which a 
nation had in its possession. But we can tell even at a superficial glance 
that they are of a spiritual nature, so that the only kind of reality they can 
have is a spiritual one, i.e. through the spirit's consciousness of spirit. 
But this, as already mentioned, is equivalent to self-consciousness, 
which can easily give rise to a misunderstanding, for I may wrongly 
imagine that, in the act of self-consciousness, it is my temporal indivi-
duality that I am conscious of. One of the difficulties of philosophy is that 
most people think it deals only with the particular and empirical existence 
of the individual. But spirit, in its consciousness of itself, is free; in this 
realisation, it has overcome the limits of temporal existence and enters 
into relationship with pure being, which is also its own being. If the divine 
being were not the essence of man and nature, it would not in fact be a 
being at all. Self-consciousness, then, is a philosophical concept, which 
can only attain its full determinate character in philosophical discourse. 
It we take this as established, we may further conclude that the deter-
minate national consciousness is the nation's consciousness of its own 
being. The spirit is primarily its own object; but as long as it is this only 
in our eyes, and has not yet recognised itself in its object, it is not yet its 
own object in the true sense. Its ultimate aim, however, is the attainment 
of knowledge; for the sole endeavour of spirit is to know what it is in and 
for itself, and to reveal itself to itself in its true form. It seeks to create a 
spiritual world in accordance with its own concept, to fulfil and realise its 
own true nature, and to produce religion and the state in such a way that 
it will conform to its own concept and he truly itself or become its own 
Idea. (The Idea is the reality of the concept, of which it is merely a 
reflection or expression.) This, then, is the uniYersal goal of the spirit 
and of history; and just as the seed bears within it the whole nature of 
the tree and the taste and form of its fruits, so also do the first glimmerings 
of spirit contain virtually the whole of history. 
53 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
Gn•e1z this abstract definition, we can say that world history is the record 
of the spirit's efforts to attain knowledge of what it is in itself The 
Orientals do not know that the spirit or man as such are free in themsel-ves. 
And because thq do not know this, they are not themselves free. They on()' 
know that One rsfree; but for this t·ery reason, such freedom is mere arbitrarz-
ness, sm,ager_)', and brutal passion, or a milder and tamer ;:erszon of this 
which zs itself on()' an accident of nature, and equalry arbitrary. This One is 
therefore mere()' a despot, not a free man and a human being. The conscious-
uess of.freedrmz first awoke amm1g the Greeks, and they were according()' 
free; but, like the Romans, they onry knew that Some, and not all men as 
such, are free. Plato and Aristotle did not know this either; thus the Greeks 
not onry had slaves, on which their life and the continued existence of thezr 
estimable freedom depended, but tlzezr very freedom itself was on the one 
hand onl_y a fortuitous, undeuloped, transient, and limited e.fflorescence, and, 
on the other, a harsh servitude of all that is humane and proper to man. The 
Germanic nations, with the rise of Christianity, were the first to realise 
that man is by nature free, and that freedom of the spirit is his very essence. 
This consciousness first dawned in religion, in the innermost region of the 
spirit; but to incorporate the same principle into secular existence was a 
further problem, whose solution and application require long and arduous 
cultural exertions. For example, slavery did not immediate()' [come to an 
end] with the adoption of Christianity; still less did freedom at once pre-
dominate in states, or governments and constitutions become rationalry 
organised and founded upon the principle of freedom. This application 
of the principle to secular affairs, the penetration and transformation of 
secular life by the prznciple of freedom, is the long process of which history 
itself [is made up]. I have already drawn attention to this distinction 
between the principle as such and its application- i.e. its introduction 
and execution in the actual world of the spirit and of life- and we shall 
return to it again shortry. It is one of the basic articles of philosophical science, 
and its vital importance must not be overlooked. The same distinction applies 
not onry to the Christian principle of the self-consciousness of freedom which 
I have mentioned provisional()' here, it applies just as essential()' to the 
principle of freedom in general. World history is the progress of the conscious-
ness of freedom - a progress whose necessity it is our business to compre-
hend. 
These general remarks on the different degrees of knowledge of freedom -
firstry, that of the Orientals, who knew onry that One is free, then that of 
the Greek and Roman world, which knew that Some are free, and finalry, 
our own knowledge that All men as such are free, and that man is by 
54 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
nature free - supply us with the divisions we shall observe in our survey of 
rvorld history and which will help us to organise our discussion of it. But these 
are only provisional remarks thrown out in passi11g; several other concepts 
must first be explazned. 
The spirit's consciousness of its freedom (which is the precondition of the 
reality of this freedom) has been defined as spiritual reaso11 i11 its determinate 
form, hence as the destiny of the spiritual world, and- since the latter is the 
substantial world and the physical world [is] subordinated to it (or, in 
speculative terminology, has no truth in comparison with it}- as the ultimate 
end of the world in general. But that this freedom, as defined above, still 
remains an indefinite term which ts capable of infinite interpretations, and 
that, since it is the highest concept of all, it is open to an infinite number of 
misunderstandings, confusions, and errors and covers et•ery possible kind of 
extravagance- all this has never been known and experienced so fully as 
in the present age; but we must make do for the moment with this general 
definition. We have also stressed the importance of the infinite difference 
between the principle- i.e. that which exists only in itself- and its realisa-
tion. For freedom in itself carries with it the infinite necessity of attaining 
consciousness-for freedom, by definition, is self-knowledge- and hence of 
realising itself: it is itself the end of its own operations, and the sole end of the 
spirit.21 
The substance of the spirit is freedom. From this, we can infer that its 
end in the historical process is the freedom of the subject to follow its 
own conscience and morality, and to pursue and implement its own univer-
sal ends; it also implies that the subject has infinite value and that it must 
become conscious of its supremacy. The end of the world spirit is realised 
in substance through the freedom of each individual. 
The spirits of the nations are the links in the process whereby the spirit 
arrives at free recognition of itself. Nations, however, exist for them-
selves- for we are not concerned here with spirit in itself- and as such, 
they have a natural existence. In so far as they are nations, their principles 
are natural ones; and since their principles differ, the nations themselves 
are also naturally different. Each has its own principle which it seeks to 
realise as its end; if it has attained this end, it has no further task to 
perform in the world. 
The spirit of a nation should thus be seen as the development of a 
principle; this principle is at first bound up with an indistinct impulse 
which gradually works its way out and seeks to attain objective reality. 
A natural spirit of this kind is a determinate spirit, a concrete whole; it 
must gain recognition in its determinate form. Since it is a spirit, it can 
55 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
only be understood in spiritual terms, by means of thought, and it is we 
who understand it in this way; the next step is for the national spirit to 
understand itself in turn by the same means. We must therefore examine 
the determinate concept or principle of the spirit in question. This 
principle is extremely rich in content, and it assumes many forms in the 
course of its development; for the spirit is living and active, and is con-
cerned only with its own productions. The spirit, as it advances towards 
its realisation, towards self-satisfaction and self-knowledge, is the sole 
motive force behind all the deeds and aspirations of the nation. Religion, 
knowledge, the arts, and the destinies and events of history are all aspects 
of its evolution. This, and not the natural influences at work upon it (as 
the derivation of the word natzo from nasci might suggest), determines the 
nation's character. In its active operations, the national spirit at first 
knows only the ends of its determinate reality, but not its own nature. 
But it is nevertheless endowed with an impulse to formulate its thoughts. 
Its supreme activity is thought, so that when it reaches the height of its 
powers, its aim is to comprehend itself. The ultimate aim of the spirit 
is to know itself, and to comprehend itself not merely intuitively but also 
in terms of thought. It must and will succeed in its task; but this very 
success is also its downfall, and this in turn heralds the emergence of a 
new phase and a new spirit. The individual national spirit fulfils itself by 
merging with the principle of another nation, so that we can observe a 
progression, growth and succession from one national principle to another. 
The task of philosophical world history is to discover the continuity 
within this movement. 
The abstract mode of the development of the national spirit consists 
simply in the temporal process as perceived by the senses, which is the 
primary activity of the spirit; the more concrete process, however, is 
that of its spiritual activity. A nation makes internal advances; it develops 
further and is ultimately destroyed. The appropriate categories here are 
those of cultural development,* over-refinement, and degeneration; 
the latter can be either the product or the cause of the nation's downfall. 
But the word 'culture' tells us nothing definite about the substantial 
content of the national spirit; it is a formal category, and is always 
construed in terms of universal properties. A cultured man is one who 
• The word Bildung is notoriously difficult to translate. In the following passage, it is 
rendered as 'cultural development' or 'culture', although it carries many of the 
associations of the English word 'education' as well. The same applies to the past 
participle gebildet, translated here as 'cultured'. For a detailed analysis of the concept 
of Bildung see W. H. Bruford, Culture and Society in Classical Weimar I77s-r8o6, 
Cambridge, 1962, pp. 4f. and passim. 
s6 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
knows how to impress the stamp of universality upon all his actions, who 
has renounced his particularity, and who acts in accordance with universal 
principles. Culture is the form of our thinking; it owes its existence to 
man's ability to control himself, and to the fact that he does not merely 
follow his desires and inclinations but subjects himself to a discipline. 
He thereby grants his object a position of independence, and habitually 
adopts a theoretical attitude. He is also in the habit of treating the 
various aspects of his object separately, of analysing the situation before 
him, of isolating individual aspects of it and abstracting from them, 
thereby directly conferring the imprint of universality upon them all. 
The cultured individual recognises the different facets of objects; all 
of them are present to him, and his fully developed powers of reflection 
have invested them with the form of universality. In his behaviour, too, 
he takes them all into account. The uncultured individual, on the other 
hand, may grasp the main point and at the same time inadvertently do 
violence to half a dozen others. But the cultured man takes in all the 
different aspects, and thus acts in a concrete manner; he is accustomed to 
act in the light of universal perspectives and ends. Culture can therefore 
be defined quite simply as the imposition of a universal quality upon a 
given content. 
Since the development of spirit is the process which gives rise to 
culture, it must now be explained in more concrete terms. The universal 
property of spirit is that it actualises those determinants which it 
possesses in itself. This can also be interpreted in a subjective sense, in 
which case we call what the spirit is in itself its disposition; and when this 
disposition has been actualised, we speak instead of its qualities or abilities. 
In the latter case, the end product itself is also understood in a subjective 
sense. In history, however, it assumes the form of an object, deed, or 
work produced by the spirit. The national spirit is knowledge, and 
thought acts upon the reality of the national spirit in such a way that it 
knows its own work as something objective, and no longer merely as 
something subjective. We should note in connection with these deter-
minations of the spirit that a distinction is often made between man's 
inner nature and his deeds. This does not apply in history; the man 
himself is the sum total of his deeds. One might imagine a case in which a 
person's intentions were excellent even though his actual deeds were 
worthless. And individual instances can certainly occur in which people 
conceal their real attitudes; but this is not the whole picture. The truth 
is that there is no difference between the inner and the outer. In history 
especially, there is no need to waste time puzzling over temporary dif-
57 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
ferences between them. The character of the nation is that of its deeds, 
for the deeds represent the end it pursues. 
The spirit's acts are of an essential nature; it makes itself in reality 
what it already is in itself, and is therefore its own deed or creation. 
In this way, it becomes its own object, and has its own existence before it. 
And it is the same with the spirit of a nation; its activity consists in 
making itself into an actual world which also has an existence in space. 
Its religion, ritual, ethics, customs, art, constitution, and political laws-
indeed the whole range of its institutions, events, and deeds - all this is 
its own creation, and it is this which makes the nation what it is. Every 
nation feels this to be so. And then the individual finds his nation already 
in being, as a complete and firmly established world to which he must 
become assimilated. He must take over its substantial being as his own, 
so that his outlook and abilities are in accord with it, in order that he may 
himself become something in turn. The product is already there, and it 
is up to the individuals to adapt themselves to it and conform to it. If we 
examine a nation in its formative period, we find that its actions are cal-
culated to further the end of its spirit; we describe it as moral, virtuous, 
and vigorous, because its actions are governed by the inner will of its 
spirit and it is also prepared, in its struggle to objectivise itself, to defend 
its achievements against external aggression. At this stage, the individuals 
are not yet separated from the whole, for this separation does not take 
place until later, when the period of reflection begins. Once the nation 
has created itself, the dichotomy between its essence (or what it is in 
itself) and its real existence is overcome, and it has attained satisfaction: 
it has created its own world out of its inner essence. The spirit now 
indulges itself in the world it has created. 
The next stage begins after the spirit has attained its object. It is no 
longer aroused to activity, and its substantial soul is inactive. Its actions 
are now only remotely connected with its highest interests. I am interested 
in something only in so far as it is still out of my reach, or is necessary 
to some purpose which I have not yet fulfilled. Thus when a nation is fully 
developed and has attained its end, its pro founder interests evaporate. The 
national spirit is a natural individual, and as such, it blossoms, grows 
strong, then fades away and dies. It lies in the nature of finite things that 
any limited spirit is ephemeral. Since it is a living thing, its business is 
to bring forth, to produce, and to realise itself. This involves an opposition 
in so far as reality does not match its concept, or in so far as its inner con-
cept has not yet become conscious of itself. But as soon as the spirit has 
given itself an objective life, or as soon as it has fully worked out its 
ss 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
concept and put it into practice completely, it reaches a stage of self-
indulgence which is no longer activity but an unrestrained self-abandon. 
The period in which the spirit is still active is that of the nation's youth, 
the finest stage in its development; during this period, individuals feel 
impelled to preserve their fatherland and to implement their nation's end. 
When this is accomplished, life becomes a thing of habit; and just as man 
languishes through routine existence, so also does the national spirit 
through self-indulgence. When the spirit of the nation has fulfilled its 
function, its agility and interest flag; the nation lives on the borderline 
between manhood and old age, and enjoys the fruits of its efforts. Measures 
have been taken to satisfy the needs and wants of the past, and these have 
now ceased to exist. Then the measures themselves can be dispensed with 
in turn, and the present has no further needs left to ~atisfy. It may also 
be that the nation has relinquished certain aspects of its end and contented 
itself with more limited aims. Even if its imagination transcended these 
limits, it nevertheless abandoned its wider objectives if no opportunity of 
realising them presented itself, and restricted itself to what reality per-
mitted. It then lives on with the satisfaction of having achieved its end, 
falls into fixed habits which are now devoid of life, and thus moves 
gradually on towards its natural death. It may still have much to do in 
war and in peace, and in internal and external affairs, for it may continue 
to vegetate over a long period. It still has movement; but this movement 
is only occasioned by the particular interests of individuals, and no longer 
by the interest of the nation itself. Its greatest and highest interest has 
vanished out of its life; for no interest is possible without some kind of 
opposition. 
The natural death of the national spirit may take the form of political 
stagnation, or of what we call habit. The clock is wound up and runs on 
automatically. Habit is an activity with nothing to oppose it; it retains 
only the formal property of temporal continuity, and the depth and rich-
ness of its end need no longer be expressed. It is, so to speak, a super-
ficial and sensuous kind of existence whose profounder significance has 
been forgotten. Thus both individuals and nations die a natural death. 
And even if the latter live on, their existence is devoid of life and interest; 
their institutions have become superfluous, because the needs which 
created them have been satisfied, and nothing remains but political 
stagnation and boredom. The negative element no longer assumes the form 
of dissension and conflict; this was the case with the old German Imperial 
Cities, for example, which lost their independence through no fault of 
their own and without realising what had befallen them. In a moribund 
59 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
state such as this, a nation may even prosper, although it no longer 
participates in the life of the Idea. It then serves as material for a higher 
principle, and becomes the province of another nation in which a higher 
principle is active. But the principle with which a nation is endowed has a 
real existence; even if it dies through habit, it still retains its spiritual 
nature and thus cannot be extinguished altogether, but moves on into a 
higher existence. The transience of everything may well distress us, but 
in a profounder sense, we realise that it is necessary in relation to the 
higher Idea of the spirit. For the spirit is such that it has to employ 
means of this kind to fulfil its absolute end, and this knowledge must 
reconcile us to the transient side of its existence. 
The individual national spirit is subject to transience. It p~rishes, 
loses its world-historical significance, and ceases to be the bearer of the 
highest concept the spirit has formed of itself. For the nation whose 
concept of the spirit is highest is in tune with the times and rules over 
the others. It may well be that nations whose concepts are less advanced 
survive, but they exist only on the periphery of world history. 
But since the nation is a universal, a collective, a further determinant comes 
into play. As a collective, the national spirit exists for itself; this also means 
that the universal aspect of its existence may assume a role of opposition. 
Its negative side manifests itself; thought rises above the nation's im-
mediate functions. And thus its natural death also appears as a kind of 
suicide. Thus we see on the one hand how the national spirit brings about 
its own downfall. The phenomenon of national degeneration in fact takes 
on various forms. It may break out from within as appetites are unleashed, 
with individuals pursuing their own satisfaction to the detriment of the 
substantial spirit, which consequently disintegrates. Individual interests 
seize control of the powers and resources which were formerly dedicated 
to the whole. In this case, the negative side manifests itself as an internal 
degeneration, as a tendency towards particularism. It is usually associated 
with some external force which deprives the nation of its sovereignty, so 
that it ceases to exist as such. But this external force belongs only to the 
phenomenal world; no destructive force can prevail against the national 
spirit or within it unles;; it is already internally lifeless or dead. 
But there is a further category beyond that of transience, for death is 
followed by new life. One might think in this context of life in the natural 
world, in which buds wither and fall and new ones take their place. But 
this is not the case in the spiritual world. The tree lives perennially, puts 
forth shoots, leaves, and blossoms, and produces fruit, and thus al\\ays 
6o 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
starts again from the beginning. The annual plant does not survive its 
fruition, and although the tree can live for many decades, it too eventually 
dies. The reawakening of nature is merely the repetition of one and the 
same process; it is a tedious chronicle in which the same cycle recurs 
again and again. There is nothing new under the sun. But this is not so 
with the sun of the spirit. Its movement and progression do not repeat 
themselves, for the changing aspect of the spirit as it passes through 
endlessly varying forms is essentially progress. This progress is evident 
even when the national spirit destroys itself by the negativity of its 
thought, because its knowledge, its thinking apprehension of being, is the 
source and matrix from which a new form - and indeed a higher form, 
whose principle both conserves and transfigures it- emerges. For 
thought is of a universal and collective nature, so that it cannot die, but 
always retains its identity. Each determinate form which the spirit 
assumes does not simply fade away naturally with the passage of time, 
but is preserved* in the self-determining, self-conscious activity of the 
self-consciousness. Since this preservationt is an activity of thought, it 
is both a conservation and a transfiguration. Thus while the spirit on 
the one hand preserves! the reality and continuity of its own nature, it 
is at the same time enriched by the essence, the thought, the universal 
aspect of what was formerly its mere existence. Its principle is no longer 
the immediate content and end of its former existence, but their underlying 
essence. 
As we trace the passage of one national spirit into the other, we should 
note that the universal spirit as such does not die; it dies only in its 
capacity as a national spirit. As a national spirit, it belongs to world 
history, and its task is to attain knowledge of its own function and to 
comprehend itself by means of thought. This thought or reflection 
eventually ceases to respect its immediate existence, for it realises that 
the principle behind it is a particular one; and as a result, the subjective 
spirit becomes divorced from the universal spirit. Individuals withdraw 
into themselves and pursue their own ends, and this, as already remarked, 
is the nation's undoing: each individual sets himself his own ends as his 
passions dictate. But as the spirit withdraws into itself, thought emerges as 
a reality in its own right, and the learned disciplines flourish. Thus learn-
ing and the degeneration or downfall of a nation always go hand in hand. 
But at the same time, a new and higher principle emerges. Division 
contains and carries with it the need for unification, because the spirit is 
• aufgehoben (cf. note to p. 20). 
t Aufheben. 
! auj/tebt. 
6r 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
itself one. It is a living thing, and is powerful enough to create the unity 
it requires. The opposition or contradiction between the spirit and the 
lower principle gives rise to a higher factor. For example, when their 
culture was at its height, the Greeks, for all the untroubled serenity of 
their manners, had no concept of universal freedom; they did have their 
Ka8~Kav, their idea of propriety, but they had no real morality or con-
science. Morality, which rests on a reflexive movement of the spirit, a 
turning in of the spirit upon itself, did not yet exist; it dates only from the 
time of Socrates. But as soon as reflection supervened and individuals 
withdrew into themselves and dissociated themselves from established 
custom to live their own lives according to their own wishes, degeneration 
and contradiction arose. But the spirit cannot remain in a state of oppo-
sition. It seeks unification, and in this unification lies the higher principle. 
History is the process whereby the spirit discovers itself and its own 
concept. Thus division contains within it the higher principle of con-
sciousness; but this higher principle also has another side to it which does 
not enter the consciousness at all. For there can be no consciousness of 
opposition until the principle of personal freedom is already present. 
The result of this process is therefore that the spirit, as it objectivises 
itself and becomes aware of its objective being, destroys the determinate 
aspect of its being on the one hand and comprehends its universal aspect 
on the other, thereby giving its principle a new determination. This 
means that the substantial determination of the national spirit has altered, 
or to put it differently, that its principle has been absorbed into another 
and higher principle. 
If we seek to understand history and to comprehend it by means of 
philosophy, the most important and distinctive feature of the whole 
undertaking- indeed its very essence- is that we should discover and 
recognise this idea of transition. The individual goes through various 
stages of development as a single unit and retains his individual identity; 
so too does the nation, at least up to the point at which its spirit enters its 
universal phase. We can see in this the inner or conceptual necessity 
by which such changes are governed. But, as already mentioned, the 
impotence of life is evident from the fact that its beginning and its end 
do not coincide. And this applies both to the life of individuals and to that 
of nations. The determinate national spirit is but a single individual in the 
course of world history. The life of the nation brings a fruit to maturity, 
for its activity is directed towards the fulfilment of its principle. This fruit 
does not, however, fall back into the womb from which it emerged; the 
nation itself is not permitted to enjoy it, but must taste it instead in the 
62 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
form of a bitter draught. It cannot refuse to drink it, for it has an infinite 
thirst for it, but the price of its satisfaction is its own annihilation (although 
it also heralds the birth of a new principle). The fruit again becomes the 
seed, but the seed of another nation, which it brings to maturity in turn. 
The spirit is essentially the product of its own activity, and its activity 
consists in transcending and negating its immediacy and turning in upon 
itself. 
The spirit is free; and the aim of the world spirit in world history is 
to realise its essence and to obtain the prerogative of freedom. Its activity 
is that of knowing and recognising itself, but it accomplishes this in 
gradual stages rather than at a single step. Each new individual national 
spirit represents a new stage in the conquering march of the world spirit 
as it wins its way to consciousness and freedom. The death of a national 
spirit is a transition to new life, but not as in nature, where the death of 
one individual gives life to another individual of the same kind. On the 
contrary, the world spirit progresses from lower determinations to higher 
principles and concepts of its own nature, to more fully developed ex-
pressions of its Idea. 
The question at issue is therefore the ultimate end of mankind, the end 
which the spirit sets itself in the world, and which it is driven to realise 
incessantly and with irresistible power. The more specific implications of 
this ultimate end follow on from what has already been said with regard 
to the national spirit. We have seen that the spirit cannot be concerned 
with anything other than itself. Nothing is higher than the spirit, and 
nothing is more worthy of being its object. It cannot rest or occupy itself 
with anything else until it knows its own nature. This thought, which we 
have specified as the highest and only interest of the spirit, is, of course, 
of a general and abstract nature, and there is a wide gulf between it and 
that which constitutes the interests of nations and individuals as we 
observe them in history. On the empirical level, we sec specific ends and 
particular interests with which nations have been occupied for centuries. 
We need only think, for example, of the antagonism between Rome and 
Carthage. And knowing these empirical phenomena is a far cry from 
recognising in them that process of thought which, as already said, 
constitutes their essential interest. We shall not discuss until later the 
opposition between the immediately obvious interests of the spirit and its 
absolute interest as specified above. At least it is not difficult to grasp the 
general significance of the idea that the relationship of the free spirit to 
itself is a necessary one, precisely because it is a free spirit; otherwise it 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
would not be free at all but dependent. We have defined the goal of 
history as consisting in the spirit's development towards self-conscious-
ness, or in its making the world conform to itself (for the two are identical). 
It might equally be said that the spirit produces its concept out of itself, 
objectivises it, and thus becomes the being of its own concept; it becomes 
conscious of itself in the objective world so that it may attain its salvation: 
for as soon as the objective world conforms to its internal requirements, 
it has realised its freedom. When it has determined its own end in this 
way, its progress takes on a more definite character in that it no longer 
consists of a mere increase in quantity. It may also be added that, even 
on the evidence of our own ordinary consciousness, we must acknowledge 
that the consciousness must undergo various stages of development before 
it becomes aware of its own essential nature. 
The aim of world history, therefore, is that the 1>pirit should attain 
knowledge of its own true nature, that it should objectivise this knowledge 
and transform it into a real world, and give itself an objective existence. 
The essential point to note is that this aim is itself a product of the spirit. 
The spirit is not a natural entity like an animal, for the animal is no more 
than its immediate existence. The spirit is such that it produces itself 
and makes itself what it is. Thus the first form it assumes in its real 
existence is the outcome of its own activity. Its essential being is actuosity, 
not static existence, for it has produced itself, it has come to exist for 
itself, and made itself what it is by its own agency. It can only be said 
to have a true existence if it has produced itself, and its essential being is 
process in the absolute sense. This process, in which it mediates itself 
with itself by its own unaided efforts, has various distinct moments; 
it is full of movement and change, and is determined in different ways at 
different times. It consists essentially of a series of separate stages, and 
world history is the expression of the divine process which is a graduated 
progression in which the spirit comes to know and realise itself and its 
own truth. Its various stages are stages in the self-recognition of the 
spirit; and the essence of the spirit, its supreme imperative, is that it 
should recognise, know, and realise itself for what it is. It accomplishes 
this end in the history of the world; it produces itself in a series of deter-
minate forms, and these forms are the nations of world history. Each of 
them represents a particular stage of development, so that they correspond 
to epochs in the history of the world. Or on a more fundamental level, 
they are the principles in which the spirit has discovered itself, and which 
it is impelled to realise. There is therefore an essential connection between 
them in which the nature of the spirit alone is expressed. 
64 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
World history is the expression of the divine and absolute process of 
the spirit in its highest forms, of the progression whereby it discovers its 
true nature and becomes conscious of itself. The specific forms it assumes 
at each of these stages are the national spirits of world history, with all 
the determinate characteristics of their ethical life, their constitutions, 
their art, their religion, and their knowledge. The world spirit has an 
infinite urge and an irresistible impulse to realise these stages of its 
development; for this sequence and its realisation are its true concept. 
World history merely shows how the spirit gradually attains consciousness 
and the will to truth; it progresses from its early glimmerings to major 
discoveries and finally to a state of complete consciousness. We have 
already discussed the ultimate end of this process. The principles of the 
national spirits in their necessary progression are themselves only moments 
of the one universal spirit, which ascends through them in the course of 
history to its consummation in an all-embracing totality. 
This vision of a process whereby the spirit realises its aim in history 
clashes with a widespread attitude concerning the nature of ideals and 
their relationship to reality. For no opinion is more widely held or more 
frequently voiced than the lament that ideals cannot be translated into 
reality- be they ideals of the imagination or ideals of reason, so long as 
they claim to be ideals. In particular, we are told that the ideals of youth 
dissolve into dreams in the cold light of reality. Whatever ideals of this 
kind do founder on the rocks of harsh reality in the course of the voyage 
of life must be primarily subjective; they can belong only to individuals 
who consider themselves superior to and wiser than others. As such, they 
have no place in the present discussion. For the fancies of isolated indi-
viduals cannot become binding upon reality at large, just as the laws of 
the universe are not framed solely for the benefit of single individuals, 
who may in fact be most unfavourably affected by them. It may certainly 
happen that the ideals of individuals are not realised. Individuals often 
have their own peculiar opinions of themselves, of their lofty intentions, 
of the splendid deeds they hope to perform, and of their own supposed 
importance from which the world, as they think, must assuredly benefit. 
Be that as it may, such ideas merit no further attention here. The dreams 
of the individual are often no more than exaggerated estimates of his 
own personal significance. Furthermore, the individual may well be 
treated unjustly; but this is a matter of indifference to world history, 
which uses individuals only as instruments to further its own progress. 
But these are not the only kind of ideals. There are also the ideals of 
reason, those ideas of the good, the true, and all that is best in the world; 
6s 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
and these have a genuine claim to be satisfied, for their non-fulfilment is 
generally recognised to be an objective injustice. Poets such as Schiller 
have expressed their grief over unfulfilled ideals with great pathos and 
emotion. But if we say that universal reason is fulfilled, this has of course 
nothing to do with individual empirical instances; the latter may fare 
either well or badly, as the case may be, for the concept has authorised 
the forces of contingency and particularity to exercise their vast influence 
in the empirical sphere. When we consider particular instances, we may 
well conclude that there is much injustice in the world, and there is 
certainly much to find fault with among individual phenomena. But we 
are not concerned here with empirical details; they are at the mercy of 
chance, which has no place in the present discussion. It is only too easy 
to indulge in criticism, and it helps to confirm men's estimates of their 
own superior knowledge and good intentions. Subjective criticism of this 
kind, directed solely at particular matters and their shortcomings - regard-
less of the universal reason behind them - is extremely facile; and inas-
much as it conveys an impression of good intentions towards the welfare 
of the whole, and lends itself an air of sincere benevolence, it can become 
extremely self-important and full of conceit. It is easier to perceive the 
shortcomings of individuals, states, and the course of world affairs than 
to understand their true import. For in passing negative judgements, 
one looks down on the matter in hand with a superior and supercilious air, 
without having gone into it thoroughly enough to understand its true 
nature, i.e. its positive significance. The criticism may well be justified, 
except that it is far easier to detect shortcomings than the true substance 
(as in works of art, for example). People often think they have done their 
job when they have found something which can be justly criticised; they 
are right, of course, in one respect; but they are also wrong in so far as 
they fail to recognise the positive factor. To see only the bad side in 
everything and to overlook all the positive and valuable qualities is a 
sign of extreme superficiality. Age, in general, takes a milder view, 
whereas youth is always dissatisfied; this is because age brings with it 
maturity of judgement, which does not simply tolerate the bad along 
with the rest out of sheer lack of interest, but has learnt from the serious-
ness of life to look for the substance and enduring value of things. And 
this is not so much equity as justice. 
But to return to the true ideal, the Idea of reason itself, philosophy 
should help us to understand that the actual world is as it ought to be. 
It shows us that the rational will, the concrete good is indeed all-powerful, 
and that this absolute power translates itself into reality. The true good, 
66 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
the universal and divine reason, also has the power to fulfil its own purpose, 
and the most concrete representation of this goodness and reason is God. 
For goodness, not just as a general idea but also as an effective force, is 
what we call God. Philosophy teaches us that no force can surpass the 
power of goodness or of God or prevent God's purposes from being 
realised; it shows us that God's will must always prevail in the end, and 
that world history is nothing more than the plan of providence. The 
world is governed by God; and world history is the content of his govern-
ment and the execution of his plan. To comprehend this is the task of the 
philosophy of world history, and its initial assumption is that the ideal 
is fulfilled and that only that which corresponds to the Idea possesses 
true reality. The pure light of this divine Idea, which is no mere ideal, 
dispels the illusion that the world is a collection of senseless and foolish 
occurrences. The aim of philosophy is to recognise the content and 
reality of the divine Idea, and to defend reality against its detractors. For 
it is through reason that we apprehend the work of God. 
What is usually called reality is seen by philosophy as no more than an 
idle semblance which has no reality in and for itself. If we have the impres-
sion that the events of the past are totally calamitous and devoid of sense, 
we can find consolation, so to speak, in this awareness. But consolation 
is merely something received in compensation for a misfortune which 
ought never to have happened in the first place, and it belongs to the 
world of finite things. Philosophy, therefore, is not really a means of 
consolation. It is more than that, for it transfigures reality with all its 
apparent injustices and reconciles it with the rational; it shows that 
it is based upon the Idea itself, and that reason is fulfilled in it. For in 
reason, the divinity is present. The basic content of reason is the divine 
Idea, and its essence is the plan of God. In the context of world history, 
the Idea is not equivalent to reason as encountered in the subjective will, 
but to the activity of God alone. We conceive of reason as a means of 
perceiving the Idea, and even its etymology* suggests that it is a percep-
tion of something expressed, in other words, of the Logos - the true. 
The true acquires its truth in the created world. God expresses himself, 
and himself alone; he is that power whose nature is self-expression and 
whose expression can be perceived by reason. And what reason perceives 
is the truth and image of God. Thus philosophy concludes that nothing 
which is empty of significance can be an ideal, but only that which 
possesses reality, and that the Idea reveals itself to perception. 
• Hegel is alluding to the etymological relationship between Vernunft (reason) and 
vernehmen (to perceive). 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
The immediate question which now presents itself is this: what means 
does the Idea employ to realise itself? This is the second poznt we hat•e to 
consider here. 
b. [The means of its realisation] 
This question of the means whereby freedom creates a world for itself leads 
us to the phenomenon of history proper. Whereas freedom as such is primarily 
an internal concept, the means it employs belong to the external and pheno-
menal world which confronts us directly in history. An inztial survey of 
history, however, would indicate that the actions of men are governed by 
their needs, passions, and interests, by the attitudes and aims to which these 
give rise, and by their own character and abilities; we gain the impression 
that, in this scene of activity, these needs, passions, interests, etc., are the sole 
motive forces. Individuals do at times pursue more general ends such as 
goodness, but the good they pursue is invariably of a limited character. 
Worthy patriotic sentiments are of this kind, for they may well be directed 
towards a country whose importance in relation to the world as a whole and 
to its universal end is negligible; and the same is true of love of one's family 
or friends, and indeed of moral rectitude in general. In short, all virtues 
come under this category. We may well see the ends of reason realised in the 
virtues of individual subjects and in their sphere of injlence: but these are on(y 
isolated individuals who constitute but a small proportion of the mass of 
mankind when we compare them with all the others, and the extmt to which 
their virtues are effective is relatively limited. But in many cases, passions, 
private interests, and the satisfaction of selfish impulses are the most potent 
force. What makes them powerful is [that] they do not heed any of the restraints 
which justice and morality seek to impose upon them, and the elemental power 
of passion has a more immediate hold over man than that artificial and 
laboriously acquired discipline of order and moderation, justice and mora/it]'· 
When we contemplate this display of passions, and consider the historical 
consequences of their violence and of the irrationality which is associated 
with them (and even more so with good intentions and worthy aims); when we 
see the evil, the wickedness, and the downfall of the most flourishing empires 
the human spirit has created; and when we are moved to profound pity for 
the untold miseries of individual human beings- we can only end with a 
feeling of sadness at the transience of everything. And since all this destruction 
is not the work of mere nature22 but of the will of man, our sadness takes on a 
moral quality, for the good spirit in us (zf we are at all susceptible to it) 
eventually revolts at such a spectacle. Without rhetorical exaggeration, we 
need only compile an accurate account of the misfortunes which have over-
taken the finest manifestations of national and political life, and of perso11al 
68 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
virtues or innocence, to see a most terrij)ing picture take shape before our 
eyes. Its effect is to intensify our feelmgs to an extreme pitch of hopeless 
sorrow with no redeeming circumstances to counterbalance it. We can 011ly 
harden ourselves against it or escape from it by telling ourselves that it was 
ordained by fate and could not have been otherwise. There is nothing we 
can do about it now, and we react against the lassitude into which such 
sorrowful rejlecttons can plunge us and return to our customary attitudes, to 
the aims and interests of the present, which [call for] activzty rather than 
laments over the past. Indeed, we retreat into that selfish complacency which 
stands on the calmer shore and,from a secure positton, smugly looks on at the 
distant spectacle of confusion and wreckage. But eun as we look upon 
history as an altar on which the happiness of nations, the wisdom of states, 
and the virtue of individuals are slaughtered, our thoughts inevitably impel 
us to ask: to whom, or to what ultimate end ha;:e these monstrous 
sacrifices been made? This usually leads in turn to those general considera-
tions from which our whole enquiry began. From this beginning, we proceeded 
to define those same events which afford so sad a spectacle for gloomy smtz-
ments and brooding rejle~tion as no more than the means whereby what we 
have specified as the substantial destiny, the absolute and final end, or in 
other words, the true result of world history, is realised. From the ·eery 
outset, we rejected the path of reflection as a meatJs of ascending from the 
spectacle of historical detail to the universal principle behind it. Besides, such 
sentimental reflections hat·e no real interest in transcending the attitudes and 
emotions which go along with them, or in soh·ing the enigmas of prot·z"dence 
to which they give rise. They are coment instead to derive a lugubrious 
satisfaction from the empty and futile sublzmities which the negative results 
of history evoke. Let us therefore return to the point of view we originally 
adopted; and the moments we shall discover witlun it will furnish us with 
the essential definitions we require in order to a11swer the questions which 
such scenes from history present. 
The first thing we have to twtice is23 this: what we have hitherto called 
the principle, or ultimate md, or destiny, or the 11ature and concept of the 
spirit in itself, is purely universal and abstract. A principle,Jundamental 
rule, or law is something universal and implicit, aud as such, it has not at-
tained complete reality, however true it may be m itself Aims, principles, 
and the like are present at first in our thoughts and inner intentions, or even 
in books, but not yet in realzty itself In other words, that zvhich exists on(y in 
itself is a possibility or potentiality24 which has not yet emerged znto 
existence. A second moment is necessary before it can attain reality- that of 
actuation or realisation; and its principle is the will, 25 the activity of mankind 
6g 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
zn the 1vor/d at large. It is only by means of tim acth·tt)' that the ongmal 
concepts or impliczt determinatzons are realzsed and actualised. 26 
Laws and principles have no zmmedu.ae life or mbdzty in themsehes. The 
acm·ity which puts them mto operation and endows them wzth real existence 
has its source zn the needs, mzpulses, inclinations, and passzons of man. If I 
put something illto practtce and gi·ve zt a real existence, I must hare some 
personal imerest m doing so; I must be personally invoh·ed in it, and hope to 
obtain satisfactzon through its accomplzshment- m other words, my own 
interest must be at stake. To lza·ve an interest m something means to be 
zmplicated and im;ohed mit, and an end whzch I am actn:ely to pursue must 
in some way or other be my own end. It is my end which must be satisfied, 
even zf the e11d for which I am working has many other sides to it whiclz have 
nothing to do zvith me. This znfimte right of the subject ts the second essentzal 
moment of freedom, in that the subject must itself be satisfied by whatever 
actiVIty or task it performs. And if men are to be mterested in anythmg, 
they must be actzvely mgaged in it; that is, they look for their own interest in 
whatever end they work for, and they wish to identify themsel-ves with it and 
find their own self-esteem confirmed by it. But there zs a possible misunder-
stand~ng here wluch 111e must take care to avoid: a common and justified form 
of censure or cntzcism is to say of someone that he is an imerested party- in 
other words, that he is merel.J· seeking some personal advantage and this 
alone; he is solely concerned mitlz furthering his own CtlUSe, regardless of 
the common weal, and the latter i11terests hmz only in so far as he can turn 
it to his personal advantage, even at the expense of actively detracting ji-om 
the general cause, jeopardismg zt, or sacrificing it altogether. But cmyo11e 
who actively supports a cause is not jwt an interested party - he is interested 
in the cause itself27 Language accurately reproduces this distinctio11. 
Thus nothing can happen, nothing can be accompbshed unless the individuals 
concerned can also gain satisfaction for themselus as particular indi·viduals. 
For the_y hare thezr o1vn specwl needs, impulses, and interests which are 
peculiur to themselves- peculiar to themselves inasmuch as they are separate 
individuals, although the same needs, impulses, and interests may be no 
different in colltent from those of others, and may in fact be shared by them. 
Such interests28 29 include not only those dictated by personal needs and voli-
tions, but also those which arise out of personal beliefs and convtctions (or 
at letlS! out of personal conjectures and opinions)- provided, of course, that 
the desire to r~flect, to analyse, and to think 1'ationally is alread.Y awake. 
Under these condttiom, people also expect that the cause for which they are 
supposed to act should appeal to them personally, and at all events, that they 
should be able to enter into it mith the backing of thei1' own opinions and 
70 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
convictions regardmg its goodness, justice, uti/it)', the reward they hope to 
reap from it, and so on. This mommt is particularly applicable to our own 
age, in whiclz people are much less inclined to accept things on trust or on 
the strength of external authority and wish to act zn support only of those 
causes to which they can assent with their own understanding and their 
independent convictions and opinions. 
In world history, the object of our enquiry is the Idea as it expresses 
itself through the medium of the human will or of human freedom. The 
will thereby becomes the abstract basis of freedom, and gives rise to the 
entire ethical life of nations. The first principle of the Idea in this form, 
as already remarked, is the Idea itself as an abstract entity; and the second 
is that of human passion. These two are the warp and weft in the fabric 
of world history. The Idea as such is the reality, and the passions are the 
arm which serves it. These are the extremes, and the middle point at 
which the two coincide and in which they are united is the state of ethical 
freedom. Considered objectively, the Idea and the realm of particular 
things seem as completely opposed to one another as freedom and neces-
sity, for we at once think in this connection of man's struggle against 
fate. But the necessity in question is not an external one like that of fate, 
but that of the divine Idea, so that we must now ask how this exalted Idea 
can be reconciled with human freedom. The will of the individual is 
free if he can determine his volitions absolutely, abstractly, and in and 
for himself. How, then, is it possible for the universal or the rational to 
determine anything whatsoever in history? This is not the place to discuss 
this paradox in all its ramifications, but the following points should at 
least be borne in mind. 
A flame consumes air, and is at the same time fed by wood. Air is the 
sole condition for the growth of trees; but when wood enables the fire 
to consume the air, it is attacking its own existence and source; yet the 
oxygen in the air continues to exist as before, and the trees do not cease 
to flourish. In like fashion, if someone wishes to build a house, he is at 
liberty to do so; but all the elements must help him in his task. And yet 
the purpose of the house is to protect men against these very elements. 
In this instance, therefore, the elements are being used against them-
selves, although the universal law of nature is not thereby invalidated. 
The building of a house consists in the first place of an inner aim and 
intention. Opposed to this are the means employed, the particular elements 
and materials such as iron, wood, and stone. The elements are used to 
process these materials - fire to melt the iron, air to fan the flames, 
water to turn the wheels, to cut the wood, and so on. The final result is 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
that the air "hich helped to build the house is shut out by the house 
itself, as are the torrents of rain and the ravages of fire (in so far as the 
house is fireproof). The stones and beams obey the law of gravity and 
press downwards, making it possible for high walls to be built. Thus 
the elements are utilised as their respective natures allow, and they act 
together to create a product which restricts their own activity. The human 
passions are satisfied in much the same way: they fulfil themselves and 
their ends in accordance with their specific nature, and thereby create the 
edifice of human society in which justice and order are given power 
over the passions themselves. In our daily existence, we can see 
that there is a system of justice which guarantees our security; and justice 
grows up of its own accord, for it is an essential characteristic of human 
behaviour (although it is often directed against the particular interests 
and aims of men). In individual instances, men pursue their particular 
ends in defiance of the universal justice, and behave as free agents. 
But this does not destroy the common ground, the underlying substance, 
the system of right. And the same applies to the world order in general; 
its ingredients are the passions on the one hand and reason on the other. 
The passions are the active force, and they are by no means always 
opposed to ethical values, for it is through them that the universal end 
is realised. As to their moral qualities, the passions admittedly do seek 
to further their own interests. Thus in one respect, they do appear base 
and selfish. But all active things are of an individual nature: I exist in 
my actions, and they are the ends which I seek to attain. But the end I 
pursue may well be morally good, or even universal. My interest may 
indeed be a particular one, but it does not follow from this that it is 
opposed to the universal interest. For the universal can only be realised 
by means of the particular. 
Passion is usually regarded as something contrary to right and more 
or less base in nature, and man is expected not to have any passions. But 
passions is perhaps not quite the right word for what I am trying to 
express. I use it here to denote any human activity which is governed by 
particular interests, special aims, or, if you will, by selfish intentions; 
men dedicate the entire energy of their will and character to attaining 
such ends, and will sacrifice other possible ends and indeed all other 
things to this object. The particular content of such personal ends is so 
much a part of the individual's will that it determines it completely and 
is inseparable from it, and it is this which makes the individual what he is. 
For the individual exists as a determinate being, unlike man in general, 
who has no existence as such. The word 'character' also denotes this 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
determinate aspect of the will and the intellect. But a person's character 
includes all his individual peculiarities, the way he behaves in his private 
relations, etc., and does not convey specifically the active functioning of 
his individuality. I shall therefore continue to use the word passion, by 
which I understand the determinate aspects of character and volition in 
so far as they do not have a purely private content but are the effective 
motive force behind actions whose significance is universal. I shall dis-
regard all those intentions which can be classed as ineffectual subjective 
opinions, and with which persons of weak character are fond of making 
idle demonstrations. 
We may therefore conclude that nothing whatsoever has been accomplished 
without the active interest of those concerned in it; and since interest can be 
described as passion (in so far as the whole individuality, to the exclusion 
of all other actual or possible interests and aims, applies itself to an object 
with every fibre of the will, and concentrates all its needs and resources 
on attaining its end), we may say without qualification that nothing great 
has been accomplis/zed in the world without passion. Passion is the subjective 
or formal aspect of the energy of active volition- irrespective of its actual 
content or end- and this distinction between form and content also applies 
to all personal convictions, opinions, and conscience. For the content of my 
convictions and the end to which my passions are directed are of vital 
importance when it comes to deciding whether the one or the other is of a 
true and substantial nature. But conversely, if its nature is indeed such, it 
must inevitably attain real existence as that moment of the subjective will 
which includes all such factors as needs, impulses, and passions, as well as 
personal attitudes, opinions, and convictzons. 
From this examination of the second essential moment ;,, the realisation of 
historical ends, it is evident- if we stop for a moment to consider the political 
implications - that a state will be well constituted and internally powerful if 
the private interest of its citizens coincides with the general end of the state, 
so that the one Ctm be satisfied and realised through the other; this proposition 
is an extremely important one. But for the state to achieve this unity, 
numerous institutions must be set up and appropriate mechanisms invented, 
and the understanding must go through prolonged struggles before it discovers 
what is in fact appropriate. Conflicts with indi·vidual interests and passions 
are also inevitable, and the latter must be subjected to a long and rigorous 
process of discipline before the ultimate unity is achieved. Tlze moment at 
which the state attains this unity marks the most flourishing period in its 
history, when its virtue, strength, and prosperity are at their height. But 
73 

SECOND DRAFT (I 8 3 0) 
world history does not begin with any conscious end, as do all parti-
cular associations set up by men. Even man's social instinct entails the 
conscious purpose of securing his life and property, and as soon as a society 
has come into being, such purposes at once take on an even more definite 
shape. The aim is now to defend the city of Athens or Rome, for instance, 
and with every new e'L·il or exigency which arises, the problem becomes more 
specific still. World history begins with its universal end- that the concept 
of the spirit should be realised- existing only in itself, i.e. as mere nature;30 
it is as yet only an inward, basic, unconscious impulse, and the whole activity 
of world history, as already mentioned, is a constant endeavour to make this 
impulse conscious. Thus, what we have called the subjectzve element- i.e. 
needs, impulses, passions, particular interests, and opinions or subjective 
ideas- is immediately present to ztself from the beginning in the shape of 
natural being or natural will. This vast conglomeration of volition, 
interests, and activities is the sum total of instruments and means which the 
world spirit employs to accomplish its end, to make this end conscious and to 
give it reality; and its end is simply that of finding itself, of coming to terms 
with itself, and of contemplating its own actuality. All these expressions of 
individual and national life, in seeking and fuljillmg their own ends, are at 
the same time the means and instruments of a higher purpose and wider 
enterprise of which they are themselves ignorant and which they nevertheless 
unconsciously carry out. This, however, may be open to question, and it has 
indeed been questioned and often denied altogether, or dismissed and con-
demned as pure fantasy or as a figment of mere philosophy. But I ha<:e 
made my position clear on this issue from the very beginning, and stated our 
initial assumption or belief (which I put forward only as anticipating the 
result of our enquiry, without any further pretensions for the moment) that 
reason rules the world, and consequently its history, and continues to do so. 
In relation to this universal substance which exists in and for itself, everything 
else is in a subordinate position and acts only as a means to serve its interests. 
This universal reason exists as an immanent principle within history, in 
which and through which it fulfils itself That the union of the universal 
substance, which exists in and for itself, with the particular and the subjective, 
is the sole truth, is a speculative proposition which is dealt with in this 
general form by logic. But in the actual process of world history, seen as 
something as yet incomplete, we find that the subjective element or conscious-
ness is [not] yet in a position to know the true nature of the ultimate end of 
history, the concept of the spirit. For the latter has not yet become the content 
of its needs and interests; and although the subjective consciousness is still 
unaware of it, the universal substance is nevertheless present in its particular 
74 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
ends and realises itself through them. Since, as I hau said, the speculatn·e 
aspect of this relationship bel011gs to the prorince of logic, this is not the place 
for me to define and analyse zts concept and to make zt, so to speak, intel-
ligible. But I can at least attempt, by means of examples, to give a clearer 
impression of its nature. 
This relationship between the subjectiu conscioumess and the unirersal 
substance is such that the actiom of human beings in the history of the world 
produce an effect altogether different from what they themseh:es i11tend and 
accomplish, from what they zmmedzately recognise and desire. Their own 
interest is gratified; but at the same time, they accomplzsh a further purpose, 
a purpose which was indeed implicit in their own actions but was not part of 
their conscious intentions. By way of analogy, let us imagine a man who., 
from motives of revmge- perhaps ofjustified revenge, in that he maJ' himself 
have suffered unjustly- set light to someone else's house; this at once means 
that a connection is established between the immediate deed and a train of 
circumstances, albeit external circumstances, which hac•e nothing to do wzth 
the original deed regarded purely in zsolation. The deed as such consisted, let 
us say, in applying a small flame to a small portion of a beam. What this deed 
itself does not accomplish takes place of its own accord; the igntted portio11 is 
connected with further sections of the beam, these in turn are connected with 
the timberwork of the entire house, which is itself connected with other houses, 
and a widespread conflagration [results]; this conflagration destroys the 
property of many other people apart from that of the indit·idual against 
whom the revenge was directed, and it may even cost many of them their !ius. 
All this was not part of the original deed itself, nor of its perpetrator's 
intention. But the same action contains yet another31 general implication: 
in the intention of its instigator, it was purely a means of gaining revmge on 
an individual by destroying his property; but it is also a crzme, which carries 
its punishment with it. The perpetrator may not hau been conscious of this, 
and it may not have been his remotest intention, but it zs nevertheless the zmiur-
sal and substantial essence of the deed itself, and a necessary consequence of zt. 
The main purpose of this example is to show that an action may hare 
implications which transcend the intmtion and consciousness of the agent. 
The above example has thefurtlzer peculiarity [that] the substance of the act, 
and consequently the act itself in its entirety, reacts upon the indiridual who 
performed it; it recoils upon him and destroys him, thereby annulling the 
original act itself (inasmuch as it constitutes a crime} and restoring the 
authority ofjustice. But there is no need to stress thzs aspect here, as it applies 
only to a specific instance; and besides, I have already said that I wished only 
to establish an analogy. 
75 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
But I should like to mention a further example, to ll)/ziclz 1vt: shall ha•·e 
occasimz to return later at the appropriate mommt. As mz actual historzcal 
instance, it exemplifies that combination of the uni·versal and the partiwlar, 
of an apparently necessary determmatton and au apparently colltingent 
purpose, in the peculiar form with which we are at present chiefly concerned. 
Caesar, in danger [of losing] the posttion to which he had ascended- a 
position in which he was not yet superior to the others who stood at the head 
of the state, hut at least on an equal footmg wttlz them- opposed his rzra/s 
with the intentzon of preserrzng himself, his positzon, Ius honour, and lm 
securtty. He was in danger [ofsuccumhmg] to those who [tPere] 011 the point 
of becoming hzs enemies, hut who at the same time had the formal constitution 
of the state (and hence the authority of outward legality) on the side of their 
own personal ends. But since their power gat•e them sovereignty our the 
provinces of the Roman Empzre, his victory over them simultaneously enabled 
him to conquer the whole empi1·e itself He thereby became the sole ruler of 
the state, although he left the form of the comtitution intact. But the means 
by which he achieved Ius own (onginally negative) md, i.e. the undit·ided 
sovereignty of Rome, rvas at the same time an inherently necessary determina-
tiOn in the history of Rome and of the world. Tlms not just his own personal 
advanttzge was zn1·olved, for his work was the product of an impulse which 
accomplished the end for 1vhich his age was ready. Such are the great men of 
history: the substance of their own particular ends is the will of the world 
spirit. Their true power resides in this inner content, which is present in the 
universal unconsczous instinct of mankind. All men are driun 011 by an 
inward compulsion, and they are incapable of resistzng the indtvidual who 
has taken it upon himself to execute one of the ends of history in the course of 
furthering his own personal interests. On the contrary, the 1wtzons flock to 
hzs standard, for he reveals to them and carries out what is already thezr 
own zmmanent impulse. 
A nation consists on the one hand of distinct moments which combine 
to give it its general character; on the other, it also embodies the opposite 
principle of individuality, and these two principles together constitute 
the reality of the Idea. In a nation or state, everything depends on the 
nature of these two elements, on the way in which they differ, and the 
way in which they unite. They create between them the living process 
from which the Idea itself derives its life. The Idea is at first an internal 
and inactive principle, the inner essence of the nation which exists only 
in thought and representation, but not yet in reality; and that which 
implements and externalises this universal principle and gives it reality is 
the activity of individuality, which translates the inner essence into reality. 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
It thereby brings what is wrongly described as reality, i.e. the world of 
mere externals, into conformity with the Idea. 
Individuality itself, in so far as it is as yet devoid of spirit or not yet 
fully developed, comes under this category of mere externality; individual 
things become progressively more authentic the more completely they 
enter in their totality into the universal substance and the more com-
pletely the Idea enters into them. Everything depends on this relationship 
between the universal and the subjective; the underlying substance must 
become part of the national consciousness, so that the nation is conscious 
of the truth as the essential element which has eternal being in and for 
itself. But this development towards living consciousness, \vhereby being 
in and for itself gains recognition, does not immediately attain its proper 
form, the form of universality. So long as it remains internal and dormant, 
the will is still only a natural will which has not yet discovered the 
rational. Justice and the sense of right as such do not yet exist for it. 
No truly ethical existence is possible until individuals have become fully 
conscious of their ends. They must attain knowledge of the unmoved 
mover, as Aristotle calls it, of the unmoved motive force by which all 
individuals are activated. For this force to become effective, the subject 
must have developed to a condition of free individuality in which it is 
fully conscious of the eternally unmoved mover, and each individual 
subject must be free and independent in its own right. From this point 
of view, the individual members of a nation can be seen as analogous to 
the nations themselves in their independent development throughout the 
history of the world. 
The Idea contains the inner determination of self-knowledge and acti-
vity. For the Idea is the eternal inner life of God, the logical nexus which 
is present, as it were, even before the creation of the world. Initially, it 
still lacks the form of immediate being, for it is as yet purely general, an 
inner representation. The second stage in the development of the Idea is 
that it must acknowledge the rights of the opposite principle which is at 
first only ideally present within it - in short, it must posit its own anti-
thesis. The antithesis in question is that between the Idea in its free and 
universal mode, in which it is entirely self-sufficient, and the Idea as 
purely abstract internal reflection. Thus, while the universal Idea retains 
its primary position, it proceeds to determine its opposite pole as that of 
formal being-for-itself, of formal freedom, of abstract unity of self-
consciousness, of infinite internal reflection, and of infinite negativity: 
the ego which, as an individual atom, is diametrically opposed to all 
fulfilment, is the ultimate extreme within this opposition, the antithesis of 
77 

SECOND DRAFT (r830) 
the total fullness of the Idea. The universal Idea accordingly exists as 
substantial fullness on the one hand, and as the abstract quality of free 
volition on the other. God and the whole of existence are divided up into 
discrete elements, and each of these is posited as a separate entity; but 
the knowing subject, the ego, is also in a position to recognise the existence 
of other things. If we pursue this development further, we can see that the 
creation of independent minds, and of the world itself, etc., is implicit 
within it. This dimension of otherness, of the individual atom which is at 
the same time a plurality, constitutes the world of finite things. Each 
separate entity exists for itself only in so far as it excludes the other, 
which is accordingly restricted and limited by it in turn so that it is 
itself of a finite nature. This reflection of the subject upon itself is indivi-
dual self-consciousness; it is the complete antithesis of the Idea, and is 
therefore absolutely finite. 
But in relation to the divine glory, as the absolute Idea which perceives 
the ultimate destiny of everything, this finite realm of maximal freedom, 
this world of formal knowledge, is the soil in which the spiritual moment of 
knowledge as such takes root. It is therefore itself an aspect of the 
absolute, but only of its formal reality. To comprehend this antithetical 
relationship in absolute terms is the profound concern of metaphysics. 
For the ego, the other is present both in the divinity, as the object of 
religion, and also in the world at large, as the universal aggregate of finite 
things. Within the world of finite things, the ego too sees itself in finite 
terms; it conceives of itself in this context as something finite, and its 
perspective is accordingly one of finite ends and of the phenomenal world. 
The freedom of internal reflection, in an abstract and general sense, is 
the formal moment in the activity of the absolute Idea. In the first instance, 
the self-conscious subject wills only itself, and it wills itself in everything; 
its certainty of itself is such that it seeks its own self-conscious subjectivity 
in all objective things. This may be called an impulse of reason in so far 
as it is the sole content of subjectivity - just as the sole concern of religious 
piety is the salvation of the subject. Thus the ego does not will itself 
primarily as a knowing subject, but as a finite and immediate entity, and 
this is the sphere of its phenomenal existence. It wills itself in its 0\\ n 
particularity, and it is at this point that the passions come into play, and 
that individuality realises its own particular nature. If it succeeds in 
realising its finite nature, it has in fact doubled itself; and when the 
atom has thus reconciled itself with its other, the individual has attained 
that state which we call happiness. For a man is said to be happy if he 
has found harmony within himself. It is possible to consider history from 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
the point of view of happiness, but history is not the soil in which happi-
ness grows. The periods of happiness in it are the blank pages of history. 
There are certainly moments of satisfaction in the history of the world, 
but this satisfaction is not to be equated with happiness: for the aims 
which are satisfied transcend all particular interests. All ends of importance 
in world history must be secured by means of abstract volition and energy. 
The world-historical individuals who have pursued such ends may well 
have attained satisfaction, but happiness was certainly not their object. 
This moment of abstract activity should be regarded as an intermediate 
link, a middle term between the universal Idea, which remains at rest in 
the innermost recesses of the spirit, and the world of external things. 
It stands for everything which the Idea projects out of itself into external 
existence. As soon as the universal is externalised, it takes on a particular 
character. In isolation, the inward dimension of the Idea would remain a 
lifeless abstraction, and it is only by means of activity that it acquires 
real existence. Conversely, activity elevates the world of empty objectivity 
into a manifestation of being in and for itself. So far, we have considered 
one aspect of the diremption of the Idea - its division into the Idea on 
the one hand and the atom- the thinking atom- on the other. The 
atom exists for the other, and the other exists for it; its nature is therefore 
pure activity and infinite agitation. As a specific entity, it stands out in 
isolation; but it is at the same time an immediate existence whose task it 
is to translate everything from the realm of matter into that of univer-
sality and vice versa, so that the absolute will may be recognised and 
fulfilled. This infinite impulse towards unity, this reconciliation of 
division, is the other aspect of the diremption of the Idea. The perspective 
of finite existence is that of individual activity, whereby the universal 
acquires a real existence and realises its inner determinations. It consists, 
on the one hand, of activity as such, inasmuch as all individuals endeavour 
to accomplish their real and finite volitions and to gratify their own 
particular natures. But on the other hand, universal ends such as goodness, 
justice, and duty are also manifest within it. If this is not the case, a state 
of barbarism and arbitrariness prevails; but we are here concerned with 
a higher level than this. The ethical education of the subject consists in 
learning to generalise from the particular, and it is this alone which makes 
ethical existence possible. This universal quality in particular things is 
the particular form of the universal good, in which it attains a specific 
ethical existence. Its creation is really no more than a conservation of 
what is already there, in so far as all conservation is productive and not 
79 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
just a lifeless perpetuation of what already exists. This conservation (of 
ethical norms and recognised standards of right) is of a particular nature, 
and is not to be equated with goodness in general, which is an abstraction. 
Duty requires that men should defend not just whatever country they 
choose but their own particular fatherland. This requirement is the 
criterion by which the ethical activity of all individuals is measured; it is 
the source of all the recognised duties and laws which are known to 
every individual, and the objective basis on which each individual's 
position rests. For there is no room in living reality for empty notions 
like that of pursuing goodness for its own sake. If someone intends to 
act, it is not enough for him simply to pursue the good; he must also 
know whether this or that specific thing is good. For the everyday con-
tingencies of private life, definitions of what is good and bad or right and 
wrong are supplied by the laws and customs of each state, and there is no 
great difficulty in recognising them. 
The worth of individuals is measured by the extent to which they reflect 
and represent the national spirit, and have adopted a particular station 
within the affairs of the state as a whole. And one of the conditions of 
freedom in a state is that this decision should be left to the individual, 
and that the occupation he takes up should not be laid down in advance 
by any kind of caste system. The individual's morality will then consist 
in fulfilling the duties imposed upon him by his social station; these can 
be recognised without difficulty, and their particular form will depend 
on the particular class to which the individual belongs. The substantial 
nature of such relationships, i.e. the rational element they embody, is 
universally known, and its expression is what we call duty. To try to 
define duty in itself is idle speculation, and to regard morality as some-
thing difficult to attain may even indicate a desire to exempt oneself 
from one's duties. Every individual has his station in society, and he is 
fully aware of what constitutes a right and honourable course of action. 
If someone declares that, in ordinary private existence, it is not at all 
easy to decide what is right and good, and if he considers that moral 
excellence consists in finding it extremely difficult to be moral and in 
having all kinds of scruples about being so, we can only attribute this to 
his evil or malevolent will which is looking for excuses to escape its 
duties; for it is by no means hard to recognise what these duties are. 
Failure to do so suggests at the very least that one's powers of reflection 
are in abeyance, and that, receiving too little stimulus from a pusillanimous 
will, they have become preoccupied with other things and have lapsed 
into moral complacency. The nature of a relationship governed by moral 
So 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
considerations is determined by its underlying substance and by the 
precepts of duty. Thus, the nature of the relationship between children 
and their parents simply prescribes that their actions should accord with 
this relationship. Or to take a legal relationship, let us suppose that I owe 
someone money. By rights, I must act as the nature of the transaction 
requires and pay the money back. There is no difficulty here. Duty is 
rooted in the soil of civil life: individuals follow their appointed profession, 
and hence also their appointed duty; and their morality consists in acting 
in accordance with this duty. 
Thus, the union of the two extremes - i.e. the translation of the univer-
sal Idea into immediate reality and the elevation of the particular to 
universal truth - is approached from an initial state in which the two 
sides must be assumed to be completely distinct and indifferent towards 
one another. The individual agents pursue finite ends and particular 
interests in their activity; but they are also knowing and thinking beings. 
For this reason, the content of their ends is interwoven with universal 
and essential determinations of justice, goodness, duty, and the like. For 
mere desires and barbarous or uncultivated forms of volition fall outside 
the sphere of world history and play no part in it. These universal deter-
minants, which also serve as guidelines for the aims and actions of 
individuals, have a particular content. Each individual is the son of his 
own nation at a specific stage in this nation's development. No one can 
escape from the spirit of his nation, any more than he can escape from the 
earth itself. The earth is the centre of gravity, and if we imagine a body 
abandoning its own centre, we can only conceive of it as disintegrating 
in the air. And the same applies to the individual. By his very nature, the 
individual must accord with his own substance; he must become con-
scious within himself of the will which his nation demands, and give 
expression to it. The individual does not invent his content, but merely 
activates the substantial content which is already present within him. 
But this universal substance which every individual must translate into 
activity, an activity by which the whole of ethical life is sustained, is 
countered by a second universal which expresses itself in history as a 
whole and which makes it difficult for the individual'to comply with the 
precepts of ethics. I have already discussed the origin of this second 
universal in connection with the development of the Idea. It does not 
fall within the limits of the ethical community; within the latter, there 
may well be particular occurrences (such as vices, deceptions, and the 
like) which violate its own particular universal, but these are soon 
suppressed. Since, however, an ethical whole is of a limited nature, it has 
8t 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
above it a higher universal which creates a dichotomy within it. The 
transition from one phase of the spirit to another can only take place in 
so far as an earlier universal is overcome• and recognised in its parti-
cularity through the activity of thought. The higher universal which 
supersedes it is, so to speak, the next variety of the previous species, and 
is already inwardly present within it, although it has not yet come into 
its own; and it is this which makes the present reality unstable and 
fragmentary. 
One of the essential moments in history is the preservation of the 
individual nation or state and the preservation of the ordered departments 
of its life. And the activity of individuals consists in participating in the 
common cause and helping to further it in all its particular aspects; for 
it is by this means that ethical life is preserved. But the second moment 
in history is that the further existence of the national spirit is interrupted 
(inasmuch as it has exhausted itself and worked itself out to its conclusion) 
in order that world history and the world spirit may continue in their 
course. Neither the position of individuals within the ethical whole nor 
their moral attitudes and duties need be discussed here, for we are 
concerned only with the development, progress, and ascent of the spirit 
towards a higher concept of itsdf. But this is accompanied by the debase-
ment, fragmentation, and destruction of the preceding mode of reality 
which had already developed its concept to the full. All this takes place 
to some extent automatically through the inner development of the Idea; 
yet, on the other hand, the Idea is itself the product of factors outside 
itself, and it is implemented and brought to its realisation by the actions 
of individuals. It is precisely at this point that we encounter those great 
collisions between established and acknowledged duties, laws, and rights 
on the one hand, and new possibilities which conflict with the existing 
system and violate it or even destroy its very foundations and continued 
existence, on the other {although their content may well appear equally 
good and for the most part propitious, essential, and necessary). These 
new possibilities then become part of history. They incorporate a universal 
of a different order from that on which the continued existence of a nation 
or state is based. For the universal they embody is a moment of the 
productive Idea itself, of that truth which works its way on to its own 
realisation. 
The great individuals of world history, therefore, are those who seize 
upon this higher universal and make it their own end. It is they who 
" aufgehoben. 
82 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
realise the end appropriate to the higher concept of the spirit. To this 
extent, they may be called heroes.· They do not find their aims and 
vocation in the calm and regular system of the present, in the hallowed 
order of things as they are. Indeed, their justification dues not lie in the 
prevailing situation, for they draw their inspiration from another source, 
from that hidden spirit whose hour is near but which still lies beneath the 
surface and seeks to break out without yet having attained an existence 
in the present. For this spirit, the present world is but a shell which 
contains the wrong kind of kernel. It might, however, be objected that 
everything which deviates from the established order- whether inten-
tions, aims, opinions, or so-called ideals- is likewise different from what 
is already there. Adventures of all kinds have such ideals, and their activi-
ties are based on attitudes which conflict with the present circumstances. 
But the fact that all such attitudes, sound reasons, or general principles 
differ from existing ones does not mean to say that they are justified. The 
only true ends are those whose content has been produced by the absolute 
power of the inner spirit itself in the course of its development; and world-
historical individuals are those who have willed and accomplished not 
just the ends of their own imagination or personal opinions, but only those 
which were appropriate and necessary. Such individuals know what is 
necessary and timely, and have an inner vision of what it is. 
It is possible to distinguish between the insight of such individuals and 
the realisation that even such manifestations of the spirit as this are no 
more than moments within the universal Idea. To understand this is the 
prerogative of philosophy. World-historical individuals have no need to 
do so, as they are men of practice. They do, however, know and will their 
own enterprise, because the time is ripe for it, and it is already inwardly 
present. Their business is to know this universal principle, which is the 
necessary and culminating stage in the development of their world, to 
make it their end, and to devote their energy to its realisation. They 
derive the universal principle whose realisation they accomplish from 
within themselves; it is not, however, their own invention, but is eternally 
present and is merely put into practice by them and honoured in their 
persons. But since they draw it from within themselves, from a source 
which was not previously available, they appear to derive it from them-
selves alone; and the new world order and the deeds they accomplish 
appear to be their own achievement, their personal interest and creation. 
But right is on their side, for they are the far-sighted ones: they have 
discerned what is true in their world and in their age, and have recognised 
the concept, the next universal to emerge. And the others, as already 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
remarked, flock to their standard, for it is they who express what the 
age requires. They are the most far-sighted among their contemporaries; 
they know best what issues are involved, and whatever they do is right. 
The others feel that this is so, and therefore have to obey them. Their 
words and deeds are the best that could be said and done in their time. 
Thus, the great individuals of history can only be understood within 
their own context; and they are admirable simply because they have made 
themselves the instruments of the substantial spirit. This is the true rela-
tionship between the individual and his universal substance. For this 
substance is the source of everything, the sole aim, the sole power, and 
the sole end which is willed by such individuals; it seeks its satisfaction 
through them and is accomplished by them. It is this which gives them 
their power in the world, and only in so far as their ends are compatible 
with that of the spirit which has being in and for itself do they have 
absolute right on their side - although it is a right of a wholly peculiar kind. 
The state of the world is not yet fully known, and the aim is to give it 
reality. This is the object of world-historical individuals, and it is through 
its attainment that they find satisfaction. They can discern the weakness 
of what still appears to exist in the present, although it possesses only a 
semblance of reality. The spirit's inward development has outgrown the 
world it inhabits, and it is about to progress beyond it. Its self-conscious-
ness no longer finds satisfaction in the present, but its dissatisfaction has 
not yet enabled it to discover what it wants, for the latter is not yet 
positively present; its status is accordingly negative. The world-historical 
individuals are those who were the first to formulate the desires of their 
fellows explicitly. It is not easy for us to know what we want; indeed, we 
may well want something, yet still remain in a negative position, a position 
of dissatisfaction, for we may as yet be unconscious of the positive factor. 
But the individuals in question knew what they wanted, and what they 
wanted was of a positive nature. They do not at first create satisfaction, 
however, and the aim of their actions is not that of satisfying others in 
any case. If this were so, they would certainly have plenty to do, because 
their fellows do not know what the age requires or even what they them-
selves desire. But to try to resist these world-historical individuals is a 
futile undertaking, for they are irresistibly driven on to fulfil their task. 
Their course is the correct one, and even if the others do not believe that 
it corresponds to their own desires, they nevertheless adopt it or acquiesce 
in it. There is a power within them which is stronger than they are, even 
if it appears to them as something external and alien and runs counter to 
what they consciously believe they want. For the spirit in its further 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
evolution is the inner soul of all individuals, although it remains in a state 
of unconsciousness until great men c·all it to life. It is the true object of 
all men's desires, and it is for this reason that it exerts a power over them 
to which they surrender even at the price of denying their conscious will; 
they follow these leaders of souls because they feel the irresistible power 
of their own inner spirit pulling them in the same direction. 
If we go on to examine the fate of these world-historical individuals, we see 
that they had the good fortune [to be] the executors of an end which marked 
a stage in tlze adl•ance of the universal spirit. But as indn:idual subjects, 
they also have an existmce distinct from that of the uni7.;ersal substance, an 
exzstence in which they cannot be said to have enjoyed what is commonly 
called happiness. They did not wish to be happy in any case, but only to 
attain their end, and they succeeded in doing so only by dint of arduous 
labours. They knew how to obtain satisfaction and to accomplish their 
end, which is the universal end. With so great an end before them, they 
boldly resolved to challenge all the beliefs of their fellows. Thus it was 
not happiness that they chose, but exertion, conflict, and labour in the 
service of their end. And even when they reached their goal, peaceful 
enjoyment and happiness were not their lot. Their actions are their entire 
being, and their whole nature and character are determined by their ruling 
passion. When their end is attained, they fall aside like empty husks. 
They may have undergone great difficulties in order to accomplish their 
purpose, but as soon as they have done so, they die early like Alexander, 
are murdered like Caesar, or deported like Napoleon. One may well ask 
what they gained for themselves. What they gained was that concept or 
end which they succeeded in realising. Other kinds of gain, such as 
peaceful enjoyment, were denied them. The fearful consolation that the 
great men of history did not enjoy what is called happiness- which is 
possible only in private life, albeit under all kinds of different external 
circumstances- this consolation can be found in history by those who 
are in need of it. It is needed by the envious, who resent all that is great 
and outstanding and who accordingly try to belittle it and to find fault 
with it. The existence of such outstanding figures only becomes bearable 
to them because they know that such men did not enjoy happiness. In 
this knowledge, envy sees a means of restoring the balance between itself 
and those whom it envies. Thus, it has often enough been demonstrated 
even in our own times that princes are never happy on their thrones; 
this enables men not to grudge them their thrones, and to accept the fact 
that it is the princes rather than they themselves who sit upon them. The 
Bs 

SECOND DRAFT (I 830) 
free man, however, is not envious, for he readily acknowledges and rejoices 
in the greatness of others. 
But such great men are fastened upon by a whole crowd of envious 
spirits who hold up their passions as weaknesses. It is indeed possible 
to interpret their lives in terms of passion, and to put the emphasis on 
moral judgements by declaring that it was their passions which motivated 
them. Of course, they were men of passion, for they were passionately 
dedicated to their ends, which they served with their whole character, 
genius, and nature. In such individuals, then, that which is necessary in 
and for itself assumes the form of passion. Great men of this kind admit-
tedly do seem to follow only the dictates of their passions and of their 
own free will, but the object of their will is universal, and it is this which 
constitutes their pathos. Passion is simply the energy of their ego, and 
without this, they could not have accomplished anything. 
In this respect, the aim of passion and that of the Idea are one and the 
same; passion is the absolute unity of individual character and the 
universal. T~e way in which the spirit in its subjective individuality 
here coincides exactly with the Idea has an almost animal quality about it. 
A man who accomplishes something excellent puts his whole energy 
into the task; he is not sufficiently dispassionate to vary the objects of 
his will or to dissipate his energy in following various separate ends, but 
is entirely dedicated to the one great end to which he truly aspires. His 
passion is the energy of the end itself and the determinate aspect of his 
will. That a man can thus devote his whole energy to a particular cause 
suggests a kind of instinct of an almost animal quality. We also describe 
such passions as zeal or enthusiasm, but we only use the term enthusiasm 
when the ends in question are of a more ideal and universal nature. The 
man of politics is not an enthusiast, for he must possess that clear circum-
spection which we do not normally attribute to enthusiasts. Passion is the 
prerequisite of all human excellence, and there is accordingly nothing 
immoral about it. And if such zeal is genuine, it remains cool and reflect-
ing; the theoretical faculty retains a clear view of the means by which its 
true ends can be realised. 
We must further note that, in fulfilling their grand designs as neces-
sitated by the universal spirit, such world-historical individuals not only 
attained personal satisfaction but also acquired new external characteristics 
in the process. The end they achieved was also their own end, and the hero 
himself is inseparable from the cause he promoted, for both of these were 
satisfied. One may, however, attempt to distinguish the hero's self-
satisfaction from the success of the cause itself and to show that the great 
86 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
men in question were really pursuing their own ends, and then conclude 
that it was only their own ends which they were pursuing. Such men did 
indeed win fame and honour, and were recognised both by their contem-
poraries and by posterity- at least so long as the latter has not succumbed 
to the temptations of criticism, and of envy in particular. But it is absurd 
to believe that anyone can do anything without wishing to obtain satis-
faction from doing so. Nevertheless, since the subjective factor is of a purely 
particular character, and since its ends are purely finite and individual, it 
must necessarily subordinate itself to the universal. But in so far as it 
implements the Idea, it must also help to sustain the underlying substance. 
To make a distinction of this kind, however, is simply psychological 
pedantry. Those who indulge in it label every passion as a lust, and thereby 
cast doubt on the morality of the individuals in question. In so doing, they 
present the results of such individuals' actions as their actual ends, and 
reduce the deeds themselves to the position of means, declaring that 
those concerned acted solely out of lust for fame, lust for conquest, and 
the like. Thus the aspirations of Alexander, for example, are characterised 
as lust for conquest, which lends them a subjective colouring and presents 
them in an unfavourable light. This so-called psychological approach 
contrives to trace all actions to the heart and to interpret them subjectively, 
with the result that their authors appear to have done everything because 
of some greater or lesser passion or lust, and, on account of such passions 
and lusts, cannot have been moral men. Alexander of Macedonia partly 
conquered Greece, and then Asia; therefore he was filled with a lust for 
conquest. He acted from a lust for fame and conquest, and the proof 
that these were his motives is that his actions brought him fame. What 
schoolmaster has not demonstrated of Alexander the Great or Julius 
Caesar that they were impelled by such passions and were therefore 
immoral characters? -from which it at once follows that the schoolmaster 
himself is a more admirable man than they were, because he does not 
have such passions (the proof being that he does not conquer Asia or 
vanquish Darius and Porus, but simply lives and lets live). These psycho-
logists are particularly apt to dwell on the private idiosyncrasies of the 
great figures of history. Man must eat and drink; he has relationships with 
friends and acquaintances, and has feelings and momentary outbursts 
of emotion. The great men of history also had such idiosyncrasies; they 
ate and drank, and preferred this course to another and that wine to 
another (or to water). 'No man is a hero to his valet de chambre' is a 
well known saying. I have added - and Goethe repeated it two years 
later32 - 'not because the former is not a hero, but because the latter is a 

SECOND DRAFT (I 830) 
valet'. The valet takes otr the hero's boots, helps him into bed, knows 
that he prefers champagne, etc. The hero as such does not exist for the 
valet, but for the world, for reality, and for history. Historical personages 
who are waited upon in the history books by such psychological valets 
certainly come off badly enough; they are reduced to the same level of 
morality as these fine connoisseurs of humanity, or rather to a level 
several degrees below theirs. Homer's Thersites, the critic of kings, is a 
stock figure in all ages. Admittedly, not every age belabours him- in the 
sense of thrashing him with a stout cudgel- as happened to him in 
Homer's time; but his envy and obstinacy are the thorn which he carries 
in his flesh, and the undying worm which eats at him is the tormenting 
knowledge that all his excellent intentions and criticisms have no effect 
whatsoever upon the world. We may even derive a malicious satisfaction 
from the fate of Thersites and his kind. 
Besides, psychological pedantry of this variety is not even internally 
consistent. It depicts the honour and fame of great men as faults, as if 
honour and fame had been the objects they aimed for. Yet, on the other 
hand, we are told that the designs of great men must have the assent of 
others, that is, that their subjective will should be respected by their 
fellows. But the very fact that they rose to honour and fame implies that 
they did meet with this required assent and that their aims were recognised 
by others as correct. The ends which world-historical individuals set 
themselves in fact correspond to what is already the inner will of mankind. 
Yet the assent which they are supposed to receive from others is treated 
as a fault after they have received it, and they are accused of having coveted 
the honour and fame they achieved. To this we may reply that they 
were not at all concerned with honour and fame, for the ordinary and 
superficial appearances which had previously been revered are precisely 
what they would have treated with derision. And only by so doing were 
they able to fulfil their task, for otherwise they would have remained 
within the ordinary channels of human existence, and someone else would 
have accomplished the will of the spirit. 
Yet, on the other hand, they are again censured for not having sought 
the approval of others and for having flaunted their opinions. It is 
perfectly true that they rose to honour by treating accepted values with 
contempt. Since the innovation they brought into the world was their 
own personal goal, they drew their conception of it from within themselves, 
and it was their own end that they realised. It was this which gave them 
their satisfaction. They willed their own end in defiance of others, and 
were satisfied in the process. The aim of great men was to obtain satis-
88 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
faction for themselves, and not for the we!J-meaning intentions of others. 
They learnt nothing from others, and if they had followed their advice, 
it would only have limited them and led them astray. They themselves 
knew what was best. Caesar had formed an extremely accurate impres-
sion of the so-called Roman Republic, for he realised that the supposed 
laws of auctoritas and dignitas had fallen into abeyance and that it was 
right and proper to put an end to the latter as a source of individual 
arbitrariness. He succeeded in doing so because this course was the 
correct one. If he had followed Cicero, he would never have achieved 
anything. Caesar knew that the republic was a lie, and that Cicero's words 
were empty. He knew that this hollow structure had to be replaced by a 
new one, and that the structure he himself created was the necessary one. 
Thus such world-historical individuals, in furthering their own momen-
tous interests, did indeed treat other intrinsically admirable interests and 
sacred rights in a carefree, cursory, hasty, and heedless manner, thereby 
exposing themselves to moral censure. But their position should be 
seen in an altogether different light. A mighty figure must trample 
many an innocent flower underfoot, and destroy much that lies in its path. 
The particular interests of passion cannot therefore be separated from 
the realisation of the universal; for the universal arises out of the parti-
cular and determinate and its negation. The particular has its own interests 
in world history; it is of a finite nature, and as such, it must perish. 
Particular interests contend with one another, and some are destroyed in 
the process. But it is from this very conflict and destruction of particular 
things that the universal emerges, and it remains unscathed itself. For it is 
not the universal Idea which enters into opposition, conflict, and danger; 
it keeps itself in the background, untouched and unharmed, and sends 
forth the particular interests of passion to fight and wear themselves 
out in its stead. It is what we may call the cunning of reason that it sets 
the passions to work in its service, so that the agents by which it gives 
itself existence must pay the penalty and suffer the loss. For the latter 
belong to the phenomenal world, of which part is worthless and part is of 
positive value. The particular is as a rule inadequate in relation to the 
universal, and individuals are sacrificed and abandoned as a result. The 
Idea pays the tribute which existence and the transient world exact, but 
it pays it through the passions of individuals rather than out of its own 
resources. Caesar had to do what was necessary to overthrow the decaying 
freedom of Rome; he himself met his end in the struggle, but necessity 
triumphed: in relation to the Idea, freedom was subordinate to the 
external events. 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
But although we may accept that individuals, thetr aims, and the satisfaction 
of these aims are sacrificed, that their entire happiness is gzven up to the 
realm of natural forces- and hence to the realm of contingency to which it 
belongs- and that individuals in gmeral come under the category of means 
rather than ends, there still remains one aspect of individuality which we 
should hesitate to view in this light, even in relation to the universal itself, 
for it is definitely not of a subordinate nature. It is an essentially eternal and 
divine principle which is present in all individuals, and it manifests itself in 
morality, ethics, and religiosity. In my earlier remarks on how the end of 
reason is put into operation by individuals, I have already mentioned that 
their subjective aim -i.e. their interest as a whole and that of their needs 
and impulses, opinions and convictions- although representing only the 
formal aspect of their activity, itself has an infinite right to be satisfied. 
When we speak of a means, we think of it primarily as something wholly 
external to the end and as having no part in the latter. But in fact, even 
natural objects and the commonest inanimate materials, if used as means, 
must be suited to their end and have something in common with it. And the 
relationship of human beings to the end of reason is least of all that of a means 
in this purely external sense; for in fulfilling the end of reason, they not only 
simultaneously fulfil their own particular ends (whose content is quite different 
from that of the universal end), but also participate in the end of reason 
itself, and are therefore ends in their own right. They are ends in themselves 
not only in a formal sense, as are all living thingfl3 (although their individual 
life is by its very nature subordinate to that of man and is rightly used by 
him as a means); individual human beings are also ends in themselves by 
virtue of the content of the end which they serve. And under this heading we 
must include all that we would exempt from the category of means, namely 
morality, ethics, and religiosity. Man is an end in himself only by virtue 
of that divine principle within him which we have all along referred to as 
reason (or, in so far as it is internally active and self-determining, as free-
dom); and although we cannot discuss its further implications here, we may 
nevertheless assert that religiosity, ethics, etc., have their roots and source in 
this principle and are therefore essentially elevated above external necessity 
and chance. But it must be remembered that we are only concerned with these 
factors in so far as they exist within individuals, that is, in so far as they are 
subject to the discretion of individual freedom; from this point of view, the 
individuals themselves can be blamed for any decline, corruption, or loss of 
religious and moral values. 
This is the hallmark of the sublime and absolute destiny of man- that he 
knows what good and evil are, and that it is his will which chooses either 
90 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
the one or the other. In short, he can be he/4 responsible, for good as well as 
for evil, and not JUSt for this or that particular circumstance and for every-
. thing around him and within hzm, but also for the good and e·vil which are 
inherent in his individual freedom. Only the animal can truly be described 
as totally innocent. But to prevent or remove all the misunderstandzngs to 
which this usually gives rise (for example, the fallacy that innocence, in the 
sense of complete unconsciousness of et•il, is hereby debased and devalued) 
would require an extensive disquisition, a dzsquisition no less extensire thml 
a complete treatzse on freedom ztself. 
But when we consider the fate which overtakes virtue, morality, and evm 
religiosity in histcry, we must not fall into a litany of lamentations to the 
effect that the good and the pious often, or indeed in most cases, fare badly 
zn the world, while the evil and the wzcked prosper. The idea of prosperzty can 
be interpreted in very many different ways ,for example in the sense of wealth, 
outward honour, and the like. But when we are discussing an end which 
exists in and for ztsel[, the so-called prosperity or misfortune of some particular 
individuals or other cannot and should not be regarded as an essenttal moment 
within the rational order of the universe. There zs more justification for 
requirzng that the uni~·ersal end should allow good, just, and moral ends to 
seek fulfilment and protectzon within zt and under it than for expectmg it to 
provide individuals with happiness and good fortune. What makes men 
morally discontented (and they may e·ven take a certazn pride zn this 
discontent) is that they find the present unsuited to their ideas, principles, 
and opinions concerning ends of a more universal content, wlzzclz they consider 
to be right and good (among which we must nowadays znclude ideals of 
political constztutzons in particular), or to thezr predilectzon for constructing 
thezr own ideals on which to lavzslz their enthuszasm. • They co1llrast existence 
as it is with their own view of how things by rights ought to be. In this case, 
it ts not partzcular interests or passions wlzzch demand satisfaction, but 
reason, justice, and freedom; and, eqwpped with this title, such demands gtve 
themselves an air of authorit)1 and can easily take the form not JUSt of dis-
content with the condition and events of the world but of actual rebellion 
against them. To appreciate such feelings and attttucles correctly, we should 
have to make a thorough examinatzon of the demands themselws and of the 
highly peremptory ~·iews and attztudes which accompany them. Never before 
have so many general propositions and ideas been advanced on such matters, 
and wzth such great pretenswn, as in our own times. Whereas history usually 
presents itself as a conjlzct of passions, in the present age- although the 
" This sentence is grammatically and syntactically incoherent in Hegel's original German. 
91 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
passions are not absent- it appears, on the one hrmd, primari(y as a conflict 
of ideas vying with one another to justify themselves and, on the other, as a 
conflict of passions and subjective interests, but essentially under the guise 
of the higher prznciples which are used to justify them. These rights, demanded 
in the name of what we have described as the absolute end of reason and as 
self-conscious freedom, are thereby classed as absolute ends like those of 
religion, ethics, and morality. 
We shall turn in a moment to the state, at which all such demands are 
directed. But as for the corruption, violation, and destruction of religious, 
ethical, and moral purposes and affairs in general, it must at least be34 
said- although we shall examine the question in more detail later- that such 
spiritual forces are indeed absolutely justified; nevertheless, although their 
inward and universal aspect is infinite, the forms they assume, their content, 
and their development towards realisation may be of a lzmited character, 
and hence subject to the realm of external nature and of contingency. In 
this respect, therefore, they too are transient and subject to decay and injury. 
Religion and ethics, as intrinsically universal essences, have by definition 
(and hence in the true sense) the quality of being present in the individual soul, 
even if they do not develop to their fullest extent in it and are not applied to 
situations of great complexity. The religiosity and ethicality of a restricted 
sphere of lift (for example, that of a shepherd or peasant), in their concentrated 
inwardness and limitation to a few simple situations of lift, have infinite 
worth; they are just as valuable as those which accompany a high degree of 
knowledge and a lift with a wide r.ange of relationships and actions.35 This 
inner centre, this simple source of the rights of subjective freedom, the seat of 
volition, resolution, and action, the abstract co11tent of consczence, that in 
which the responsibility and worth of the individual and his eternal court of 
judgement are contained- all this remains untouched and [protected] from 
the noisy clamour of world history, and not only from external and temporary 
changes, but also from those produced by the absolute necessity of the concept 
of freedom itself But as a general rule, we must take it as established that 
whatever in the world can justly claim glory and nobility zs nevertheless 
subject to something even higher than itself The right of the world spirit 
transcends all particular rights; it shares in the latter itself, but only to a 
limited extmt, for although these lesser rights may partake of its substance, 
they are at the same time fraught with particularity. 
These remarks may suffice in respect of the means which the world spirit 
employs in order to realise its concept. In simple abstract terms, the means it 
employs is the activity ofindzvidual subjects in whzch reason is present as thezr 
znherent substantial essence; but this basis is as yet indistznct and concealed 

REALISATION Of SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
from their ·view. The problem becomes more complex and difficult, howet•er, 
when we consider indn:iduals not merely from the pomt of rie1v of thezr 36 
actiom and of those particular ends which are cotzfined to them alone, 
but m more concrete terms wrth reference to the determinate contellt of tlmr 37 
religion and ethical life; for tillS content partakes of reason itself and hence 
also of zts absolute rights. In the latter instance, the relation of a mere means 
to an end disappears. The principal considerations which arise in connection 
with the absolute md oft he spirit have, howerer, already been briefly dzscussed. 
c. [The materwl of its realisatzon] 
The third point to be considered ts the nature of the end to be realised 
by these means, in other words, the form it assumes in reality. We have spoken 
hitherto of means, but in the realisation of a subjectzve and finite end we 
must also take account of the material which is available or which has to 
be procured in order that the md may be realised. The question we must 
answer zs accordzngly this: what is the material in which the ulumate end of 
reason is realised? 
The changes in historical existence presuppose a medium within 
which such changes occur. But as we have seen, it is the subjective will 
which implements them. Thus, in this case too, the first part of our answer 
is once again the subject itself, the needs of men, and the realm of sub-
jectivity in general. The rational attains existence within the medium of 
human knowledge and volition. We have seen how the subjective will has 
an end which represents the truth of a reality (in so far as it embodies 
some great passion of world-historical significance). When its passions 
are limited, however, the subjective will is dependent, and it can only 
satisfy its particular ends within this position of dependence. But as 
already pointed out, it too has a substantial life, a reality in which it 
moves as in its essential being and which constitutes the aim of its 
existence. This essential being, the unity of the subjective will and the 
universal, is the ethical whole, and its concrete manifestation is the state. 
The state is the reality within "hich the individual has and enjoys his 
freedom, but only in so far as he knows, believes in, and wills the universal. 
This, then, is the focal point of all the other concrete aspects of the spirit, 
such as justice, art, ethics, and the amenities of existence. Within the 
state, freedom becomes its own object and achieves its positive realisation. 
But this does not mean that the subjective v. ill of the individual is imple-
mented and satisfied through the universal will, and that the latter is 
merely a means to the end of the former. Nor is the universal will merely 
a community of human beings within which the freedom of all individuals 
93 

SECOND DRAFT (I 830) 
has to be limited. To imagine that freedom is such that the individual 
subject, in its co-existence with other subjects, must limit its freedom in 
such a way that this collective restriction, the mutual constraint of all, 
leaves everyone a limited area in which to act as he pleases, is to interpret 
freedom in purely negative terms; on the contrary, justice, ethical life, 
and the state, and these alone, are the positive realisation and satisfaction 
of freedom. The random inclinations of individuals are not the same thing 
as freedom. That kind of freedom on which restrictions arc imposed is 
mere arbitrariness, which exists solely in relation to particular needs. 
Only in the state does man have a rational existence. The aim of all 
education is to ensure that the individual does not remain purely subjec-
tive but attains an objective existence within the state. The individual 
can certainly make the state into a means of attaining this or that end. 
But the truth is realised only in so far as each individual wills the universal 
cause itself and has discarded all that is inessential. Man owes his entire 
existence to the state, and has his being widlin it alone. Whatever worth 
and spiritual reality he possesses are his solely by virtue of the state. For 
as a knowing being, he has spiritual reality only in so far as his being, i.e. 
the rational itself, is his object and possesses objective and immediate 
existence for him; only as such does he possess consciousness and exist 
in an ethical world, within the legal and ethical life of the state. For the 
truth is the unity of the universal and the subjective will, and the universal 
is present within the state, in its laws and in its universal and rational 
properties. 
The subjective will- or passion- is the activating and realising 
principle; the Idea is the inner essence, and the state is the reality of 
ethical life in the present. For the state is the unity of the universal, 
essential will and the will of the subject, and it is this which constitutes 
ethical life. The individual who lives within this unity has an ethical 
existence, and his value consists solely in this substantiality. Sophocles' 
Antigone says: 'The divine commands are not of yesterday, nor of today; 
no, they live eternally, and no one could say whence they came.' The laws 
of ethics are not contingent, for they are the rational itself. The aim of the 
state is that the substance which underlies the real activity and disposi-
tions of men should be recognised and made manifest, and that it should 
ensure its own continuity. The absolute interest of reason requires that 
this ethical whole should be present; and it is from this interest of 
reason that the justification and merit of those heroes who have founded 
states - however primitive the latter may have been - are derived. The 
state does not exist for the sake of the citizens; it might rather be said 
94 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
that the state is the end, and the citizens are its instruments. But this 
relation of end and means is not at all appropriate in the present context. 
For the state is not an abstraction which stands in opposition to the 
citizens; on the contrary, they are distinct moments like those of organic 
life, in which no one member is either a means or an end. The divine 
principle in the state is the Idea made manifest on earth. 
The essence of the state is ethical life. This consists in the unity of the 
universal and the subjective will. The will is activity, and within the 
subjective will, it encounters its opposite in the external world. The 
principle of the will is that of being for itself; but this entails exclusivity 
and limitation. It is often said that man is unlimited in his will and limited 
in his thought, although quite the reverse is true. But if we take the will in 
its essential being in and for itself, we must conceive of it as liberated 
from its opposition to the external world, and as completely universal in 
this respect too. Thus, the will is a power in its own right and the essence 
of universal power in both nature and the spirit. We may choose to think 
of this essential being as 'the Lord', the Lord of nature and of the spirit. 
The Lord as a subject, however, is merely one entity as against other 
entities. But the absolute power is not Lord over other things, but Lord 
over itself, reflection within itself, or personality. This inward reflection 
is simple self-relatedness with an existence of its own; for power, thus 
internally reflected, is immediate reality. But this is equivalent to know-
ledge, or, more precisely, to the bearer of knowledge- in other words, 
to human individuality. The universal spirit is essentially present as 
human consciousness. Knowledge attains existence and being for itself 
in man. The spirit knows itself and exists for itself as a subject, and its 
nature is to posit itself as immediate existence: as such, it is equivalent 
to human consciousness. 
It is customary to act in accordance with the universal will and to make 
one's aim a universal one which is recognised within the state. Even in 
primitive states the will is subordinated to another will, although this 
does not mean that the individual has no will of his own, but only that 
his particular will has no authority. The whims and fancies of individuals 
are not taken into account; even in primitive political conditions, the 
particular aspects of the will are disregarded, and the universal will is 
alone essential. The particular will is at least suppressed, and it accordingly 
turns in upon itself. This is the first necessary moment in the existence of 
the universal- the elrment of knowledge and thought which emerges at 
this point within the state. Only in this environment, i.e. within the state, 
can art and religion exist. The nations we are concerned with here have 
95 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
acquired a rational internal organisation, and world history takes account 
only of those nations which have formed themselves into states. But we 
must not imagine that this can occur on a desert island or in a completely 
isolated community. It is certainly true that all great men have developed 
in solitude, but they have done so only by assimilating to their own ends 
what the state had already created. The universal must be more than just 
the opinions of individuals. It must have an existence of its own, and 
as such, it is to be found in the state itself in the shape of all that is generally 
recognised. In the state, the internal becomes reality. Reality, of course, is 
outwardly varied, but in this case, we are considering its universal 
qualities. 
The universal Idea attains phenomenal reality in the state. As regards 
the expression phenomenal, it should be noted that its meaning in the 
present context is not the same as in everyday thinking. In everyday 
usage, we distinguish between forces and phenomena, as if the former were 
essential and the latter inessential and external. But even the category 
of force does not contain a concrete determination. In the case of the 
spirit or concrete concept, however, the phenomenon itself is the essential. 
The differentiation of spirit is the work of the spirit itself, and it is the 
product of its own activity. Man, too, is his own product; he is the sum 
total of his own deeds, and has made himself what he is. Spirit, therefore, 
is essentially energy, so that it is impossible in this case to abstract from 
the phenomenon itself. The phenomenal aspect of the spirit is its self-
determination, which is the element of its concrete nature: the spirit 
which does not determine itself is merely an abstraction of the under-
standing. The self-determination of the spirit is its phenomenal aspect, 
which we have to consider here in the shape of states and individuals. 
The spiritual individual, the nation -in so far as it is internally 
differentiated so as to form an organic whole - is what we call the state. 
This term is ambiguous, however, for the state and the laws of the state, 
as distinct from religion, science, and art, usually have purely political 
associations. But in this context, the word 'state' is used in a more com-
prehensive sense, just as we use the word 'realm' to describe spiritual 
phenomena. A nation should therefore be regarded as a spiritual indivi-
dual, and it is not primarily its external side that will be emphasised here, 
but rather what we have previously called the spirit of the nation, i.e. its 
self-consciousness in relation to its own truth and being, and what it 
recognises as truth in the absolute sense- in short, those spiritual powers 
which live within the nation and rule over it. The universal which emerges 
and becomes conscious within the state, the form to which everything 
g6 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
in it is assimilated, is what we call in general the nation's culture. But 
the determinate content which this universal form acquires and which 
is contained in the concrete reality which constitutes the state is the 
national spirit itself. The real state is animated by this spirit in all its 
particular transactions, wars, institutions, etc. This spiritual content 
is a firm and solid nucleus which is completely removed from the world 
of arbitrariness, particularities, caprices, individuality, and contingency; 
whatever is subject to the latter is not part of the nation's character: it 
is like the dust which blows over a town or a field or hangs above it 
without changing it in any essential way. Besides, this spiritual content 
is the essential being of each individual, as well as constituting the spirit 
of the nation. It is the sacred bond which links men and spirits together. 
It remains one and the same life, one great object, one great end, and one 
great content, on which all private happiness and all private volition depend. 
Thus, the state is the more specific object of world history in general, 
in which freedom attains its objectivity and enjoys the fruits of this 
objectivity. For the law is the objectivity of the spirit, and the will in its 
true expression; and only that will which obeys the law is free: for it 
obeys itself and is self-sufficient and therefore free. When the state or 
fatherland constitutes a community of existence, and when the subjective 
will of men subordinates itself to laws, the opposition between freedom 
and necessity disappears. The rational, as the substance of things, is 
necessary, and we are free in so far as we recognise it as law and follow 
it as the substance of our own being; the objective and the subjective will 
are then reconciled, forming a single, undivided whole. For the ethical 
character of the state is not that of individual morality, which is a product 
of reflection and subject to personal conviction; reflective morality is more 
accessible to the modern world, whereas the true ethics of antiquity are 
rooted in the fact that everyone adhered to his prescribed duty. An 
Athenian citizen did virtually by instinct what was expected of him; if 
I reflect on the object of my activity, however, I must be conscious that 
my will has assented to it. But ethical life is duty, the substantial right, or 
second nature (as it has justly been called); for man's first nature is his 
immediate animal existence. 
The nature of the state has now been described. We have also seen that, 
in jfresent-day theories, various misconceptions concerning the state are 
prevalent. These have acquired the status of established truths, and have 
!Jecome fixed prejudices. We will cite only a few of them here, with particular 
reference to those which ha1•e some relationship to the aim of our study of 
history. 
97 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
The first fallacy we encounter stands in direct contradiction to our colzcep-
tion of the state as the realisation of freedom. According to the view in question, 
man is by nature free, but in society and the state- which he must of necessity 
enter- he must limit this natural freedom. That man is by nature free is 
perfectly true in the smse that he is free by the inherent concept of his nature, 
but only in relation to his destiny, i.e. to what he is in himself; for it must 
be acknowledged that the nature of an object is equivalent to its inherent 
C(Jncept. But the above prop(jsition is also supposed to pro-vide information 
regardmg man's natural and immediate mode of existence. In this way, a 
state of nature is postulated in which man is allegedly in full possession of 
his natural rights, with unrestricted exercise and enjoyment of his freedom. 
This assumption does not exactly claim the status of historical fact - and if zt 
did seriously make such pretensions, it would be difficult to show that such a 
condition actually existed either in the present or at any time in the past. 
States of savagery can certainly be encountered, but they are ob-z:iously 
associated with brutal passions and deeds of violence; and no matter how 
primiti·ve they are, they are also accompanied by social institutiow which - to 
use the common expression - impose restrictions on freedom. This assumption 
is one of those nebulous constructions which theory produces as a necessary 
co11sequmce of its operatimzs, and to which it then attributes a real existence 
without seeking any historical justification for doing so. 
It is customary to present history as beginning with a state of nature 
or state of innocence. But according to our present conception of the 
spirit, its initial condition is not a state of freedom at all but a state in 
which the spirit as such has no reality. The opposite view is based on a 
misunderstanding. If the word 'nature' denotes the being or concept of a 
thing, then the state of nature or the law of nature is that state or law 
which is appropriate to man by virtue of his inherent concept and of the 
inherent concept of spirit. But this must not be confused with what the 
spirit is in its natural condition; for the latter is a condition of servitude 
in which man lives by the intuitions of his senses: Exeundum est e statu 
naturae (Spinoza). We shall therefore not begin with those traditions 
which tell of man's original condition (the Mosaic tradition, for example), 
but will touch on them only at that point of time at which the prophecies 
they embodied were fulfilled. For only then do the latter have a historical 
existence; before that time, they had not yet become part of their national 
cultures. 
States of nature as we encou11ter them i11 empirical existmce do indeed 
conform to the concept of a purely natural state. Freedom as the ideal cmzditirm 
of what is as yet purely immediate wzd natural does not itself possess an 
g8 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
immediate a1zd natural extstence. It still has to be earned and won through 
the endless mediation of discipline acting upon the powers of cognition and 
will. For thzs reason, the state of nature is rather a state of znjustice, of 
·z:iolence, of uncontrolled naturalzmpulses, and of inhuman deeds and emo-
tions. It does zn·volve some restrictzons imposed by soctety and the state, but 
mch restrtctions are imposed only on those brutal emotions and crude im-
pulses already referred to, on reflected inclinations, on the needs which arise 
with the progress of culture, and on arbitrariness and passion. Restrictions of 
this kind are part of that process of mediation whereby the consciousness of 
freedom and the will to realise it in its true (i.e. rational and essential) 
form are mgendered. The concept of freedom is such that justice and ethical 
life are inseparable from it, attd these are universal essences, objects, and aims 
which exist in and for themselves, which can be discovered only through the 
activity of thought (as it distinguishes itself from the realm of the senses and 
det•elops itself in opposition to the latter), and which must in turn be assimi-
lated and i1zcorporated into the (primarily sensuous) will in defiance of its 
own inclinations. To regard freedom in a purely formal and subjective sense, 
abstracted from its absolutely essential objects and aims, is a perennial 
misunderstanding; for it means that impulses, desires, and passions- which 
pertain by their nature exclusively to the particular individual- and arbi-
trariness and ra1tdom inclinations are identified with freedom, and that any 
restrictions imposed upon these are seen as restrictions on freedom itself 
On the contrary, such restrictions are the indispensable conditions of libera-
tion; and society and the state are the only situations in which freedom can be 
realised. 
We must also mention a second poim of view which conflicts with the 
development of justice towards a law-governed state. The patriarchal 
condition is regarded- either in relation to the human species as a whole or 
at least to some branches of it- as that state in which both justice and the 
ethical and emotional aspects of life receive their due, and in which justice 
itself, in conjunction with these other elements, is truly realised in all its 
implications. The patriarchal condition is based on the family relationship, 
the earliest expression of ethical life, to which the second (consciously deve-
loped) institution of the state is subsequently added. The patriarchal relation-
ship is a transitional stage in which the family has already grown into a tribe 
or nation. The family bond has therefore already ceased to be simply a bond 
of love and trust, and has become an association of mutual service. 
We must first define the ethical principle of the family. The family is 
nothing more than a single person; its members have either mutually sur-
rendered their itzdividual personality (and hence also their legal status as 
99 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
individuals and all their other particular interests and selfish inclinations), 
as in the case of the parents, or they do not yet have a personality of their 
own, as in the case of the children, who remain for the time being in that 
state of nature described above. They accordingly live in a union of feeling, 
love, trust, and faith towards one another. Within a love relations/zip, the 
individual is conscious of himself through the consciousness of another; he 
renounces his own self, and in this mutual renunciation, each gains not only 
the other self but also his own self in return, for the latter is united with that 
of the other. The further interests which arise out of the exigencies and external 
concerns of life, as well as the internal development of the family (which takes 
place through the children) lend it a common purpose. The spirit of the 
family- the Penates- constitutes a single substantial being just as much as 
the spirit of the nation within the state, and ethical life consists in both ca.ses 
in a common sentiment, a common conscioumess, and a common volition 
which are not confined to individual personalities and interests. But in the 
family, this unity is essentially one of feeling, and it remains on a purely 
natural plane. Family piety must be treated with the highest respect by the 
state; for it is thanks to it that the state has as its members individuals who 
already have an explicitly ethical existence (which, as individual persons, 
they do not possess), and who bring with them as a sound basis of political life 
the ability to feel that they belong to a larger whole. But the expansion of the 
family into a patriarchal unit transcends the ties of blood relationship and 
the purely natural aspect of the original family, beyond which individuals must 
assume the status of independent personalities. 
To examine the wider implications of the patriarchal condition would also 
lead us to consider the form of theocracy, for the head of the patriarchal 
tribe is also its priest. If the family is still completely at one with society and 
the state, religion has not yet been di·c:orced from it either, the less so since 
family piety is itself a deeply subjective form of emotion. 
Situations of this kind are certainly to be encountered in the world, and 
states also originate in part from the union of families. The family itself 
is an ethical whole, although it is in love as such that the spirit manifests 
itself within it. In the family as well as in the nation, each member knows 
that he is a member of the whole; he does not work selfishly for his own 
ends, but for those of the whole family. But the spirit of the state is 
different from the ethic of the family, the spirit of the Penates. In the 
state, the spirit does not assume the form of love and emotion, but of 
consciousness, volition, and knowledge. The state has the universal of 
ethical life already present within it as a natural world, for its ethics 
appear as an immediate form of ethical existence. But a state requires 
100 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
laws, which means that its ethicality is present not only in an immediate 
form, but also in a universal form as an object of knowledge. It is the 
fact that this universal is known which lends the state its spiritual quality. 
The individual obeys the laws and knows that he owes his freedom to this 
obedience; his relationship to his own will is governed by it. This unity 
is therefore consciously willed. Thus, individuals enjoy a position of 
independence within the state; for they are knowing subjects, in that they 
can distinguish between their own ego and the universal. Such indepen-
dence is not to be found within the family, for it is a natural impulse which 
binds the members of the family together. Only within the state are their 
powers of internal reflection developed; for in the state, a division arises 
between that which confronts the individuals as their object, and the 
position of independence which they occupy in face of it. This is the 
moment of rationality whereby the state exists as an inherently concrete 
entity. 
We must now consider more closely the further determination of the 
national spirit, its internal differentiation, and the essentially necessary 
phenomena in which the spirit appears as self-activating and self-
determining: for these are the qualities which make it what it is. When we 
speak of a nation, we must analyse those powers in which the spirit 
particularises itself. These powers are religion, the constitution, the 
system of justice (including civil right), industry, trade, arts and science, 
and the military world, the world of valour, by which one nation is 
distinguished from the other. The relationship between these distinct 
moments is of particular relevance to our present discussion. All the 
features which stand out in the history of a nation are intimately connected 
with one another. The history of a nation consists solely of that process 
whereby the nation impresses on all the spheres of its activity the spirit's 
concept of its own nature. In other words, the state, religion, art, the 
system of justice, and the relationship of the nation to other nations- all 
of these are aspects in which the spirit's concept of itself is realised, in 
which the spirit contrives to perceive itself and to know itself as an 
existent world, and to have itself as its own object. As such, it is like an 
artist who is impelled to project his own being outside himself and to 
satisfy himself in his own work. The products of the national spirit, as 
already mentioned, include religion, etc.; but they also include the stages 
in its destiny and the deeds which it performs: for these are nothing more 
than the expression of its inherent concept. A nation's religion, its laws, 
its ethical life, the state of its knowledge, its arts, its judiciary, its other 
IOI 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
particular aptitudes and the industry by which it satisfies its needs, its 
entire destiny, and its relations with its neighbours in war and peace- all 
these are extremely closely connected. Montesquieu in particular was a 
firm advocate of this view, which he expressed and elaborated with great 
ingenuity. Its importance is manifold, for it enables us to perceive, for 
example, that Indian religion is incompatible with the spiritual freedom 
of the Europeans, and that political constitutions, which are often widely 
different, are themselves incompatible with an alien religion. On the 
other hand, the proposition that all aspects of national life are related is 
an overworked one. A multitude of sayings to this effect is in common use, 
and they fill whole pages and indeed books without conferring any real 
content upon them. For example, there are nations in which many arts 
have attained a high degree of perfection, as in China and India. But 
although the Chinese invented gunpowder, they did not know how to use 
it, while the Indians produced superb gems of poetry without any cor-
responding advances in art, freedom, and law. If, on the strength of these 
particular achievements, we were to pass the superficial judgement that 
their culture was uniform in every respect, it would at once be evident 
how seriously our initial proposition concerning the relatedness of all 
branches of national life can be misunderstood. What matters most is 
that the real nature of the relationship in question should be defined. But 
this side of the problem has been neglected, as if it were enough to note 
simply that the various moments of national life were generally related; 
there is, however, one principle basic to them all, the spirit of their 
determinate character which permeates every one of them. This principle 
is the nation's self-consciousness, the active force at work in the destinies 
of all nations. The various aspects of a nation's culture are the spirit's 
relationships to itself; it is the spirit which shapes the nations, and we 
can only know these relationships if we recognise the spirit itself. In 
this way, the substance of the national spirit should be seen as a kind of 
Hermes, who leads the souls to the underworld, as the guide and leader of 
all individuals within the nation. This is what is meant by the idea that 
it is important to have the individuals present to us. 
The living reality of the state within its individual members is what we 
have called its ethical life. The state and its laws mzd imtiwtions belong to 
these indh:iduals; they enjoy their rights within it, and they hare their 
external possessions within its nature, its soil, its mountairH, its air, and its 
JPMers, for it is their land, their fatherland. The history of their state, its 
deeds tmd the deeds of their forefathers, are theirs too; this past heritage hus 
in their memory as lurving created what IZOIP exists, and it is to them that it 
102 

REALISATION Of SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
belo11gs. All this is their property, just as they are its property; for it is their 
'l.'ery substance and being. Their ideas are fulfilled within it, and their will 
a[!irms the laws of their fatherland. lflze is asked, any Englishman will say of 
himself and his fellow citizens that it is they who rule the East Indies 
and the oceans of the world, who dominate world trade, who have a 
parliament and trial by jury, etc. It is deeds such as these which give the 
nation its sense of identity. This spiritual totality constitutes a single being, 
the spirit of the natwn. Since it is of a spzritualtzature, and since all its 
determinate attributes are parts of one s1mple entity, it must become fixed as 
one power and one bemg; Athena, for example, has a double significance; 
[she ts the city of Athens itself in its totality, and the goddess as the spirit by 
which this totality is animated]. The individuals belong to this spirit; each 
of them is the son of his tzation, and also, in so far as the state to which he 
belongs is still developing, the son of his age- for no one can remain behind 
the age he lives in, let alone transcend it. This spiritual bezng is his being, 
and he zs its representcttive; he arises out of it and exists within it. It is 
this which constitutes the objective element in all men, and everything 
else is purely formal. 
The national spirit is a determinate spirit, and, as I have just said, it is 
also determined by the stage of historical development it has reached. This 
same spirit is likewise the foundation and content of the other forms of 
spiritual awareness mentioned above. For in its self-consciousness, the 
spirit must be its own object, and its objective reality directly entails the 
emergence of differences which together make up the totality of the various 
spheres of the objective spirit; in the same way, the soul exists only as a 
system of distinct components which, joining together into a simple 
unit, produce the soul itself. The spirit is a single individual; in religion, 
its essential being is represented, revered, and assimilated as the divine being 
or God; in art, it is depicted as an image and intuition;• and in philosophy, 
it is recognised and comprehended by thought. The forms which it assumes, 
because of the original identity of their substance, their content, and their 
object, are indivisibly united with the spirit of the state, so that this parti-
cular form of state can only exist in conjunction with a particular religion, 
and only this or that particular philosophy and art can exist within it. 
The foregoing remarks are particularly important in view of the foolish 
attempts made in our own times to devise and implement constitutions 
independently of religion. The Catholic religion, although it is akin to 
Protestantism in so far as they are both forms of Christianity, does not 
• Anschauung. 
103 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
permit that internal justice and ethicality in politics which the more profound 
principle of Protestantism embodies. The pewliar nature of a religion which 
does not acknowledge the independent and substantial existence ofJustice and 
ethical life does make it necessary for the political constitution to be separated 
from religion itself; but 1[ political principles and institutions are divorced 
from the realm of inwardness, from the innermost shrine of conscience, from 
the still sanctuary of religion, they lack any real centre and remain abstract 
and indeterminate. 
We have, then, distinguished two separate moments: the Idea of 
freedom as the absolute and ultimate end, and the means by which it is 
realised, the subjective aspect of knowledge and volition with all its life, 
movement, and activity. We have recognised that the state is the totality 
of ethical life and the realisation of freedom, and hence the objective unity 
of the two moments in question. For although the two aspects may be 
distinguished for the purposes of discussion, we must not forget that they 
are intimately connected, and that this connection is implicit in each 
of them even if they are considered in isolation. On the one hand, we 
have recognised that the Idea in its determinate form is equivalent to 
freedom which knows and wills its own existence and whose sole end is 
itself: and it is also the simple concept of reason and what we have de-
scribed as the subject, or self-consciousness, or the spirit in its worldly 
existence. If, on the other hand, we consider subjectivity itself, we find 
that subjective knowledge and volition are the same thing as thought. But 
if I know and will something as a thinking being, the object of my will 
is the universal substance of reason which exists in and for itself. It is 
therefore evident that the objective aspect, i.e. the concept, and the 
subjective aspect, are implicitly united. The objective existence of this 
union is the state, which is accordingly the basis and focus of the other 
concrete aspects of national life - of art, justice, ethics, religion, and 
science. The sole end of all spiritual activity is to attain consciousness of 
this union, and hence of freedom. Of all the forms which this conscious 
union assumes, religion occupies the first place. In it, spirit in its worldly 
existence becomes conscious of the absolute spirit, and in this conscious-
ness of the being which exists in and for itself, the human will relinquishes 
its particular interests; it puts them aside in a spirit of devotion in which 
it can no longer occupy itself with particulars. Through sacrifice, man 
expresses his renunciation of his property, his will, and his particular 
emotions. The religious concentration of the mind takes the form of 
feeling, but it also passes over into contemplation: for worship is an 
external manifestation of contemplation. The second form which the 
104 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
spiritual union of the objective and the subjective assumes is art: art 
enters more fully into the world of sensuous reality than does religion, and 
its worthiest occupation is to portray, if not the spirit of God, at least the 
form of the deity, and the divine and the spiritual in general. The aim of 
art is to make the divine immediately perceptible and to present it to the 
imagination and intuition. • But truth is present not only to the powers of 
representationt and feeling, as in religion, and to intuition, as in art, but 
also to the thinking mind: and this brings us to the third form of spiritual 
union, that of philosophy, which, in its own way, is the highest, freest, 
and wisest of the three. 
That content of the state which exists in and for itself is the national 
spirit. The real state is animated by this spirit, but the real state is also 
occupied with determinate interests and particular matters such as wars, 
institutions, and the like. But these are not the only things which man 
must know, for through them, he must also know himself and become 
expressly conscious of his original unity with the universal spirit. The real 
spirit of this consciousness and the focal point of this knowledge is 
religion. It is the primary mode of self-consciousness, the spiritual 
consciousness of the national spirit itself, of the universal spirit which 
exists in and for itself, but in its determinate role as the spirit of a nation; 
it is the consciousness of truth in its purest and most undivided deter-
mination. And everything else which can be defined as true is the concern 
of all men in so far as it has a corresponding principle within religion. To 
this extent, religion, which is the representation of God, constitutes the 
universal horizon and foundation of the nation's existence. It is in terms 
of religion that a nation defines what it considers to be true. The definition 
of an object, or the laws which govern it, contain everything which belongs 
to that object by virtue of its inner essence. This definition is equivalent 
to the nature of the object as a whole, reduced to a simple determination 
of thought by means of which all its individual properties can be said to 
be explained; in short, it is the soul of all particular things. In this way, 
we can deduce all the particular positions of the heavenly bodies from the 
laws which govern their movement. 
Religion is the nation's consciousness of its own being and of the 
highest being. This knowledge is in fact the universal being. A nation 
conceives of God in the same way as it conceives of itself and of its rela-
tionship to God, so that its religion is also its conception of itself. A 
nation which worships nature cannot possess freedom; for only if it sees 
• Anschauung. 
t Vorstel/ung. 
105 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
God as a spirit which transcends nature can it itself become a spirit and 
attain freedom. But when we consider spiritual religions themselves, 
everything depends on whether they know the truth- i.e. the Idea- only 
in its divided form, or in its true unity. In the former case, God is 
regarded as the highest being in an abstract sense, as Lord of heaven and 
earth, who exists above and beyond the world and from whom human 
reality is excluded. In the latter, God is seen as the unity of the universal 
and the particular, for within him, even the particular takes on a positive 
significance in the idea of the Incarnation. Within the divine Idea, the 
unity and universality of spirit and of consciousness in its true existence 
have their being; in other words, the finite and the infinite are united. 
Where the two are separate, the infinity of the understanding is dominant. 
But in the Christian religion, the divine Idea is revealed as the unity of 
divine and human nature. This is the true Idea of religion. It is the object 
of worship, which is simply the means whereby the individual conscious-
ness becomes united with the divinity. The understanding of the modern 
age has made God into an abstraction, into something which lies beyond 
the self-consciousness of man, into a bare iron wall against which man can 
only beat his head in vain. But the ideas of reason are totally different from 
the abstractions of the understanding. 
The object of religion is the truth, the unity of the subjective and the 
objective. But in particular religions, the absolute often becomes separated 
again from the finite, even where the former already goes under the name 
of spirit; in such cases, spirit is no more than an empty name. This applies 
to the Jews, to the Mohammedans, and to the modern religion of the 
understanding, which in this respect has reverted to the Turkish attitude. 
It is also possible to conceive of this abstract universal as a mere work of 
nature of an elemental variety such as fire; but it can also be interpreted 
as a spiritual universal, as in the Jewish religion. If man equates this 
universal with nature, his religion is one of pantheism. But pantheism 
has no content, for God, as a subject, disappears, because the subject no 
longer has any distinct existence. Another possibility is to conceive of 
God as united with the world: this applies to the Indian doctrine of 
incarnation, to the art of the Greeks, and, in a much more refined sense, 
to the Christian religion, in which the unity of divine and human nature 
is made manifest in Christ. The Christian incarnation is not presented in 
an anthropomorphic form unworthy of the deity, but points instead to 
the true Idea of God. 
To show in more detail how the religious consciousness progressively 
acquires a greater understanding of the nature of spirit is the task of the 
zo6 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
philosophy of religion, and we can only touch upon it in passing here. For 
we are equally concerned with the other aspects of the spirit, with the 
remaining forms into which the national spirit is differentiated. The real 
spirit of this consciousness is religion, and art and secular knowledge can 
be regarded as its individual aspects or forms. The content of art is the 
same as that of religion, except that its medium is the intuition of the 
senses. Knowledge Kar' £gox~v, i.e. philosophy, also treats of the same 
object, but through the medium of thought. The other branches of know-
ledge do not possess an absolute content, and so far as the state is con-
cerned, their content is finite and comes under the heading of human 
needs. In religion, therefore, the national principle receives its simplest 
expression, and it is on religion that the nation's entire existence is based. 
In this respect, religion is intimately associated with the principle of 
the state. It is a representation* of the spirit of the state in absolute 
universality, but it is such that the real spirit in which it is represented has, 
in its religious capacity, rid itself of all external contingencies. Conscious 
freedom can only exist when all individual things are recognised as having 
their positive existence within the divine being and when subjectivity is 
related to the divine being itself. This freedom, as an object of knowledge, 
existed among the Greeks, and - in a more highly developed form - in 
the Christian world. From this point of view, it can rightly be said that 
the state is based on religion. The relationship between the two is such 
that, although worldly existence, being of a temporal order, is relative 
and without any inherent justification in itself, it does receive its justifica-
tion in so far as the universal soul or principle which animates it is itself 
absolutely justified; and the latter can only be justified if it is recognised 
as the particular form and existence of the divine being. It is in this sense, 
therefore, that the state is based upon religion. The principle of the state 
must have its own immediate justification, whereas finite interests remain 
purely relative. The universal principle gains its absolute justification 
through being recognised as a moment or determination of the divine 
nature itself. Thus, the principle of the state, the universal on which its 
existence depends, is recognised as an absolute, as a determination of the 
divine being itself. We often hear it said in our own times that the state 
is based on religion, and this usually means simply that pious individuals 
are the more ready and willing to do their duty because obedience towards 
the ruler and towards the law can so easily be linked with religious piety. 
It is admittedly true that such piety, inasmuch as it exalts the universal 
• Vorstellung. 
107 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
above the particular, can turn against the particular, become fanatical, 
and visit fire and destruction on the state and on all its works and institu-
tions. For this reason, it is often maintained, piety should be kept within 
the bounds of sobriety and retain a certain coolness, lest it should rise in 
turmoil against that which it ought to protect and preserve, and sweep it 
away altogether. Such violence docs at least exist as a latent possibility 
within it. 
But even those who have rightly realised that the state is based on 
religion approach the latter as if the state were already present but religion 
itself were not. They believe that, in order to support the state, religion 
should be imported into it by the bushel or bucketful and instilled into 
the minds of men. It is perfectly correct that men should be educated 
towards religion, but not as if it were something which did not yet exist. 
Man is educated towards what is already there, and not to that which docs 
not yet exist. For although we may say that the state is founded on religion 
and has its roots in it, this really means that it has emanated from religion 
and continues to do so, now and always, and that each particular state 
has emerged from its own particular religion. As already remarked, the 
principles of the state must be regarded as valid in and for themselves, 
and this is not possible unless they are recognised as determinations of 
the divine nature. Thus the state and its constitution will correspond to 
the religion which underlies them; for the state really has grown out of 
religion, so that the Athenian or Roman state, for example, was possible 
only in conjunction with the specific form of paganism practised by the 
nations in question, just as a Catholic state will have a different spirit 
and constitution from a Protestant one. 
If, as it would often seem, those noisy appeals and agitations which 
set out to implant religion in the state are really expressions of fear and 
distress in face of the threat that religion has already disappeared from 
the state or is about to disappear completely, the situation is certainly 
grave, and in fact even worse than the cries of distress would imply; 
for such appeals still assume that the evil can be counteracted by propa-
gating and inculcating religion. But religion is not something which can 
be artificially created in this way, for it creates itself at a much more 
profound level. 
The state, then, shares a common principle with religion. Religion is 
not something introduced from outside in order to regulate the workings 
of the state and the conduct of individuals towards it from within; on 
the contrary, it is the original inner principle which determines and acti-
vates itself within the state. Men must indeed be educated to religion, 
I08 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
and religion must be continually fostered, just as science and art have to be 
imparted through instruction. But we must not imagine that the relation-
ship is such that religion has to be added as an afterthought; for, as 
already pointed out, the true sense of this relationship is that the state 
has already grown outofadefinitereligion, that it shares the same principle 
with it, and that its entire political, artistic, and learned life are dependent 
upon it. 
Superficial objections can easily be raised against these arguments. 
But we must not simply pick upon any so-called nation at random if we 
wish to discover whether this relationship is present within it. We must 
look instead to those states which have attained maturity, and to nations 
which have reached the fullest stage of development- but not, for example, 
to pastoral nations, whose constitutions will be the same however much 
their religions may vary. Undeveloped states of this kind have not yet 
reached that degree of advancement at which the principle of the national 
spirit realises itself in a determinate form and can become an object of 
determinate knowledge. When a nation is fully developed, all the depart-
ments and ways of life within it make up a single unity; but in those 
nations whose condition is still primitive or which have not yet attained 
autonomy and independence (or which at least do not owe their constitu-
tion and power to their independent position), these different areas of 
national life may still exist in isolation. Such nations either have not yet 
developed fully within themselves, or they do not enjoy a position of 
independence. Athens had a democratic constitution, but so, for example, 
does Hamburg; the religions of the two states are completely different, 
although their constitutions are the same. These examples would seem to 
weigh against our contention that there is an essential link between certain 
religions and certain constitutions. But the phenomenon in question can 
be explained by the fact that the commercial element is paramount in 
Hamburg; this means that the city is indeed independent, but not in the 
same way as a major European state. Similarly, we must disregard those 
nations which, though possessing the outward capacity, have not yet 
developed it freely to its fullest extent. The North American states began 
from the sea and laid the foundations of commerce; they are now expand-
ing internally, but have not yet reached that degree of development and 
maturity which is the prerogative of the older European states. 
Religion should accordingly be seen as necessarily inseparable from the 
political constitution, from secular government, and from secular life. 
The universal principle is present in the world and must be realised 
109 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
within it, for the v. orld is the object of its knowledge. The deeper the 
spiritual principle descends into itself- i.e. the more refined the religion 
is- the less it is concerned with v.orldly things. This can be seen, for 
example, in the Christian religion. Religion differs from secular wisdom 
in that it enjoins indifference towards honour, valour, and property, 
whereas the latter takes more part in worldly affairs, aspires to honour, 
and praises valour and bravery: for these are worldly \ alues. It is ''·ell 
known that religion can be extremely unfruitful. For this reason, it is 
often said that religion must d'.Vell in the hearts of men as well as in their 
minds, that the whole of their actual lives should be an expression of theit 
religion, and that morality and righteousness should be an essential 
part of them. And v.hile, in the case of individuals, we may have the 
impression that the principle of truth is not always translated into reality, 
we see that it cannot fail to be realised in nations as a whole. For the 
universal principle of truth permeates all the particular areas of national 
life, so that the latter becomes imbued with a practical religious conscious-
ness of truth. Thus, the political constitution, the system of justice, ethical 
life in general, art, and science are all manifestations of truth in particular 
areas of national existence. As we have repeatedly pointed out, the spirit 
must realise its consciousness of itself and become its own object, for it is 
only a spirit in so far as it knows itself and has itself as its object. But in 
order to attain objectivity, it has to become finite; distinctions must emerge 
within it, just as an organism requires a series of separate members. As 
soon as the spirit enters into relations with an object, its differentiation 
is posited; and when it enters into relations with itself, divides itself into 
separate parts, and becomes the single living soul within the various 
members, it is internally conscious of itself and results in itself as the 
expression of its particular parts within its own particular sphere. The 
spirit should not be seen merely as a beginning, however; for it creates 
itself and is its own end and product, so that the end result is identical 
with the beginning. But it gives itself reality through the mediating 
process of self-objectification. Religion as such must give itself essential 
reality; it must create a world for itself so that the spirit may become 
conscious of itself as a real spirit. 
In religion, everything depends on the extent to which the spirit's 
consciousness of its own nature is really contained within it. And if this 
consciousness of the nature of spirit also includes a consciousness of the 
nature of truth, i.e. of the concept of spirit, all the aspects of its existence 
are truly posited and invested with the determination of truth - but this 
can only occur within the true religion. Unless they are based upon 
I 10 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
religion, all other aspects of life will remain barren, for they will not be 
determined by truth. But even then, certain areas will be given over to 
arbitrariness and remain in a state of lawlessness in which the truth is not 
yet realised. The aim of these deliberations is to show how religion is 
the common denominator of all the particular areas of existence. 
It has been said that religion as such often proves unfruitful in the case 
of individuals. The system of national life, on the other hand, must deve-
lop in accordance with religion. Religions will differ profoundly according 
to whether or not their principle is such that everything which comes 
under the category of spirit has a common basis in the religious principle 
itself and has acquired a determinate principle of its own. Unless the 
spirit is grasped in all its true profundity, there will, as already remarked, 
be aspects of national existence which are irrational, a prey to arbitrary 
forces, or in some way lacking in freedom. For example, the religion of the 
Greeks, the principle of the Greek spirit, or the concept which the spirit 
had formed of itself within the Greek nation, was deficient, for the Greeks 
had to resort to oracles both in public affairs (as in the conclusion of 
treaties) and in their private business. This meant that an essential aspect 
of the spirit had fulfilled itself in a false and unfree manner before it had 
been accorded its proper place within the substantial principle of religion. 
And the same applies to Mohammedanism. The fanaticism of its adherents 
impelled them to conquer the world, but it was incapable of producing a 
state with a differentiated organic life and a system of laws framed in the 
interest of freedom. But if, as in Christianity, a religion has the absolute 
concept of the spirit as its principle, the development of its whole world 
must be governed by this concept. The transformation of reality in the 
light of this principle requires prolonged exertions, and could not be 
accomplished immediately; at the beginning of the Christian era, we shall 
in fact discover an enormous discrepancy between the Christian principle 
and the barbarism and lawlessness which at first prevailed among the 
Christian nations. 
Art, both as a supplier of materials for practical requirements and as a 
creator of works of beauty, is much affected by the determinate nature of 
whatever religion it is associated with. There can be no art for the 
understanding- except perhaps that of sublimity, in which form is so 
attenuated that the individual disappears altogether. Where the spirit, as 
opposed to man, is seen as something devoid of form (as with the Jews 
and Mohammedans), no place is left for visual art. What is recognised by 
such religions as the truth is not amenable to visual representation, and it 
is not supposed to be apprehended through the medium of external 
I II 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
forms. In such religions, the imagination is not the appropriate faculty 
for comprehending what the spirit has recognised as truly valid. But art is 
essentially fine art, and its presence is accordingly necessary wherever the 
formative imagination is the supreme faculty and where God is not yet 
recognised as the universal spirit. Thus, it had its necessary function 
among the Greeks, whose vision of the divine universality took the form 
of natural subjectivity. Such a nation has to comprehend and depict the 
universal and the divine by means of direct intuitions of the senses. Art 
is also an essential part of Christianity, for Christianity does not treat the 
divine as an abstraction of the understanding either. But art can no 
longer be the highest vehicle of expression for us as it was for the Greeks, 
who saw it as a means of representing and comprehending the truth; its 
position is now a subordinate one. That form which art can alone confer does 
not possess unconditional truth for us; it is not the form in which the abso-
lute can become manifest. Artistic form is purely finite, and is therefore 
incommensurate with the infinite content which it is meant to represent. 
The learned disciplines come closest of all to religion. Admittedly, 
their content is extremely varied, and is often no more than a collection of 
known facts; but at least the principle of thought and cognition is recog-
nised in all of them. They are useful to all areas of reality; religion, the 
state, and justice are useful too, but truth serves other purposes as well. 
One might even argue that God is useful; but this would be a profane 
and inappropriate manner of speaking, for God's usefulness is the good-
ness with which he grants independence to other things and sacrifices 
himself to them. But the learned disciplines should not really be measured 
by this subordinate criterion of utility, because, like religion, they are an 
end in and for themselves, and are themselves their own ultimate end. 
Since they belong to the province of thought- and this applies particularly 
to disciplines such as philosophy which practise free intellectual enquiry-
they exist within the peculiar medium and soil of the spirit. A nation 
comprehends its concept of itself and of the truth by means of scientific 
thought, i.e. thought whose form corresponds to the concept of the spirit 
itself. If we attain an abstract comprehension of the deepest regions of 
the spirit, we do so by means of thought. The object is in this case 
commensurate with the nature of the spirit. To this extent, the learned 
disciplines are the supreme culmination of a nation's life, for the nation's 
highest impulse is to comprehend itself and to realise in every area of its 
existence the concept it has formed of itself. The most important element 
is neither that of physical need, whatever its nature may be, nor that of 
formal justice, but of thought and intelligence as such. Free, disinterested, 
112 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
dispassionate consciousness is the highest achievement of the nation, 
and the same is true in art. But the content of this consciousness does not 
appear in a tangible medium as in art, for the element in which it expresses 
its concept is that of thought. To cultivate the learned disciplines does a 
nation credit. It is the discipline of philosophy in particular which thinks 
and comprehends that content which appears in religion in the form of 
sensuous and spiritual representation. Christianity expresses it in the 
doctrine that God has brought forth a Son. This is not a conceptual 
relationship but a natural one. What religion grasps as a living relationship 
by means of representational thought is grasped by philosophy by means 
of rational comprehension, so that the content remains the same but 
appears in the latter instance in its highest, worthiest, and most vivid 
form. Philosophy is the highest means by which a nation can attain 
consciousness of the truth and realise the absolute mode of the spirit. 
Thus the position of philosophy in world history is similar to that of 
visual art. Concrete philosophy can only occur among the Greeks and the 
Christians, whereas abstract philosophy can also be found among the 
Orientals, who do not, however, achieve a synthesis between the finite 
and the divine. 
As against this ideal mode of existence, the state has a second dimension 
in the content of its external appearance. Whatever its particular nature 
may be, this content is likewise illuminated by the universal. 
The first material of this class is everything that pertains to the ethics 
and customs of nations. This includes the natural phase of ethical life 
or the family relationship, which is determined by the nature of the 
state- for example, by the forms which marriage assumes, such as 
polygamy, polyandry, or monogamy. In Christian states, the only recog-
nised form of marriage is that of one man with one woman, since this is 
the only form in which both partners can receive their full rights. It also 
includes the relationship between children and their parents, which may 
be one of slavery or which may allow the children to be free owners of 
property. The second mode of ethical life is that which relates to the 
conduct of individuals towards one another, even down to the level of 
ordinary politeness. One need only think of such differences in etiquette 
as that between Europeans and Asiatics in their behaviour towards 
superiors. These customs are derived from substantial relationships, 
and they express what men think about them. They have a symbolic 
value, although they also contain much that is purely contingent; for 
not everything in them is equally significant. 
Another item which comes under the category of external appearance is 
113 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
the practical comportment of men in relation to nature and to the way 
in which they satisfy their finite needs. Their industry comes under 
this heading, for it reveals the way in which men behave in their depen-
dence upon and relationship to nature, and how they satisfy their needs 
in this direction in order to obtain various kinds of enjoyment. The 
natural impulse which this involves is part of man's particular qualities; 
the essential aspect as such, i.e. religion and the constitution of the state, 
is therefore only remotely connected with this particular sphere. But the 
universal principle of the spirit is also essentially present in the nation's 
attitude towards industry, trade, and commerce. The purpose of such acti-
vities is that the individual should look after himself and apply his dili-
gence, understanding, energy, and skill to satisfying his needs -which can, 
incidentally, be multiplied and refined upon ad infinitum. Among these 
activities, that of agriculture is necessarily dependent upon nature. 
What is properly called industry takes up raw material in order to process 
it, and derives its subsistence from what it can produce by dint of 
intelligence, reflection, and application. All this belongs to the particular 
sphere, to which there are no inherent limits, because the accumulation 
of wealth and the refinement of techniques can continue indefinitely. But 
there is a great difference between a situation in which industry is restricted 
or tied to social castes so that it cannot expand, and one in which the 
individual is completely unrestricted and can extend the sphere of his 
activity without limit. The latter situation presupposes a completely 
different national spirit- and hence also a completely different religion 
and constitution- from that in which diligence, though equally necessary, 
is placed within fixed and final limits. 
In this same category we must also include the weapons which men 
use against animals and against each other, as well as the ships in which 
they sail. For example, ancient legend has it that iron was first discovered 
by the Asiatic peoples. The invention of gunpowder should not be regarded 
as fortuitous, however, for it could only have been discovered and applied 
at a specific time and in a specific culture. But a whole host of such 
commodities is independent of the specific character of the national 
spirit- for example luxuries, which can appear in much the same form 
at any time and in any culture. 
The third item in this class is that of private right, i.e. the rights of 
individuals in relation to those finite needs which have already been 
mentioned. This raises the question of personal freedom and its develop-
ment, and hence of whether slavery is prohibited and property freely 
owned or not. Full personal freedom and complete freedom of ownership 
Il4 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
can only occur in states which are governed by a determinate principle. 
For the principle of justice is directly connected with the universal 
principle itself. The universal principle of the Christian religion, for 
example, is, firstly, that there is one spirit, which is the truth, and 
secondly, that individuals have infinite worth and should be received in 
grace into absolute spirituality. A consequence of this is that the individual 
personality is recognised as infinite, as absolutely self-conscious and free. 
The Oriental religions do not ackno\\ ledge the principle that the human 
being, as a human being, has infinite "orth. It is therefore only under 
Christianity that men become personally free, i.e. capable of owning 
property in freedom. 
Finally, a word must be said about the science of finite things. 
Mathematics, natural history, and physics also demand a certain level of 
culture. For only when the individual has gained inner freedom does he 
accord the object an existence of its own and react to it not simply in 
terms of desire but in a theoretical manner. In this case too, the ancient 
and modern worlds are different, for the former did not have this kind of 
interest in nature and its laws. Such an interest requires a higher and 
more concrete assurance, a strength of intellect which is capable of 
looking at the objects in their finite aspects. The intellect can only achieve 
this abstraction when it has reached a higher degree of self-consciousness. 
These, then, are the principal areas into which the spirit becomes 
differentiated as it realises itself to form a state. In a fully developed state 
in which these various aspects have a distinct existence and in which 
each has received its due, they must correspond to different social classes. 
On the one hand, the individual can participate in all of these aspects, 
and on the other, he is obliged to do so, at least indirectly, as in the case of 
religion, justice, the constitution, and science. But these areas also 
correspond to particular social classes to which different groups of 
individuals belong, and it is these classes which determine the indivi-
dual's profession. For the differences which are inherent in the various 
aspects in question must crystallise into particular spheres, each with 
its own peculiar preoccupations. It is this which determines the difference 
between the social classes as found within an organised state. For the 
state is an organic whole, and these subdivisions are just as necessary to 
it as they would be within an actual organism. The state is an organic 
whole, but of an ethical nature. Freedom is not envious; it allows its 
various aspects to assume different forms, while the universal remains 
strong enough to preserve the unity between itself and its particular 
determinations. 
115 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
d. [Its reality] 
The pomts hitherto discussed ha·re concerned the abstract moments which 
occur within the concept of the state. But it is the constitution which puts 
this concept mto execution and adopts measures to ensure that all that 
happem u>ithm the state is in accord with its nature. [Some may consider it] 
superfluous for a nation to lllll"e a comtitution, [and argue that the form 
of the state] rs se/f-el'ident. But tim smzply means that the absence of a 
constitution is itself regarded as a kind of constitution, just as a sphere is 
regarded as a shape. 
If the principle of the indit•idual wrllzs taken as the sole determination of 
political freedom, and it is accepted that all individuals should consent to 
everything that is done by and for the state, there is, strictly speaking, no 
constitutio1z. Tlze only znstztutzon required would be a central body with no 
will of its own, which took note of what appeared to be the needs of the state 
and made its opinion known; and tlzen a mechanism would hac•e to be set up 
to call the indi·viduals together, to register their votes, and to perform the 
arithmetical operation of counting and comparing the number of votes in 
fac•our of the different propositions, at which poi1Zt the decision would already 
have been takm. 
The state itself is an abstraction which has its purely universal reality in 
the citizens who belong to it; but it does have reality, and its purely uni·versal 
existence must take oil a determinate form in the will and activity of indi-
vidua[s.38 The need arises for some kind of government and political adminis-
tration; it becomes necessary to single out and separate from the rest those who 
are heavily occupied with political affairs, who take political decisions and 
determine how they are to be put into practice, and who issue instructions to 
those citizens wlzo have to implement them. For e:r:ample, even if it is the 
nation as a whole which decides upon war in a democratic state, a general 
still has to be placed at the head of the army in order to conduct the war. 
The state as an abstraction only acquires life and reality through the con-
stitution; but as it does so, a difference arises between those who command 
and those who obey, those who rule and those who are ruled. Yet obedience 
seems incompatible with freedom, and those who command mould seem to be 
dozng the opposite of what is required by39 the very basis of the state, the 
concept of freedom. But if, as is often maintained, the distinction between 
commanding and obqmg is 11ecessary because the state could not function 
without it- and this would indeed appear to be no more than a form of 
compulsion, 1111 externaluecemty mluch actual(y conflicts n>zth freedom i11 
the ah.rtr(!ct snHe- the comtitution slrould be so organised that the minzmum 
II6 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
of obedience is required of the czttzens and the minimum of arbitrarznm is 
permitted to those who issue the commands; and the content of whatet:er 
makes these commands necessary should in the main be determined and re-
solved upon by the people, by the will of many or all of the individual 
citizens- although the state as a reality, as an individual uuity, must at the 
same time retain its vigour and strength. 
The first determination of all withi11 the state is the distinction between 
rulers and ruled, cmd constitutions in general ha:ve rightly been di·vided into 
monarcky, aristocrac:.y, and democracy. But we should also note, firstly, that 
monarchy must be further divided into despotism and monarchy proper; 
secondly, that i1z all classifications derived from the concept of the state, 
only the basic determination of each category is specified, which does not 
imply that the latter is necessarily exhausted in its concrete application [by] 
an)' single form, variet)', or kmd; and thirdly, the most important point of 
all is that [the concept] admits of a large number of particular modifications, 
not onl.J' within the general types of constitution mentioned above, but also 
in tlze shape of combinations of several of these essentially distinct types, 
which are consequently amorphous, unstable, a11d internally inconsistent 
structures. [Thus, the first determination within the state is the distinction 
between rulers and ruled,] together with the institutions which follow from 
it, and the sense and aim which underlies them. This collision raises the ques-
tioll of what is the best constitution, that is, by what arrangement, 
organisation, or mechanism of political power the aim of the state can most 
surely be fulfilled. 
This aim can admittedly be interpreted in various ways-for example, as 
the peaceful enjoyment of civic life, or as universal happiness. It is alms of 
this kind which have given rise to the so-called ideal constitutions, 
and pttrticularly to ideal schemes of princely education (cf Fenelon)40 or of 
the education of rulers in general, i.e. of the aristocracy (cf Plato). For, 
in all such cases, the main emphasis falls on the character of those who govern 
the state, and the ideal constitutions tell us nothing about the organic institu-
tions of the state itself The question of what is the best constitution is often 
treated as if not only the theory itself were the business of free subjective 
deliberation, but as if the actual implementation of a constitution recognised 
as the best (or at least as mperior to others) would automatically follow from 
a purely theoretical decision of this kind - as if the variety of constitution 
adopted were a matter of completely free choice, determined solely by 
reflection. It was in this thoroughly nazve spirit that the noblemen of Persia 
(although not the Persian nation as a whole), ha1·i11g mccessfully conspired to 
orerthrow the pseudo-Smerdis and the Magi, deliberated on the kind of 
117 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
constitution they should introduce in Persia in the light of the fact that no 
member of the rulingfamily• was still altve; and Herodotus gives an equally 
naive accou11t of these deltberations. 
Nowadays, people no longer imagine that the constitution of a country 
and nation zs so completely a matter of free choice. The fundamental but still 
abstractly formul,aed dejimt1on of freedom has led to the verJ' widespread 
theory that the republic ts the only just and authentic constitution. There 
have eren been many, who, whtle holdmg high political office under monarchic 
comtitutions (e.g. Lafayette),41 hare made no attempt to oppose such 
opzntons or have actually adopted them themselves; but they have neverthe-
less perceived that such a constitution, though it may well be the best, cannot 
alwa)'S be realised, and that, men being what they are, we must content 
ourselves with a lesser degree of freedom. Under the given circumstances, and 
with the moral condition of the people as it is, the monarchic constitution 
would therefore seem the most advantageous one. This same way of thinking 
also makes the need for a partzcular constitution dependent upon the prevailing 
situation as something purely external and contingent. Conceptions of this 
kind are based on the distinction which the rejlecti1•e understanding makes 
between the concept and its realzty, in that it jitstens upon a purely abstract 
and hence unauthenttc concept and Jails to grasp the Idea itself; or, what 
amounts to the same thing in substance, if not in form, it fails to attain a 
concrete perceptiont of the nation and state. We have already noticed how 
the comtitution of a nation forms a single substance and a single spirit 
mith its religion, art, and philosopky - or at least with the attitudes and 
thoughts which go along rvzth its culture in general- not to mention the 
further external zn.fiuences of zts climate, its neighbours, and its position in 
the world at large. Every state is an individual totality, from which it is 
impossible to select and isolate any particular aspect, however important the 
latter may be (as in the case of the constitution), and to consider zt solely in 
relation to itself For not only is the constitution intimately associated with 
and dependmt upon those other spiritual powers, but the determinate form 
of its whole spiritual indn•idualit)', including all the powers it embodies, is 
on~}' 011e moment in the hzstory of the whole, occupyi11g its predetermined 
place wzthin its derelopmmt; and it is this which gi·ves the constitution tts 
mpreme sanctio11 aud necessit)'. 
But it should not be forgotten that, when we are dealing with consti-
tutions, we must not rest content with abstract distinctions such as the 
" Hegel uses the proper name Pischdadier (plural) for the TO) al house of Persia. If an 
English equivalent of this name exists, I ha' e been unahle to trace it. 
t Amchauu11g. 
u8 

RE.\I.ISATION OF SPIRIT ll'i IIISTORY 
well known classification, already referred to, of democracy, aristocracy, 
and monarchy. Besides, no one will deny that it is hard to find an un-
mixed democracy from which the aristocratic principle is completely 
absent. Furthermore, monarchy is a constitution which comprehends and 
contains the other two moments within it. But when we come to consider 
constitutions, i.e. the essential political condition of nations, totally 
different considerations come into play. 
The essential determination of the constitution amidst all the various 
aspects of political life can be expressed in the following proposition: the 
best state is that in which the greatest degree of freedom prevails. But 
this raises the question of what constitutes the reality of freedom. Free-
dom is usually thought of as a state in which the subjective will of all 
individuals is involved in the most important affairs of the state. In this 
case, the subjective will is regarded as the ultimate and decisive factor. 
But the nature of the state is the unity of the objective and the universal 
will, and the subjective will is raised to the point at which it renounces its 
particularity. The common conception of the state tends to make a 
division between the government on the one hand and the people on the 
other, so that the former is equated with the concentrated activity of the 
universal and the latter with the many subjective wills of the individual 
citizens. Thus, the government and people are treated as separate entities. 
It is thought that a good constitution is one in which the two elements- the 
government in its universal function and the people in its subjective 
will - are secured against one another; the two are thus expected to 
impose mutual restraints on one another. This form of constitution does 
indeed have its place in history; but the opposition it contains is overcome• 
in the concept of the state. There is something perverse about such 
contrasts between the people and the government, a malicious artifice 
designed to imply that the people, divorced from the government, them-
selves constitute the whole. So long as such ideas are countenanced, it 
cannot be said that the state - which is the unity of the universal and the 
particular will- is really present. On the contrary, the state still has to be 
created. The rational concept of the state has left such abstract antitheses 
behind it; and those who treat them as if they were necessary know 
nothing of the nature of the state. For the state has this unity as its basis, 
and it is this which constitutes its being and its substance. 
But this does not mean that its substance is fully developed within 
itself For as such, it is a system of organs, of distinct spheres, of parti-
• aufgehoben. 
119 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
cular universalities which are intrinsically independent but whose func-
tion is to create the whole and thereby to annul* their own independence. 
In the organic world, there can be no question of any such opposition 
between particular independent functions; in animal life, for example, 
the universal property of life is present in every smallest particle, and 
when it is removed, only inorganic matter remains. The constitutions of 
states, however, vary according to the form which the totality assumes. 
The state is rationality made manifest in the world, and the various 
constitutions accordingly succeed one another, each with its distinct 
principle; and it invariably happens that the earlier formsaresupersededt 
by those which follow them. 
The state is the spiritual Idea externalised in the human will and its 
freedom. All historical change is therefore essentially dependent upon 
the state, and the successive moments of the Idea appear within it as 
distinct constitutional principles. The constitutions under which the 
world-historical nations have blossomed are peculiar to them, and should 
not therefore be seen as universally applicable. Their differences do not 
simply consist in the particular way in which they have elaborated and 
developed a common basis, but in the distinct nature of the principles 
which underlie them. No lessons can therefore be drawn from history for 
the framing of constitutions in the present. For the latest constitutional 
principle, the principle of our own times, is not to be found in the 
constitutions of the world-historical nations of the past. In knowledge and 
art, however, it is altogether different. For, in their case, the earlier prin-
ciples are the absolute foundation of all that follows; for example, the 
philosophy of antiquity is so fundamental to modern philosophy that it is 
necessarily contained within the latter and constitutes its entire basis. 
The relation here is one of unbroken development within one and the 
same edifice, whose foundation stone, walls, and roof have always re-
mained the same. In art, it might even be said that the art of the Greeks, 
in its original form, remains the supreme model. But with political 
constitutions, it is quite different; for ancient and modern constitutions 
have no essential principle in common. Abstract determinations and 
doctrines of just government to the effect that wisdom and virtue should 
rule supreme are of course common to both. But it is quite mistaken to 
look to the Greeks, Romans, or Orientals for models of how constitutions 
ought to be organised in our own times. The Orient affords us fine 
spectacles of the patriarchal system, of paternal government, and of 
• aufzuheben. 
t aufgehoben. 
120 

REALISATION 01' SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
popular devotion, and the Greeks and Romans furnish us with accounts of 
popular freedom. For in Greece and Rome the concept of a free constitu-
tion was so construed that all citizens were expected to participate in 
discussions and decisions concerning the affairs and laws of the state. 
In our own times, this still remains the general opinion, but with the 
qualification that, since our states are so large and the number of citizens 
so vast, the latter should not give their assent directly to decisions on 
matters of public concern, but through the indirect method of represen-
tation; in short, for the purposes of legislation in general, the people 
should be represented by deputies. The so-called representative constitu-
tion is the form with which we associate the idea of a free constitution, 
so much so that this has become a hardened prejudice. But the most 
important point is that freedom, if it is determined by the concept itself, 
does not have as its principle the subjective will and its arbitrary inclina-
tions, but the insights of the universal will; and the system of freedom 
consists in the free development of its various moments. The subjective 
will is a purely formal determination which does not tell us what it is 
that is willed. The rational will alone is the universal principle which 
determines and develops itself independently and unfolds its successive 
moments as organic members. But the last phase of all is that of rational 
freedom, a Gothic edifice whose substance is the universal. Of such 
Gothic cathedral building the Ancients knew nothing, for it is an achieve-
ment of the Christian era. An infinite dichotomy has arisen, and it is only 
resolved when individuals recognise that their freedom, independence, and 
essential being reside in their unity with the underlying substance, and 
when the latter coincides with the form of their activity - for everything 
depends on this last phase in the development of the substance. This is the 
higher sense in which nations and their constitutions differ from one 
another. 
Seen in the light of this higher principle, what is usually taken to be 
the most important factor in a constitution - i.e. whether the individual 
citizens have given their subjective assent to it or not- appears as a 
distinction of subordinate significance. It must first be established 
whether the individuals are regarded as persons in their own right, and 
whether the substance is present as spirit, as that essential being of which 
the individuals are conscious. Among the Chinese, for example, no form 
of individual assent whatsoever is required; if they were taken to task for 
this as a deficiency in their constitution, they would consider it just as 
absurd as if children of all ages were asked to participate in a family 
council. The Chinese are not yet conscious of their own nature as free 
121 

SECOND DRAFT (I 830) 
subjectivity; they do not yet realise that the essential property of ethicality 
and justice is contained within the latter, which is not yet present to them 
as their end, their product, and their object. With the Turks, on the other 
hand, we see the subjective will expressing itself in a completely uncon-
trolled manner. The Janissarics, for example, have their independent will 
and exercise it; it is a savage will which is determined in part by religion 
but at the same time unrestrained in its desires. It is wrongly imagined 
that their personal will is therefore free, although it is not in fact inte-
grated into the rational and concrete will. It knows nothing of the latter, 
which is neither its object, its interest, nor its motivating principle, and 
when it does impinge on a universal, this universal is not something 
organic, but merely an abstraction of a purely fanatical nature; it is 
destructive of all organisation, ethical existence, and justice of every 
kind. In European states, the position is different again, for here, on the 
whole, discernment is universal. Systematic education and the pursuit 
of universal ends and principles are the property of everyone; they are 
shared by the citizens with the government, and by the government with 
the citizens (in so far as all branches of the administration arc iftcludcd 
within the concept). In such circumstances, the consent of each particular 
individual is again more or less superfluous, for individuals in general 
cannot contribute any particular wisdom to the common cause, but have 
in fact less to offer than those who are expressly concerned with political 
matters. Nor would their particular interests bring favourable conse-
quences with them either; for the decisive factor is that there is a common 
weal to which all individual interests must yield. If freedom is defined as 
a state to which all individuals must give their assent, it is easily seen that 
no law can be upheld unless everyone agrees to it. This in turn gives rise 
to the principle that the minority must yield to the majority, so that the 
majority in fact makes the decisions. But as J. J. Rousseau has already 
observed, this can no longer be described as freedom, for the will of the 
minority is no longer respected. In the Polish diet, every individual had 
to give his assent to all decisions, and it was this very freedom which 
led to the downfall of the state. Besides, it is a dangerous and mistaken 
assumption that the people alone possess reason and discernment and 
know what is right and proper; for every popular faction can set itself 
up as representing the people as a whole. What constitutes the state is 
in fact the business of those who possess education and knowledge, and 
not that of the people at large. 
The differences between political constitutions concern the form in 
which the totality of political life is manifested. The first form is that in 
122 

REALISATION OF SPIRIT IN HISTORY 
which this totality is not yet clearly defined and in which its various 
particular spheres have not yet attained an independent existence; the 
second is that in which these particular spheres- and hence the individual 
citizens - have gained a greater degree of freedom; and the third and last 
form is that in which they have attained independence and at the same 
time function in such a way as to create the universal. We can see how 
every country and the history of the world as a whole go through each of 
these phases in turn. At first, we find in every state a kind of patriarchal 
kingdom, either peacefully or belligerently inclined. During this first 
phase in its evolution, the state is imperious and ruled by instinct. But 
even obedience and force and fear of a ruler involve a relation of the will. 
At the next stage, the particular becomes dominant; aristocrats, distinct 
spheres of interest, democrats, and individuals hold sway. From among 
these individuals, a fortuitous aristocracy is precipitated, and this in tum 
gives way to a new kingdom or monarchy. The final stage is accordingly 
that at which the particular is subordinated to a power whose nature is 
necessarily such that the particular spheres can exist independently out-
side it- in other words, a monarchy. We must therefore distinguish 
between primary and secondary varieties of monarchy. This, then, is the 
abstract but necessary process whereby states develop towards true 
independence; and in every case, we encounter a definite constitution 
which is not a matter of free choice but invariably accords\\ ith the national 
spirit at a given stage of its development. 
All constitutions will depend on the internal development of the 
rational (i.e. political) condition of the state in question, on the liberation 
of the successive moments within the concept. The particular powers 
within the state become differentiated and complete within themselves, 
but at the same time they freely collaborate towards the realisation of a 
single purpose by which they are all sustained : in short, they form an 
organic whole. Thus, the nature of the state is rational freedom \\hich 
knows itself objectively and exists for itself. For freedom only attains an 
objective existence when its moments are present not just ideally but in 
their own peculiar mode of reality, and when they become absolutely 
effective in relation to reality itself; and as a result, the totality, the soul, 
the individual unity, is created. 
It must also be remembered, however, that the state has relationships 
with other states, although it is itself independent and self-sufficient. 
The nation's honour in fact consists in its position of independence. But 
to define these factors more precisely would call for a long explanation 
which can well be dispensed with here. It is, however, important that 
123 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
we should not confuse the principles which govern relations bet\\ een 
states with the principle which governs their position within the history 
of the world. For in world history, the sole authority is the right of the 
absolute spirit, and the only relations which matter are those in which 
a higher spiritual principle asserts itself. But this is a right to which no 
state can appeal. Individual states recognise one another as independent 
individuals, and the independence of each is only respected in so far as 
the independence of the others is also recognised. Such relationships can 
be defined in treaties, in which case legal considerations are at least 
supposed to decide the issue. But in world history, a higher right comes 
into play. In fact, this is even recognised in reality in those situatimi.s 
where civilised nations come into contact with barbarian hordes. And in 
wars of religion, one of the parties involved will invariably claim to be 
defending a sacred principle in relation to which the rights of other 
nations are secondary and of lesser validity. This was true of the Moham-
medans in former times, and in theory even today. The Christians like-
wise, in making war on heathen nations 'vith a vie'' to converting them, 
have claimed that their religion invests them with superior rights. In 
situations such as these, it is not a question of abstract rights and wrongs; 
but such situations can only arise where a law-governed state has not 
yet come into force. And whatever obtains under these conditions cannot 
be applied to a situation in which states enjoy true independence in their 
reciprocal relations. Conversely, whatever obtains within a state of right 
cannot be applied to a sit~ation which cannot yet be described as law-
governed. We are therefore nut concerned here with those political 
principles which come under the heading of international law. Instead, we 
shall look to the right of the world spirit as against that of individual 
states. 
c 
The course of world history 
a. [The prmciple of deulopment] 
J!tstorical change in the abstract semc has long been znterpreted in general 
terms as embod;•mg some kmd of progress towards a better and more perfect 
condition. Changes zn the natural world, 110 matter han' great their varzety, 
exhib1t only an etemally recurring CJ'C!e; for zn nature there IS nothing new 
under the sun, and in th1s respect 1ts manifold pla.Y of forms produces an 
ejj'e£1 of boredom. On~y m tlzose changes IPiuch take place m the spirttual 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
sphere does anything new emerge. This peculiarity of spiritual phenomma 
has given rise to the idea that the destiny of man zs quite different from that 
of merely natural objects. For in the latter we alwa)'S encounter one a11d the 
same determznatzon and a consta11tly stable character to which all change can 
be reduced, and from which all change follows as a secondary consequence; 
whereas man displays a real capacity for change, and, as already remarked, 
for progress towards a better and more perfect condition- in short, he possesses 
an impulse of perfectibility. This prmciple, which reduces change itself 
to a law-governed process, has met with dzsfavour both from religzom-for 
example Catholicism - and from states, which claim a genuine right to a 
fixed (or at least stable) position. Although it is generally conceded that 
worldly things, including the state, are subject to cha11ge, an exceptzon is 
made in the case of religion- as the religion of truth- on the one hand; and on 
the other, it is always possible to ascribe changes, revolutions, and the 
destruction of legitimate institutions to accidents or errors of judgement, but 
above all to the levity, depravity, and evil passzom of man. In fact, perfecti-
bility is almost as indeterminate a concept as that of change in general; it zs 
without aim or purpose, and the better and more perfect condition to whzch 
it supposedly tends is of a completely indefinite nature. 
It is important that we should recognise that the development of the 
spirit is a form of progress, for although this idea is widespread enough, 
it is just as frequently attacked (as we have already noticed). For it may 
well appear incompatible with the idea of peaceful stability and of a 
permanent constitution and legislation. Stability is a value which must 
certainly be accorded the highest respect, and all activity ought to contri-
bute to its preservation. The idea of progress is unsatisfactory simply 
because it is usually formulated in such a way as to suggest that man is 
perfectible, i.e. that it is possible and even necessary for him to become 
increasingly perfect. From this point of view, stability does not appear 
as the highest value; on the contrary, the highest value is that of change 
itself. For the sole consideration here is that of ever increasing perfection, 
which is so indefinite that we are left only with the idea of change in 
general; we are offered no criterion whereby change can be measured, nor 
any means of assessing how far the present state of affairs is in keeping 
with right and with the universal substance. We have no principle which 
can help us to exclude irrelevant factors, and no goal or definite end is in 
sight; and the only definite property which remains is that of change in 
general. Lessing's idea of the education of the human race is an ingenious 
one, but it is only remotely connected with what we are discussing here. 
For such doctrines invariably present progress in quantitative terms- as 

SECOND DRAFT (I 830) 
a constant gro\\ th of knowledge, as increasing refinement of culture, and 
other such comparatives; one can go on in this manner at great length 
without ever reaching any definite conclusions or making any qualitatiH: 
pronouncements. The object in hand, the qualitative element, is given 
from the start, but no indication is given of the goal which is supposed to 
be ultimately reached; the goal itself remains completely indefinite. If, 
however, we wish to discuss progress in definite terms, we must realise 
that the idea of quantitative change is devoid of intellectual content. 
We must know the goal which is supposed to be ultimately attained, 
because the activity of the spirit is such that its productions and changes 
must be presented and recognised as variations in quality. 
But the prmciple of development has further implications,for it contains 
an mner determination, a potentially present condttion which has still 
to be realised. This formal determination is an essential one; the spirit, whose 
theatre, province, and sphere of rea!isatzon ts the history of the world, is 
not something wluch drifts aimlessly amidst the superficial play of contingeut 
happenings, but ism itself the absolute determining factor; in its own P£culiar 
destiny, tt zs completely proof against contingencies, which it utilises and 
controls for its own purposes. But organic entities zn the natural world are 
also capable of development. Their existence is not just an immediate one 
which can be altered only by external influences; 011 the contrary, it has its 
source within itself, zn an unchanging inner principle, a simple essence whose 
own existence as a germ is at first equally simple, but which subsequently 
develops distinct parts. These then enter into relations with other objects and 
consequently undergo a -continuous process of change- although this process 
itself leads to the ~·ery opposzte of change, in that it takes on the new functzon 
of conserving the orgamc principle and the forms it creates. Thus the individual 
organism produces itself: it makes itself actually what it already was 
potentially; and the spirit too IS only what zt makes itself,Jor it likewzse makes 
itself actually what it already was potentially. But the development of natural 
organisms takes place in an immediate, unopposed, and unhindered fashion, 
for nothing can intrude between the concept and its realisation, between the 
inherently determzned nature of the germ and the actual existence which 
corresponds to it. But It is otherwise zn the world of the spirit. The process 
whereby tts mner determination zs translated into reality is medzated by 
consciousness and will. The latter are themseh,es immersed at first in their 
immediate natural life; their primary object and aim is to follow their 
natural determination as such, which, since zt is the spirit which animates it, 
is42 nevertheless endowed with infinite claims, power, and richness. Thus, the 
spirit is divided against itself; it has to overcome ztself as a truly hostile 
126 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
obstacle to the realisation of its end. That development which, m the natural 
world, is a peaceful process of growth -for it retains its identity and remains 
self-contained in its expression - is in the spiritual world at once a hard and 
unending conflict with itself The wzll of the spirit is to fulfil tts own concept; 
but at the same time, it obscures its own vision of the concept, and is proud and 
full of satisfaction in this state of self-alimation. 
Derelopment, therefore, is not just a harmless and peaceful process of 
growth like that of organic life, but a hard and obstinate struggle with ztself 
Besides, it contazns not just the purely formal aspect of development itself, 
but zm:oh:es the realisation of an end whose content is determinate. And we 
hare made it clear from the outset what this end is: it is the spirit zn its 
essentzal uature, i.e. as the concept of freedom. This zs the fundamental 
object, so that the guiding principle of development mdows the development 
itself with meaning and significance; thus, in Roman history, Rome is the 
object which guides our consideration of the events, and, conversely, the 
events have their source in this object alone, so that their entire significance 
and import are derived from it. In the history of the world, there have been 
several great periods of development which have come to an end without any 
apparent continu:lfion; whereupon,43 zn fact, the whole enormous gains of 
past culture have been destroyed, wzth the unfortunate result that everything 
had to start agaznfrom the begznning, in the hope of regaining- perhaps with 
some help from fragments salvaged from the lost treasures of the past and 
wzth an incalculable new expenditure of time and energy, crimes and suffer-
ings- one of the promzces of past culture which had originally been conquered 
long ago. But there have also been unbroken processes of development, 
structures and ~ystems of culture existing in their own peculiar elements, rich 
in quality and radiating in er·ery directio11. The formal principle of develop-
ment m general Ctm ne1ther assign to one product superzority over another, nor 
help us to comprehend the purpose which underlies the destruction of earlier 
penods of deulopment; i1zstead, zt must regard such happenings- or more 
preme()', tlze retrogreSSions they embod_y- as extemal contzngmcies, and it 
can only ec:u/uate the gains by indeterminate cnterltl (which, since de·velop-
ment 1.1 the u/tm1ate factor, are relati·L'e rather than absolute ends). 
The concept of the spirit is such that historical development must take 
place in the temporal world. But time entails the property of negativity. 
A given entity or event has a p(Jsitive existence for us, but its opposite is 
equally possible, and this relation to non-existence is a function of time; 
it is a relation which exists not only for thought, but also for our immediate 
perception. Time, then, is the completely abstract dimension ofthe sensory 
world. If non-existence docs not encroach upon something, we describe 
127 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
it as permanent. If we compare spiritual changes with those of nature, we 
observe that, in the natural world, individual things are subject to change, 
whereas the species themselves are enduring. Thus a planet, for example, 
leaves each particular position it occupies, although its orbit as a whole is 
constant. And the same is true of animal species. For change is a cyclic 
process, a repetition of identical phases. Thus, everything moves in 
cycles, and it is only within these, in the world of particular things, that 
change takes place. In nature, the life which arises from death is itself 
only another instance of particular life; and if the species is taken as the 
substantial element behind this change, the destruction of particular things 
will appear as a relapse on the part of the species into particularity. 
Consequently, the survival of the species consists purely in a uniform 
repetition of one and the same mode of existence. But with spiritual forms, 
it is otherwise; for in this case, change occurs not just on the surface but 
within the concept, and it is the concept itself which is modified. In the 
natural world, the species does not progress, but in the world of the spirit, 
each change is a form of progress. Admittedly, the hierarchy o' natural 
forms also constitutes a gradual sequence, extending from light at the 
one extreme to man at the other, so that each successive step is a modi-
fication of the preceding one, a higher principle which arises out of the 
dissolution* and destruction of its predecessor. But in nature, this sequence 
is fragmented, and all its individual elements coexist simultaneously; 
the transitions between them are only apparent to the thinking mind, 
which comprehends their overall relationship. Nature cannot comprehend 
itself, so that the negation of the forms it creates does not exist for it. 
But in the case of spiritual phenomena, higher forms are produced through 
the transformation of earlier and less advanced ones. The latter accord-
ingly cease to exist; and the fact that each new form is the transfiguration 
of its predecessor explains why spiritual phenomena occur within the 
medium of time. Thus, world history as a whole is the expression of the 
spirit in time, just as nature is the expression of the Idea in space. 
But in one respect, the nations of history, which are spiritual forms, 
arc also natural entities. Accordingly, the various patterns they assume 
appear to coexist indifferently in space, i.e. to exist perennially. For if 
we cast our eyes around the world, we can discern three main principles 
in the older continents: the Far Eastern (i.e. Mongolian, Chinese, or 
Indian) principle, which is also the first to appear in history; the Moham-
medan world, in which the principle of the abstract spirit, of monotheism, 
" Aufhehrn. 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
is already present, although it is coupled with unrestrained arbitrariness; 
and the Christian, Western European world, in which the highest 
principle of all, the spirit's recognition of itself and its own profundity, 
is realised. This universal series has been described here as existing 
perennially; but in world history we encounter it as a sequence of succes-
sive stages. For although these great spiritual principles coexist perennially, 
this does not mean that all the forms which have come and gone with the 
passage of time should also endure permanently. We might expect, for 
example, to find a Greek nation with its noble paganism etc. still existing 
in the present, or a Roman one of the same kind. But these nations belong 
to the past. Similarly, we encounter in every nation forms which have 
disappeared while the nation itself continued to exist. Why they dis-
appear and do not likewise endure permanently in space can only be 
explained by their own peculiar nature, which only allows them to exist 
within the medium of world history itself. And it will at the same time 
emerge that only the most general forms endure, and that the more 
specific ones must inevitably disappear as soon as they have expressed 
themselves in restless activity. 
All progress takes the form of following the successive stages in the 
evolution of consciousness. Man begins life as a child, and is only dimly 
conscious of the world and of himself; we know that he has to progress 
through several stages of empirical consciousness before he attains a 
knowledge of what he is in and for himself. The child starts out with 
sensory emotions; man next proceeds to the stage of general representa-
tions, and then to that of comprehension, until he finally succeeds in 
recognising the soul of things, i.e. their true nature. In spiritual matters, 
the child lives at first by relying on its parents and its environment, and 
is aware of their efforts to guide it in the ways of rectitude, which appear 
to it to have been laid down arbitrarily. A further stage is that of youth; 
its distinctive feature is that the human being now looks for independence 
within himself, that he becomes self-sufficient, and that he recognises 
that what is right and ethically proper, what is essential for him to 
perform and accomplish, is present in his own consciousness. And the 
consciousness of the adult contains even more principles regarding what 
is essential. Since progress consists in a development of the consciousness, 
it is not just a quantitative process but a sequence of changing relation-
ships towards the underlying essence. 
The" historJ' of the world ar:r:ordmgly represems the successive stages in 
the development of that principle whose substantial content is the r:onsr:iouS11ess 
129 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
of freedom. This de·velopment is gradual, not only because the spirit appears 
zn 1t in a medzate rather than an immediate form- in that the spirzt mediates 
Itself with itself; but also because It IS intenzally differenttated,for it im:oh:es 
a division or differentzation of the spzrzt within itself The more specific 
determination of these various stages zn their universal form belongs to the 
province of logic, but in its concrete aspect it is part of the philosoph_y of 
spirit. As regards zts abstract qualitzes, zt need only be mentioned here that, 
during the first and immediate stage zn the process, the spirit, as already 
pomted out, IS still zmmersed in nature, in wh1ch it exists in a state of unfree 
particularity (onl_y One is free). But during the second stage it emerges into 
an awareness of its own freedom. The first departure from nature is, howerer, 
imperfect and partial- only Some are free- for zt is deri·ved indirectly from 
a state of nature, and is therefore related to it and still encumbered with it 
as one of its essential moments. The third stage witnesses the ascent of the 
spirit out of this as yet specific form of freedom into zts purely universal 
form - man as such is free- in which the spiritual essence becomes conscious 
of itself and aware of its own nature. 
Thus, the first stage we shall consider in the spirit's develop~ent can 
be compared with the spirit of childhood. In it, that so-called unity of the 
spirit with nature which we encounter in the Oriental World still 
prevails. This natural spirit is still immersed in nature and is not yet 
self-sufficient; it is therefore not yet free, and has not undergone the 
process by which freedom comes into being. Even at this initial stage in 
the spirit's evolution, we find states, arts, and the rudiments of learning 
already in existence; but they are still rooted in the soil of nature. In this 
early patriarchal world, spirituality is still an underlying substance to 
which the individual is related only as an accidental property. In relation 
to the will of the One, all the others are in the position of children or 
subordinates. 
The second phase of the spirit is that of separation, in which the spirit 
is reflected within itself and in which it emerges from a position of mere 
obedience and trust. This phase is made up of two distinct parts. The 
first is the youthful age of the spirit, in which it possesses freedom for 
itself, but a freedom which is still bound up with the underlying substance. 
Freedom has not yet been reborn from within the depths of the spirit. 
This youthful age is that of the Greek World. The second part of this 
phase is that of the spirit's manhood, in which the individual has his 
own ends for himself, but can only attain them in the service of a universal, 
of the state. This is the Roman World. In it, the personality of the 
individual and service towards the universal stand in opposition. 
130 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
Then fourthly, there follows the Germanic age, the Christian World. 
If it were possible to compare the spirit's development to that of the 
individual in this case too, this age would have to be called the old age of 
the spirit. But it is a peculiarity of old age that it lives only in memories, 
in the past rather than in the present, so that the comparison is no longer 
applicable. In his negative aspects, the individual human being belongs 
to the elemental world and must therefore pass away. The spirit, however, 
returns to its concepts. In the Christian age, the divine spirit has come 
into the world and taken up its abode in the individual, who is now 
completely free and endowed with substantial freedom. This is the 
reconciliation of the subjective with the objective spirit. The spirit is re-
conciled and united wirh its concept, in which it had developed from a 
state of nature, by a process of internal division, to be reborn as subject-
ivity. All this is the a priori structure of history to which empirical reality 
must correspond. 
These stages are the basic principles which underlie the universal process; 
but to show in detail how each of them contains within itself a further process 
whereby it achieres specific form, and what constitutes the dialectit· of 
transitions between them, must be left to the later part of this investigation. 
We must merely note for the present that the spirit begins in a state of 
infinite potentiality- but no more than potentiality- which contains its 
absolute substance as something as J'et implicit, as the object and goal which 
it only attains as the end result in which it at last achieves its realisatwn. 
In actual existence, progress thus appears as an advance from the imperfect 
to the more perfect, although the former should not be understood in an 
abstract sense as merely imperfect, but as something which at the same time 
contaim its own opposite, i.e. what is commonly called perfection, as a germ 
or impulse:just as potentielity- at least in terms of reflection- points forward 
to something which will erentually attain reality, or- to take a more specific 
example -just as the Aristotelian dy11amis is also potentia, i.e. power and 
strength. Thus the imperfect, in so far as it contains its own opposite within 
itself, is a contradiction; and although it certain~y exists, it must just as 
surely be overcome• and resolved. It is the drive and inherent impulse of 
spiritual life to break through45 the shell of natural and sensory existence, of 
all that is alien to it, and to arrive at the light of consciousness, i.e. at its own 
true nature. 
b. [The beginning of history] 
In connection wztlz the idea of a state of nature in which freedom and justice 
are- or were- supposed I]• present in perfect form, we have already remarked 
• aujgelwbw. 
131 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
in general terms on how the commencement of the historJ' of spirit should be 
interpreted in relatron to the concept wluch underlies it. But the idea of a 
state of nature was merely an assumption as far as historical existence is 
concerned, an assumptton made in the twilzt regions of hypothetical 
reflection. But a claim of an altogether different kind- i.e. one put forward 
not as an assumption based on thought but as a historical fact guaranteed 
by a higher authority - is made by another idea which is now frequently 
advanced in certam quarters. It takes up the old doctrzne of the primitive 
paradisiac condition of man, which the theologians originally elaborated 
after their own fashion (for example, in the theory that God conversed with 
Adam in Hebrew), but adapts it to suit other requirements. For it has been 
argued (by Schelling, for example; cf. also Schlegel's On the Language 
and Wisdom of the Indiam) that a primitive nation once existed, and that 
all our knowledge and art has simply been handed down to us from it. 
This original nation, it is contended, existed before mankind proper 
had come into being, and is immortalised in ancient legends under the 
image of the gods; distorted fragments of its highly developed culture are 
allegedly also to be found in the myths of the earliest nation~.-And the 
condition of the earliest nations, as described in history, is represented 
as a gradual decline from the high level of culture which preceded it. 
All this is put forward with the claim that philosophy requires that it 
should be so, and that it is also supported by historical evidence. The 
high authority to which appeal is made in the first instance is that of the 
biblical narrative. But on the one hand, this narrative portrays the primitive 
condition only in its few well known characteristics, and on the other, it 
describes it and its various changes either in relation to mankind at large- i.e. 
as part of human nature in general- or, in so far as Adam is to be taken as a 
single individual or at most as two people, as present and complete only in 
this one individual or in a single human couple. The biblical account does not 
justify us in imagining that a nation and its historical condition actually 
existed in that primitive form, let alone in inferring that it had de·veloped a 
perfect knowledge of God and of nature. Nature, so the fiction runs, originally 
lay open and transparent like a bright mirror ofGod's creation before the 
clear eye ofman,46 and the divine truth was equal/.;' transparent to him. It ts 
also hinted- albeit in an indefinite and obscure manner - that in this primeval 
condition, man was in possession of a definite and already extensive knowledge 
of religious truths, revealed to him directly by God. Furthermore, all religions 
had their historical origin in this primitn'e condition, although they subsequently 
adulterated and obscured the original truth with figments of error and 
depravity. But in all the mythologies which error has created, traces of that 
132 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
original state and of the early doctrines of religious truth are presetlt and can 
still be recognised. It is accordingly claimed that the study of the historJ' of 
ancimt peoples gains its essential interest from the fact that it is possible to 
follow it back to the point where such fragments of the earliest rn·ealed 
knowledge can still be encountered in a purer formY 
We certainly owe very much that is valuable to the interest which has fired 
such historical research, but this same research can also be indicted on Its 
own direct testimony. For it sets out to prove by historical methods that 
whose historical existence zt has already presupposed. Besides, it begins with 
a highly concentrated amalgam of hzstorical data, and even these are even-
tually lost sight of altogether. Neither that advanced state of theological 
knowledge, or of other scientific (e.g. astronomical) knowledge (such as 
astronomers themselves, including Bailly,48 have fimcifully attributed to 
the Indians), nor the assumption that such a state of affairs prevailed at the 
beginning of histor_y or that the religions of the various nations were tradition-
ally derived from zt and subsequently developed by a process of degeneration 
and deterioration (as is claimed by the crudely concei·ved so-called' system of 
emanation') - none of these assumptions has any historical foundatwn, 
nor- if we may contrast their arbitrary and purely subjective origin wtth 
the true concept of history- can they ever hope to attain one. 
This notion of a perfect primeval condition does, however, contain a 
philosophical element - namely the realisation that man cannot have 
originally existed in a state of animal insensibility. This is perfectly 
correct; man cannot have developed from a state of animal insensibility, 
although he may well have developed from a state of human insensibility. 
Animal humanity is altogether different from animality proper. The spirit 
is present from the beginning; but the spirit at first exists only in itself, 
as natural spirit, on which the character of humanity is nevertheless 
already imprinted. The child has no rationality, but it does have the real 
capability of becoming rational. The animal, on the other hand, is 
incapable of attaining self-consciousness. Even the simple movements of 
the child have a human quality about them; its first movement of all, its 
crying, is of a completely non-animal nature. For man is from the start 
an intelligent being; but those who persist in believing that man, in his 
original condition, lived in pure consciousness of God and of nature - sur-
rounded, as it were, by everything which we have to acquire through 
laborious efforts, and in the centre of all arts and sciences - have failed 
to appreciate what intelligence and thought are. They cannot have under-
stood that spirit is that infinite movement, £vEpyELa, 
£vrEAEXELa 
(energy, activity) which never rests, that it abandons its original condition 
133 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
and is drawn on to a new one which it works upon in turn, discovering 
itself through the work it performs: for it is through this work alone that 
the spirit externalises its universal concept and attains a real existence. 
This, accordingly, is not the first but the last stage in its development. The 
customs, laws, institutions, and symbols of ancient nations are indeed 
the vessels of speculative ideas, for they are products of the spirit. But 
this inner reality of the Idea and its recognition of itself in the form of the 
Idea are two quite different things. The speculative Idea as an object of 
knowledge cannot have come first; on the contrary, it is the fruit of the 
spirit's highest and most abstract endeavours. 
The on!]• appropriate aud 1vorth)' method of philosophtcal inrestzgation is 
to take up histor_y at that point where rationality begzns to manifest itself in 
worldly existence- z.e. not where it is still a mere potentiality in itself but 
where it is in a positiOn to express itself in consczousness, volition, and actzon. 
The inorganic existence of the spzrit or of freedom- i.e. unconscious zndiffirence 
(whether sa·vage or mild in temper) towards good and evil, and hence towards 
laws in general, or, if we prefer to call it so, the perfection of znnocence- is 
not itself an object of history. The natural (and at the same time r;ligious) 
form of ethical life zs family piety. In a soczety where this prevails, ethical 
life conszsts tn the members behaving towards each other not as indzviduals or 
distinct persons with a will of their own; and for this very reason, the family 
in itself lies outside that developme11t from which history takes its source. 
But if this spiritual unit steps bqond the sphere of emotion and naturallo·z:e 
and attains a consciousness of personality, we have before us that dark and 
impenetrable intermediate zone in which neither nature nor spirit is open 
and transparent, and for which nature and spirit can become open and trans-
parent only through a further process whereby the will, which has now become 
conscious of itself, develops ot·er a protracted period of time. The quality of 
openness pertains solely to consciousness, and it is to consciousness alone that 
God- and indeed all other things too - can be revealed; in thm true and 
universal form, which exists in and for itself, they can only be revealed to a 
consciousness which has become capable of rejlectzve thought. Freedom is 
nothing more than a knowledge and affirmation of such universal and sub-
stantial objects as law and justice, and the production of a reality which 
corresponds to them- i.e. the state. 
Nations may hat·e had a long history before they finally reach thezr 
destinatzon- i.e. that of forming themselves into states- and may even have 
det•eloped considerably in some respects before they attain this goal. But, as 
already indicated, this pre-historical period lies outside the scope of our 
presellt investigation, irrespective of whether a real historJ• followed it or 
134 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
whet!Jer the 1Wtwns in question nerer fin all)' succeeded in fonumg themselves 
into states. A great historzcal dtscorerJ', !tke the dtscou1J' of a new UJor/d, 
has been made in the last twenty [years] or uprvards m connection nith the 
Sanskrit language and tts ajjintties with the languages of Europe. In parti-
cular, tt has giVen us an insight mto the historicallmks between the Germanic 
nations and those of India, an tnsight which carries as much certamty with 
it as can ever be achteved in such matters. Even at the present time, we know 
of peoples tvhtch scarcely form a society, let alone a state, but whtch have 
long been known to exist; and with others agam, although it is primarily 
their advanced conditiOn which interests us, thetr tradztwns extend bqond 
the history of their first constitution, and they underwent numerous changes 
before this epoch began. In the above-mentioned connectiOn between the 
languages of natwns so llJidely separated in space and so very different m 
relzgion, constitutions, etlucs, and zn every variety of sprrttual and even 
physzcal culture (differences which ha<Y exzsted not only zn the present, but 
also in the already remote ages m which thq first became known to us), we 
ha·ve before us a result which proves as an irrefutable fact that these nations 
spread outwards from a centre zn Asia and developed in dtsparate ways from 
an original family relationship; and thzs is not a fact established by the 
favourite method of combining and reasoning from circumstances of greater 
and lesser import- a method which has enriched history with so many 
fabrications given out as facts, and which, since alternative combinations of 
the same circumstances (either among themselves or with others) are equally 
possible, will continue to enrich it in the same fashion. But all these events, 
whose range appears so extensive, lte outside history proper: they in fact 
preceded it. 
In our language, the word' history'* combznes both objective and subjec-
tive meanings, for it denotes the historia rerum gestarum as well as the 
res gestae themselves, the historical narrative and the actual happenings, 
deeds, and events- which, zn the stricter sense, are quzte distinct from one 
another. But this conjunction of the two meanings should be recognised as 
belonging to a higher order than that of mere external contingency: we must 
in fact suppose that the writing of history and the actual deeds and events of 
history make their appearance simultaneously, and that they emerge together 
from a common source. Family memorials and patrtarchal traditions have an 
interest only within the fami~y or tribe ttself The uniform course of their existence 
is not an object worthy of commemoration, although distinct deeds or turns of 
fate may well inspire Mnemosyne to retain their images, just as love and 
* Geschichte, from the verb geschehen (to happen). 
135 

SECOND DRAFT (I 8 3 0) 
and agencies. But although the organisation of ma11, for example, is de filled 
by the concrete form it assumes, and the brai1z, the heart, etc., are specified 
as essemial ingredimts of it, it is quite possible to adduce some wretched 
abortion or freak which possesses a generally human form (or at least parts 
of it) and which has been conceived in a human body, lived in it, been born 
from it, and drawn the breath of life, but which lacks either a brain or a heart. 
If such a specimen is quoted against the defining properties of an authentic 
human constitution, we can proceed no further than the abstract name of man 
a1ld its superficial definition, from which tlze idea of a real, concrete human 
being is of course altogether different: for the latter must have a brain in its 
head and a heart in its breast. 
A similar situation arises when it is maintained- quite correctly- that 
genius, talent, moral virtues, moral sentiments, and piety can be encountered 
in every region, under all constitutions, a1zd in all political circztmstances; 
and there is no lack of examples to prove this assertion. But if this is meam to 
imply that those distinctions which arise out of the degree of self-consciousness 
which freedom has attained are unimportant or inessential i1z relation to the 
above-mentioned qualities, reflection remains tied to abstract categories and 
lacks any determinate content, for which no principles are provided by the 
categories in question. The intellectual attitude which adopts such formal 
points of view certainly affords unlimited scope for ingenious questions, 
scholarly opinions, striking comparisons, and seemingly profound reflections 
and declamations; their brilliance may in fact seem to increase in proportion 
to their capacity for indefiniteness, and they may be the more readily refur-
bished and modified the less their attempts to achieve great results lead to 
anything of rational substance. From this point of ;;iew, one might well 
compare the familiar Indian epics, as they are called, with those of Homer, 
and argue that, since imaginative greatness is the true test of poetic genius, 
they are superior to the latter; in the same way, similarities between certain 
imaginary traits or attributes of the deities have led some to feel justified in 
identifying figures of Greek mythology with those of India. Similarly, the 
philosophy of China, in so far as it takes the One as its basis, has been 
equated with what later appeared as the Eleatic philosophy or the system of 
Spinoza; and since it also expresses itself in abstract numbers and lines, some 
have claimed to detect Pythagorean philosophy or even Christzan dogma in it. 
Examples of bravery, indefatigable courage, qualities of magnanimity, self-
denial and self-sacrifice, etc., which are encountered in the most savage and the 
most faint-hearted of nations, are deemed sufficient evidence for tlze ·view that 
there is as much - or even more- virtue and morality in such nations as in the 
most civilised Christian states, and so on. With such examples in mind, some 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
have uen fit to doubt whether men have become better with the progress of 
history and of culture in general, and whether their morality has increased- the 
assumption being that morality depends upon the agent's subjective intentions 
and insights, on what he considers as justice or injustice, good or e·vil, and not 
on what is considered to be just and good or unjust and evil in and for 
itself or within a particular religion which is generally recognised as 
true. 
We can spare ourselves the task of analysing the formalism and error of 
such attitudes here, and of establishing the true principles of morality - or 
rather of ethical life- in opposition to false morality. For world history 
moves on a higher plane than that to which morality properly belongs, for 
the sphere of morality is that of private convictions, the conscience of indi-
viduals, and their own particular will and mode of action; and the latter 
have their value, imputation, and reward or punishment within themselves. 
Whatever is required and accomplished by the ultimate end of the spirit, 
which exists in and for itself, and whatever providence does, transcends the 
obligations, liability, and responsibility which attach to individuality by 
virtue of its ethical existence. Those who, on ethical grounds (and hence with 
a noble intention), have resisted what the progress of the Idea of the spirit 
required, stand higher in moral worth than those whose crimes hat·e been 
transformed by a higher order into the instruments of realising its will. But in 
revolutions of this kind, both parties alike stand within the same circle of 
corruptible existence, so that it is merely a formal kind of justice, abandoned 
by the living spirit and by God, which those who have the existing law on their 
side defend. The deeds of the great men who are the individuals of world 
history thus appear justified not only in their inner significance (of which 
the individuals in question are unconscious), but also in a secular sense. But 
from this latter point of view, no representations should be made against 
world-historical deeds and those who perform them by moral circles to which 
such individuals do not belong. The litany of private virtues- modesty, 
humility, charity, liberality, etc.- must not be raised against them. World 
history might well disregard completely the sphere to which morality and the 
much discussed and misunderstood dichotomy between morality and politics 
belong- and not merely by refraining from judgements (for the principles of 
world history and the necessary relationship of men's actions to these prin-
ciples themseh·es constitute the judgement), but by ignoring indit·iduals 
altogether and leat•ing them unmentioned; for what it has to record is the 
activity of the spirit of nations, and the individual forms which the spirit has 
assumed in the sphere of external reality could well be left to the attention of 
ordinary historians. 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
The same kmd offormalzsm as that practzsed in moralzty also makes use of 
the iudefinzte notions wluclz surround genius, poetr_y, and eren philosophy, 1md 
likewise manages to dtscover them in ererJ•thmg. These 11otions are products of 
rejlectrve thought, and the abzlity to manipulate such generalitzes- whzch do 
szgnalzse and deszgnate esse1ltzal distinctions, but without bringing out the 
true depth of thezr significance- is wlzat we call culture;* it zs a purely 
formal property, m that its sole aim, zrrespectzve of the content zt has before 
zt, IS to analyse the latter into its component parts and to comprehend these 
in forms and definitzom of thought. Culture as such does not contain that free 
universality which would enable it to make Itself the object of its own con-
sciousness. Such a consciousness of thought itself and of the forms of thought 
taken in zsolatzon from any parttcular material, zs philosophy, for whose 
existence culture is admittedly a prerequiszte; but the functzon of culture 
consists merely in clothing whatever colltent 1t has before it in the form of 
unzversalzty, so that the tzvo are inseparably united wtthin zt- so inseparably 
that it regards its content (which, through the analysis of one conceptzon into 
a multztude of subordmate conceptions, can be enlarged to an zmm(t,asurable 
degree of richness) as a purely empirical element in which thought plays no 
part whatsoever. It is nevertheless just as much an act of thought- or, more 
specifically, of the understanding- to reduce to a simple conception (such as 
earth, man, etc., or Alexander or Caesar) an object which itself encompasses a 
rich and concrete content and to dwgnate it by a single word, as it is to 
analyse it imo its separate parts, to isolate the determinations which such a 
conception contains, and to bestow particular names on each of them. All 
this [had to be said] to avoid the risk of making indefinite and empty pro-
nouncements on culture. But to returu to tlze view which originally provoked 
the abo·ve remarks, it zs at least clear that, JUSt as reflection produces the 
untversal notions of genzus, talent, art, SCience, etc., and equally general 
observations concerning therr nature,formal culture, at evet)' stage of spiritual 
e-z:olution, not only can but also must make its appearance, grow, and 
blossom out to the full; for each stage in the process nzust de·velop rtself mto a 
state, and advance from thrs basis of cn,ilzsation to rejlecth•e understanding 
and to forms of generalzsation, both in laws and m all other things. Polztical 
life as such inerztabl)' gn·es rzse to formal culture, and hence also to learning 
and to a fully de~·eloped poetry and art in general. Besides, what we call the 
plastic arts, even m their technical aspects, presuppose a czvilrsed community 
of men. Poetry, whzclz has less need of external means and accessories and 
whose medium is the r•oice, the instrument of the spzrit's immedi11te self-
" Bildung; cf. note to p. 56 above. 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
expression, emerges in all its boldness and with highly det·eloped powers of 
expression even in nations which have not yet reached the stage of uniting to 
form a law-governed communtty; for as already remarked, language attains 
a high level of reflecth·e development in its own right even before civilisation 
has emerged. 
Philosophy, too, must make its appearance as soon as political life is 
established. For that which confers the property of culture upon any given 
content is, as already mentioned, the form proper to thought itself; whereas 
philosophy is merely the consciousness of this form, the thinking of thinking, 
so that the material which it requires for its own peculiar edifice is already 
prepared for it through the general progress of culture. And in the development 
of the state itself, periods must occur in which the spirit of nobler natures is 
forced to flee from the present into ideal regions, and to find in them that 
reconciliation with itself which it can no longer enjoy in an internally divided 
rea !tty; for the reflective understanding attacks all those sacred and profound 
elements which were artlessly introduced into the religion, laws, and customs 
ofnations, and debases and dilutes them into abstract and godless generalities. 
Thought is then impelled to become thinking reason, and to pursue and accom-
plish in its own element the undoing of that destruction which had previously 
overtaken it. 
Thus, in all world-historical nations, we do indeed encounter poetry, plastic 
art, science, and even philosophy. But these differ not only in their tone, style, 
and general tendency, but even more so in their basic import; and 1his import 
involves the most important difference of all, i.e. that of rationality. It is 
pointless for a presumptuous aesthetic crzticism to insist that their subject-
matter, i.e. the substantial part of their content, should not be determined by 
the pleasure we derive from it, and to argue that beauty of form as such, 
imaginative greatness, and the like, are the aims of fine art and the only 
factors wluch should be registered and appreciated b)' a liberal disposition and 
cultivated mind. If the substance itself zs insignificant, or wild and fantastic 
or absurd, a healthy common sense cannot bring itself to abstract from it in 
such a way as to derive enjoyment/rom the work in question. For eren if one 
ranks the Indian epics as highly as Homer's on account of numerous formal 
qualzttes of thzs kind- greatness of tnt•ention and imagination, vividness of 
imagery and sentiments, beauty of dzction, etc. -they nevertheless remain 
infinitely different in their import and hence in their ury substance; and the 
latter involves the interest of reason, which is directly concerned with the 
consciousness of the concept of freedom and the may in whzch it expresses 
ttself in individuals. There is not only a classical form, but also a classical 
content; and besides,form and content are so intzmately connected in works of 
143 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
art that the former can only be classical m so far as the latter ts also classical. 
If the content is fantastic and not self-contained- and it is reason alone 
which supplies both measure and goal- the form becomes unbalanced and 
amorphous, or awkward and trivzal. 
In the same way, it is equally possible to draw parallels between Chinese 
and Indian philosophy, and between Eleatic, Pythagorean, and Spinozistic 
metaphysics- or even modern metaphysics in general-for all of them do 
indeed base themselves on the One or on unity, the wholly abstract universal; 
but to compare or even to identify them in this way is a highly superficial 
procedure. For it overlooks the one essential factor, i.e. the determinate 
characteristics of the unity in question; and this involves an essential distinc-
tion, for the unity may be understood either in an abstract or in a concrete 
sense (concrete to the point of being a unity in itself, which is the same thing 
as spirit). Those who treat them as identical merely prove that they have 
recognised only the abstract kind of unity; and although thq pass judgements 
on philosophy, they are ignorant of the very factor from which philosophy 
derives its interest. 
On the other hand, there are also areas which remain the same despite all 
differences in the substantial content of the cultures in question. These 
differences concern the thinking reason; and freedom, whose self-consciousness 
consists in this reason, has one and the same root as thought. Since man 
alone - as distinct from the animals - is a thinking being, he alone possesses 
freedom, and he possesses it solely by virtue of his ability to think. Conscious-
ness of freedom consists in the fact that the individual comprehends himself 
as a person, i.e. that he sees himself in his distinct existence as inherently 
universal, as capable of abstraction from and renunciation of everything 
particular, and therefore as inherently infinite. Consequently, the areas which 
lie outside this variety of comprehension are a common denominator amidst 
the substantial differences referred to above. Even morality, which is so 
closely connected with the consciousness of freedom, can attain a high degree 
of purity before any such consciousness is present; for it may simply enunciate 
universal duties and rights as objective commandments, or even remain purely 
negative in character, prescribing a formal elevation of the mind and a 
renunciation of the sensual and of all sensual motives. Chinese morality, 
since the Europeans have become acquainted with it and with the writings of 
Confucius, has received the highest praise and the most flattering tributes to 
its merits even from those who are familiar with Christian morality; in the 
same way, men have acknowledged the sublimity with which the religion and 
poetry of India (or at least the higher kinds of these), and in particular the 
Indian philosophy, express and enjoin the removal and sacrifice of all sensual 
144 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
things. Yet these two nations are lackmg- indeed completely lacking- in the 
essential self-conscioumess of the concept of freedom. The Chinese look on 
their moral rules as if they were laws of nature, positive external command-
ments, coercive rights and duties, or rules of mutual courtesy. Freedom, 
through which the substantial determinations of reason can alone be translated 
into ethical attitudes, is absent; morality is a political matter which is 
administered by governmmt officials and courts of law. Their writings on 
the subject are not, however, collections of legal statutes, but are addressed 
to the subjective will and disposition of the reader. Like the moral writings of 
the Stoics, they read like a series of commands which purport to be necessary 
for the attainment of happiness, so that it is left to the individual to adopt and 
follow such commands or not; in the same way, the idea of an abstract subject, 
the wzse man, is the culmination of such doctrines with both the Chinese and 
the Stoic moralists. 52 And in the Indian doctrine of the renunciation of 
sensuality, desires, and all earthly interests, positive ethical freedom is not 
the goal and end, but rather the extinction of consciousness and the suspension 
of spiritual and evm physical life. 
A nation is only world-historical in so far as its fundamental element and 
basic aim have embodied a universal principle; only then is its spirit 
capable of producing an ethical and political organisation. If nations are 
impelled merely by desires, their deeds are lost without trace (as with all 
fanaticism), and no enduring achievement remains. Or the only traces 
they leave are ruin and destruction. In this way, the Greeks speak of the 
rule of Chronos or Time, who devours his own children (i.e. the deeds 
he has himself produced); this was the Golden Age, which produced no 
ethical works. Only Zeus, the political god from whose head Pallas 
Athene sprang and to whose circle Apollo and the Muses belong, was 
able to check the power of time; he did so by creating a conscious ethical 
institution, i.e. by producing the state. 
An achievement is only objective in so far as it is an object ofknowledge. 
It contains the determination of universality or thought in its very element; 
without thought, it has no objectivity, for thought is its basis. The nation 
must know the universal on which its ethical life is based and before 
which the particular vanishes away, and it must therefore know the deter-
minations which underlie its justice and religion. The spirit cannot rest 
content with the mere existence of an order or cult; its will is rather to 
attain this knowkdge of its own determinations. Only in this way can it 
succeed in uniting its subjectivity with the universal of its objectivity. 
Admittedly, its world is also composed of distinct elements to which it 
145 

SECOND DRAFT (I 8 3 0) 
responds through the medium of external intuition, etc., but the unity 
of its innermost nature with this external world must also be present to it. 
This is its supreme liberation, since thought is its innermost nature. The 
highest point in the development of the nation is reached when it has 
understood its life and condition by means of thought, and acquired a 
systematic knowledge of its laws, justice, and ethical life; for in this 
achievement lies the closest possible unity which the spirit can attain 
with itself. The aim of its endeavours is for it to have itself as its own 
object; but it cannot have itself as its object in its true essentiality unless 
it thinks itself. At this point, then, the spirit knows its own principles, 
the universal aspect of its real world. Thus, if we wish to know what 
Greece really was, we find the answer in Sophocles and Aristophanes, 
Thucydides and Plato; in them, we find the historical expression of what 
Greek life actually was. For in these individuals, the Greek spirit com-
prehended itself through representation and thought. 
This spiritual self-consciousness is the nation's supreme achievement; 
but we must remember in the first place that it is also only ideal. In this 
achievement of thought lies the profounder kind of satisfaction which the 
nation can attain; but since it is of a universal nature, it is also ideal, and 
accordingly different in form from the real activity, the real work and life 
which made such an achievement possible. The nation now has both a 
real and an ideal existence. At such a time, we shall therefore find that 
the nation derives satisfaction from the idea of virtue and from discus-
sion of it- discussion which may either coexist with virtue itself or become 
a substitute for it. All this is the work of the spirit, which knows how to 
bring the unreflected - i.e. the merely factual - to the point of reflecting 
upon itself. It thereby becomes conscious to some degree of the limitation 
of such determinate things as belief, trust, and custom, so that the con-
sciousness now has reasons for renouncing the latter and the laws which 
they impose. This is indeed the inevitable result of any search for reasons; 
and when no such reasons- i.e. no completely abstract universal prin-
ciples - can be found as the basis of the laws in question, men's ideas of 
virtue begin to waver, and the absolute is no longer regarded as valid in 
its own right, but only in so far as it has reasons to justify it. At the same 
time, individuals gradually became isolated from one another and from 
the whole, selfishness and vanity intervene, and men seek to obtain their 
own advantage and satisfaction at the expense of the whole. For the 
consciousness is subjective in nature, and subjectivity carries with it the 
need to particularise itself. Vanity and selfishness accordingly make their 
appearance, and passions and personal interests emerge unchecked and 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
in a destructive form. This is not, however, the natural death of the 
national spirit, but merely a state of internal division. 
And thus Zeus, who set limits to the depredations of time and suspended 
its constant flux, had no sooner established something inherently enduring 
than he was himself devoured along with his whole empire. He was 
devoured by the principle of thought itself, the progenitor of knowledge, 
of reasoning, of insight based on rational grounds, and of the search for 
such grounds. Time is the negative element in the world of the senses; 
thought is equally negative, but it is at the same time that innermost and 
infinite form into which all existence - and in the first place finite being 
or determinate form - is dissolved. Time, then, is indeed the corrosive 
aspect of negativity; but spirit likewise has the property of dissolving 
every determinate content it encounters. For it is the universal, unlimited, 
innermost and infinite form itself, and it overcomes all that is limited. 
Even if the objective element does not appear finite and limited in content, 
it does at least appear as something given, immediate, and authoritative 
in nature, so that it is not in a position to impose restrictions on thought 
or to set itself up as a permanent obstacle to the thinking subject and to 
infinite internal reflection. 
This dissolving activity of thought also inevitably gives rise to a new 
principle. Thought, in so far as it is universal in character, has the effect 
of dissolving every determinate content; but in this very dissolution, the 
preceding principle is in fact preserved, with the sole difference that it 
no longer possesses its original determination. The universal essence is 
preserved, but its universality as such has been brought out into relief. 
The preceding principle has been transfigured by universality; its present 
mode must be considered as different from the preceding one, for in the 
latter, the present mode existed only implicitly and had an external 
existence only through a complex series of manifold relationships. What 
formerly existed only in concrete particulars now has the form of univer-
sality conferred upon it; but a new element, another further determination, 
is also present. The spirit, in its new inward determination, has new 
interests and ends beyond those which it formerly possessed. This change 
in the principle's form also brings with it new and additional determina-
tions of content. Everyone knows that a cultured* man has quite different 
expectations from those of his uncultured fellow-countryman, although 
the latter lives within the same religion and ethical community and his 
substantial condition is precisely the same. Culture would at first seem 
" gebi!der. 

SECOND DRAFT (I 830) 
to be purely formal in character, but it does also give rise to differences in 
content. The cultured and the uncultured Christian appear completely 
identical in one respect, but their needs are nevertheless completely 
different. And it is precisely the same with property relations. Even the 
serf has property, but it is coupled with obligations which render another 
person the joint owner of it. If, however, we define property in terms of 
thought, it of course follows that only one man can be the owner. For 
thought brings out the universal aspect, thereby creating a different 
interest and different needs. 
The determinate nature of the transition which takes place in all such 
changes is therefore as follows: what at present exists becomes an object 
of thought, and it is thereby elevated into universality. The nature of the 
spirit is to comprehend the universal, i.e. that which is essential. Univer-
sality, in its truest sense, is the substance, the essence, that which truly 
exists. In the case of the slave, for example, the appropriate universal 
is that of the human being; for it is at this point that particularity passes 
over into universality. If, therefore, particularity is transcended in a 
given nation - for example, in that of Athens- by means of thought, 
and if thought develops to the point where the particular principle of the 
nation in question is no longer essential, that nation cannot continue to 
exist; for another principle has meanwhile emerged. World history then 
passes over to another nation. Such principles are present in world 
history in the shape of national spirits; but the latter also have a natural 
existence. The particular stage which the spirit has reached is present as 
the natural principle of the people in question or as the nation. 
According to the different ways in which it manifests itself in this deter-
minate natural element, the spirit appears in various forms. Thus, 
although its new and higher determination within a particular national 
spirit does appear as the negation or destruction of the preceding one, its 
positive side also emerges in the shape of a new nation. A nation cannot 
pass through several successive stages in world history or make its mark 
in it more than once. If it were possible for genuinely new interests to 
arise within a nation, the national spirit would have to be in a position to 
will something new - but where could this new element come from? It 
could only take the shape of a higher and more universal conception of 
itself, a progression beyond its own principle, or a quest for a more 
universal principle - but this would mean that a further determinate 
principle, i.e. a new spirit, was already present. In world history, a 
nation can be dominant only once, because it can only have one task to 
perform within the spiritual process. 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
This advance or progression appears to be a process of infinite duration, 
in keeping with the notion of perfectibility - a constant progress which 
must always remain distant from its goal. But even if, in the advance 
towards a new principle, the content of the preceding one is comprehended 
in a more universal sense than before, it is at least certain that the new 
form which emerges will again be a determinate one. Furthermore, history 
has to do with reality, in which the universal must in any case assume a 
determinate form. And no limited form can establish itself permanently 
in face of thought or the concept. If there were something which the 
concept could not digest or resolve, it would certainly represent the 
highest degree of fragmentation and unhappiness. But if something of 
the kind did exist, it could be nothing other than thought itself in its 
function of self-comprehension. For thought alone is inherently unlimited, 
and all reality is determined within it. In consequence, the fragmentation 
would cease to exist, and thought would be satisfied within itself. This, 
then, would be the ultimate purpose of the world. Reason recognises 
that which is truthful, that which exists in and for itself, and which is 
not subject to_any limitations. The concept of the spirit involves a return 
upon itself, whereby it makes itself its own object; progress, therefore, is 
not an indeterminate advance ad infinitum, for it has a definite aim- namely 
that of returning upon itself. Thus, it also involves a kind of cyclic 
movement as the spirit attempts to discover itself. 
It is sometimes said that goodness is the ultimate end. But in the first 
place, this is an indefinite kind of expression. One might well be reminded 
-and should be reminded- of the equivalent form in religion. For in 
philosophy, we must on no account adopt the attitude of ignoring other 
venerable insights out of a misplaced sense of awe. From the point of 
view of religion, the ultimate aim is that man should attain a state of 
holiness. This, in religious terms, is indeed the proper aim so far as 
individuals are concerned. The subject gains itself as such and fulfils its 
end within the institution of religion. But seen in this light, the end already 
presupposes a content of a universal kind, i.e. a state in which souls may 
find their salvation. One might well object that this conception of salva-
tion is no concern of ours, since salvation is a future end whose fulfilment 
lies in another world. But then we would still be left with existence in 
this world as a preparation for that future state. This whole distinction, 
however, is only subjectively valid; it would leave individuals with no 
choice but to regard whatever leads them to salvation as nothing more 
than a means. But this is not at all the case, for the latter must undoubtedly 
be understood in an absolute sense. From the point of view of religion, 
149 

SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
the aim of both natural existence and spiritual activity is the glorification 
of God. Indeed, this is the worthiest end of the spirit and of history. 
The nature of the spirit is to make itself its own object and to comprehend 
itself. Only then is it really present as the product and result of its own 
activity. 'To comprehend itself' means, of course, to comprehend itself 
by means of thought. But this implies not merely a knowledge of arbitrary, 
casual, and ephemeral determinations, but a comprehension of the 
absolute itself. The aim of the spirit is therefore to make itself conscious 
of the absolute, and in such a way that this consciousness is given to it 
as the sole and exclusive truth, so that everything must be - and actually 
is - brought into conformity with it, and world history is ruled by it in 
reality as it was all along. To become actively aware of this means to do 
honour to God or to glorify the truth. This is the absolute and ultimate 
end, and truth is itself the power which produces its own glorification. In 
honouring God, the individual spirit is itself honoured - not, however, in 
a particular sense, but through the knowledge that the activity it performs 
in honour of God is of an absolute nature. Here, the individual spirit 
exists in truth, and participates in the absolute; it is therefore self-
sufficient. Here also, the dichotomy which besets the limited spirit 
(which knows its own being only as a restriction, and raises itself above 
it by means of thought) is removed. And here again, not even natural 
death can intervene. 
In our understanding of world history, we are concerned with history 
primarily as a record of the past. But we are just as fully concerned with 
the present. Whatever is true exists eternally in and for itself- not 
yesterday or tomorrow, but entirely in the present, 'now', in the sense 
of an absolute present. Within the Idea, even that which appears to be 
past is never lost. The Idea is of the present, and the spirit is immortal; 
there is no past or future time at which it did not exist or would not exist; 
it is not over and done with, nor does it not yet exist- on the contrary, 
it exists absolutely now. This in fact means that the present world and the 
present form and self-consciousness of the spirit contain within them all 
the stages which appear to have occurred earlier in history. These did 
admittedly take shape independently and in succession; but what the 
spirit is now, it has always been implicitly, and the difference is merely 
in the degree to which this implicit character has been developed. The 
spirit of the present world is the concept which the spirit forms of its 
own nature. It is this which sustains and rules the world, and it is the 
result of 6ooo years of effort; it is all that the spirit has created for itself 
through the labours of world history, and all that was destined to emerge 

THE COURSE OF WORLD HISTORY 
from these labours. This, then, is how we should understand "orld 
history, which presents us with the work of the spirit in its progressiw 
recognition of its own nature and in its application of this knowledge to 
all the various spheres which are affected by it. 
In this connection, it should be remembered that every individual, in 
his cultural development, must pass through various spheres "hich 
together form the basis of his concept of the spirit and each of which 
has taken shape and developed independently at some time in the past. 
But what the spirit is now, it has always been; the only difference is that 
it now possesses a richer consciousness and a more fully elaborated 
concept of its own nature. The spirit has all the stages of the past still 
adhering to it, and the life of the spirit in history consists of a cycle of 
different stages, of which some belong to the present and others have 
appeared in forms of the past. Since we are concerned with the Idea of 
the spirit and look upon everything in world history merely as a manifes-
tation of it, we are invariably occupied with the present whenever we 
review the past, no matter how considerable that past may be. For 
philosophy is concerned with what is present and real. Those moments 
which the spirit appears to have outgrown still belong to it in the depths 
of its present. Just as it has passed through all its moments in history, so 
also must it pass through them again in the present- in the concept it 
has formed of itself. 

Appendix 
1. The natural context or the geographical basis 
of world history 
a. General determinations 
The universal premise of this investigation is that world history represents 
the Idea of the spirit as it displays itself in reality as a series of external 
forms. The stage of self-consciousness which the spirit has reached 
manifests itself in world history as the existing national spirit, as a nation 
which exists in the present. Consequently, this stage of self-consciousness 
exists within time and space, and its mode is that of natural existence. The 
particular spirits which we have to consider in their simultaneous and 
successive existence are particular, because each of them has its own 
determinate principle; and each world-historical nation has the functions 
of a distinct principle allotted to it. It must admittedly pass through 
various principles in its own right in order that its distinct principle may 
attain maturity; but in world history, it always retains a single form. It 
may well occupy several positions in the course of its historical existence; 
but it can never command the first place in world history in more than 
one of these. On the contrary, it is eventually assimilated into another 
principle which, since it is itself original, is incompatible with the former 
one. But every particular national principle is also subject to natural 
determinants, so that it also appears as a natural principle. The various 
national spirits are separated in time and space; and in this respect, the 
influence of the natural context, the relationship between the spiritual 
and the natural (i.e. the national temperament, etc.) makes itself felt. 
Seen against the universality of the ethical whole and its own active 
individuality, this relationship is a purely external one; but as the ground 
on which the spirit moves, it is nevertheless an essential and necessary 
basis. 
When the spirit first enters existence, it takes on the mode of finitude 
and hence of natural existence in general. Its particular forms diverge 
from one another; for the form of natural existence is that of disparity, 
in that its particular determinate characteristics appear as separate units. 
It follows as a necessary consequence of this abstract determination that 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
whatever appears as a particular stage in the development of the spirit 
will also appear as a particular natural form, existing independently and 
to the exclusion of all others. This particularity, since it manifests itself 
in the natural world, is a natural particularity; in other words, it exists as a 
natural principle or as a particular natural determination. It follows from 
this that every people which represents a particular stage in the develop-
ment of the spirit constitutes a nation; its natural characteristics correspond 
to the nature of the spiritual principle within the series of spiritual forms. 
This natural dimension leads us to consider the influence of geography; 
for the latter includes all that belongs to the purely natural phase. But in 
natural existence, we can immediately distinguish two aspects of deter-
minate reality: on the one hand, it includes the nation's natural will or 
subjective disposition; but on the other, it is also present in the shape of a 
particular external nature. In so far as man is unfree and natural, he can 
be described as a creature of the senses. The world of the senses, however, 
consists of two distinct aspects: that of subjectivity and that of external 
nature. The latter is the geographical aspect, which can be recognised at 
first gla'nce as part of external nature in general. What we have to consider, 
therefore, are differences which are grounded in nature. They must also 
be seen first and foremost as particular possibilities from which the spirit 
germinates, and they accordingly lend it its geographical basis. It is not 
our business to acquaint ourselves with the nation's environment as an 
external locality, but merely with the natural type to which the latter 
belongs; for this is intimately connected with the type and character of 
whatever nation is rooted in this particular soil. The nation's character 
consists simply in the form and manner in which it appears in world 
history and takes up its position and stance within it. But this connection 
between nature and the character of men would seem to be incompatible 
with the freedom of the human will. We call it the realm of the senses, 
and one might well argue that man possesses truth within himself 
independently of nature. But we must not assume that the relationship of 
dependence between man and nature implies that the character of a 
nation is formed exclusively by the natural characteristics of its environ-
ment. The spirit should not be thought of as something abstract which 
only later acquires its content from nature. On the contrary, the spirits 
which emerge in history are already particular and determinate; the 
speculative Idea shows how the particular is contained within the univer-
sal without in any way obscuring it. Since nations are spirits whose form 
is of a particular nature, their determinateness is spiritual in character, 
although it is also matched by a corresponding natural determinateness. 
153 

APPENDIX 
That which still exists within itself exists only on the level of nature; thus 
the child is a human being in itself, and, as a child, it remains a purely 
natural being which has only a latent capacity for existing in and for 
itself as a free human being. 
This consideration would seem to tally with what is usually said 
concerning the influence of climate on human affairs. It is a general and 
widely held opinion that the particular national spirit is linked with the 
climate of the nation in question, and that the nation is by birth a single 
people. This is a very commonly expressed sentiment. But however 
necessary the connection between the spiritual and the natural principle 
may be, we must not rest content with everyday opinions and ascribe 
over-specific effects and influences to climate. For example, a great deal 
is often said about the mild Ionic sky which supposedly produced Homer, 
and it did undoubtedly contribute much to the charm of the Homeric 
poems. But the coast of Asia Minor has always been the same, and is still 
the same today; nevertheless, onlv one Homer has arisen among the Ionic 
people. It is not the nation which sings; a poem is composed only by one 
person, by a single individual - and even if several persons were involved 
in the composition of the Homeric songs, they were still only a group of 
individuals. Despite the mild sky, no further Homers emerged, parti-
cularly under the Turkish rule. The effect of climate is limited to minor 
particulars; but we are not concerned with these, and they have no real 
influence in any case. 
Climate does have a certain influence, however, in that neither the 
torrid nor the cold region can provide a basis for human freedom or for 
world-historical nations. At his first awakening, man possesses an 
immediately natural consciousness in relation to nature in general. Since 
this is so, there is necessarily a relationship between the two: all develop-
ment involves a reflection of the spirit within itself in opposition to nature, 
or an internal particularisation of the spirit as against its immediate 
existence, i.e. the natural world. The moment of naturalness is itself part 
of this particularisation, because it is itself of a particular nature; and in 
this way, an opposition arises between the spirit and the external world. 
Nature is therefore the original basis from which man can achieve inward 
freedom. For in so far as man is primarily a creature of the senses, it is 
imperative that, in his sensuous connection with nature, he should be 
able to attain freedom by means of internal reflection. But where nature 
is too powerful, his liberation becomes more difficult. His sensuous 
existence and his withdrawal from it are themselves his natural mode of 
existence, and the latter, as such, embodies the determination of quantity. 
154 

GEOGRAPIIICAI. BASIS OF WORLD IIISTORY 
It is therefore essential that man's connection with nature should not be 
too powerful in the first place. 
Nature, in contrast to the spirit, is a quantitative clement whose power 
must not be so great as to render it omnipotent in its own right. Extreme 
conditions are not conducive to spiritual development. Aristotle has 
long since observed that man turns to universal and more exalted things 
only after his basic needs have been satisfied. 1 But neither the torrid nor 
the frigid zone permits him to move freely, or to acquire sufficient re-
sources to allow him to participate in higher spiritual interests. He is kept 
in too insensible a state; he is oppressed by nature, and consequently 
cannot divorce himself from it, although this is the primary condition 
of all higher spiritual culture. The power of the elements is too great for 
man to escape from his struggle with them, or to become strong enough 
to assert his spiritual freedom against the power of nature. The frost 
which grips the inhabitants of Lappland and the fiery heat of Africa are 
forces of too powerful a nature for man to resist, or for the spirit to achieve 
free movement and to reach that degree of richness which is the precon-
dition and source of a fully developed mastery of reality. In regions such 
as these, dire necessity can never be escaped or overcome; man is con-
tinually forced to direct his attention to nature. Man uses nature for his 
own ends; but where nature is too powerful, it does not allow itself to be 
used as a means. The torrid and frigid regions, as such, are not the theatre 
on which world history is enacted. In this respect, such extremes are 
incompatible with spiritual freedom. 
All in all, it is therefore the temperate zone which must furnish the 
theatre of world history. And more specifically, the northern part of the 
temperate regions is particularly suited to this purpose, because at this 
point, the earth has a broad breast (as the Greeks put it), i.e. the continents 
are closely connected. This formation calls to mind the distinction which 
is commonly made between north and south; for the earth is widest in 
the north and divided in the south, where it separates out into many 
distinct points as in America, Asia, and Africa. The same peculiarity 
shows itself in natural products. All the interconnected northern countries, 
as we know from natural history, have many natural products in common; 
but in the widely separated promontories of the south, they diverge 
much more widely. In terms of botany and zoology, the northern zone is 
therefore the most important one; the largest number of animal and 
vegetable species is found in it, whereas in the south, where the land is 
broken up into separate points, the natural forms also diverge widely 
from one another. 
1SS 

APPENDIX 
If we now consider those determinate differences which have a bearing 
on the distinct characteristics of national spirits, it should be remembered 
that we must confine ourselves to such essential and universal distinctions 
as are necessary to thought and at the same time founded in empirical 
reality. For determinateness must be distinguished from mere diversity, 
which is in some measure contingent. To isolate these determining dif-
ferences is the task of philosophical enquiry, and we must take care not 
to lose ourselves in formless diversity. The latter comes into play as soon 
as we consider what is usually understood by the indefinite word 'climate', 
which we have already dealt with above. Our next step will be to discuss 
in more detail the universal distinctions which occur in the natural world. 
In the sphere of natural determinateness, the universal relation which 
is of most importance to history is that of land and sea. As far as land is 
concerned, three fundamental distinctions can be made. Firstly, there are 
the waterless uplands; secondly, valley formations which are watered 
by rivers; and thirdly, the coastal regions. These three moments are the 
most essential of those which admit of conceptual differentiation, and to 
which all other determinations can be reduced. 
The first moment is that solid, metallic element which remains in-
different, enclosed, and amorphous - the uplands with their great steppes 
and plains. They may well furnish impulses to activity, but such impulses 
are of a wild and mechanical nature. These waterless plains are primarily 
the abode of nomads, as of the Mongol and Arab nations in the Old 
World. The nomads are in themselves of a mild disposition, but their 
principle is an unstable and volatile one. They are not tied to the soil, 
and they know nothing of those rights which, in an agricultural society, 
oblige men to live together. This restless principle is associated with the 
patriarchal constitution, but it readily breaks out into mutual wars and 
depredations, or even into assaults upon other peoples; the latter are 
first subjugated, and then the invaders become amalgamated with them. 
The wanderings of the nomads are purely formal, because they are 
confined within uniform and circumscribed paths. But this limitation is 
merely factual; the possibility exists for them to sever their ties. The soil is 
not cultivated, and it can be found wherever they go; consequently, any 
external or internal impulse can lead such nations to migrate. But the 
spirit of restlessness does not really lie in the nations themselves. In the 
lower regions of the upland plains which border on settled countries, such 
nations are driven to plundering, whereas the higher regions are bounded 
by high mountains in which powerful nations have their home. But the 
tribes of the lower regions will clash with hostile inhabitants and come 
IS6 

GEOGRAPHICAl. f!ASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
into conflict with them, so that these particular nomads are destined to 
live in a state of war with those around them, with the result that they 
become fragmented. This fosters the individual personality and an unruly 
and fearless independence, but also the abstract quality of fragmentation. 
The mountains are the seat of pastoral existence; but their varied soil 
also makes agriculture possible. Their extremely variable climate with 
its harsh winters and hot summers, along with the many dangers they 
contain, is conducive to bravery. But mountain life remains isolated by 
the very nature of the environment. If such a nation finds the locality too 
restricting, it only needs a leader for it to swoop down on the fertile 
valleys and plains. But such incursions are not just symptoms of unsettled-
ness, for they are prompted by a definite aim. The natural conflicts which 
occur in Asia arc invariably based on antitheses of this kind. 
The context here is accordingly one of highland regions surrounded by 
mountain chains. The second characteristic of such regions is that the 
mountain massif is broken up by rivers which, from their source in the 
highlands, flow downwards and burst through the chain of mountains. 
For as a rule, an upland region is surrounded by mountains which are 
penetrated by rivers; these may subsequently form valleys with gentler 
slopes if the distance to the sea is sufficiently great. They then flow through 
an area of greater or less breadth before debouching into the sea. The 
decisive factor here is whether their precipitous reaches lie close to the sea 
or not, i.e. whether only a narrow strip lies before them or rather a broad 
obstacle which compels them to develop a long course, whether they flow 
into a moderately hilly region or into a wide river basin. Although the 
mountain chains of Africa are penetrated by rivers, these quickly flow into 
the sea, and the coastal strip is for the most part extremely narrow. The 
same applies to parts of South America, such as Chile and Peru, and like-
wise to Ceylon. Chile and Peru are narrow coastal territories, and they 
have no culture of their own. Brazil is quite different in this respect. 
But, apart from this, another factor may be involved; for the highlands 
themselves may consist entirely of mountain ranges with very few level 
areas among them. 
Uplands such as these are to be found in Central Asia, the home of the 
Mongols (in the general sense of the word); steppes of this kind extend 
northwards from the Caspian Sea and across towards the Black Sea. 
Other similar regions which call for mention are the deserts of Arabia, 
those in Barbary in North Africa, and those around the Orinoco and in 
Paraguay in South America. The main pecularity of the inhabitants of 
these upland regions, which are watered only by occasional rain or by the 
157 

APPENDIX 
overflowing of a river (as in the plains of the Orinoco), is their patriarchal 
way of life, for they are split up into separate family units. The soil on 
which they live is either completely infertile or fertile only for short 
periods; consequently, their wealth lies not in their land, from which 
they derive only a meagre harvest, but in the animals which accompany 
them in their wanderings. The animals find pasture for a time on the 
plains, and when these cease to support them, the community moves on 
to other regions. They lead a carefree life and do not store provisions for 
the winter, so that half of their herds must frequently perish. No legal 
system exists among these highland peoples, and their life is therefore 
marked by the extremes of hospitality and marauding- the latter occur-
ring more frequently if they are surrounded by civilised countries, as in 
the case of the Arabs, who are aided in their attacks by their horses and 
camels. The Mangels live on mare's milk, so that their horses are both a 
means of sustenance and instruments of war. Although their patriarchal 
existence usually assumes the form outlined above, it also frequently 
happens that they congregate together in large numbers and are led by 
some impulse to move outwards from their homeland. Although formerly 
of a peaceful disposition, they now fall like a raging torrent upon the 
civilised countries, and the ensuing revolution produces only destruction 
and devastation. National upheavals of this kind occurred under Genghis 
Khan and Tamerlane; the invaders trampled down everything before 
them and then finally disappeared, just as an overflowing forest stream 
must eventually subside, since it has no inner principle of vitality. The 
next level below the highlands is that of the narrow mountain valleys. 
These are inhabited by peaceful mountain nations- pastoral peoples who 
also practise agriculture, like the Swiss. Such nations are also to be found 
in Asia, but they are on the whole of less importance. 
The second major division is the transitional region, that of the broad 
river valleys. Such valleys are formed by the major rivers, which are 
surrounded by peaceful dales. The gradual accumulation of silt has made 
the soil fertile, and the land owes its entire fertility to the rivers which 
have shaped it. It is here that centres of civilisation, which brings with 
it internal independence, first arise. It is not, however, that unenlightened 
independence of the previous region, but a differentiated state - although 
this differentiation does not extend beyond the confines of the society in 
question, but leads instead to a process of internal development. The 
river plains are the most fertile lands; agriculture becomes established 
there, and with it, the rights of communal existence are introduced. The 
fertile soil automatically brings about the transition to agriculture, and 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
this in turn gives rise to understanding and foresight. Agriculture has to 
adapt itself to the changing seasons; it is not a question of gaining im-
mediate satisfaction for individual needs, for these are now satisfied in a 
universal manner. The cares of man are no longer confined to a single day, 
but extend far into the future. Tools have to be invented, and practical 
ingenuity and art develop. Fixed possessions, property, and justice are 
instituted, and this in turn gives rise to distinct social classes. The demand 
for manufactured implements and the need to conserve provisions lead to 
a settled existence, confined to a specific locality. As the land in question 
is cultivated, the determinations of property and justice come into being. 
Natural isolation is overcome by this mutually determined and exclusive 
(but at the same time universal) independence; a condition of universality 
prevails, and the purely particular is excluded from it. This opens up the 
possibility of a universal sovereign - and, what is more important, of 
the rule oflaw. Great empires grow up in such countries, and the founda-
tions of powerful states are laid. This process of finite development, 
therefore, is not one of aimless expansion, but of adherence to the 
universal. In Oriental history, we shall encounter states which have only 
just attained this condition, i.e. the empires on the banks of the rivers of 
China, and of the Ganges, the Indus, and the Nile. 
In more recent times, in which it has been argued that states must 
necessarily be separated by natural elements, we have become accustomed 
to look on water as a creator of divisions. The main objection to this is 
that nothing unites so effectively as water, for the civilised countries are 
invariably river territories. Water is in fact the uniting element, and it 
is the mountains which create divisions. If countries are separated by 
mountains, they are separated far more effectively than they would be by 
a river or even by the sea. France and Spain, for example, are separated 
by the Pyrenees; and Cadiz used to have closer links with America than 
with Madrid. Mountains create divisions between nations, customs, and 
characters. But a country is constituted by the river which flows through 
it, and both banks of the river properly belong to one and the same 
country. Silesia is the basin of the Oder, Bohemia and Saxony are the 
valley of the Elbe, and Egypt is the valley of the Nile. During the Wars 
of the Revolution, the French used to maintain that rivers arc the natural 
frontiers between countries, but this is mistaken. And it is precisely the 
same with the sea. Communications between America and Europe are 
much easier than in the interior of Asia or America. Since the discovery 
of America and the East Indies, the Europeans have constantly maintained 
contact with these countries; yet they have scarcely penetrated the interior 
159 

APPENDIX 
of Africa and Asia, because it is far more difficult to communicate by land 
than it is by water. Similarly, history tells us that Brittany and Britain 
were united for centuries under English rule, and it took many wars to 
sever the links between them. Sweden formerly possessed Finland, as 
well as Courland, Livonia, and Estonia. Norway, however, did not 
belong to Sweden, but had a far more cordial relationship with Denmark. 
We can therefore appreciate that the third class of countries will 
contrast just as pronouncedly with the second class as the second did 
with the first. The third division is that of coastal countries, and the relation-
ship here is that between land and sea. The countries in question are 
linked with the sea, and have expressly developed this relationship. Traces 
of such distinctions can still be seen in Europe; for example, Holland, the 
country in which the Rhine flows into the sea, cultivates its maritime 
associations, whereas Germany has not expanded along the line of its 
principal river. Similarly, Prussia forms the coastal strip which dominates 
the mouth of the Vistula to the seaward side of Poland, whereas the 
Polish interior is quite different in character, having a different culture 
and different needs from those of the coastal strip which has developed 
its links with the sea. The rivers of Spain flow into the sea in Portugal. 
One might well think that Spain, since it has rivers, must also have 
links with the sea; but in this particular case, it is Portugal which has 
developed the latter more fully. 
The sea in fact always gives rise to a particular way of life. Its indeter-
minate element gives us an impression of limitlessness and infinity, and 
when man feels himself part of this infinity, he is emboldened to step 
beyond his narrow existence. The sea itself is limitless, and it is not 
conducive to the peaceful and restricted life of cities as the inland regions 
are. Land - in the sense of the broad river valleys - binds man to the 
soil; consequently a whole series of ties attaches him to the locality he 
lives in. But the sea lifts him out of these narrow confines. The sea awakens 
his courage; it lures him on to conquest and piracy, but also to profit and 
acquisition. Any work performed with a view to gain will be associated 
with the particular nature of the ends it serves, i.e. with what we refer 
to as needs. The work which men undertake in order to satisfy these needs 
will have the effect of compelling them to adopt a settled routine of earning 
their living. But if this leads them to go to sea, the relationship is changed. 
Those who sail the seas will and can profit and earn in the process; but 
the means they employ entail the direct opposite - i.e. danger - of the 
result they intend: the relationship is reversed, in that they thereby place 
their lives and property at risk. This invests their employment of such 
!60 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
means with a courageous quality, and gives the individual a consciousness 
of greater freedom and independence. It is this which elevates acquisition 
and trade above their usual level and transforms them into a courageous 
and noble undertaking. The sea awakens men's courage; those who sail 
on it to earn their livelihood and wealth must earn them by hazardous 
means. They must be courageous, and they must put their lives and riches 
at stake and treat them with contempt. The quest for riches, as already 
remarked, is elevated into a courageous and noble activity in so far as it is 
directed towards the sea. At the same time, the sea awakens men's cunning, 
for they have to battle with an element which appears to submit itself 
peacefully to everything and to adapt itself to all possible forms, but which 
can nevertheless be extremely destructive. Courage is here inseparably 
linked with understanding, with the highest degree of cunning. For it is 
the very weakness of this element, i.e. its submissive and yielding quality, 
which holds the greatest danger. Thus, bravery in face of the sea must be 
coupled with cunning; for the element which confronts such bravery is 
itself cunning, and the most unstable and treacherous of all the elements. 
The sea's infinite surface is absolutely yielding, for it does not resist the 
slightest pressure - not even of a breath of air; it appears infinitely 
innocent, compliant, benevolent, and ingratiating, yet it is this very 
compliance which transforms the sea into the most dangerous and power-
ful of the elements. And man, aes triplex circa pectus, • opposes its power 
and deceit with nothing more than a simple piece of wood, and embarks 
on this, relying only on his courage and presence of mind; he thereby 
abandons the stable shore for the unstable depths, taking his artificial 
land along with him. The ship, this swan of the seas which cuts through 
the expanse of the waves in quick and graceful movements or describes 
circles on its surface, is an instrument whose invention does the highest 
credit both to man's boldness and to his understanding. The Oriental 
states, splendid edifices though they are, lack this maritime outlet from 
their limited land bound existence, even if- as in the case of China -they 
are themselves situated on the sea. The sea, for them, is merely the termi-
nation of the land, and they have no positive relationship with it. The 
activity which the sea inspires is of a wholly peculiar nature, and it breeds 
a wholly peculiar character. 
In these three departments of the natural world, we can perceive 
• The quotation is from Horace, Odes, 1. iii: 'illi robur et aes triplex I circa pectus 
erat, qui fragilem truci I commisit pelago ratem I primus ... ' ('Oak and triple bronze 
must have girt the breast of him who first committed his frail bark to the angry 
sea ... '); Horace. The Odes a.nd Epodes, translated by C. E. Bennett (Loeb Classical 
Library), Cambridge, Mass., and London, 1914, revised edition, 1946, pp. 12-13. 
161 

APPENDIX 
the essential influence of nature upon the life of nations. The greatest 
contrast is that between the inland principle and that of the coastal 
regions. More highly developed states combine the distinct attributes of 
both: the stability of the inland regions and the roving character of coastal 
life with all its contingencies. 
b. The New World 
The world is divided into the Old and the New- the latter taking its 
name from the fact that America and Australia only became known to 
the Europeans at a later stage of history. But the difference between them 
is not merely an external one, for the two are in fact essentially distinct: 
the New World is not just relatively new, but absolutely so, by virtue of 
its wholly peculiar character in both physical and political respects. Its 
geological age does not concern us here. I will not deny it the honour of 
also having risen from the sea at the time of the world's creation (or 
however we wish to describe it). Nevertheless, the archipelago between 
South America and Asia displays a physical immaturity even in respect 
of its origin; for most of the islands are based on coral, and are so con-
stituted as to be, so to speak, merely a superficial covering for rocks which 
rise up out of the bottomless depths and bear the marks of relatively 
recent origin. New Holland appears geographically no less immature; 
for if we proceed further inland from the English settlements, we en-
counter vast rivers which have not yet reached the stage of cutting chan-
nels for themselves, but lose themselves instead in marshy plains. America, 
as everyone knows, is divided into two parts; and although these are 
connected by an isthmus, it does not facilitate communications between 
them. On the contrary, they remain quite definitely separate. In North 
America, we first of all encounter a broad coastal strip along the eastern 
seaboard, beyond which a mountain range- the Blue Mountains or 
Appalachians, with the Allegheny Mountains to the north - extends. The 
rivers which flow from these water the coastal regions, which are admir-
ably suited to the needs of the free North American states which first 
grew up in this area. Beyond this mountain range, the StLawrence River, 
which is connected with the Great Lakes, flows from south to north, with 
the northern colonies of Canada along its banks. Further west, we meet 
the basin of the great Mississippi, with the other territories of the Missouri 
and Ohio Rivers which flow into it before it empties itself into the Gulf 
of Mexico. To the west of this region lies another long mountain range 
which runs on through Mexico and the Isthmus of Panama; under the 
name of the Andes or Cordilleras, it cuts off the entire western side of 
!62 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
South America. The coastal strip formed by these mountains is narrower 
and less hospitable than that of North America. Peru and Chile are 
situated on it. To the east of the mountains, the vast Orinoco and Amazon 
Rivers flow eastwards; they have formed wide valleys, which are not, 
however, a suitable setting for civilisation, for they are really no more than 
vast steppelands. To the south flows the Rio de la Plata, some of whose 
tributaries rise in the Cordilleras, and others in the northern mountain 
ridge which separates it from the basin of the Amazon. The basin of the 
Rio de la Plata includes Brazil and the Spanish republics. Columbia 
is the northern coastal region of South America, and in its western 
half the Magdalena River flows along the Andes and into the 
Caribbean. 
The New World may even have been connected with Europe and 
Africa at one time. But the recent history of the transatlantic continent 
indicates that, although it did possess an indigenous culture when it was 
first discovered by the Europeans, this culture was destroyed through 
contact with them; the subjugation of the country amounted, in fact, to 
its downfall. We do have information concerning America and its culture, 
especially as it had developed in Mexico and Peru, but only to the effect 
that it was a purely natural culture which had to perish as soon as the spirit 
approached it. America has always shown itself physically and spiritually 
impotent, and it does so to this day. For after the Europeans had landed 
there, the natives were gradually destroyed by the breath of European 
activity. Even the animals show the same inferiority as the human beings. 
The fauna of America includes lions, tigers, and crocodiles, but although 
they are otherwise similar to their equivalents in the Old World, they are 
in every respect smaller, weaker, and kss powerful. We are even assured 
that the animals are not as nourishing as the food which the Old World 
provides. And although America has huge herds of cattle, European beef is 
still regarded as a delicacy. 
As for the human population, few descendants of the original inhabi-
tants survive, for nearly seven million people have been wiped out. The 
natives of the West Indian islands have died out altogether. Indeed, the 
whole North American world has been destroyed and suppressed by the 
Europeans. The tribes of North America have in part disappeared, and 
in part withdrawn from contact with the Europeans. Their degeneration 
indicates that they do not have the strength to join the independent 
North American states. Culturally inferior nations such as these are 
gradually eroded through contact with more advanced nations which have 
gone through a more intensive cultural development. For the citizens of 

APPENDIX 
the independent states of North America are all of European descent, 
and the original inhabitants were unable to amalgamate with them. 
The natives have certainly learnt various arts from the Europeans, 
including that of brandy drinking, whose effect upon them has been 
disastrous. The only inhabitants of South America and Mexico who feel 
the need for independence are the Creoles, who are descended from a 
mixture of native and Spanish or Portuguese ancestors. They alone have 
attained a higher degree of self-awareness, and felt the urge for autonomy 
and independence. It is they who set the tone in their country. But it 
would appear that only a few native tribes share their attitude. Admittedly, 
we do hear reports of native peoples who have identified themselves with 
the recent efforts of the Americans to create independent states, but it is 
probable that very few of their members are of pure native origin. For 
this reason, the English have also adopted the policy in India of preventing 
the rise of a native Creole population, i.e. a people of mixed European and 
native blood. 
We should also note that a larger native populace has survived in 
South America, despite the fact that the natives there have been subjected 
to far greater violence, and employed in gruelling labours to which their 
strength was scarcely equal. The local populace is subjected to every kind 
of degradation. One must read the accounts of travellers to appreciate 
their mildness and passivity, their humility and obsequious submissive-
ness towards a Creole, and even more towards a European; and it will be 
a long time before the Europeans can succeed in instilling any feelings of 
independence into them. Some of them have visited Europe, but they 
are obviously unintelligent individuals with little capacity for education. 
Their inferiority in all respects, even in stature, can be seen in every 
particular; the southern tribes of Patagonia are alone more powerfully 
constituted, although they still live in a natural state of lawlessness and 
savagery. The religious brotherhoods have treated them in the correct 
manner, first impressing them by their spiritual authority and then 
allotting them tasks calculated to awaken and satisfy their needs. When 
the Jesuits and Catholic clergy first set out to acquaint the Indians with 
European culture and manners (for, as everyone knows, they founded a 
state in Paraguay and established monasteries in Mexico and California), 
they went into their midst and prescribed their daily duties for them as 
if they were minors; and, however idle the natives otherwise were, they 
duly carried them out in compliance with the authority of the fathers. 
The clergy also built storehouses for them and instructed them in their 
use, so that they might provide for their future needs. They chose the 
164 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
most appropriate means of bettering them, treating them much as one 
would treat children. I even recollect having read that a clergyman used 
to ring a bell at midnight to remind them to perform their matrimonial 
duties, for it would otherwise never have occurred to them to do so. 
These precepts at first served - quite rightly- to awaken their needs, 
which are the springs of all human activity. 
The Americans, then, are like unenlightened children, living from one 
day to the next, and untouched by higher thoughts or aspirations. The 
weakness of their physique was one of the main reasons why the negroes 
were brought to America as a labour force; for the negroes are far more 
susceptible to European culture than the Indians. The Portuguese were 
more humane than the Dutch, Spanish, and English. For this reason, it 
was easier on the coast of Brazil than elsewhere for slaves to gain their 
freedom, and large numbers of free negroes were to be found in this 
region. Among them was the black physician Dr Kingera, who first 
acquainted the Europeans with quinine. An English writer reports that, 
among the wide circle of his acquaintances, he had encountered instances 
of negroes becoming skilled workers and tradesmen, and even clergymen 
and doctors, etc. But of all the free native Americans he knew, he could 
think of only one who had proved capable of study and who eventually 
became a clergyman; but he had died soon afterwards as a result of 
excessive drinking. The weakness of the human physique in America is 
further aggravated by the lack of those absolute instruments which can 
alone establish a firmly based authority- namely horses and iron, the 
principal means by which the natives were subdued. And if at any time 
we speak of free citizens in South America, this applies only to peoples of 
mixed European, Asiatic, and American blood. The true Americans are 
only now beginning to adapt themselves to European culture. And where 
they do take steps to achieve independence, it is foreign means which 
have enabled them to do so: the cavalry of the Llanos, for example, is 
excellent; but it employs the European horse. But all of these native 
states are still in the process of formation, and their position is not com-
mensurate with that of the Europeans. In Spanish and Portuguese 
America, the natives still have to liberate themselves from slavery, and 
in North America, they lack a focus of communal existence without 
which no state can exist. 
Since the original American nation has vanished - or as good as 
vanished- the effective population comes for the most part from Europe, 
and everything that happens in America has its origin there. The surplus 
population of Europe has emigrated to America, by a process not unlike 
165 

APPENDIX 
that which occurred in former times in the Imperial German Cities. 
For these cities had many commercial privileges, and numerous emigrants 
fled to them in order to settle nearby so that they might enjoy the same 
rights as they did. In this way, Altona grew up near Hamburg, Offenbach 
near Frankfurt, Furth near Niirnberg, and Carouge near Geneva. 
Similarly, citizens who had suffered bankruptcy, and who could no longer 
enjoy the privileges of their trade in the city itself or attend its institutions 
without disgrace, would settle in the adjoining territory; they would have 
there all the advantages which such a town can offer - exemption from 
the dues which the older cities exacted from them, and from all obliga-
tion to belong to a guild. Thus, in the vicinity of the enclosed cities, new 
settlements arose in which the same trades were practised, but without 
the controls which the cities imposed upon them. The relationship 
between North America and Europe is similar. Many Englishmen have 
settled there, for the burdens and levies which are imposed on trade and 
commerce in Europe no longer apply in America. They bring with them 
all the advantages of civilisation, and are able to practise their skills without 
interference. The accumulation of European methods and skills has 
enabled them to reap some benefit from the vast areas of hitherto virgin 
soil. America has also become a place of refuge for the dregs of European 
society. Indeed, emigration to America offers many advantages, for the 
emigrants have cast off much that might restrict them at home, and they 
bring with them the benefits of European self-reliance and European 
culture without the accompanying disadvantages; and to those who are 
willing to work hard and who have not found an opportunity to do so in 
Europe, America certainly offers ample scope. 
With the exception of Brazil, the states of South America are generally 
republics, as in North America. But if we compare South America (includ-
ing Mexico) with North America, we discover an astonishing contrast. 
North America owes its prosperity to the growth of its industry and 
population and to civil order and firmly established freedom; the whole 
federation constitutes a single state with various political centres. In 
South America, however, the republics are based solely on military force; 
their whole history is one of continuous revolution: federations of states 
are dissolved and new ones are formed, and all these changes are the 
product of military revolutions. The more specific differences between 
the two parts of America reveal two opposing tendencies - the one in 
politics, and the other in religion. South America, in which the Spanish 
settled and asserted their supremacy, is Catholic, whereas North America, 
although a land of innumerable sects, is fundamentally Protestant. A 
x66 

GLOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
further incongruity is that South America was conquered, while North 
America was colonised. The Spanish took possession of South America 
in order to dominate it and to enrich themselves both through political 
office and by exacting tributes from the natives. Living far away from the 
mother country on which they depended, they had more scope to indulge 
their arbitrary inclinations; and by force, adroitness, and self-confidence 
they gained a great preponderance over the Indians. The noble and 
magnanimous aspects of the Spanish character did not accompany them 
to America. The Creoles, who are descended from the Spanish immigrants, 
lived on in the presumptuous ways they had inherited, and behaved in an 
arrogant manner towards the natives. The Creoles were themselves 
subject to the influence of the European Spaniards, and were fired by 
base ambitions for rank and titles. The people lived under the influence of 
a strict hierarchy and the dissolute rule of the secular and regular clergy. 
These peoples have still to extricate themselves from the spirit of hollow 
interests before they can attain the spirit of rationality and freedom. 
The North American states, however, were entirely colonised by the 
Europeans. Since Puritans, Episcopalians, and Catholics were constantly 
at loggerheads in England, with each party gaining the upper hand in 
turn, many of them emigrated to another continent in search of religious 
freedom. These were industrious Europeans who applied themselves to 
agriculture, tobacco and cotton planting, etc. Soon, their whole concern 
was with their work; and the substance which held the whole together 
lay in the needs of the populace, the desire for peace, the establishment of 
civil justice, security, and freedom, and a commonwealth framed in the 
interests of the individuals as discrete entities, so that the state was 
merely an external device for the protection of property. The mutual 
confidence of individuals and their trust in the goodwill of their fellows 
had their source in the Protestant religion; for in the eyes of the Protestant 
Church, religious works constitute the whole of life and human activity. 
Among the Catholics, however, there can be no grounds for any such 
confidence. For in worldly affairs, force and voluntary subservience rule 
supreme, and the forms which go under the name of constitutions are in 
this case merely a necessary expedient, offering no protection against 
mistrust. Thus, the population which has settled in North America is of 
a completely different order from that of South America. They had no 
united church to bind the states together and impose restrictions upon 
them. The industrial principle was imported from England, and industry 
itself contains the principle of individuality: for in industry, the individual 
understanding is developed and becomes the dominant power. In North 
167 

APPENDIX 
America, therefore, the various states were shaped in conformity with 
the various religions of the citizens. 
If we next compare North America with Europe, we find that the former 
affords a perennial example of a republican constitution. It has a subjective 
unity; for the head of state is a president who, as a guarantee against any 
monarchic ambitions, is elected for only four years. Universal protection 
of property and the almost complete absence of taxes are facts which are 
constantly held up for praise. This indeed sums up the basic character 
of the community: the private citizen is concerned above all with industry 
and profit, and particular interests, which look to the universal only in 
order to obtain private satisfaction, are dominant. A state of justice and a 
formal code of Ia ws are certainly present; but this formal justice is devoid 
of genuine integrity, and the American traders have the bad reputation of 
practising deceit under the protection of the law. If, on the one hand, the 
Protestant Church evokes the essential element of confidence (as we 
earlier noted), it thereby entails on the other hand a recognition of the 
moment of feeling, which can readily open the way to every kind of 
caprice. Those who adopt this point of view maintain that everyone is 
entitled to his own personal beliefs, and hence also to his own peculiar 
religion. This explains why their religion has split up into so many sects, 
culminating in the extremes of insanity; many of them practise forms of 
worship characterised by transports of enthusiasm, and sometimes by the 
most sensual forms of self-abandonment. This anarchy of worship has 
reached such proportions that the various congregations employ and dis-
miss their ministers as they see fit; for the church is not something which 
exists in and for itself, possessing a substantial spirituality and a corres-
ponding external framework, because religious affairs are simply regulated 
in accordance with the desires of the moment. In North America, the 
most unbridled licence prevails in all matters of the imagination, and 
there is no religious unity of the kind which has survived in the European 
states, where deviations are limited to a few confessions. 
As to the politics of North America, the universal purpose of the state is 
not yet firmly established, and there is as yet no need for a closely knit 
alliance; for a real state and a real government only arise when class 
distinctions are already present, when wealth and poverty are far advanced, 
and when a situation has arisen in which a large number of people can 
no longer satisfy their needs in the way to which they have been accus-
tomed. But America has a long way to go before it experiences tensions of 
this kind; for the outlet of colonisation is fully adequate and permanently 
open, and masses of people are constantly streaming out into the plains 
168 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
of the Mississippi. By this means, the principal source of discontent has 
been removed, and the continued existence of the present state of civil 
society is guaranteed. 
The example of the United States of America is frequently cited as an 
objection to the proposition that it is impossible in our times for a large 
state to have a liberal constitution; for it supposedly proves that republican 
states are possible on a large scale. But this argument is inadmissible; 
North America cannot yet be regarded as a fully developed and mature 
state, but merely as one which is still in the process of becoming; it has 
not yet progressed far enough to feel the need for a monarchy. It is a 
federal state, but such states are in the worst possible position as regards 
external relations. Its peculiar geographical situation has alone prevented 
this circumstance from bringing about its complete destruction. This was 
already obvious in the last war against England. The Americans could not 
conquer Canada and the English were able to bombard Washington 
simply because the strained relations between the provinces prevented 
them from mounting a vigorous campaign. Besides, there is no neigh-
bouring state in America with which the United States could have the 
kind of relationship which prevails among the European nations, a state 
which they would have to view with distrust and against which they would 
have to maintain a standing army. Canada and Mexico present no serious 
threat, and England has found over the last fifty years that a free America 
is more useful to it than a dependent one. In the War of Independence, 
the American militia certainly proved themselves just as brave as the 
Dutch under Philip II; but when they do not have to fight for their 
independence, they display less vigour, so that their militia acquitted 
itself badly against the English in 1814. Furthermore, America is a 
coastal country. The main principle in its states is that of trade, which is 
an extremely one-sided one; in particular, they practise intermediate 
trade, which has not yet attained the stability of the English system. It 
has neither credit nor security of capital, and still lacks a solid basis. 
Besides, it still deals only in raw materials, but not yet in factory goods or 
industrial products. The hinterland - i.e. the interior of North America-
has devoted itself to agriculture, and has made far greater progress in 
cultivating the land, although it is still not sufficiently developed either. 
Land can be obtained easily and cheaply, and no direct taxes are paid; 
but these advantages are counterbalanced by considerable inconveniences. 
The agricultural class has not yet become self-contained; it does not feel 
itself under pressure, and when this feeling does arise, it will easily find 
an outlet in cultivating new tracts of land. On this side of the Allegheny 
169 

APPENDIX 
Mountains, wave upon wave of farmers rolls on every year to occupy new 
areas. A state cannot truly exist as such until it has ceased to direct its 
energies into constant emigration; the agricultural class must no longer 
be able to spread outwards, but must rather turn in upon itself and join 
together to establish towns and town-based industries. Only then can a 
system of civil society arise, and this in turn is a prerequisite for the 
existence of an organised state. North America is still at the stage of 
cultivating new territories. Only when, as in Europe, it has ceased merely 
to augment its farming population will the inhabitants pre~s in upon each 
other to create town-based industries and communications instead of 
moving outwards in search of new land; only then will they set up a 
compact system of civil society and feel the need for an organic state. A 
comparison between the free states of North America and the countries 
of Europe is therefore impossible; for Europe, despite all its emigrations, 
has no natural outlet for its population such as America possesses: if the 
ancient forests of Germany still existed, the French Revolution would 
never have occurred. North America will be comparable with Europe 
only after the measureless space which this country affords is filled and 
its civil society begins to press in upon itself. 
In physical terms, America is not yet fully developed, and it is even less 
advanced in terms of political organisation. It is certainly an independent 
and powerful state, but it is still engaged in developing its purely physical 
assets. Only when the country is completely occupied will a firmly estab-
lished order be introduced. Such rudiments as already exist are of a 
European character. For the moment, the surplus population of the 
European states can continue to settle there; but when this comes to an 
end, the whole will turn in upon itself and become consolidated. It is 
therefore not yet possible to draw any lessons from America as regards 
republican constitutions. Consequently, this state does not really concern 
us, any more than do the other American states which are still struggling 
for independence. Only its external relations with Europe come into 
consideration, inasmuch as America is an annex which has accommodated 
the surplus population of Europe. The American continent had in some 
respects outlived itself when we first came into contact with it, and in other 
respects, it is still not yet fully developed. 
America is therefore the country of the future, and its world-historical 
importance has yet .to be revealed in the ages which lie ahead - perhaps in 
a conflict between North and South America. It is a land of desire for 
all those who are weary of the historical arsenal of old Europe. Napoleon 
is said to have remarked: Cette vieille Europe m'emzuze. It is up to America 
qo 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
to abandon the ground on which world history has hitherto been enacted. 
What has taken place there up to now is but an echo of the Old World 
and the expression of an alien life; and as a country of the future, it is of 
no interest to us here, for prophecy is not the business of the philosopher. 
In history, we are concerned with what has been and what is; in philo-
sophy, however, we are concerned not with what belongs exclusively to 
the past or to the future, but with that which zs, both now and eternally -
in short, with reason. And that is quite enough to occupy our attention. 
c. The Old World 
Putting aside the New World and whatever dreams we might build upon 
it, we now pass on to the Old World. It is essentially the setting of those 
events which we have to consider here, i.e. the setting of world history. 
Here again, we must first direct our attention to the moments and deter-
minations of nature. America is split up into two parts, and although these 
are connected by an isthmus, the connection is only a superficial one. 
The Old World consists of three parts, as the Ancients, with their eye 
for nature, correctly discerned. These divisions are not fortuitous, but the 
expression of a higher necessity which accords with the underlying con-
cept. The whole character of its territories is composed of three distinct 
elements, and this tripartite division is not arbitrary but spiritual, for it is 
essentially based on determinations of nature. The three continents of 
the Old World are therefore essentially related, and they combine to form 
a totality. Their distinguishing feature is that they all lie around a sea 
which provides them with a focus and a means of communication. This 
is an extremely important factor. For the connecting link between these 
three continents, the Mediterranean, is the focus of the whole of world 
history. With its many inlets, it is not an ocean which stretches out 
indefinitely and to which man has a purely negative relationship; on the 
contrary, it positively invites him to venture out upon it. The Mediter-
ranean Sea is the axis of world history. All the great states of ancient 
history lie around it, and it is the navel of the earth. Greece, that resplen-
dent light of history, lies there. Then in Syria, Jerusalem is the centre 
of Judaism and Christianity; south-east of it lie Mecca and Medina, the 
fountainhead of the Moslem faith; to the west lie Delphi and Athens, 
with Rome and Carthage further west still; and to the south lies Alexan-
dria, an even greater centre than Constantinople in which the spiritual 
fusion of east and west took place. The Mediterranean is therefore the 
heart of the Old World, its conditioning and vitalising principle. It is the 
centre of world history, in so far as the latter possesses any internal 
171 

APPENDIX 
coherence. World history would be inconceivable without it; it would be 
like ancient Rome or Athens without the forum or street where all the 
life of the city converged. The whole eastern part of Asia is remote from 
the current of world history and plays no part in it; the same applies to 
the north of Europe, which appeared in world history only at a later date 
and had no share in it in ancient times; for ancient history was strictly 
confined to the countries around the Mediterranean. Julius Caesar's 
crossing of the Alps, the conquest of Gaul, and the resultant contact 
between the Germanic peoples and the Roman Empire, were epoch-
making events in world history; for world history crossed the Alps along 
with them. The eastern part of Asia is one extreme and the lands to the 
north of the Alps are the other. The eastern portion lives on in its mono-
lithic unity; it does not enter into the movement of world history, which 
takes place rather at the other extreme, at the western end. The lands 
which lie beyond Syria constitute the beginning of world history, and this 
beginning itself lies suspended, as it were, outside the historical process; 
the occidental portion marks the end of this process, and its agitated 
centre lies around the Mediterranean. The latter is a major natural feature, 
and its influence is truly considerable; we cannot conceive of the historical 
process without the central and unifying element of the sea. 
We have already specified the geographical distinctions which can be 
observed within each continent as a whole- the upland regions, the broad 
river valleys, and the coastal lands. They occur in all three continents of 
the Old World, so that we can classify these according to which of the 
three principles is dominant within them. Africa, generally speaking, is 
the continent in which the upland principle, the principle of cultural 
backwardness, predominates. Asia, on the other hand, is the continent in 
which the great antitheses come into conflict, although its distinguishing 
feature is the second principle, that of the broad river valleys; these 
support a culture which broods for ever within itself. The totality consists 
in the union of all three principles, and this is to be found in Europe, the 
continent in which the spirit is united with itself, and which, while 
retaining its own solid substance, has embarked upon that infinite process 
whereby culture is realised in practice. (The only principle left over for 
America would be that of incompleteness or constant non-fulfilment.) 
The spiritual character of the three continents varies in accordance with 
these natural differences. In Africa proper, man has not progressed beyond 
a merely sensuous existence, and has found it absolutely impossible to 
develop any further. Physically, he exhibits great muscular strength, 
which enables him to perform arduous labours; and his temperament is 
172 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
characterised by good-naturedness, which is coupled, however, with 
completely unfeeling cruelty. Asia is the land of antithesis, division, and 
expansion, just as Africa is the land of concentration. One pole of the 
antithesis is that of ethical life, the universal rational essence which 
remains solid and substantial; the other is the exact spiritual opposite, that 
of egotism, infinite desires, and boundless expansion of freedom. Europe 
is the land of spiritual unity, of retreat from this boundless freedom into 
the particular, of control of the immoderate and elevation of the particular 
to the universal, and of the descent of the spirit into itself. It was Ritter2 
who formulated these distinctions between the continents and expressed 
them in a direct and tangible form. His works offer interesting sidelights 
on the historical implications of geography. 
a. Africa 
Generally speaking, Africa is a continent enclosed within itself, and this 
enclosedness has remained its chief characteristic. It consists of three 
parts, which are essentially distinct from one another. The divisions in its 
geographical configuration are so pronounced that even the differences in 
its spiritual character remain tied to these physical peculiarities. One 
might almost say that Africa consists of three continents which are 
entirely separate from one another, and between which there is no 
contact whatsoever. The first of these is Africa proper, the land to the 
south of the Sahara desert; it consists of almost entirely unexplored high-
lands with narrow coastal strips along its shores. The second is the land 
to the north of the desert, a coastal region which might be described as 
European Africa. And the third is the region of the Nile, the only valley 
land of Africa, which is closely connected with Asia. 
North Africa lies on the Mediterranean Sea and extends westwards 
along the Atlantic; it is separated from southern Africa by the great 
desert- a waterless sea- and by the River Niger. The desert is a more 
effective division than the sea, and the character of the people who live 
immediately on the Niger reveals the difference between the two regions 
particularly clearly. The northern region stretches across to Egypt, inter-
spersed with numerous sandy wastes to the north and traversed by ranges 
of mountains; between the mountains lie fertile valleys, which make it one 
of the most fruitful and attractive of territories. It includes the countries 
of Morocco, Fas (not Fez), Algeria, Tunis, and Tripoli. It could be said 
that this whole region does not really belong to Africa but forms a single 
unit with Spain, for both are part of one and the same basin. With this 
in mind, the prolific French writer and politician de Pradt3 has said that, 
173 

APPENDIX 
in Spain, one is already in Africa. This northern region is the non-
independent portion of Africa, for it has always been subject to foreign 
influences; it is not itself a theatre of world-historical events, and has 
always been dependent on revolutions of a wider scope. It was originally 
colonised by the Phoenicians, who established themselves as an indepen-
dent power in Carthage, then by the Romans, the Vandals, the Romans 
of the Byzantine Empire, the Arabs, and finally by the Turks, under 
whom it dissolved into various piratical states. It is a country which 
merely shares the fortunes of great events enacted elsewhere, but which 
has no determinate character of its own. This portion of Africa, like the 
Near East, is orientated towards Europe; it should and must be brought 
into the European sphere of influence, as the French have successfully 
attempted in recent times. 
Egypt, the land of the Nile, depends on this river for its entire existence 
and life. Unlike North Africa, it is one of those regions which we have 
described as constituting a focus, as destined to become the centre of 
a great and independent culture. It does have an association with the 
Mediterranean, an association which was at first interrupted but then 
intensively cultivated at a later date. 
Africa proper is the characteristic part of the whole continent as such. 
We have chosen to examine this continent first, because it can well be 
taken as antecedent to our main enquiry. It has no historical interest of 
its own, for we find its inhabitants living in barbarism and savagery in a 
land which has not furnished them with any integral ingredient of culture. 
From the earliest historical times, Africa has remained cut off from all 
contacts with the rest of the world; it is the land of gold, for ever pressing 
in upon itself, and the land of childhood, removed from the light of self-
conscious history and wrapped in the dark mantle of night. Its isolation is 
not just a result of its tropical nature, but an essential consequence of its 
geographical character. It is still unexplored, and has no connections 
whatsoever with Europe. For occupation of its coasts has not led the 
Europeans to penetrate its interior. Its shape is that of a triangle: to the 
west lies the Atlantic coast, which forms a deep indentation in the Gulf of 
Guinea, to the east lies the coast of the Indian Ocean from the Cape of 
Good Hope to Cape Guardafui, and to the north, the desert and the Niger. 
The northern part is in the process of acquiring a new character through 
contact with the Europeans. The main characteristic of Africa proper 
is that it appears to be predominantly an upland region, and in particular, 
that it has a very narrow coastal strip, habitable only in a few isolated 
spots. The next region towards the interior, in almost every case, is a 
174 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
belt of swampland; it lies at the foot of a circle of high mountains which 
are broken only at rare intervals by rivers, and even these do not afford 
a means of access to the interior: for the gaps they form are never far 
from the tops of the mountain ranges, creating only a few narrow openings 
which are often blocked by impassable waterfalls and raging cross-
currents. The north of Africa proper also appears to be cut off by a belt 
of mountains- the Mountains of the Moon to the south of the Niger. 
The coastal strip of Africa has been occupied for centuries by Europeans; 
but they did not succeed in reaching the interior until approximately 
fifteen years ago. 4 At the Cape of Good· Hope, the missionaries have 
recently crossed the mountains into the interior. Europeans have settled 
on the coastal strip in several places: on the east coast in Mozambique, 
and on the west coast in the Congo and Loango regions, on the Senegal, 
which flows through sandy deserts and mountains, and on the Gambia; 
but throughout the three to three-and-a-half centuries that they have 
known the coastal strip and occupied parts of it, they have only crossed 
the mountains at a few isolated places and for brief periods of time, 
and have nowhere gained a permanent footing beyond them. The coastal 
strip is sandy in parts and inhospitable, but further inland it is neverthe-
less fertile. Beyond it, however, lies the belt of swampland, full of the 
most luxuriant vegetation; it is also the home of all manner of rapacious 
animals, and its atmosphere is pestilential and almost poisonous to breathe. 
This, as in Ceylon, has made it virtually impossible to reach the interior. 
The English and Portuguese have often sent sufficient troops for such 
expeditions; but most of them have died in the swamplands, and the rest 
have invariably been overcome by the natives. Since so many rivers run 
through the mountains, one might well imagine that these would allow 
access by ship to the interior. The Congo (which is thought to be a 
branch of the Niger) and the Orange River have indeed proved navigable 
for short stretches, but then they are interrupted by frequent and im-
passable waterfalls. Given these natural conditions, the Europeans have 
gained little knowledge of the African interior; but from time to time, 
upland tribes have descended from the mountains, and displayed such 
barbarous ferocity that it proved impossible to establish any contact with 
them. Such outbreaks occur from time to time, and they are among the 
oldest traditions of the African continent. In the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries in particular, it is reported that the most assorted hosts of 
natives, terrible hordes, descended at several widely separated points 
upon the peaceful inhabitants of the slopes and the nations of the coasts, 
driving them dov.n to the edge of the sea. A similar attempt was made at 
175 

APPENDIX 
the Cape of Good Hope, but the assault was repulsed before it had passed 
the mountains. Several nations on the west coast appear to be remnants 
of such incursions; they have eventually been subjugated by later invaders, 
and reduced to the most wretched condition. Negro hordes have poured 
down across Abyssinia, and on the other side of the continent too. When 
their fury has abated, and when they have lived for a time on the slopes 
or in the coastal region and become pacified, they prove mild and indus-
trious, although they seemed completely intractable at the time of their 
initial onslaught. It is uncertain whether these upheavals are occasioned by 
internal unrest, and what the nature of this unrest may have been. What 
we do know of these hordes is the contrast in their behaviour before and 
after their incursions: during their wars and forays, they behaved with 
the most unthinking inhumanity and revolting barbarity, yet subsequently, 
when their rage had died down and peace was restored, they behaved 
with mildness towards the Europeans when they became acquainted 
with them. This was the case with the Fula and Mandingo peoples who 
inhabit the mountain terraces of Senegal and Gambia. 
In this main portion of Africa, history is in fact out of the question. 
Life there consists of a succession of contingent happenings and surprises. 
No aim or state exists whose development could be followed; and there is 
no subjectivity, but merely a series of subjects who destroy one another. 
In the past, little attention has been paid to this peculiar mode of self-
consciousness which the spirit exhibits in Africa. Numerous reports have 
come in from the most diverse regions, but most people regard them as in-
credible; they provide us rather with a collection offearful details than with 
a determinate image or principle such as we shall now attempt to extract 
from them. The literature on a subject of this kind is somewhat indefinite 
in scope, • and anyone who wishes to go into it in detail must avail him-
self of such information as is available in the useful works of reference. 
The best general account of Africa is that provided in Ritter's geography. 
We shall now attempt to define the universal spirit and form of the 
African character in the light of the particular traits which such accounts 
enumerate. This character, however, is difficult to comprehend, because 
it is so totally different from our own culture, and so remote and alien in 
relation to our own mode of consciousness. We must forget all the 
categories which are fundamental to our own spiritual life, i.e. the forms 
under which we normally subsume the data which confront us; the 
difficulty here is that our customary preconceptions will still inevitably 
intrude in all our deliberations. 
It must be said in general that, in the interior of Africa, the conscious-

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
ness of the inhabitants has not yet reached an awareness of any substantial 
and objective existence. Under the heading of substantial objectivity, we 
must include God, the eternal, justice, nature, and all natural things. 
When the spirit enters into relations with substantial things such as 
these, it knows that it is dependent upon them; but it realises at the same 
time that it is a value in itself in so far as it is capable of such relationships. 
But the Africans have not yet attained this recognition of the universal; 
their nature is as yet compressed within itself: and what we call religion, 
the state, that which exists in and for itself and possesses absolute 
validity- all this is not yet present to them. The circumstantial reports 
of the missionaries fully bear this out, and Mohammedanism seems to 
be the only thing which has brought the negroes at all nearer to culture. 
The Mohammedans also know better than the Europeans how to penetrate 
the interior of the country. 
The characteristic feature of the negroes is that their consciousness 
has not yet reached an awareness of any substantial objectivity - for 
example, of God or the law- in which the will of man could participate 
and in which he could become aware of his own being. The African, in 
his undifferentiated and concentrated unity, has not yet succeeded in 
making this distinction between himself as an individual and his essential 
universality, so that he knows nothing of an absolute being which is 
other and higher than his own self. Thus, man as we find him in Africa 
has not progressed beyond his immediate existence. As soon as man 
emerges as a human being, he stands in opposition to nature, and it is 
this alone which makes him a human being. But if he has merely made a 
distinction between himself and nature, he is still at the first stage of 
his development: he is dominated by passion, and is nothing more than a 
savage. All our observations of African man show him as living in a state 
of savagery and barbarism, and he remains in this state to the present day. 
The negro is an example of animal man in all his savagery and lawlessness, 
and if we wish to understand him at all, we must put aside all our European 
attitudes. We must not think of a spiritual God or of moral laws; to 
comprehend him correctly, we must abstract from all reverence and moral-
ity, and from everything which we call feeling. All this is foreign to man 
in his immediate existence, and nothing consonant with humanity is to 
be found in his character. For this very reason, we cannot properly feel 
ourselves into his nature, no more than into that of a dog, or of a Greek as 
he kneels before the statue of Zeus. Only by means of thought can we 
achieve this understanding of his nature; for we can only feel that which 
is akin to our own feelings. 

APPENDIX 
Thus, in Africa as a whole, we encounter what has been called the 
state of innocence, in which man supposedly lives in unity with God and 
nature. For in this state, man is as yet unconscious of himself. The spirit 
should not remain permanently in such a state, however, but must 
abandon this primitive condition. This primitive state of nature is in fact 
a state of animality. Paradise was that zoological garden in which man 
lived in an animal condition of innocence- but this is not his true destiny. 
Man is not truly a human being until he knows what goodness is, has 
experienced opposition, and become divided within himself. For he can 
only know what is good if he also has knowledge of evil. For this reason, 
the state of paradise is not a perfect one. That early state of perfection of 
which the myths of all nations speak means simply that the abstract 
destiny of man was already potentially present; but whether it also existed 
in reality is quite another matter. Its potential presence has been confused 
with its real existence. For the concept of the spirit is only potentially 
present, and it has wrongly been assumed that it already existed in reality. 
It is still only potentially present for us; but the purpose of the spirit is 
to ensure that it is also realised in practice. In real existence, this repre-
sents the final stage in history, although in terms of mere potentiality, it 
is equivalent to the first stage. We hear much about the higher intelligence 
of mankind in the earlier stages of history, of which- as Schlegel has 
claimed - the wisdom of the Indians in astronomy etc. allegedly still 
shows vestiges. But as far as this Indian wisdom is concerned, we have 
already pointed out that such traditions have proved extremely unreliable, 
and that the numbers they specify are empty fabrications [ cf. p. 133 above]. 
As we now proceed to review the principal moments within the African 
spirit, we shall have occasion to examine in detail certain particular 
features which illuminate its nature more fully; but our main concern 
must be with the general conception. Thus, if we turn first of all to the 
religion of the Africans, our own conception of religion tells us that it 
requires that man should recognise a supreme being which exists in and 
for itself as a completely objective and absolute being or higher power; 
this supreme being determines the course of everything, and, in contrast 
to it, man appears as a weaker and humbler creature. It can be conceived 
of either as a spirit, or as a natural power which governs the course of 
nature (although this is not its true form). Alternatively, the fantastic 
attitude has prevailed whereby men have worshipped the moon, the sun, 
and the rivers; they have animated these natural forms in their own 
imagination, at the same time treating them as completely independent 
agents. Religion begins with the awareness that there is something higher 
q8 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
than man. But this kind of religion is unknown to the negroes. The 
character of the Africans shows the antithesis between man and nature 
in its earliest form. In this condition, man sees himself and nature as 
opposed to one another, but with himself in the commanding position; 
this is the basic situation in Africa, as Herodotus was the first to testify. 
We can sum up the principle of African religion in his declaration that all 
men in Africa are sorcerers.5 That is, as a spiritual being, the African 
arrogates to himself a power over nature, and this is the meaning of his 
sorcery. Even today, the reports of the missionaries carry the same impli-
cation. Sorcery does not entail the idea of a God or of a moral faith, but 
implies that man is the highest power and that he alone occupies a position 
of authority over the power of nature. There is therefore no question of a 
spiritual adoration of God, nor of a realm of justice. God thunders, but 
he is not recognised as God. For the human spirit, God must be more 
than a thunderer, but this is not the case among the negroes. The Africans 
see nature as opposed to them; they are dependent upon it, and its powers 
fill them with fear. The river may swallow them up, and the earthquake 
may destroy their abodes. The success of the harvest and of the fruits on 
the trees is dependent upon the weather. At times they have too much rain, 
and at others too little; they need the storm, the rainy season, and the end 
of the rains, for neither the rains nor the dry season must last for too 
long. But although these natural forces, as well as sun, moon, trees, and 
animals, are recognised as powers in their own right, they are not seen as 
having an eternal law or providence behind them, or as forming part of a 
universal and permanent natural order. The African sees them ruling 
over him, but he also sees them as powers over which man can in some 
way gain mastery in turn. Man, then, is master of these natural forces. 
This has nothing whatsoever to do with veneration of God or the recog-
nition of a universal spirit as opposed to the spirit of the individual. 
Man knows only himself and his opposition to nature, and this is the sole 
rational element which the African peoples recognise. They acknowledge 
the power of nature, and attempt to raise themselves above it. They 
therefore also believe that man never dies from natural causes, and that 
it is not nature but the will of an enemy which has killed him by means of 
sorcery; they then resort to sorcery in turn, as they would against all 
natural agencies. 
Not everyone possesses this magical power; on the contrary, the Africans 
believe that it is concentrated in certain individuals. These individuals 
issue commands to the elements, and it is this activity which they call 
sorcery. Many devote themselves exclusively to regulating, predicting, 
'79 

APPENDIX 
and producing such effects for the benefit of mankind or of their peoples. 
The kings have ministers and priests -and sometimes a fully organised 
hierarchy of officials- whose task is to practise sorcery, to command the 
powers of nature, and to determine the weather. When their commands 
have proved persistently ineffectual, they are given a sound thrashing. 
Every place possesses such sorcerers, who conduct special ceremonies 
with all kinds of movements, dances, din, and clamour; and amidst this 
deafening noise they make their dispositions. If thunderstorms- and 
these are truly formidable- should break when the army is in the field, 
the sorcerers must perform their duty by threatening and commanding 
the clouds to be still. In the same way, they have to make rain in times of 
drought. They do not invoke God in their ceremonies; they do not turn 
to any higher power, for they believe that they can accomplish their aims 
by their own efforts. To prepare themselves for their task, they work 
themselves into a state of frenzy; by means of singing, convulsive dancing, 
and intoxicating roots or potions, they reach a state of extreme delirium 
in which they proceed to issue their commands. If they do not succeed 
after prolonged efforts, they decree that some of the onlookers - who are 
their own dearest relations- should be slaughtered, and these are then 
devoured by their fellows. In short, man considers himself the highest 
commanding authority. The priest will often spend several days in this 
frenzied condition, slaughtering human beings, drinking their blood, and 
giving it to the onlookers to drink. In practice, therefore, only some 
individuals have power over nature, and these only when they are beside 
themselves in a state of dreadful enthusiasm. All this applies to the African 
nations at large, although there are some modifications in individual cases. 
The missionary Cavazzi,6 for example, enumerates many such instances 
among the negroes. Among the Jagas or Jakas, there were priests known 
as Chitomen who had the reputation of being able to protect men against 
animals and water by means of amulets and the like. 
The second feature of their religion is that they give this power of theirs 
a visible form, projecting it out of their own consciousness and making 
images of it. The first object they encounter which they imagine has 
power over them - whether it be an animal, a tree, a stone, or a wooden 
image- is given the status of a genius. Each individual will fetch himself 
some such object from the priest. It is a fetish, a word to which the 
Portuguese first gave currency, and which is derived from feitifo or 
magic. Here, in the fetish, the arbitrary will of the individual does seem 
to be faced with an independent entity, but since the object in question 
is nothing more than the will of the individual projected into a visible 
ISO 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
form, this will in fact remains master of the image it has adopted. What 
they regard as their ruling power is therefore not an objective entity with 
an independent existence distinct from their own. The fetish remains in 
their power, and they reject it when it does not do their will. They then 
adopt something else as their higher authority and imagine that it exer-
cises power over them, but keep it in their own power for this very 
reason. If something unpleasant occurs which the fetish has failed to 
avert, the oracles which they have consulted are deemed to be false and 
become discredited. If the rain does not come or the crops do badly, they 
bind and beat the fetish or destroy and discard it, and at once create 
another to take its place. In other words, their god remains in their power, 
to be acknowledged and rejected at will, so that they do not progress 
beyond a condition of arbitrariness. A fetish of this kind has no indepen-
dent existence as an object of religion, and even less as a work of art. It is 
merely an artifact which expresses the arbitrary will of its creator, and 
which always remains in his hands. In short, this religion does not involve 
any relationship of dependence. And it is the same with the spirits of the 
dead, to whom they attribute a mediating function like that of the sor-
cerers. These spirits are also men, but what does suggest the presence of 
a higher authority here is that they are men who have cast off their 
immediate existence. This is the source of the Africans' cult of the dead, 
in which their deceased ancestors and forefathers are regarded as a power 
capable of acting against the living. They resort to these spirits in the same 
way as to fetishes, offering them sacrifices and conjuring them up; but 
where this proves unsuccessful, they punish the departed ancestor him-
self, casting his bones away and desecrating his remains. On the other 
hand, they believe that the dead avenge themselves if their needs are not 
satisfied, and misfortunes in particular are ascribed to their agency. We 
have already referred to the negroes' conviction that it is not nature or 
natural agencies which cause human sickness, and that men do not die 
by natural means; they believe that all this is the work of some sorcerer 
or enemy, or the vengeance of one of the dead. This is simply the super-
stition of witchcraft, whose terrible rule once prevailed in Europe too. 
The natives combat such sorcery by other more powerful magic. It some-
times happens that the keeper of the fetish is disinclined to make it 
perform its task; he is accordingly beaten and forced to work his magic. 
One of the main kinds of magic practised by the Chitomen consists in 
propitiating the dead or exacting their services by the most fearful 
abominations. At the command of the dead, reincarnated in the priests, 
human sacrifices etc. are offered. Thus, the object of their religion always 
181 

APPENDIX 
remains subject to their own arbitrary will. The power of the dead over 
the living is indeed recognised, but held in no great respect; for the 
negroes issue commands to their dead and cast spells upon them. In 
this way, the substance always remains in the power of the subject. Such 
is the religion of the Africans, and it does not extend beyond these limits. 
It does admittedly presuppose that man is superior to nature, but only 
in an arbitrary sense. For it is only his contingent will which stands above 
the natural world, and he regards this as no more than a means. He does 
not do it the honour of treating it in accordance with its own nature, but 
simply commands it to do his will. This nevertheless embodies a more 
correct principle than does nature-worship, which is often considered an 
act of piety; for people frequently maintain that natural phenomena are 
works of God, thereby implying that the works of man, i.e. the works of 
reason, are not likewise divine. The negroes' consciousness of nature is not 
a consciousness of its objective existence; still less is it a consciousness of 
God as a spirit, as something higher in and for itself than nature. Nor do 
they possess that understanding which uses nature as a means - by sailing 
on the sea, for example, and generally exercising control over nature. The 
negroes' power over nature is only an imaginary power, an illusory 
authority. 
As for the relationship between men themselves, it follows, firstly, 
that man is posited as the highest instance, and secondly, that he has no 
respect for himself or for others; for such a respect would touch on a 
higher or absolute value peculiar to man. Only when he attains a conscious-
ness of a higher being does man become capable of true reverence. For 
if the arbitrary will is the absolute, and the only solid and objective reality 
recognised by man, the spirit cannot have reached the stage of knowing 
anything universal. For this reason, the Africans know nothing of what 
we call the immortality of the soul. They do recognise what we call ghosts, 
but this is not the same thing as immortality: for immortality implies 
that man is a spiritual being in and for himself, and that his nature is 
unchanging and eternal. The negroes have, therefore, a complete contempt 
for man, and it is this above all which determines their attitude towards 
justice and morality. Their belief in the worthlessness of man goes to 
almost incredible lengths; their political order can be regarded as tyranny, 
but this is considered perfectly legitimate and is not felt to constitute an 
injustice. Along with this goes the belief that it is quite normal and per-
missible to eat human flesh. This is certainly the case among the Ashanti, 
and among the tribes further south on the River Congo and on the eastern 
side of Africa. Cannibalism at once strikes us as utterly barbarous and 
182 

GEOGRAPIIICA!. BASIS OF \\"ORLD IIISTOR\ 
revolting, and we instinctively reject it. But we cannot speak of instinct 
in the case of human beings, for such reactions have a spiritual quality 
about them. All men who have progressed even to a limited extent in 
consciousness have respect for human beings as such. In an abstract sense, 
we may well say that flesh is flesh, and that what we eat is simply a 
matter of taste; but our powers of representation • tell us that this is 
human flesh, identical with that of our own bodies. The human body is 
of an animal nature, but it is essentially the body of a being capable of 
representation; in short, it has psychological associations. But this is not 
the case with the negroes, and the eating of human flesh is quite compatible 
with the African principle; to the sensuous negro, human flesh is purely 
an object of the senses, like all other flesh. It is not used primarily as food; 
but at festivals, for example, many hundreds of prisoners are tortured 
and beheaded, and their bodies are returned to those who took them 
prisoner so that they may distribute the parts. In some places, it is true, 
human flesh has even been seen on sale in the markets. At the death of a 
rich man, hundreds may well be slaughtered and devoured. Prisoners 
are murdered and slaughtered, and as a rule the victor consumes the 
heart of his slain enemy. And at magical ceremonies, it very often happens 
that the sorcerer murders the first person he encounters and divides his 
body among the crowd. 
Since human beings are valued so cheaply, it is easily explained why 
slavery is the basic legal relationship in Africa. The only significant 
relationship between the negroes and the Europeans has been- and still 
is- that of slavery. The negroes see nothing improper about it, and the 
English, although they have done most to abolish slavery and the slave 
trade, are treated as enemies by the nrgroes themselves. For one of the 
main ambitions of the kings is to sell their captured enemies or even their 
own subjects, and, to this extent at least, slavery has awakened more 
humanity among the negroes. The negroes are enslaved by the Europeans 
and sold to America. Nevertheless, their lot in their own country, where 
slavery is equally absolute, is almost worse than this; for the basic prin-
ciple of all slavery is that man is not yet conscious of his freedom, and 
consequently sinks to the level of a mere object or worthless article. In all 
the African kingdoms known to the Europeans, this slavery is endemic 
and accepted as natural. But the distinction between masters and slaves 
is a purely arbitrary one. The lesson we can draw from this condition 
of slavery among the negroes - and the only aspect of it which concerns 
• Vorstel/ung. 

APPENDIX 
us here- is the same as that which we have already learnt in the realm of 
ideas: namely that the state of nature is itself a state of absolute and 
consistent injustice. Every intermediate stage between it and the reality 
of the rational state admittedly does retain certain elements and aspects 
of injustice, so that we encounter slavery even in the Greek and Roman 
states, and serfdom has survived until the most recent times. But when 
it occurs within an organised state, it is itself a stage in the progress 
away from purely fragmented sensuous existence, a phase in man's 
education, and an aspect of the process whereby he gradually attains a 
higher ethical existence and a corresponding degree of culture. Slavery 
is unjust in and for itself, for the essence of man is freedom; but he must 
first become mature before he can be free. Thus, it is more fitting and 
correct that slavery should be eliminated gradually than that it should 
be done away with all at once. 
Slavery ought not to exist, as it is by definition unjust in and for itself. 
This 'ought' expresses a subjective attitude, and as such, it has no 
historical justification. For it is not yet backed up by the substantial 
ethical life of a rational state. In rational states, slavery no longer exists; 
but before such states have come into being, the authentic Idea is present 
in some areas of life only as an unfulfilled obligation, in which case 
slavery is still necessary: for it is a moment in the transition towards a 
higher stage of development. We cannot yet expect that man will be 
regarded as essentially free simply because he is a human being. This was 
not the case among the Greeks and Romans either; the Athenian was 
free only as a citizen of Athens, and so on. It is now generally accepted 
that man, as a human being, is free; but where this is not the case, man 
has value only in one or other of his particular capacities: for example, 
partners in marriage, relatives, neighbours, and fellow citizens are of 
value to one another. Among the negroes, however, even these values are 
scarcely present; their moral sentiments are extremely weak, or, to be 
more precise, they are altogether deficient. The first ethical relationship 
of all, that of the family, is a matter of total indifference to the negroes. 
Men sell their wives, parents sell their children, and children sell their 
parents whenever they have it in their power to do so. Since slavery is so 
prevalent, all those bonds of moral esteem which we cherish towards one 
another have disappeared, and it never occurs to the negroes to expect of 
others what we are entitled to demand of our fellows. They devote no 
attention to their sick parents, apart from seeking occasional advice from 
the Chitomen. Philanthropic sentiments oflove etc. entail a consciousness 
of the self which is no longer confined to the individual person. For when 
184 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
I love someone, I am conscious of myself in the other person; or, as 
Goethe puts it, my heart is open. Love, then, is an enlargement of the 
self. The polygamy of the negroes often has the sole object of producing 
many children, so that they can all be sold as slaves; and they are quite 
oblivious to the injustice of this situation. Indeed, they carry this anomaly 
to unbounded lengths. The king of Dahomey, for example, has 3333 
wives; every rich man has numerous wives, and his many children provide 
him with a new source of revenue. Missionaries7 tell us how a negro 
once came to church and announced to the Franciscans with fearful 
lamentations that he was now completely destitute, as he had already sold 
all his relatives, including his father and mother. 
The distinguishing feature of the negroes' contempt for humanity is 
not so much their contempt for death as their lack of respect for life. 
They set as little value on life as they do on human beings as such, for 
life is only valuable in so far as there is a higher value in man. Their 
contempt for life does not mean that they are weary of it, or that some 
fortuitous irritation has overtaken them; on the contrary, life in general 
has no value for them. The negroes often kill themselves if their honour 
is violated or if they have been punished by the king. If someone in this 
position fails to do so, he is regarded as a coward. They give no thought 
to the preservation of life, or to death itself. The great courage of the 
negroes, reinforced by their enormous physical strength, must also be 
ascribed to this lack of respect for life; for they allow themselves to be shot 
down in thousands in their wars with the Europeans. In the war between 
the Ashanti and the English, the natives persisted in running straight 
up to the mouths of the cannon, although they were invariably shot down 
fifty at a time. In fact, life is of no value unless it has a worthy object. 
If we now turn to the elements of the political constitution, we must 
realise that the whole nature of Africa is such that there can be no such 
thing as a constitution. The government must necessarily be patriarchal 
in character. The main characteristic of this patriarchal phase is the 
arbitrary rule of the senses, the energy of the sensuous will; in this 
arbitrary state, ethical relationships of an essentially universal content -
i.e. those which take no account of the consciousness in its individual 
aspects, but see its value as residing in its inner universality (whether in 
legal, religious, or ethical contexts)- are as yet completely undeveloped. 
Where this universal quality is weak or remote, the political union cannot 
be that of a state governed by free rational laws. For, as we have seen, 
even the family ethos is lacking in strength. In marriage and domestic life, 
polygamy predominates; as a result, the parents are indifferent towards 

APPENDIX 
each other and towards their children, and the children themselves arc 
indifferent towards their parents and their fellows. Thus, the arbitrary 
will has no bond whatsoever to restrain it. Under these conditions, that 
larger union of individuals which we call the state cannot possibly come 
into being; for the state is based on rational universality, which is a law 
of freedom. Where the arbitrary will prevails, there can be no union 
except that created by external force; for the arbitrary will itself offers 
no incentive for men to unite, but merely allows them to follow their own 
individual inclinations. Consequently, the African regime is one of des-
potism; the external authority is itself arbitrary, for there is no rational 
and communal spirit of which the government could be the representative 
and executor. A ruler stands at the head, for sensuous barbarism can only 
be restrained by despotic power. This despotism does have an imposing 
quality, because it places restraints on the arbitrary will, which, for all 
its arrogance, has no intrinsic value. From the formal point of view, the 
arbitrariness of the autocrat deserves respect, for it is the basis of the 
whole political union; it therefore represents a higher principle than that 
of individual arbitrariness. Arbitrariness, whether sensuous or reflective 
in character, requires a unifying principle which only an external authority 
can supply. If it has no power in its own right and is subject to a higher 
authority, it adopts a cringing demeanour; but when it itself comes to 
power, it behaves arrogantly towards the same authority before which it 
had previously humbled itself. Consequently, it can manifest itself in 
many different ways. And wherever we encounter despotism ruling in a 
particularly savage manner, we find that its arbitrary power is itself 
cancelled out by counteracting forces. In the negro states, the king is 
always accompanied by the executioner, whose office is regarded as 
extremely important; he is used by the king to eliminate all suspect 
persons, just as the king himself may be killed by him if the nobles of the 
country demand it. For, since the subjects are men of equally savage 
temper, they impose restrictions on their master in turn. Elsewhere, the 
power of despots is mediated, and on the whole they have to yield to the 
arbitrary will of the mighty. The form which despotism then assumes is 
that, although a chieftain- whom we may call the king- is the supreme 
ruler, he has under him a group of grandees, chiefs, or captains, whom 
he must consult on all matters and whose consent he must obtain if he 
wishes in particular to declare war, conclude peace, or levy a tribute. 
This is the case among the Ashanti; the king is served by a multitude of 
subordinate princes, and even the English pay him a tribute which he 
shares with his various chiefs. 
186 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF 'WORLD HISTORY 
In this way, the African despot can acquire more or less authority, and 
dispose of this or that chief by means of force or stratagem as the occasion 
presents itself. Besides, the kings enjoy certain additional privileges. 
Among the Ashanti, the king inherits all the property left by his deceased 
subjects; in other places, all unmarried girls belong to the king, and 
anyone who seeks a wife must buy her from him. But if the negroes are 
dissatisfied with their king, they depose and execute him. There is a 
little-known kingdom in the vicinity of Dahomey which has something 
approaching a history of its own- that ruled by the king of Eyio. It lies 
deep in the interior of Africa, which does not consist entirely of great 
arid deserts. In fact, all the expeditions which have succeeded in reaching 
the interior have discovered large empires, and the Portuguese of earlier 
times report that armies of around zoo,ooo men have done battle there. 
The king of Eyio also has several hundred thousand cavalrymen. Like the 
ruler of the Ashanti, he is surrounded by grandees who are not wholly 
subject to his arbitrary power. If he does not rule justly, they send him a 
deputation which presents him with three parrot's eggs. The delegates 
then put forward certain proposals; they thank him for the efforts he 
has made to rule them justly, and then tell him that his exertions have 
probably over-taxed his energy and that he is doubtless in need of sleep 
and rest. The king thanks them for their understanding and advice, 
acknowledges their goodwill, and retires to his apartments; he does not 
lie down to sleep, however, but has himself strangled by his women. A 
king of the Ashanti who allowed himself to be detained in the kingdom 
of his father-in-law by the blandishments of his wife was similarly 
deposed twenty years ago. His lieutenants invited him to return for the 
annual festival; but when he did not arrive, they placed his brother on 
the throne instead. 
Thus, even such despotism as this is not completely blind; the peoples 
of Africa are not just slaves, but assert their own will too. In East Africa, 
Bruce8 travelled through a state in which the prime minister was the 
executioner, although the only person he was permitted to decapitate 
was the king: thus, the sword really hangs above the despot's head day 
and night. On the other hand, the monarch has absolute power over the 
lives of his subjects. Where life has no value, it is recklessly squandered. 
The African nations engage in bloody battles which often last for a week 
on end and in which hundreds of thousands perish. The issue is usually 
decided by chance, and then the victors massacre everyone within their 
reach. Under many princes, the executioner is the prime minister. It is 
much the same in all the negro states, which are very numerous. The office 

APPENDIX 
of head of state is usually inherited, but the successor rarely comes to 
power in a peaceful manner. The prince is hclu in very high esteem, but 
he must share his power with his generals. The negroes also have com ts of 
law and trials. In the north, where the Moors have propagated the Mos-
lem faith, their customs have become less barbarous. And the negroes 
with whom the English first had dealings were Mohammedans. 
Their character being as it is, the Africans are extremely prone to 
fanaticism. The realm of the spirit is so poor among them, and yet the 
spirit in itself is so intensive that any idea which is disseminated among 
them may drive them to respect nothing and destroy everything. We find 
them living a peaceful and good-natured existence over long periods of 
time. But, for all their good nature, they are also capable of transports of 
frenzy. They are conscious of so few things which deserve respect in and 
for themselves that whatever idea takes hold of them becomes their sole 
motive force, spurring them on to annihilate everything they encounter. 
They seize upon and realise every idea which is thrown into their minds 
with all the energy of their will, and destroy everything in the process. 
Such nations live peacefully over long periods, and then suddenly surge 
up into a complete state of frenzy. The destruction which results from 
this sudden ferment and upheaval has no real content or thought behind 
it, for it is rather a physical than a spiritual fanaticism. Thus, we often 
see such nations rushing down to the coast in a wild fury, killing everyone 
they meet, with no other motive than that of madness and rage; their 
bravery is solely a product of their fanaticism. In the negro states, every 
decision takes on a quality of fanaticism, a fanaticism which surpasses all 
belief. An English traveller9 reports that, when the Ashanti have resolved 
to go to war, solemn ceremonies are first enacted; these include the wash-
ing of the bones of the king's mother with human blood. As a preliminary 
to war, the king decrees an attack on his own capital, as if to drive himself 
into a fury. When a punitive war was about to be launched against a 
nation which had refused to pay tribute, the king despatched a note to the 
English resident Hutchinson10 with the following message: 'Christian, 
take heed and watch over your family. The messenger of death has drawn 
his sword and will smite the necks of many of the Ashanti; when the 
drum is sounded, it will be the signal of death for multitudes. Come to 
the king if you can, and fear not for yourself.' The drum \\as sounded; 
the warriors of the king, armed with short swords, went out on their 
murderous mission, and a terrible bloodbath ensued: all who encountered 
the frenzied negroes as they rushed through the streets were struck down. 
Nevertheless, no great numbers were murdered on this occasion; for 
188 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
the people had learnt in advance of the attack and taken appropriate 
precautions. On such occasions, the king has all whom he regards as 
suspect killed, and the deed then takes on the character of a sacred act. 
And it is much the same at funerals, where everything bears the mark of 
frenzy and dementedness. The slaves of the deceased man are slaughtered, 
and it is decreed that their heads belong to the fetish and their bodies 
to the relatives, who duly devour them. When the king dies in Dahomey, 
a general tumult breaks loose in his palace, whose dimensions are enor-
mous; all utensils are destroyed, and universal carnage begins. The wives 
of the king prepare for death (and, as already mentioned, there are 3333 of 
them); they look upon their death as necessary, adorn themselves in 
preparation for it, and order their slaves to kill them. All the bonds of 
society are loosed in the town and throughout the kingdom; murder and 
theft break out everywhere, and private revenge is given free rein. On 
one such occasion, soo women died in the palace in the space of six 
minutes. The officers of state proceed with all possible speed to appoint 
the successor to the throne, in order to put an end to the riot and slaughter. 
The most fearful instance is that of a woman who ruled over the Jagas 
in the depths of the Congo.U She was converted to Christianity, became 
apostate, and was converted once again. She lived an extremely dissolute 
life, and was constantly in conflict with her mother, whom she removed 
from the throne. She established a state of women, which made itself 
famous by its conquests, and renounced all love towards her mother 
and towards her son. She pounded the latter, who was still a young child, 
in a mortar before a public assembly, besmeared herself with his blood, 
and made sure that the blood of such pounded children was always in 
supply. Her laws were indeed terrible. She had all the men expelled or 
murdered, and all the women were compelled to kill their male offspring. 
Pregnant women had to leave the encampment and give birth in the scrub-
land. And at the head of this nation of women, she proceeded to wreak the 
most terrible havoc. Like furies, they destroyed everything in the neigh-
bourhood, and lived on human flesh; and, since they did not cultivate the 
soil, they were compelled to support themselves by plundering. Sub-
sequently, the women were permitted to use their prisoners of war as 
husbands, who duly became their slaves, and even to give them their 
freedom. This way of life continued for many years. That women go to 
war is one of the peculiarities of African existence. In Ashanti-Dahomey, 
there is a corps of women who go on expeditions with the king. And in 
Dahomey, one might imagine that Plato's republic had been partially 
realised, for the children do not belong to the family, but arc brought up 
189 

APPENDIX 
publicly and distributed among the villages soon after birth. The king 
has a large number of them around him; and anyone who wishes to marry 
must pay a few dollars at the royal palace, whereupon he is presented with 
a wife. Each must take the woman he is given, be she young or old. The 
wives of the king receive these candidates for marriage, and first give 
each of them a mother, whom they are required to maintain. They must 
then return for a second time before they are given a wife. 
From all these various traits we have enumerated, it can be seen that 
intractability is the distinguishing feature of the negro character. The 
condition in which they live is incapable of any development or culture, 
and their present existence is the same as it has always been. In face of 
the enormous energy of sensuous arbitrariness which dominates their 
lives, morality has no determinate influence upon them. Anyone who 
wishes to study the most terrible manifestations of human nature will 
find them in Africa. The earliest reports concerning this continent tell us 
precisely the same, and it has no history in the true sense of the word. 
We shall therefore leave Africa at this point, and it need not be mentioned 
again. For it is an unhistorical continent, with no movement or develop-
ment of its own. And such events as have occurred in it- i.e. in its northern 
region - belong to the Asiatic and European worlds. Carthage, while it 
lasted, represented an important phase; but as a Phoenician colony, it 
belongs to Asia. Egypt will be considered as a stage in the movement of 
the human spirit from east to west, but it has no part in the spirit of 
Africa. What we understand as Africa proper is that unhistorical and 
undeveloped land which is still enmeshed in the natural spirit, and which 
had to be mentioned here before we cross the threshold of world history 
itself. 
{3. Asia 
Having disposed of these preliminary matters, we now at last find ourselves 
on the real theatre of world history. Among the negroes, the natural will 
of the individual is not yet negated; but it is only through its negation 
that a consciousness of being in and for itself can arise. This consciousness 
first emerges in the Oriental world. We find here a power which exists in 
and for itself, and man only exists in and for himself in so far as he is 
related to this universal substance. It is this relationship to the substantial 
power which unites the individuals with one another. Thus, it is in Asia 
that the ethical world of political consciousness first arose. Asia is the 
continent of sunrise and of origins in general. Admittedly, every country 
is hoth east and west in relation to others, so that Asia is the western 
190 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
continent from the point of view of America; but just as Europe is the 
centre and end of the Old World- i.e. absolutely the west- so also is 
Asia absolutely the east. It is there that the light of the spirit, the con-
sciousness of a universal, first emerged, and with it the process of world 
history. 
We must first of all outline the geographical nature and formation of 
Asia. In terms of world history, the natural conditions in Africa are on 
the whole negative; but in Asia, they arc positive. This also explains why 
the Asians have so great an appreciation of nature. Just as nature is the 
basis of history itself, so also must it be the basis of our study of history. 
The natural world and the spiritual world together form the living 
totality of history. The physical constitution of Asia presents absolute 
antitheses and the essential relationship between these antitheses. Its 
various geographical principles are in themselves fully developed and 
perfected forms. The two types of locality in question, the uplands and 
the valley plains, are in Asia the theatre of completely contrasting ways of 
life; but their relationship is essentially one of interaction, and they are 
not isolated in the same way as Egypt, for example. On the contrary, 
this very relationship between the two completely opposite dispositions 
is a characteristic feature of Asia. 
We must first of all eliminate Siberia, the northern slope of Asia. For 
it lies outside the scope of our enquiry. The whole character of Siberia 
rules it out as a setting for historical culture and prevents it from attaining 
a distinct form in the world-historical process. It does have certain 
advantages, in that it contains great rivers which flow down from the 
Altai Mountains to the northern ocean; but these advantages are nullified 
by the effects of climate. The rest of Asia, like Africa, contains in the first 
place a massive upland region, surrounded by a ring of mountains which 
include the highest peaks in the world. This ring of mountains forms a 
continuous range, with steep escarpments on its outward edges. The 
uplands of Asia are bounded to the south and south-east by the Mustag 
or Imaus Mountains, with the Himalayas running parallel to them further 
south. Towards the east, the basin of the Amur is bounded by a mountain 
chain which runs from south to north. Most of this region belongs to 
the Manchus, who are also the rulers of China; their original way of 
life, which even the Emperor of China adopts in the summer season, is 
nomadic. To the north lie the Altai and Dzungarian Mountains; the 
latter are linked in the north-west with the Mussart and in the west 
with the Belurtag, which are in turn linked with the Mustag by way of 
the Hindu Kush. 

APPENDIX 
This high chain of mountains is pierced by great rivers which subse-
quently form broad valley plains of immense fertility and luxuriant growth, 
each the centre of its own peculiar culture. They are alluvial plains which 
cannot properly be described as valleys; they are quite different in struc-
ture from the river territories of Europe, which have more true valleys 
with endless branches on either side. Such plains include that of China, 
formed by the Huang-Ho and Yangtze-Kiang (the Yellow and Blue 
Rivers), which flow from west to east; next, there is that of India, formed 
by the Ganges; the Indus, which also supports a culture in the north (in 
the Punjab region), is of less importance, for the region it flows through 
to the south consists largely of sandy plains; and then there are the coun-
tries of the Tigris and Euphrates, which rise in Armenia and flow down 
to the west of the Persian mountains. Similar river valleys occur to the 
east and west of the Caspian Sea - those to the east are formed by the 
Oxus and Yaxartes (Gihon and Sihon), which flow into the Aral Sea. 
The first of these, the Gihon, formerly flowed into the Caspian Sea, but 
subsequently changed its course. The vast region between the Belurtag 
and the Caspian Sea is a broad plain with the fuothills of the neighbouring 
mountains, and is of particular importance for world history. To the west, 
the Cyrus and Araxes (Kura and Araks) form a narrower but equally 
fertile plain. The central Asian highlands, in which Arabia (as the higher 
part of the plains) may be included, resemble both the plains and the 
highlands in character. Here, the opposite principles receive their freest 
expression; they are the home oflight and darkness, of outward splendour 
and the abstraction of pure contemplation- in short, of what we call 
Orientalism. This is particularly true of Persia. 
The plains and uplands form a complete contrast to one another; the 
third type of country is a combination of these two principles, such as is 
found in the Near East. This includes Arabia, the land of deserts and 
high plateaux, the empire of unrestricted freedom from which the most 
extreme fanaticism has sprung; it also includes Syria and Asia Minor, 
which are connected with the sea and form a link with Europe. Their 
culture is drawn towards Europe, with which they are constantly in 
contact. 
After these remarks on the geographical peculiarities of Asia, something 
must be said about the effects these have had on the character of its 
peoples and history. The most important feature is the relationship be-
tween the uplands and the river plains. Or, to be more precise, it is not 
so much the upland plateau itself which is of great world-historical 
importance, as the mountain ravines which lie at the conjunction of the 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
mountains and the plains. The relationship between the nations who live 
in such areas with the kind of culture which is found on the river plains 
calls for particular emphasis in Asian history. Among the mountain 
nations, the basic principle is that of stock-rearing, whereas the principle 
of the river plains is that of agriculture and the development of trade. 
The third principle, which is peculiar to the Near East, is that of foreign 
commerce and navigation. These principles have been presented here in 
abstract terms, but they also enter into essential relations with one another; 
they thereby appear in various distinct determinations, and form the 
common principles which underlie the way oflife and historical character 
of the nations in question. 
For example, the stock-rearing of the mountain peoples leads to three 
different kinds of existence. On the one hand, we see the peaceful life of 
the nomads running its uniform cycle with few needs to be satisfied. On 
the other hand, unrest may give rise to a life of plundering, which is also 
found among the nomadic peoples. And thirdly, they may actually 
embark on a career of conquest. Such nations, without developing a 
historical status of their own, do have a powerful impulse towards internal 
change; and even if they do not yet possess a historical content, they 
nevertheless contain the beginnings of history. In their immediate 
activity- the rearing of horses, camels, and sheep (and to a lesser extent 
cattle) - they pursue their own wandering and unstable life; this can 
either remain in its usual peaceful course, or give way to a life of plunder-
ing, or lead to a situation in which great masses congregate together and 
swoop down upon the river plains. Such nomadic hordes never attain 
any degree of internal development; they become civilised only when 
they have lost their original character through living on the river plains, 
where they first appeared in the role of conquerors. But incursions of 
this kind provide enormous historical impulses, creating havoc and 
transforming the external configuration of the world. 
The second principle, that of the river plains with their agricultural 
existence, is the most interesting one for our present purposes. Agricul-
ture, by its very nature, requires that the nomadic existence should 
come to an end. It necessarily entails a settled way of life, and demands 
foresight and provision for the future. Reflection on a universal object 
is thereby awakened, for the family must be provided for in a universal 
manner; and this in itself involves the principle of property and of private 
industry. China, India, and Babylon have become great civilised countries 
in this way. But they have remained enclosed within themselves and have 
not developed their links with the maritime principle- at least not after 
193 

APPENDIX 
their own peculiar principle had come to fruition; and if they do subse-
quently take to the sea, it plays no real part in their culture and civilisation. 
Thus, the only connection they could have with later developments in 
history was through being visited and explored by other nations. But it is 
the intermediate principle which properly characterises Asia; the anti-
thesis of day and night - or in geographical terms, that of river plains and 
a ring of mountains- is the determining factor in Asian history. The ring 
of mountains round the upland region, the uplands themselves, and the 
river plains, determine the physical and spiritual character of Asia. But 
these are not themselves the concrete elements of history, for the poles 
of the antithesis are absolutely related to one another: the settled existence 
of those who inhabit the fertile plains is the goal to which the unstable, 
restless, and nomadic inhabitants of the mountains and upland regions 
constantly aspire. Regions which are naturally distinct from one another 
become essentially related in the course of history. 
In the Near East, both of these elements are united: it is the country 
of varied forms, and its main peculiarity is its relationship with Europe. 
It has not retained its own productions, but has passed them on to 
Europe. It has given birth to principles which were not developed in 
their country of origin but were brought to fruition in Europe. It has 
witnessed the rise of all religious and political principles, but their 
development took place in Europe. This region is associated with the 
Mediterranean Sea. Arabia and Syria - and particularly the Syrian coast 
with Judaea, Tyre, and Sidon- have adopted the principle of commerce 
from its earliest beginnings, and developed it in the direction of Europe. 
In Asia Minor, Troas and Ionia, as well as Colchis on the Black Sea with 
Armenia beyond it, have been major points of contact between Asia and 
Europe. But the broad plain of the Volga is also noteworthy as the route 
along which the vast hordes of Asia poured across into Europe. 
y. Europe 
In Europe, we do not find the same physical differences which we en-
countered in Africa and even more pronouncedly in Asia. It Jacks that 
solid nucleus of highlands which these continents possess, for the uplands 
of Europe occupy a subordinate position. The principle of the plains is 
likewise secondary; the south and west in particular display a greater 
assortment of valleys, surrounded by mountains and hills. The character 
of Europe is such that the differences in its physical structure do not 
form abrupt contrasts as they do in Asia; they are more closely intermingled, 
so that the antitheses of Asia disappear or are at least modified, and each 
194 

GEOGRAPHICAL BASIS OF WORLD HISTORY 
natural division merges into the next. Even in the structure of Europe, 
however, three separate parts can be distinguished. But since there is no 
abrupt contrast between uplands and river plains, we must employ another 
method of classification. 
The first part is Southern Europe, i.e. the country south of the Pyrenees, 
the south of France and Italy {which are cut off by the Alps from the rest 
of France and from Switzerland and Germany), and the series of eastern 
countries towards the Balkan Peninsula, south of the Danube basin, 
including Greece. This region, which was long the theatre of world history, 
does not have a clearly defined nucleus of its own, but is orientated out-
wards, looking towards the Mediterranean. While the middle and north 
of Europe were still uncultivated, the world spirit had its residence here. 
The land to the north of the Alps must be subdivided into two further 
parts: the western part, which includes Germany, France, Denmark, and 
Scandinavia, is the heart of Europe, the world which was first opened up 
by Julius Caesar. Caesar's world-historical action in opening this new 
terrain was a deed of manhood, just as Alexander the Great's plan to 
impose an occidental character on the Near East was a deed of youth. 
But Alexander was less successful in his attempts to raise the east to the 
Greek way of life than Caesar was in his undertaking. Nevertheless, 
although Alexander's achievement was transient, it established a link 
between cast and west from which the first great world-historical events 
of the west could subsequently arise. In its implications, his deed appeals 
strongly to the imagination on account of its greatness and splendour, 
but, in its results, it soon vanished away like a mere ideal. 
The third region is the north-east of Europe. It contains the northern 
plains, which have a peculiar character of their own; they once belonged 
to the Slavonic nations, and form a link with Asia, particularly with 
Russia and Poland. These countries are late arrivals in the series of 
historical states, and they maintain a constant connection between Europe 
and Asia. 
Since no one particular type of environment predominates in Europe 
as it does in the other continents, man too is more universal in character. 
Those particular ways of life which are tied to different physical contexts 
do not assume such distinct and peculiar forms as they do in Asia, on 
whose history they have had so great an effect; for the geographical 
differences within Europe are not sharply defined. Natural life is also the 
realm of contingency, however, and only in its universal attributes does 
it exercise a determining influence commensurate with the principle of 
the spirit. The character of the Greek spirit, for example, grew out of the 
195 

APPENDIX 
soil of Greece, a coastal territory which encourages individual autonomy. 
Similarly, the Roman Empire could not have arisen in the heart of the 
continent. Man can exist in all climates; but the climates are of a limited 
character, so that the power they exercise is the external counterpart to 
man's inner nature. Consequently, European man also appears naturally 
freer than the inhabitants of other continents, because no one natural 
principle is dominant in Europe. Those distinct ways of life which appear 
in Asia in a state of mutual conflict appear in Europe rather as separate 
social classes within the concrete state. The main distinction in geography 
is that between the interior and the coast. In Asia, the sea is without 
significance, and the Asiatic nations have in fact shut themselves off from 
it. In India, going to sea is positively forbidden by religion. In Europe, 
however, this maritime relationship is of vital importance, and it creates 
an enduring difference between the two continents. The European state 
is truly European only in so far as it has links with the sea. The sea 
provides that wholly peculiar outlet which Asiatic life lacks, the outlet 
which enables life to step beyond itself. It is this which has invested 
European political life with the principle of individual freedom. 
2. The phases of world history 
The following scheme of historical phases contains a general survey of 
world history. Its aim is also to make the historical process intelligible 
in the light of the Idea and its underlying necessity. 
In the course of our geographical survey, we have already indicated the 
general direction of world history. The sun rises in the Orient. The sun 
is light, and light is universal and simple self-relatedness, i.e. universality 
in itself. This light, though universal in itself, exists in the sun as an 
individual or subject. We often imagine someone watching the moment 
of daybreak, the spreading of the light, and the rise of the sun in all its 
majesty. Descriptions ofthis kind tend to emphasise the rapture, astonish-
ment, and infinite self-oblivion which accompany this moment of clarity. 
But when the sun has ascended further, the astonishment diminishes, and 
the eye is constrained to turn instead to nature and to the self; it will see 
by its own light, become conscious of itself, and progress from its original 
state of astonishment and passive contemplation to activity, to indepen-
dent creation. And by evening, man has constructed a building, an inner 

THE PHASES OF WORLD HISTORY 
sun, the sun of his own consciousness, which he has produced by his 
own efforts; and he will value it more highly than the actual sun outside 
him. As a result of his activity, he now stands in the same relationship 
to the spirit as he originally stood to the external sun, except that this 
new relationship is a free one: for his second object is his own spirit. 
Here, in a nutshell, is the course of the whole historical process, the great 
day of the spirit and the day's work it accomplishes in world history. 
World history travels from east to west; for Europe is the absolute 
end of history, just as Asia is the beginning. World history has an absolute 
east, although the term east in itself is wholly relative; for although the 
earth is a sphere, history does not move in a circle around it, but has a 
definite eastern extremity, i.e. Asia. It is here that the external and physical 
sun rises, and it sets in the west: but it is in the west that the inner sun 
of self-consciousness, which emits a higher radiance, makes its further 
ascent. World history imposes a discipline on the unrestrained natural 
will, guiding it towards universality and subjective freedom. 
Among all the phenomena of history, our true object is the state. As the 
state is the universal Idea and universal spiritual life to which individuals 
react from birth with trust and habit, in which they have their being and 
reality, their knowledge and volition, and through which they acquire 
and preserve their worth, two basic determinations are involved. Firstly, 
there is the universal substance of the state, the one inherently valuable 
spirit, the absolute power, the independent spirit of the nation; and 
secondly, there is individuality as such, the realm of subjective freedom. 
The question is whether the real life of individuals is one of unreflecting 
habit and custom in relation to the basic unity, or whether these indivi-
duals are reflecting personalities and subjects who exist for themselves. 
In this connection, we must distinguish between substantial freedom and 
subjective freedom. Substantial freedom is the implicit rationality of the 
will which is subsequently developed in the state. But in this deter-
mination of reason, individual insight and volition are not yet present; 
in other words, subjective freedom, which can only determine itself in the 
individual and which constitutes the reflection of the individual in his 
own conscience, has not yet come into being. Where there is merely 
substantial freedom, commandments and laws are regarded as firmly 
established in and for themselves, and the individual subject adopts an 
attitude of complete subservience towards them. Besides, these laws need 
not accord with the will of the individual, and the subjects are therefore 
like children, who obey their parents without will or insight of their own. 
But as subjective freedom arises and man descends from the realm of 
197 

APPENDIX 
external reality into his own spirit, reflection creates an antithesis which 
contains the negation of reality. For withdrawal from the present world 
necessarily gives rise to an antithesis, one pole of which is God and the 
divine, and the other the individual subject. The sole purpose of world 
history is to create a situation in which these two poles are absolutely 
united and truly reconciled. They are reconciled in such a way that the 
free subject is not submerged in the objective existence of the spirit, but 
is accorded its independent rights; and at the same time the absolute 
spirit, the realm of pure objective unity, realises its absolute right. In the 
immediate consciousness of the Orient, the two are not yet distinct. The 
substantial world is distinct from the individual, but the object has not 
yet been located in the spirit itself. 
Thus, the first form which the spirit assumes is that of the Orzent. 
This world is based on the immediate consciousness, on substantial 
spirituality; its knowledge is no longer a matter of individual arbitrari-
ness - for the sun has now risen - but of an essential will which exists 
independently and autonomously for itself and to which the will of the 
individual subject responds primarily with an attitude of faith, trust, and 
obedience. In more concrete terms, it is a patriarchal relationship. 
Within the family, the individual is a totality in his own right, but he is 
also a moment within the whole; he partakes of a common purpose which, 
since it is common to all, has its own separate existence whereby it also 
becomes an object of the individual consciousness. This consciousness is 
embodied in the head of the family, who is the will of the whole; he acts 
in the interests of the common purpose, cares for the individuals, directs 
their activity towards the common end, educates them, and ensures that 
they remain in harmony with the universal end. Their knowledge and 
desires do not go beyond this end and its embodiment in the head of 
state. This is necessarily the first mode of national consciousness. 
At this stage, the state is already present, but the subject has not yet 
come into its rights. Ethical life has an immediate and lawless character, 
for this is the childhood of history. This early phase has two distinct 
aspects. The first is the state, which is based on the family relationship: 
it is a state of paternal guardianship, for the whole is held together by 
admonitions and punishments, and its character is prosaic, for it is still 
devoid of opposition and ideality. But it is also an enduring state, for it 
cannot change itself by its own efforts. Such is the character of the Far 
East, and of the Cninese empire in particular. As to the second aspect, 
this spatial continuity is matched by continuity in time. The states in 
question, without any change in themselves or in their underlying prin-

THE PHASES OF WORLD HISTORY 
ciple, are constantly changing in relation to one another, for they are 
engaged in an interminable conflict which rapidly leads to their downfall. 
Since the state is outwards-orientated, an awareness of the principle of 
individuality begins to dawn, for struggle and conflict require self-
collectedness and self-comprehension. But this dawning awareness is still 
relatively weak, unconscious, and rooted in nature; it is a light, but not 
yet the light of self-conscious personality. History is still predominantly 
unhistorical, for it is merely a repetition of the same majestic process of 
decline. The innovations with which courage, strength, and magnanimity 
replace the splendours of the past go through the same cycle of decline 
and fall. But it is not a true downfall, for no progress results from all 
this restless change. Whatever innovation replaces what has been des-
troyed must sink and be destroyed in turn; no progress is made: and all 
this restless movement results in an unhistorical history. At this point, 
history passes over to central Asia - but the transition is only an external 
one, for the second phase has no connection with the first. If we continue 
the comparison with the ages of man, this would be the boyhood of 
history, which no longer displays the calm and trusting qualities Gf the 
child, but behaves in a boisterous and turbulent manner. 
The Oriental spirit is closer in its determination to the sphere of 
intuition, for its relationship to its object is an immediate one. But the 
subject is still immersed in substantial existence, and has not yet extricated 
or liberated itself from its original state of unmixed unity to attain subjec-
tive freedom. Thus, the subject has not yet produced the universal 
object from within itself, and the object has not yet been reborn from 
within the subject. Its spiritual mode is not yet that of representation; 
on the contrary, it still exists in a condition of immediacy, and its mode 
is that of immediate existence. The object is therefore an individual 
subject, and is determined in an immediate way. Its mode is that of a 
natural sun, for, like it, it is an image of the sensuous rather than the 
spiritual imagination; and for this reason, it takes the form of a natural 
and individual human being. Thus, the spirit and substance of the nation 
are objectively present to its individual members in the shape of a single 
individual. For humanity is always the highest and worthiest means of 
representation. The subject, then, is primarily a human being, who is 
known by his people as the spiritual unity and form of subjectivity in 
which the one totality has its existence. Such is the prmciple of the 
Oriental world: the individuals have not yet attained subjective freedom 
within themselves, but appear as accidental properties of the underlying 
substance. This substance is not purely abstract, however, like that of 
199 

APPENDIX 
Spinoza, but is present to the natural consciousness in the shape of a 
head of state, and everything is seen as belonging exclusively to him. 
The substantial power contains two distinct aspects: the spirit, which 
is dominant, and the natural world, which stands in opposition to it. 
These two moments are united within the substantial power. There is a 
master who gives expression to the substance, and who stands in the 
relation of a lawgiver towards the world of particular things. But this 
ruling power is not exclusively confined to what we know as secular 
government, for spiritual government has not yet assumed a distinct 
existence. The government of the Oriental world can be described as a 
theocracy. God is the secular ruler, and the secular ruler is God; the 
ruler is both of these simultaneously, and the state is ruled by a God in-
carnate. But we must now consider the three distinct forms which this 
principle assumes. 
The Chinese and Mongolian empire is the realm of theocratic despotism. 
The state is fundamentally patriarchal; it is ruled by a father who also 
presides over what we would regard as matters of conscience. In China, 
this patriarchal principle is organised so as to form a state, but among the 
Mongols it is not so systematically developed. The head of state in China 
is a despot, and he leads a systematically constructed government with a 
numerous hierarchy of subordinate members. Even religious matters and 
family affairs are regulated by laws of state, and the individual has no 
moral selfhood. 
In India, the difference lies in those firmly established divisions which 
necessarily arise within a highly developed national culture. In this case, 
it is the castes which determine the rights and duties of each individual. 
This system of government can be described as a theocratic aristocracy. 
These fixed distinctions are transcended by an ideality of the imagination, 
an ideal realm which has not yet become divorced from the world of the 
senses. The spirit does indeed ascend to the unity of God, but it cannot 
remain for long at this level. The transcendence of particularity is merely 
a wild and aimless movement which always sinks back to the point at 
which it began. 
In Persia, the substantial unity has attained a purer form. Its natural 
manifestation is light, and the spiritual is the good. This form can be 
described as theocratic monarchy. The monarch's function is to implement 
the good. The Persians have ruled over many nations, but all of these have 
been allowed to retain their own peculiar character; their kingdom can 
therefore be likened to an empire. While China and India remained fixed 
in their principles, the Persians form the true transition from the Orient 
200 

THE PHASES OF WORLD HISTORY 
to the west. And just as Persia is the outward transition, so also is Egypt 
the inner transition to the free life of Greece. In Egypt, we encounter 
that contradiction of principles which it is the mission of the west to 
resolve. 
The splendour of the Oriental way of life lies before us - its view of 
the One and of the substance in which everything inheres and from which 
nothing has yet become detached. Its basic view is of a firmly coordinated 
power to which all the riches of the imagination and of nature belong. 
Within this system, subjective freedom has not yet come into its rights; 
it does not yet derive its honour from itself, but only from the absolute 
object. The splendid edifices of the Oriental states are substantial forms 
which contain all the determinations of reason, but in such a way that 
the individual subjects remain purely accidental. These revolve around 
a centre, round the ruler, who, as a patriarch (but not as a despot in the 
sense of the Roman Empire), stands at the head of the state. For his task 
is to implement the claims of morality and of the substance: he has to 
uphold those essential commandments which are already established; 
and what for our purposes belongs entirely to the province of subjective 
freedom proceeds in this case from the universal totality itself. But this 
determination of the substance at once breaks up into two distinct 
moments, simply because it has not assimilated and overcome its anti-
thesis. The antithesis has not yet developed within it and consequently 
falls outside it. On the one hand, therefore, we find permanence and 
stability, and on the other, a self-destructive arbitrariness. All that is 
contained within the Idea is essentially present and existent; but every-
thing depends on the manner in which it is present, and whether its 
moments have been realised in their authentic form. And since subjec-
tivity is an essential moment within the spirit, it must necessarily be 
present too. But in the Oriental state, it is not yet reconciled or unified, 
and it still awaits satisfaction. Consequently, this splendid edifice with 
its unified power, which nothing can escape and within which nothing 
can attain an independent existence, is coupled with unrestrained arbi-
trariness. On the one hand, this terrible unappeased arbitrariness is 
present within the political edifice itself, in the worldly aspect of the 
substantial power; and on the other hand, it also pursues its unwholesome 
and restless career outside it. In terms of the Idea, it has no place within 
the political edifice; but it is inevitably present, for all its inconsistency, 
as an extraneous factor outside the substantial unity. We accordingly 
find that the political structures of Oriental substantiality are accompanied 
by wild hordes who descend from the verge of the uplands into the peaceful 
201 

APPENDIX 
states. They lay them waste and destroy them, razing everything to the 
ground, although they subsequently amalgamate with them and abandon 
their savagery; but since they are inherently intractable, they invariably 
disperse, leaving no lasting result behind them. 
The Oriental world does possess what we would call states; but within 
these states, we do not find a purpose of the kind which we would describe 
as political. Their political life does contain substantial (i.e. realised and 
rational) freedom; but although this develops, it does not attain the inward 
conditions of subjective freedom. The state is that which is thought 
substantially for itself in the form of a universal substantial end for 
everyone. But in the Orient the state is an abstraction which has no 
universal existence for itself; it is not the universal end but the sovereign 
who constitutes the state. As already remarked, this phase can be likened 
to that of childhood in general. 
The second phase, which comprehends the world of Greece, may be 
likened to the period of adolescence. It is characteristic of the Greek 
world that it witnesses the rise of numerous states. It is the realm of 
beautiful freedom, and it is in the context of immediate ethical existence 
that individuality develops within it. The principle of individuality, of 
subjective freedom, has its origin here, although it is still embedded in 
the substantial unity. As in Asia, morality is a principle, but it is also 
associated with individuality, so that it is identical with the free will of 
individuals. The two extremes of the Oriental ~·orld- subjective freedom 
and substantiality - are now combined; the kingdom of freedom- not 
that of unrestrained and natural freedom but of ethical freedom - is now 
realised. Its end is not arbitrary or particular but universal, for it takes 
the universal end of the nation as the object of its will and its knowledge. 
But it is merely the realm of beautiful freedom, and its union with the 
substantial end is natural and unreflecting. It is the union of the ethical 
with the subjective will, in which the Idea is united with a plastic form: 
it does not exist abstractly for itself, but is immediately bound up with 
the real, just as the sensuous bears the stamp and expression of the 
spiritual in a beautiful work of art. It is not yet morality, but merely 
unreflecting ethical existence; for the individual will of the subject 
intuitively adopts the customs and habits laid down by justice and the 
laws. The individual is therefore unconsciously united with the universal 
end. Accordingly, this kingdom is truly harmonious; like a lovely but 
ephemeral and quickly passing flower, the Greek world is a most serene 
yet inherently unstable structure, in that it is destined to forfeit its purity 
under the influence of reflection; and since the unity between its two 
202 

THE PHASES OF WORLD HISTORY 
principles is merely an immediate one, it constitutes the greatest of 
contradictions within itself. The two principles of the Oriental world -
those of substantiality and of subjective freedom - are here united. But 
their unity is purely immediate, so that they are in the highest degree 
self-contradictory. In the Orient, the contradiction lies in two opposite 
extremes which come into conflict with one another. In Greece, however, 
these are united, but their union cannot survive in the form it assumes in 
Greece. For the aesthetic existence of Greece cannot be equated with true 
ethical life. It has not been reborn from the struggle through which 
subjective freedom is itself reborn, but remains at the earliest stage of 
subjective freedom; as such, it still bears the mark of natural ethicality 
instead of being born anew to the higher and purer fm:m of universal 
ethical life. The ethical life of Greece will therefore be an unstable one 
which works towards its own dissolution; and the reflection of its extremes 
within themselves must bring about the downfall of the entire realm. 
In this way, a new and higher form is developed, bringing with it the 
third phase in history. Inwardness and reflection, in their incipient stages, 
are indeed present as a moment within the Greek world; and the next step 
is taken when this inner reflection, i.e. thought and the activity of thought, 
liberates itself and presses forward, so preparing the way for a new 
universal end. 
Thus, the principle of the third phase is that of universality, of an end 
which exists as such, but as yet in abstract universality; this is the era of 
the Roman Empire. The end with which the individuals are confronted and 
to which all their actions are directed is the state as such. This phase 
can be regarded as the manhood of history. For manhood follows neither 
the arbitrary will of a master, nor its own aesthetic arbitrariness; its life 
is one of arduous labour and service, not of the free and happy pursuit 
of its own end. But although the end to which man must dedicate himself 
is universal, it is also an inflexible one. A state, laws, and constitutions 
are ends, and it is these which the individual must serve: the individual 
is immersed in them and achieves his own end only in the universal one. 
(Such an empire seems destined to last for ever, especially if it also 
embodies the principle of subjective satisfaction, even in its religion, as 
was the case in the Holy Roman Empire. Nevertheless, the Holy Roman 
Empire came to an end two decades ago.) 
The state begins to take on an abstract existence and to develop itself 
towards an end in which its individual members participate, although this 
end is not yet an exhaustive and concrete one. For the free individuals 
are sacrificed to its rigorous demands, and they must dedicate themselves 
203 

APPENDIX 
to it in the service of the abstract universal. The Roman Empire is no 
longer a commonwealth of individuals such as the city of Athens was. 
It is no longer a world of gladness and joy, but of hard and arduous toil. 
The interest of the state becomes detached from the individual citizens, 
although the latter gain abstract formal universality in themselves. The 
universal subjugates the individuals, who must surrender themselves to 
it; but in return, their own universality, i.e. their personality,isrecognised: 
they are treated as persons with rights of their own in their capacity as 
private individuals. And just as individuals are assimilated into the 
abstract concept of personality, so also must individual nations undergo 
the same fate; their concrete forms are crushed beneath this universal 
existence, and incorporated into it as part of an indifferent mass. Rome 
becomes a pantheon embracing all gods and all spiritual existence, but 
these gods and this spirit no longer retain their own distinct vitality. 
The transition to the next historical principle should be seen as a 
struggle between abstract universality and individuality. Since it is 
abstract, this law-governed state must come to an end in complete 
subjectivity. The subject, the principle of infinite form, has not acquired 
a substantial existence, and must therefore appear as an arbitrary rule: 
and the reconciliation of the antithesis is thereby posited in the secular 
world. But the spiritual reconciliation can only be effected when the 
individual personality has been purified and transfigured as personal 
subjectivity in and for itself, thereby attaining a universal existence in and 
for itself. This is the divine personality; it must manifest itself in the 
world, but as something universal in and for itself. 
If we consider the two aspects of this development more closely, we 
perceive that the kingdom of the universal end, based as it is on reflection 
and abstract universality, contains the express and explicit antithesis 
within itself: it is therefore the essential embodiment of the struggle 
which the antithesis presupposes, with the necessary result that arbitrary 
individuality, the completely contingent and purely worldly power of 
an autocrat, gains ascendancy over abstract universality. At the beginning 
of this phase, an antithesis exists between the end of the state as abstract 
universality on the one hand and abstract personality on the other. As 
the principle of abstract universality is developed and realised, the indi-
vidual is absorbed into it; and from this process, the subject emerges as a 
distinct personality. As a result, the individual subjects become isolated 
from one another. The universality (or rather the abstract universality} 
which they thereby acquire gives them the status of legal personalities 
with an independent and essential existence of their own. On the 
204 

THE PHASES OF WORLD HISTORY 
other hand, this at the same time gives rise to a world of formal abstract 
right, the right of property. But since this process offragmentation into 
numerous individual personalities takes place within the state, the state 
no longer confronts the individuals as an abstract entity, but as the power 
of an autocrat over the individual citizens. Within an abstract political 
framework whose highest value is no longer the universal end but the 
right of the individual personality, the power and cohesive force which are 
required to counteract the process of fragmentation can only be of an 
arbitrary nature, as distinct from a rational political power. Thus, as the 
individual personality gains the ascendant with the progress of history 
and the disintegration of the whole into atoms can only be restrained by 
external force, the subjective power of autocracy comes forward as if 
summoned to perform this task. For abstract legality has no concrete 
existence or internal organisation of its own, and when it has gained 
predominance its motive and ruling power is purely arbitrary in the sense 
of contingent subjectivity; and the individual then seeks consolation for 
his lost freedom by cultivating his private rights. Thus, an arbitrary power 
comes into play, reconciling the antithesis and establishing order and 
peace. But this peace is accompanied by absolute internal disunion; the 
reconciliation of the antithesis is purely worldly and external in character, 
and it is accordingly counterbalanced by internal insurgency as the pains 
of despotism make themselves felt. But secondly, the true reconciliation, 
which is of a higher and spiritual nature, must be effected before the 
antithesis can be removed; a condition must arise in which the individual 
personality is contemplated, known, and willed as inwardly purified and 
elevated to universality. The spirit, driven back into its innermost depths, 
abandons the godless world, seeks the reconciliation within itself, and 
embarks on a life of inwardness- a fulfilled and concrete inwardness, 
endowed with a substantiality which is based not merely on external 
existence. On the contrary, the purely worldly empire referred to above 
is now matched by the spiritual empire of subjectivity which knows itself 
and its own essential being, i.e. of the spirit made real. The principle of 
the spirit has become manifest, in that subjectivity has acquired a universal 
character. 
The empire of self-knowing subjectivity marks the rise of the real 
spirit; this is the beginning of the fourth phase in history, which, in 
natural terms, would correspond to the old age of the spirit. In the natural 
world, old age is equivalent to weakness; but the old age of the spirit is 
the age of its complete maturity, in which it returns to a condition of 
unity while retaining its spiritual nature. The spirit as infinite power 
205 

APPENDIX 
contains within itself the moments of its earlier development and thereby 
attains its totality. 
We have now reached the stage of spirituality and spiritual reconcilia-
tion; and this spiritual reconciliation is the principle of the fourth phase 
in history. The spirit has become conscious that the spirit itself is the 
truth, and it now exists as an object of thought. This fourth phase 
necessarily consists of two parts: on the one hand, the spirit as conscious-
ness of an inner world - i.e. the spirit which is known as the essential 
being, as thinking consciousness of the highest things, or the will of the 
spirit- is again of an abstract nature, for it remains tied to spiritual 
abstraction. So long as consciousness remains at this stage, worldly 
existence is at odds with itself, and is given over to savagery and bar-
barism; it is accompanied by a total indifference towards worldly things, 
for the latter have no connection with the spiritual world and have not 
attained a rational organisation within the consciousness. Such is the 
nature of the Mohammedan world, in which the Oriental world reaches 
its highest transfiguration and its highest perception of the One. Its 
origin is admittedly later than that of Christianity; but it took many 
centuries for Christianity to achieve world importance, a process which 
was finally completed by Charlemagne. Mohammedanism, however, 
because of the abstract nature of its principle, was able to become a 
world empire within a short space of time; but it is a more primitive 
system than that of Christianity. 
The second stage in the development of this spiritual world begins 
when the spiritual principle has translated itself into a concrete world. 
This principle is the consciousness and volition of subjectivity as a 
divine personality, and it manifests itself initially in a single subject. 
But it subsequently develops into an empire of the real spirit. This phase 
can be described as the Cerma11ic world, and those nations on which the 
world spirit has conferred its true principle may be called the Germanic 
nations. The realm of the real spirit has as its principle the absolute 
reconciliation of subjectivity which exists for itself with the diversity 
which exists in and for itself, i.e. with that true and substantial condition 
in which the subject is free for itself in so far as it accords with the 
universal and has an essential existence: in short, the realm of concrete 
freedom. 
From now on, the worldly empire and the spiritual empire are opposed 
to one another. On the one hand, the principle of the spirit which exists 
for itself is freedom, in its own peculiar form, and subjectivity. The 
individual mind seeks to be united with that which it is bound to respect. 
206 

THE PHASES OF WORLD HISTORY 
It must not be contingent, however, but rather the mind in its essential 
being and spiritual truth. This is what Christ has revealed to us in his 
religion; his own truth, which is that of the mind, is that we should posit 
ourselves as united with the divinity. At this point, the reconciliation in 
and for itself is accomplished. But since it has only been accomplished in 
itself, this phase of history, by virtue of its immediacy, begins with an 
antithesis. 
Admittedly, its historical origin lies in that reconciliation which 
Christianity brought with it; but since this itself has only begun, and 
exists only implicitly for the consciousness, we find initially the greatest 
possible antithesis (although it is subsequently regarded as an injustice 
which ought to be removed). It is the antithesis between the spiritual and 
religious principle on the one hand and the secular realm on the other. 
Yet the secular realm is no longer what it formerly was, for it has now 
been converted to Christianity and ought therefore to accord with the 
truth. But the spiritual realm must also come to recognise that spirituality 
is realised in the secular world. But in so far as both worlds are still 
immediate, the secular realm has not yet cast off its arbitrary subjectivity, 
and the spiritual realm has not yet recognised the secular world; conse-
quently, the two are in conflict. The course of history is therefore not 
one of peaceful and unopposed development, for the spirit does not 
approach its realisation in a peaceful manner. In the course of history, 
both sides must renounce their one-sidedness, i.e. their inauthentic form. 
On the one hand, we find a hollow reality which ought to accord with the 
spirit but does not yet do so; and for this reason, it must be destroyed. 
And on the other hand, the spiritual realm is primarily an ecclesiastical 
one which has become immersed in outward secularity; and while the 
secular authority is suppressed by external influences, the ecclesiastical 
authority falls into decay. The situation to which this gives rise is one of 
barbarism. 
As already remarked, the reconciliation is at first implicit (i.e. in itself), 
but it still has to become explicit (i.e. for itself). Consequently, the 
principle must begin with the greatest possible antithesis; and it must also 
be the most abstract of antitheses, for the reconciliation is absolute. As 
we have seen, this antithesis consists on the one hand of the spiritual 
principle in its ecclesiastical form, and on the other of wild and barbarous 
secularity. The first stage in this historical development is one of hostility 
between the two, although they are allied to one another inasmuch as the 
ecclesiastical principle is recognised by the secular realm; yet the latter 
docs not accord with the former, although it ought, by its own admission, 
207 

APPENDIX 
to do so. The secular realm, which is now forsaken by the spirit, is 
oppressed by the ecclesiastical authority; and the primary form of eccle-
siastical authority is such that it itself lapses into secularity, thereby 
losing its spiritual determination and subsequently also its power. The 
decline of both worlds culminates in the disappearance of barbarism, and 
the spirit then discovers a higher form which is in general worthy of it, 
i.e. the form of rationality, of free and rational thought. The spirit, driven 
back upon itself, comprehends its own principle and produces it within 
itself in its free form, in the form of thought, in an intellectual shape. It is 
now able to coexist in harmony with external reality at large, to insinuate 
itself into it, and to realise the principle of rationality through the secular 
world itself. 
Only after it has gained its objective (i.e. intellectual) form can the 
spiritual principle become truly congruent with external reality; only 
then can the spiritual aim be realised in the secular world. It is the form 
of thought which brings about the fundamental reconciliation: the pro-
fundity of thought is the agent by which the reconciliation is effected. 
This profundity of thought will then manifest itself in the world of 
appearance, and this subjectivity is the source of knowledge and the point 
at which appearance and existence coincide. Thus, the principle of 
reconciliation between Church and state has emerged, and the ecclesias-
tical world thereby discovers and possesses its concept and rationality in 
the secular world. In this way, the antithesis between the Church and the 
so-called state vanishes; the state is no longer inferior and subordinate 
to the Church, and the Church retains no special prerogative; the spiritual 
world is no longer alien to the state. Freedom has found the means of 
realising its concept and its truth. Thus it has happened that, through the 
activity of thought - i.e. universal determinations of thought whose 
substance is this concrete principle or the nature of the spirit itself- the 
realm of reality or concrete thought has come into conformity with 
substantial truth. Freedom discovers its concept in reality, and has 
developed the secular world into the objective system of a specific and 
internally organised state. It is this triumphant progress which gives 
history its interest, and the point at which reconciliation and existence 
for itself are reached is now an object of knowledge: reality is transformed 
and reconstructed. This is the goal of world history: the spirit must 
create for itself a nature and world to conform with its own nature, so 
that the subject may discover its own concept of the spirit in this second 
nature, in this reality which the concept of the spirit has produced; and 
in this objective reality, it becomes conscious of its subjective freedom 
:zo8 

ADDITIONS OF I 826-7 
and rationality. Such is the progress of the Idea in general; and this must 
be our ultimate point of view in history. The more detailed process 
whereby the Idea is realised is history proper; and that work still remains 
to be done in it is a purely empirical matter. In our study of world history, 
we have to cover more circumstantially that long route which we have 
just surveyed in outline, the path which history follows in realising its 
aim. But temporal duration is something entirely relative, and the spirit 
belongs to eternity. Duration, strictly speaking, does not exist for it. 
The further labour of history is that this principle should develop and 
unfold, and that the spirit should attain its reality and become conscious 
of itself in the real world. 
3· Additions from the winter semester of 1826-7 
[to p. 28 :] 
The rational is (I) the logically rational, with which we cannot concern 
ourselves here; there is, however, (2) the form of nature, which is a 
reflection or embodiment of reason; but natural reason is not our present 
concern either, for our object is rather (3) reason in its manifestation as 
self-conscious spirit (not, however, in a general sense, but as it unfolds 
itself in deeds and actions in the world in which its essence is realised). 
The spirit in general is the basis of history, in which it unfolds itself 
in the various forms which we call nations. It is in this capacity that we 
shall consider it here. 
Reason in and for itself is eternal and at rest, but it is likewise activity, 
and its actions are exclusively rational. It produces itself from within 
itself and is consequently a product or end in which it realises its own 
nature. It is not our business to demonstrate this concept here; in the 
present context, we can only postulate it and lend it plausibility. The 
earlier stages of philosophy contain its actual proof. The prior assumptions 
which must be made here need only be mentioned in order to remind 
us of the conceptions which underlie our remarks and which tally with 
those which are also present in our ordinary consciousness. 
[to pp. 29f. :] 
The antitheses which present themselves on a closer examination of world 
history are, in general terms, (I) the antithesis between subjective reason 
20<) 

APPENDIX 
and its object, i.e. history itself (this may be called the theoretical anti-
thesis), and (2) the relationship between freedom and necessity, or the 
practical antithesis. 
The two prior assumptions with which we approached this study of 
history were (I) that the world is ruled by a providence, and ( 2) that it is 
possible to discern the plan by which this providence operates. But how 
are we to recognise the rationality of history and the ultimate end of the 
world in its historical application? The Idea has two distinct components: 
(a) the Idea as such, and (b) the existence of the nation in history, i.e. 
the empirical side of existence. The universal Idea is the unity of these 
two aspects, although they are basically distinct. The first is the theoretical 
aspect; our aim is to recognise the Idea, and the question is: how are we 
to do so? It seems as if we shall have to consider history in itself and that 
its ultimate end will reveal itself to us in the process. That is, we take the 
empirical element of ordinary history as our point of departure, and hope 
that it will reveal to us the nature of the divine will. But if we are to know 
the latter, we must come to the study of history equipped with reason, 
just as we need eyes before we can perceive blue. A rational man observes 
the data before him, and thoughts come into his mind. They do not 
come from outside, however, for he has them within himself; the objects 
before him are merely the impulse or incentive which causes him to 
reflect. If we approach the world with subjective and one-sided views, 
we shall be inclined to criticise everything; we know how it ought to be, 
and find that it is not so. But anything which deserves such censure will 
inevitably be finite in content; for the substance, i.e. the content which 
matters, must be of a rational nature. 
Our God is not an Epicurean one who lives in total aloofness in the 
empty regions of the universe. 
Before we can recognise the substance, we must already be conscious 
of its existence. The nature of the substance remains concealed from the 
senses, just as the hand cannot perceive the nature of colour; and the 
understanding, which comprehends the finite world, cannot perceive it 
either. The motley confusion of all the shapes and phenomena of existence 
contains the truth within itself, and it is the eye of the concept which 
penetrates the exterior and recognises the truth. And it is philosophy which 
purges the understanding of such subjective conceits. 
[top. 31 :] 
Even in ordinary history, we have to select from the deeds and events 
with which we are confronted and arrange them in a certain way; for 
210 

ADDITIONS OF 1826-7 
our aim is not to depict the entire happenings of the past. This applies 
even more so to the philosophical study of history. Given so great a 
mass of material, a summary procedure is required. But we must not 
summarise in such a way that numerous events are left out altogether; 
on the contrary, those events which form an extensive series in reality 
must be reduced to a single u11ity and included within a universal repre-
sentation• which will contain everything which occurs in the individual 
instances. If, for example, we speak of battles, victories, and the like, 
these are universal representations which embrace a multitude of deeds, 
etc. -the deeds of all the individuals concerned. To make the battle 
immediately present, these would have to be depicted here and now, and 
in each of their successive moments. In the sentence: 'The army was 
victorious', the whole collection of intermediate steps is fully expressed 
in a single general representation. 
This character of universality is derived from the nature of thought, 
and our study of history uses thought as its instrument. Those who reject 
the thinking approach to history in favour of an intuitive one do not 
know their own mind; for intuitiont is also universal, and it also involves 
thought. 
It is the understanding which makes this distinction between the 
essential and the inessential; and on closer investigation, we find that what 
is essential in one instance is inessential in another. The understanding 
must place the emphasis on thought, relate everything to the basic unity, 
and pass over all that is irrelevant. Herein lies the difference between the 
historian and the chronicler. The latter admittedly recounts all the events, 
but he will overlook numerous changes which quietly take place beneath 
the surface. 
Those ends- such as the state, the nation, learning, and art - to which 
the historian relates the events he describes may be highly relative, and a 
distinction at once arises between specific or particular ends and those 
which are dear to the heart and to reason. Everything which we regard 
as important, such as the destiny of nations, of religion, of learning, etc., 
will only appear important in so far as it is related to those ends which 
exist in and for themselves. But what are these ends? If we approach 
history from the point of view of thought and philosophy, we must have 
a determinate consciousness of that which interests us, i.e. of the ends 
which underlie our study of history. 
• Vorstellu11g. 
t Anschauung. 
211 

APPENDIX 
[top. 32:] 
In the history of the world, we see before us the concrete image of eril 
in its most fully developed form. If we consider the mass of individual 
happenings, history appears as an altar on which individuals and entire 
nations are immolated; we see all that is noblest and finest destroyed. 
No real gain appears to have been made, and only this or that ephemeral 
work lingers on, already bearing the mark of decay on its brow and soon 
to be supplanted by another as ephemeral as itself. 
[top. 40:] 
Above all, one must know the nature of God, who has revealed himself 
in the Christian religion. The Bible refers to those who know nothing of 
God as heathens. The Christian God is the God who has revealed himself 
to men. The most exalted attribute of Christianity is not its moral 
content, for the heathens also had a very high morality. We ought to have 
knowledge of God's actions; otherwise we are like the Athenians who 
built an altar to the unknown god. 
[to p. 43 :] 
Reason, however, rejects the category of the purely negative and assumes 
that this negative element, this universal activity of mankind, has pro-
duced a lasting achievement, and that our present reality is the result of 
the whole of human history. The finite and momentary ends are moments 
within a universal end; the perishable contains an imperishable element 
which these ends have helped to create. This affirmative element exists 
not merely in memories of the past, but is itself a product which belongs 
to reality, or rather a product to which we ourselves belong. 
[top. 46:] 
This ultimate end is firmly fixed in and for itself. It may also be described 
as the good which is destined to be realised in the world. World history 
is rooted in the soil of the spirit, not in that of nature, so that its ultimate 
end can only be deduced from the nature of the spirit. 
[top. 48:] 
Justice and the ethical world are nothing more than the concept which 
the spirit has formed of itself. The ancients did not know that man as 
such is free. 
[to pp. 52f. :] 
This universal spirit or world spirit is not the same thing as God. It is 
212 

ADDITIONS OF 1826-7 
the rationality of the spirit in its worldly existence. Its movement is 
such that it makes itself what it is, i.e. what its concept is. This movement 
is rational, and in accord with the divine spirit. God is the spirit in his 
community; he lives and really exists in it. The world spirit is the 
system of this process whereby the spirit produces for itself the true 
concept of its own nature. 
[to pp. 61f.:] 
The concept of the spirit is a turning in of the spirit upon itself; as it 
turns in upon itself, the spirit discovers itself in its externalised form 
and possesses a definite goal and absolute ultimate end. In so far as its 
principle is a particular one, its limits become evident in the life of the 
nation in question. The nation then degenerates, but at the same time 
knowledge and philosophy flourish. As the nation degenerates, reflection, 
knowledge, and the conscience make their appearance. When a nation 
has satisfied itself in relation to its principle, its further development is 
marked by the sudden emergence of thought and reflection. The times 
of instinctive behaviour in a nation are also those in which its virtues are 
apparent, but it does not remain permanently at this instinctive level. Its 
withdrawal into itself involves abstract thought. As it withdraws into 
thought, the spirit asks itself whether reality is in accord with it. For free 
thought in itself may not remain at variance with the spirit of reality. 
The Greeks had no conscience. Justice and duty were defined by the 
law of the state, and it was never considered whether they were indeed 
justice and duty. But no one is a free man unless he understands that 
what the state demands is also good. If this is not so, the individual is 
divorced from the ethical world around him; a division arises between 
the inward and formal dimension and the unity which is already present. 
Personal interests must be accorded their rights and the claims of the 
substance must also be fulfilled. 
[top. 71 :] 
The second antithesis is the practical and objective antithesis of necessity 
and freedom. Freedom in the subjective sense is the activity with which 
men respond to the outward vicissitudes of fate, sometimes triumphing 
over them and sometimes succumbing to them. The more precise signi-
ficance of this antithesis is that we should recognise the necessity as 
divine. The divine will manifests itself on the one hand, but it is opposed 
on the other by man with his freedom and the interests of his reason and 
passion. How then are we to resolve this antithesis? 
213 

APPENDIX 
(3. xi. 1826) Necessity is not to be confused with mere external pressure; 
on the contrary, it is that irresistible and divine element which is an end 
in and for itself in relation to freedom. The difficulties involved in the 
resolution of this contradiction can only be made intelligible by means of 
conceptions drawn from ordinary life. The realm of law and justice is 
concerned with the protection of wealth etc., and it exists here and now. 
A lawful condition of this kind is an authority against arbitrariness. It is a 
common ground which no individuals can violate. And it is the same in 
technical matters. A house, for example, is the product of man's arbitrary 
will; it is opposed by the free power of the elements, although these are 
themselves employed in its construction. In this way, purposive activity 
is combined with necessity. 
[to pp. 72f.:] 
Individuality is the province of deeds and actions; the end is always a 
personal one. The end which exists in and for itself is produced by the 
individuals, and it is they who are active. Their ends must also be 
particular ones, related to them as particular beings. The species contains 
the entire nature of the genus, and it is not opposed to the universal, no 
more than gold is opposed to metal. Only the substantial can be truly 
fulfilled as such; all that is negative and evil is ephemeral. The universal 
must always be realised through the particular. Particular things compete 
with one another; but they also destroy themselves. 
[top. 92:] 
The ultimate end of the will of the world spirit can be defined as follows: 
the subject as such possesses personal freedom and conscience, and its 
particular interest is to obtain satisfaction from its ethical state. The 
subject as such has infinite value; it should be considered as free, so that 
subjectivity may become conscious of its ultimate end. Subjectivity 
creates the one substantial end, which is produced by the infinite indepen-
dence of all individuals. This substance is the foundation and basis on 
which the individual can attain formal freedom in the realm of subjectivity. 
The unity of the absolute antithesis is the end which exists in the depths 
of the spirit. 
[to pp. 108f. :] 
Nations which do not yet constitute states need not be considered here. 
The word 'state' is often applied exclusively to the political and legal 
framework; in another sense, it can also be taken to include religion. The 
214 

ADDITIONS OF I 826-7 
constitutiotz is the relationship of the individual to the many, of individuals 
among themselves (i.e. legal relationships in general), and the means 
whereby different functions are assigned to different social classes. 
[to pp. I I Of.:] 
The principle is expressed in religion; but it should also be translated 
into reality; the principle of the national spirit is meant to be realised. 
Religion is the inner and abstract relationship of the self-consciousness to 
the supreme being. In its concentrated form, religion remains indifferent 
towards the secular world as the latter declares itself, expresses itself, 
and develops. But once the inner realm is consolidated, its external 
counterpart and application make their appearance in turn. 
[to p. I 52:] 
We must take notice of the influence of nature, for it is the immediate 
reality. 
[to p. I62 :] 
(14. xi. I826) The New World is still a new and young world. In this 
respect, we may exclude America from our investigation, and need only 
add a few comments on its relationship with Europe. 
[top. I70:] 
America is in fact the world of the future, for it is still in the process of 
growth. The Old World can be said to lie around a central point, the 
Mediterranean Sea; the New World, however, is quite different in 
character: its two parts, North and South America, have quite different 
origins as regards the way12 in which they have developed. 
The South American states are still growing and developing; the 
peoples of Spanish and Portuguese America have still to emancipate 
themselves from slavery. They do not yet possess the spirit of rationality. 
The peoples of the northern part have still to overcome their isolation 
and to gather around a central focus; none of the provinces is autonomous, 
for they are all dependent upon their mother countries. The emigrants 
have brought with them the assets of European culture, so that they began 
life in America with advantages which, in Europe, were the fruit of 
thousands of years of development. 
[to p. I72 :] 
Africa is characterised by concentrated sensuality, immediacy of the will, 
absolute inflexibility, and an inability to develop. 
215 

APPENDIX 
[top. 173:] 
Asia is the land of sunrise, of antithesis, and of unbounded expansion, 
whereas Europe is the land in which the spirit descends into itself and 
concentrates upon itself. The extravagance of the Orient gives way here 
to moderation, determinateness, and rationality, to control of the im-
moderate by the spiritual principle. 
[to pp. 175f. :] 
Africa is divided up amongst a multitude of peoples, so that it forms a 
loose conglomeration. It has often happened that a prince has subjugated 
many peoples, but has soon lost control of them again. They are united 
temporarily under a single sceptre; this has supplied us with sufficient 
information concerning Africa. 
It is now regarded as almost certain that the Niger flows into the 
Bight of Benin; for 2000 years, no one has believed Herodotus' claim that 
it flows eastwards. But the remainder of its course is unknown. 
[top.176:] 
The interest of this study of Africa is that it shows us man living in a 
completely barbarous condition which nevertheless admits of a certain 
degree of development. In this primeval and completely natural state, 
man exists in his natural savagery; he lives outside the sphere of culture, 
which is not an integral part of his nature. Africa may be classed as 
belonging to the phase which precedes culture and development in the 
proper sense. China and India have a settled existence of their own, 
and they play no active part in historical progress; nevertheless, they are 
points of departure for the processes of history. 
[to p. 178 :] 
God has created man in his own image; for man is a spiritual being. Man 
must therefore become what he is intended to be; that is, he must fulfil 
his destiny as a rational being. The spirit can only be what it makes itself; 
and its activity is that of producing and comprehending itself. 
It is only by recreating itself that the spirit can realise its destiny. 
Thus, the primitive condition in which man has not yet entered that state 
of division from which he must create himself anew is an animal rather 
than a spiritual condition. Only the child or the animal is innocent; man 
is inevitably guilty. This does not mean that he ought to perpetrate evil. 
On the contrary, he ought to do good; but he is invariably responsible 
for his actions, in that he must have willed them and been implicated in 
216 

ADDITIONS OF 1826-7 
them with his will. Guilt is not just the opposite of innocence, for guilt 
implies that the individual can be held responsible for his actions; and 
such responsibility is only possible in that state of division in which the 
consciousness is already differentiated. The state of perfection, if it 
exists at all, is a state of animality. Man is a spirit only in so far as he 
knows himself and has arrived at that state of division and opposition 
whose destiny contains both good and evil. The fact that the state of 
perfection - i.e. the state in which man is in accord with his concept - is 
described as man's earliest condition carries a further implication. It 
suggests that we must presuppose a correspondence between the indi-
vidual and his concept as the true substance on which the concept rests. 
Whatever man is meant to aspire to must be in conformity with his 
concept and with the spirit. Mere potentiality, i.e. that state in which the 
end exists in itself, must be the original condition; the original condition 
is that which is present in and for itself in the concept and in the Idea, 
and which at first exists only inwardly. The inward realm which posits 
itself as an end, the motive impulse which relates all outward expressions 
to this primary factor, is the original condition. Innocence, i.e. the unity 
of the spirit with its determination (i.e. with nature) is absolutely primary, 
the prior condition of its determination, hut not in a chronological sense. 
To represent it as actually existing is, however, an altogether different 
matter. For the rational takes on a new aspect if it is interpreted as 
existing in the present. What is in fact the goal of history is represented 
as the original existence of man from which he has subsequently lapsed. 
This underlying basis is the unmoved mover of everything; what in 
itself is merely an inner basis or ultimate end which the spirit has yet to 
produce is represented by religion as something which has actually 
existed. For us, however, this Idea is the substance and the original 
condition. 
As to the African character, it is still unknown to us, because the 
Europeans have not yet penetrated sufficiently far into the interior; 
Africa still remains cut off. The Europeans have not yet penetrated its 
interior, but they do have frequent commerce with the nations which 
have come down from the interior to the coastal belt. In particular, the 
Portuguese have occupied the coast of southern Guinea; they have tried 
to convert its peoples, but with little success. In Mozambique, they have 
penetrated somewhat further inland. The Dutch and the French have also 
established settlements on the coast of Senegambia; at one time, there 
was even a colony founded by Brandenburg at the mouth of the Gambia 
in Senegal, but it did not survive for long. In recent times, we have also 
217 

APPENDIX 
learnt more about the Africans from the English. The nations which 
have come into contact with Europe have entered into relations with the 
Europeans, partly through war and partly through commercial associa-
tions; but their princes have refused to allow the Europeans to extend 
their territories further, and have acquired a monopoly of trade. They have 
indeed permitted certain commodities to be imported, particularly guns 
and gunpowder, but not by the Europeans. 
[top. 179:] 
Natural man is at least sensible of the fact that his own existence is 
distinct from that of nature. Man occupies a higher and dominant 
position in relation to the natural world. The natural must subordinate 
itself to him, and nothing can stand up against him. He knows this, and 
we know it too. But we do not interpret man and the spiritual world in 
their immediate sense. The spiritual is what we call the divine; but in 
natural man, the finite spirit and the spirit which exists in and for itself 
have not yet been separated. 
[to pp. 179f. :] 
The next point to notice is that this power of sorcery which man is 
supposed to possess is not attributed to all human beings as s~ch. The 
Africans see it as concentrated in certain individuals- in the priests, or in 
some nations in the rulers, or in those who are specially appointed by the 
king and who live in isolation from the rest. 
Their behaviour is at its most terrible among the Jagas or Jakas, who 
terrorised the Guinean kingdom of Congo in the sixteenth century, and 
also attacked Mozambique and Abyssinia. Such priests are known as 
Singilla or Chitomen. Many Portuguese Europeans have lived among 
them. They used to distribute amulets as a means of protection against 
wild beasts and the like, and Catholic priests, Capuchins and Franciscans 
would issue other amulets in turn to counteract the former ... Cavazzi 
reports that many negroes were torn to pieces by wild beasts despite the 
fact that they wore amulets, but that those who had received them from 
him escaped unharmed. 
[to pp. 18of. :] 
Another kind of mediation involves the use of some external object 
which they set up as their god and ruling power. Such objects are called 
fetishes; any stone, butterfly, beetle, tree, or river they come across can be 
made into a fetish. They worship such fetishes and invest them with an 
218 

ADDITIONS OF I 826-7 
independent power, thereby projecting this power beyond their own 
spirit and giving it an external embodiment. The fetish of a given country 
may be an elephant, a tiger, or a river. The animal in question is shut 
up in a cage, worshipped, and credited with absolute power; this power 
is thus projected outside their own consciousness, and they do not see 
it as pertaining to their own minds. It is transferred to another object, 
but only to an object of the senses, and not to a universal spirit. 
[to p. r8r :] 
One of their principal beliefs is that a deceased person may take possession 
of the Singilla and deliver his oracles and commands through the latter's 
mouth. If it is thought that a certain priest is tenanted by a departed 
spirit, that priest is invested with enormous power; he will constantly 
exact new services, offerings of food, and repeated human sacrifices. 
[to p. 183 :] 
The negroes have no sentiments of regret at this condition of slavery. 
When the negro slaves have laboured all day, they are perfectly contented 
and will dance with the most violent convulsions throughout the night. 
[to p. rBs :] 
The negroes wage numerous wars, and, on many occasions, their battles 
have lasted from five to eight days with more than half a million warriors 
engaged. They fight bravely, but their contests could more aptly be 
described as slaughters than as battles. zoo,ooo men have often perished 
on the field. The issue is decided by chance: one of the parties takes flight, 
and all who are caught by the pursuers are massacred. 
[to pp. rBsf. :] 
As for the constitution - if one can speak of such a thing - it is determined 
by the factors already mentioned. There are numerous national groups, 
for the interior of Africa is densely populated. These nations are con-
stantly at war, and their object is to acquire prisoners and slaves whom 
they subsequently devour. Sometimes a nation is subjugated by another, 
and sometimes provinces will rebel and make themselves independent; 
at the moment, the greatest empire is that of the Ashanti. The succession 
is hereditary, and it usually remains within the same family- although 
practice may vary according to whether the brother, the son, or some other 
relative is the heir. But the throne is rarely inherited in a peaceful manner, 
for it may be seized by other chiefs or relations. The violent overthrow of 
dynasties is a common occurrence. 
219 

APPENDIX 
[top. 186:] 
Some Englishmen recently penetrated a region which no Europeans had 
hitherto reached. One of them sat down in the shade in front of a house 
and came into conversation with a negro. Another approached him and 
begged for alms. The Englishman impatiently turned him away; the 
negro who sat beside him said that the other was a man who had access 
to all the leading citizens, for he was the executioner. He had come to 
office in the following way. He had been required to furnish an example 
of his art in order to demonstrate his abilities. He thereupon went home, 
beheaded his brother (who had been the executioner before him), and 
was granted the office. The executioner is often the prime minister, and 
his duty is to decapitate the king if the harvest turns out badly. 
[to p. 188 :] 
Hutchinson describes various ceremonies, particularly the washing of the 
bones of the king's deceac;ed mother and relatives during a solemn 
procession at which the king himself is present. The bones are washed in 
human blood; the rest of the blood of the victims who are slaughtered 
for this purpose is drunk by the king and his retinue. If the king sees 
fit, he will send a message to his deceased father by killing someone and 
ordering him to deliver it. 
[top. 189, l. 5 from below:] 
The missionaries report that this law has existed for 120 years, and that 
they have known many women who have thrown their children into a 
river or exposed them to wild animals. 
Cannibalism is still customary among the Ashanti. The English were 
shown many chiefs of whom it was said that they had torn their enemies' 
hearts from their bodies and eaten them while they were still warm and 
bleeding. They believe that devouring the hearts of their enemies will 
make them courageous. At public festivals, sheep are distributed among 
the people, and the king acts as host to his subjects. At the end, a human 
being is torn to pieces; his flesh is cast to the multitude and greedily eaten 
by all who can lay hands on it. 
But enough of this primitive and savage condition of man. 
220 

NOTE ON THE COMPOSITION 
OF THE TEXT 
(by Georg Lasson) 
In compiling the present edition, the editor had the following source 
materials at his disposal: 
1. A manuscript in Hegel's hand, prefixed by the date 8. xi. 30, and 
accordingly composed for the last series of lectures on the philosophy of 
history which Hegel ever delivered.13 1t is very carefully written on folded 
folio sheets, but only in fragments between which Hegel himself has 
left whole columns blank. Various supplementary passages and inter-
polations have been added in the margin for inclusion in the text, along 
with brief notes and references to the sections into which the work is 
divided. 
In this edition, passages from Hegel's manuscript are printed in italics. 
The reader can thereby distinguish exactly which parts of the text are 
Hegel's own and which have been reconstructed from the lecture notes 
of his students. The spelling has in the main been adapted to present-day 
usage. But no alterations have been made to the actual wording without 
some corresponding indication either in the text or in the footnotes. For 
example, all additions -except where it was self-evident that words 
accidentally omitted had to be restored - are enclosed in square brackets 
in the text. In particular, in all cases where marginal notes consisting of 
incomplete sentences had to be incorporated into the text, words supplied 
to complete the sense are marked as editorial additions. 
Hegel's manuscript breaks off in the middle of his discussion of those 
points of view which enable us to make concrete distinctions between 
the various cultural stages in history. In the second published edition of 
the lecture course in Hegel's collected works, Karl Hegel appended to 
this arbitrary conclusion a series of further passages from students' 
lecture notes. In the notes themselves, these passages appeared much 
earlier in the sequence of lectures, and we have accordingly restored them 
to their original position. No wholly satisfactory conclusion can be 
constructed from the available material; but what now appears at the 
221 

GEORG LASSON 
end of the discussion is at least clearly recognisable as a conclusion in the 
notes of those who attended the lectures. 
A comparison between the text in Hegel's collected works and our 
present edition of Hegel's manuscript at once reveals that the two previous 
editors did not pay the least regard to those principles of philological 
accuracy which are nowadays taken for granted. A single example may 
serve to illustrate just how cursory their reading was. Hegel is fond of the 
comparative construction; but he is also inclined to omit the mute e in 
closed syllables at the ends of words. Consequently, his comparatives are 
usually distinguishable as such only by the single letter r; this has almost 
invariably been overlooked by the previous editors, so that Hegel's point 
has been blunted. And there is no lack of incorrect readings either; 
perhaps the most serious is the substitution of' authorities' [ Autoritiiten] 
for 'a priori inventions' [Aprioritiiten; p. 29, I. 26], although the word 
which Hegel wrote is perfectly legible. Furthermore, the editors have not 
always correctly interpreted the general headings in the margin; the 
most flagrant example occurs in the passage on the second half of page 35 
in this edition, where the editors, having misunderstood Hegel's intro-
ductory words, were compelled simply to omit the greater part of the 
marginal note which can alone make Hegel's opinion clear. 
The first editor, Eduard Gans, took somewhat more care to preserve 
Hegel's style, and did not alter the sequence in which the various sections 
occurred in Hegel's draft. But the second, Karl Hegel, not only made 
many additional changes to Hegel's mode of expression, but also, to 
facilitate the inclusion of new sections from students' notes, altered the 
order of certain sections in Hegel's manuscript, thereby obscuring and 
violating the thought-progression which Hegel intended. Both editors 
alike simply left out whole sentences of the manuscript and altered 
Hegel's diction in ways for which there was no justification and which 
often detract from the sense. 
The way in which the first editors dealt with Hegel's own manuscript 
inspires little confidence in their treatment of the students' lecture notes 
which formed the main source on which their edition was based. And 
indeed, a comparison of one set of notes which was available both to them 
and to the present editor with the printed version reveals that they aspired 
neither to textual accuracy nor to comprehensiveness of content. It is 
astonishing how much important material in the notes in question has 
simply been left out altogether by the editors. This made it all the more 
necessary for the present editor to refer back to the lecture notes wherever 
this was possible. 
222 

NOTE ON THE COMPOSITION OF THE TEXT 
2. Of the sets of notes taken down at Hegel's lectures, the present editor 
was able to consult the following: 
(a) Philosophy of universal world history, a course oflectures delivered 
by Hegel in the winter semester of 1822-3, from the notes of von Gneslzeim. 
The author is the well-known military writer Gustav von Griesheim, 
who was born in 1798 and died in 1854 as Major General and Comman-
dant of Koblenz (cf. Allgemeine deutsche Biographie, vol. g, pp. 66sff.). 
His notes, already used by the first editors, fill two volumes; they are a 
most painstakingly written, extremely neat and eminently legible fair 
copy, every line of which bears witness to the diligence of the copyist. 
It cannot, of course, be demonstrated with complete certainty that the 
original text of Hegel's lectures has been preserved in full throughout. 
It is therefore particularly fortunate that at least the beginning of this 
same series has survived in a second copy, which is as follows: 
(b) The philosophical history of the world. {The heading supplies no 
further information.) The notes are by Hauptmann von Kehler. No year 
is specified, but a comparison with von Griesheim's notes leaves no 
doubt whatsoever that both sets were based on the same lectures delivered 
in the winter semester of r 822-3. The days of individual lectures are also 
noted. 
This set of notes fills only 23 quarto pages. Since the disposition of 
Hegel's lectures in this first Berlin series differs sharply from that of his 
final draft of the Introduction, those matters which are discussed in our 
edition in Chapter 11, sections 2 and 3, are not dealt with until after the 
first two sections of Chapter III. This explains why Kehler's manuscript 
breaks off with a passage which does not appear until p. 133 in our edition, 
although the manuscript contains only the beginning of what was then 
the Introduction. 
Kehler's notes are very hastily written, and are obviously the original 
version as copied down during Hegel's lectures. At the same time, they 
tally remarkably closely with the text of von Griesheim's notes; it can at 
most be said that a few turns of phrase are more vividly preserved than 
in the latter. It was very easy to construct a unified whole from these two 
texts. 
(c) Philosophy of world history, from Hegel's lectures. Winter 
semester r824-5. From the notes of Hauptmann von Kehler. 
The writer of the previous notes has in this case followed the lectures 
of the winter semester 1824-5 up to the middle of February. His hand 
is even more hasty than on the previous occasion, and is for the most 
part extremely difficult to decipher; but, at the same time, the original 
223 

GEORG LASSON 
character of Hegel's mode of expression is incomparably well preserved. 
The painful task of deciphering these indistinct characters was richly 
rewarded by the joy of discovering a completely untapped and freshly 
flowing source of Hegel's deliberations from the period at which the great 
thinker was at the height of his powers. 
(d) Philosophy of world history. Copied from Professor Hegel's 
lectures by Stieve. Berlin 1826-7. 
The writer of these notes later attained eminence as a Privy Councillor 
in the Prussian Ministry of Education. He has not recorded Hegel's 
observations as fully as he might have done, but he does give an impression 
of the form which the lectures had assumed by the time of their third 
delivery, and supplies whole sections which are missing in the earlier 
series. 
It was therefore possible to draw on students' notes from three separate 
years of Hegel's lecture course in compiling the present edition. Hegel 
subsequently repeated the course on two further occasions, in the winter 
semesters of 1828-g and z83o-1, limiting it on the latter occasion to 
'Part One of the Philosophy of World History'. As Karl Hegel informs 
us in his preface to the second edition of the lectures in Hegel's collected 
works, Hegel reduced his basic argument in length in these last years in 
favour of a more detailed historical survey. We may therefore assume that 
the loss occasioned by the absence of notes from the last two courses is 
less serious in the case of the Introduction than in that of the historical 
survey which follows it. 
Few modifications were necessary to the wording of the notes. They 
obviously give a faithful rendering of Hegel's personal idiom, and what 
they may lack in polish is compensated for by the vigour and conciseness 
of th~ language. When Gans first edited the lectures, he saw his task as 
one of transforming a series of 'lectures' into a 'book'. He consequently 
tried to impart a more elegant form to Hegel's discourse; but it is evident 
that Hegel's own peculiar style has been unnecessarily diluted in the 
process. Today, our main interest is of course to obtain as accurate an 
image of Hegel's lectures as possible. It was therefore the duty of the 
present editor to alter the wording of the lecture notes only in those 
instances where grammatical or stylistic errors had intruded. Although 
there are some repetitions, few readers of this edition will presume to 
dismiss any sections of it as superfluous. 
The only occasion on which such doubts could arise is in the discussion 
of the geographical basis of world history. Even the editor had to ask 
himself here whether the whole corpus of ethnographical information 
224 

NOTE ON THE COMPOSITION OF THE TEXT 
contained in the lecture notes really ought to be included in a contem-
porary edition, for much of it must appear antiquated today. It was 
finally decided to include it, not just for the sake of textual accuracy, but 
also on the grounds that information which may have lost its value as 
practical knowledge may still be of considerable value for an under-
standing of the way in which Hegel worked and thought. Hegel's wide 
reading, even in remote areas of learning, and his determination to come 
to terms with problems such as the historical role of America or the 
spiritual character of the natives of Africa, surely merit the attention even 
of present-day readers. 
3· The edition of the lectures in 'The Works of Hegel', val. 9· The first 
edition was published by Gans in 1837, and the second, greatly enlarged 
edition -the Introduction in particular was much expanded - by Karl 
Hegel in 184o; a less accurate reprint of the latter was issued in 1848 as 
the third edition. The second edition must be regarded as the authoritative 
one. In 1907, a very good reprint of it was prepared for the Reclams 
Bibliothek series by Fritz Brunstad; it is particularly distinguished for 
its more accurate presentation of the Introduction. It goes without saying 
that, wherever the lecture notes at the present editor's disposal contained 
passages parallel to those in the printed text, the text was corrected in the 
light of the notes in question. The editor can vouch for the authenticity 
of all those portions of the text in which the printed version was supple-
mented by manuscript material. But some sections remained for which no 
parallels could be found in the manuscript, and these are accordingly 
reproduced here exactly as they appeared in Hegel's collected works. 
One further circumstance calls for mention. Gans had already remarked 
in the preface to his edition that he had at his disposal manuscripts in 
Hegel's hand, and that he had taken some material from them. We can 
only conclude that these were Hegel's own lecture notes. Besides, Karl 
Hegel assures us that the extensive additions he made to Gans's edition 
were not taken from the students' notes but from his father's own 
manuscripts. If we could assume from this that Hegel's deliberations in 
these manuscripts were already laid out in a more or less finished form, 
and were expressed in complete sentences with a coherent argument, we 
could then conclude that the passages added to the second edition of 
Hegel's works are the most reliable parts of that text. But until such time 
as Hegel's manuscripts come to light again, this assumption will have to 
be treated with scepticism. For, in the first place, we know from surviving 
manuscripts of Hegel that he was in the habit of collecting brief references, 
scattered notes, etc., for his lectures, and constructing the spoken version 

GEORG LASSON 
out of these; and secondly, comparison of various passages from the 
students' notes with the corresponding sections in Karl Hegel's edition 
clearly indicates that, on this occasion too, Hegel only gave concrete and 
adequate shape to his draft when he came to deliver the lecture itself. 
Consequently, in the case of those sections which could only be repro-
duced from the earlier edition, we must continue to suppose that they 
owe their precise formulation less to Hegel than to his original editors. 
And we must content ourselves with the knowledge that such sections 
are relatively few in number. 
226 

NOTES TO THE FIRST DRAFT 
( 1 8 2 2 and 1 8 2 8) 
1 Karl Hegel's edition: 'compendium'. 
2 Karl Hegel's edition: 'There are three possible ways of looking at history.' 
3 Karl Hegel adds: 'It is impossible for one man to have seen everything for 
himself.' 
4 This entire sentence is incoherent in Hegel's MS. Karl Hegel's edition 
reads instead: 'The historians bind together fleeting events and lay them up 
in the temple of Mnemosyne for everlasting life.' In the MS, the following 
words were added and later scored out: 'for it is one thing to have certain 
emotions, and quite another to present them poetically, i.e. creatively, to 
the consciousness.' 
5 Lasson adds: 'Poems do not have historical truth or determinate reality as 
their content.' 
6 Karl Hegel and Lasson add: 'The realm of perceived or perceptible reality 
affords a firmer foundation than the realm of transience from which such 
legends and poetic creations sprang; the latter lose their historical value as 
soon as nations have attained secure independence and mature individuality.' 
7 The MS reads: 'they possess'. 
8 Karl Hegel and Lasson add: 'Consider, for example, Herodotus, Thucydides, 
and Guicciardini' [the author of an Istoria d'ltalia (156I), on which the 
historian Leopold von Ranke wrote]. 
9 The MS reads: 'He'. 
10 Instead of this awkward sentence, Karl Hegel's edition has the following: 
'And if, like Caesar, he is a member of the class of generals or statesmen, it 
is his own ends which he presents as history.' And Lasson adds the further 
elucidation: 'All this can also be applied to later epochs in history. In ages 
in which a nation's culture is far advanced, there are cultural differences 
within it which result from distinctions of social class. The writer, if he is 
to qualify as an original historian, must then be a member of the same class 
as those whose deeds he intends to describe, that is, a statesman or general.' 
Lasson then continues, following Karl Hegel's version and failing to notice 
the direct transition from the Zurich sheet to the Marbach sheet of the MS 
(cf. note II below): 'Yet although it has just been maintained that such 
historians do not reflect on their material but simply depict individuals and 
227 

NOTES TO PAGES 11-2-l 
nations in their own right, this would seem to be contradicted by the speeches 
which we read in Thucydides, for example, and of which \\e can confidently 
say that they were never delivered in the way he reports them.' 
1 I After this word, the Marbach MS begins. 
12 Lasson adds: 'Men must be moved to action by speeches; and such speeches 
are an essential part of history.' 
I3 In the MS, this entire paragraph has been added in the margin. 
I4 This sentence too is a marginal addition in the MS. 
IS The preceding passage does not appear in the edition of Lasson, who 
continues from the last paragraph as follows: 'They give us an insight into 
the reflections af!.d principles of their age, making it unnecessary for the 
historian to add his own reflections. And even if he makes up such speeches 
himself, they are nevertheless speeches of his age, since he is himself part 
of the culture of his age. Thus even if Thucydides did elaborate on the 
speeches of Pericles, for example, they are still in no way alien to Pericles.' 
I6 The MS continues: 'apart from what he otherwise', and breaks off. 
I7 Marginal addition: 'We must distinguish between these and the bibles of 
nations; every nation has a book of this kind- the Bible, Homer.' 
I8 MS emendation from: 'have reached a high level'. 
I9 The three preceding sentences (from 'But such works') are supplied from 
notes in the margin of the manuscript- Karl Hegel, followed by Lasson, 
reads instead: 'In antiquity, these historians were necessarily great captains 
and statesmen; in the Middle Ages- if we except the bishops, who were at 
the centre of the business of state - there were certainly monks who wrote 
naive chronicles, but they were as isolated from the rest of their society as 
the ancient writers were immersed in theirs.' 
20 Marginal note in MS: 'political consideration -life of the state'. 
2 I Marginal note in MS: 'a Original [history] can cover only a short period of 
time. The need to survey the whole leads fJ to reflective history. aa Com-
pendia, fJfJ Counterpart. - Imitation of original history merely superficial 
addition.' 
22 Karl Hegel adds: 'In short, for what we call universal history.' 
23 The following passage is scored out in the MS, but restored (or reintroduced 
from notes made by students in one of the years before I 828) by Karl Hegel 
and Lasson: 'Compilations of this kind include world-historical compendia 
at large, and more specific works such as Livy's Roman History, Diodorus 
Siculus etc., and Johannes von Miiller's History of the Swiss. If well executed, 
they are highly meritorious, and indeed quite indispensable. But it is 
impossible to lay down general rules or definitions of how they should be 
written.' 
24 Johannes von Miiller (1752-18og), History of the Swiss Confederation [Die 
Geschichte der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft], vol. I,. Leipzig, 1786; 
vols. 2 and 3, 1786-95; vol. 4 and § 1 of vol. s, I 8os-8. Complete revised 
edition, Leipzig, 1826. 

NOTES TO PAGES 11-24 
25 Aegidius Tschudi (1505-72), Swiss Chronicle [Schweizerchronik], Basel, 
1734-6, 2 vols.- This work by the politician Tschudi reproduces a large 
number of now vanished documents which]. von Miiller uses. 
26 Marginal note: 'not just quantitative reductions, i.e. to general represen-
tations, by means of reflection'. 
27 Not 'Ranken ',as in Lasson's edition- this, by the way, is the only occasion 
in Hegel's works where he mentions the name of the great historian (whose 
career was then only beginning); cf. note 8 above. 
28 In the margin, referred by symbols to this point in the text, are the following 
words: 'In general, ratio11al history, aa a totality of interests- as the totality 
of a state, an epoch-making event, a war, or even of an individual- is the 
object. PfJ The object here is also a present interest, but the immediacy of 
tone, of feeling, of external vividness [Anschaulichkeit] in circumstantial 
details and the careers of single individuals as such [is] dispensed with.' 
29-31 In the course of major revisions to the MS, these words have been 
unintentionally deleted or not restored. 
32 Above this is written: 'At first primitive, enclosed nation, as such [not an 
object], but only in so far as it succeeds in constituting a state. What it 
undertakes as a state, a national whole in itself, is a universal end of 
reason.' 
33 Below this is written: 'Other individuals like Napoleon only momentary. 
Essential dependence.' 
34 Parenthetical addition: 'French [above: Germans] more satisfying,- this is 
how it was-.' 
35 Karl Hegel's edition reads instead: 'reflected'. 
36 The bracketed passages here and in the following pages occur only in Lasson's 
edition; the rest of the text is almost identical in Karl Hegel's and Lasson's 
versions. In doubtful cases, I have followed the text of Karl Hegel. 
37 Johannes von Miiller, Twenty-four Books ofGeneral Histories, with Special 
Reference to European Man [Vierundzwanzig Bucher allgemeiner Geschichten, 
besonders der europa"ischen Menschheit], Tiibingen, 1810, 3 vols. 
38 Johannes von Miiller, Letters to Bonstetten [Brieft an Bonstetten], 1809; 
Letters to Woltmann [Brieft an Woltmann], 18II; Muller's Letters to his 
Oldest Friend [Brieft Muliers an seinen riltesten Freund], ed. Fiissli, Zurich, 
!812. 
39 Montesquieu, De !'esprit des lots, Geneva, 1748, 2 vols.; German translation, 
Halle, 1 829, 3 vols. 
40 Barthold Georg Niebuhr, Roman History [Romische Geschichtl'], Berlin, 
1811-32, 3 vols. 
41 Lasson reads: 'of bringing the present into the past', and Karl Hegel reads 
'of achieving a present in history'. 
42 Instead of the preceding paragraph Karl Hegel has the following words: 
'In our times, this variety of conceptual history has been more emphasised 
and become more highly developed.' 
229 

NOTES TO PAGES 25-ISI 
43 Gustav Hugo (I764-I844) produced a German edition of Gibbon's Survey 
of Roman Law [ Ubersicht des riimischen Rechts ], Gottingen, 1789. 
44 Karl Friedrich Eichhorn (1781-I854), Political and Legal History ofGermany 
[Deutsche Staats- und Rechtsgeschichte], Gottingen, I8o8-23, 4 parts. 
NOTES TO THE SECOND DRAFT (1830) 
1 The MS reads: 'in the correct relationship'. 
2 M:1rginal addition: 'The preface to every new work on history- and then 
again in the introductions to reviews of such works- [brings a] new theory.' 
3 Marginal note: 
'a general concept, 
f3 determinate, 
y mode of development.' 
4 Marginal note: 'a reason.' 
5 Marginal note: 'f3 faith- survey, result.' 
6 Marginal note: 'y historical procedure.' 
7 Marginal note: '/)apprehend accurately.' 
8 The MS reads: 'thinking and brings'. 
9 As, for example, in Niebuhr's remarks on priestly rule in his Roman History 
[Riimische Geschichte], or in [Karl Ottfried] Muller's The Dorians [Die 
Dorier; 2 vols., 1824]. 
IO MS: 'on'. 
1 I Marginal note: '£ Two points - Anax.' 
I 2 The MS reads: 'this exposition of the earliest'. 
I3 The MS reads: 'of the inadequacy'. 
I 4 Marginal note: ' ' providence.' 
I 5 Marginal note: '"'I transition: plan of providence.' 
I 6 Marginal note: 'This - understanding of our time.' 
I7 Lasson adds here the following (obviously corrupt) sentence: 'This negative 
element is rejected by thinking reason, which looks instead for an affirmative 
end.' 
I8 The MS reads: 'it'. 
19 Marginal note: 'spirit higher than nature'. 
20 Marginal note: 'a general destiny, {3 visible meam of fulfilling this destiny, 
y complete realisation, the state.' 
21 Marginal note: 'Education of the human race [Translator's note: Hegel 
here quotes the title of Lessing's famous sketch of history as the progress 
of human reason]- to what?- to freedom- man is educated to it- but 
not directly - the result.' 
22 The MS reads: 'nature merely'. 
230 

NOTES TO PAGES 25-151 
23 Marginal note: 'combination of particularity and generality in which the 
former becomes the means.' 
24 Marginal note: 'one-sided (philosophy).' 
25 Marginal note: 'Individual will.' 
26 Marginal note: 'Will and aims of the individual.' 
27 Marginal note: 'Geg. Hon. [Translator's note: I have not been able to 
decipher- and hence translate- this abbreviation of Hegel's]- satisfaction 
of my own spirit- stubbornly pursued.' 
28 The MS reads: 'needs'. 
29 Marginal note: 'Nowadays, private interests are linked with the general 
interest.' 
30 Marginal note: 'Reality at first only as nature.' 
31 The MS reads: 'a further'. 
32 Cf. Hegel's Phiinomenologie des Geistes, ed. Johannes Hoffmeister, 1952, 
p. 468. 
33 Marginal note: 'see Kant.' 
34 The MS reads: 'have'. 
35 Marginal note: 'Ethicality in its true form- in the state.' 
36 The MS reads: 'his'. 
37 The MS reads: 'his'. 
38 Marginal note: 'Deceive the people- Goethe- Homer- war waged.' 
39 The MS reads: 'of what contradicts'. 
40 I651-17I5. Archbishop of Cambrai. He deals with the education of princes 
in Les aventures de Te/emaque (1699). 
41 1759-1834· The founder of the French National Guard (1789), leader of 
the Feuillants during the Revolution, in exile from 1792 to 1797, thereafter 
in Paris, supporter of Louis Philippe in 1830. 
42 The MS reads: 'are'. 
43 Lasson substitutes for this: 'after which'. 
44 Hegel erroneously prefixed the letter 'b' to this paragraph. 
45 The MS adds: 'from its fetters'. 
46 F. von Schlegel, Philosophy of History [Philosophie der Geschichte], I, 44 
(first edition). 
47 We have this interest to thank for many valuable discoveries in Oriental 
literature, and for the renewed study of previously accumulated treasures 
relating to the life, mythology, religion, and history of ancient Asia. In those 
Catholic countries which enjoy an advanced degree of culture, governments 
have ceased to resist the demands of the intellect and the need to ally 
themselves with scholarship and philosophy. In an eloquent and impressive 
fashion, the Abbe Lamennais1 has reckoned it among the criteria of the 
true religion that it must be universal, i.e. catholic, and the oldest in 
point of time, and the Congregation2 in France has laboured zealously and 
diligently to ensure that such assertions should no longer be regarded as 
mere pulpit tirades and proclamations of authority, as was generally accepted 
231 

NOTES TO PAGES 25-151 
in the past. The religion of Buddha- a god incarnate- which commands 
so widespread a following, has attracted particular attention. The Indian 
Trimiirti and the Chinese abstraction of the Trinity are clearer in content, 
however. The scholars Abel Remusat3 and Saint Martin4 have conducted 
the most praiseworthy investigations into Chinese literature, and thence 
into that of Mongolia; and if it were possible, these would be pursued into 
Tibetan literature in turn. And Baron von Eckstein,5 in his own peculiar 
way (i.e. \\ith the help of superficial conceptions and mannerisms borrowed 
from German natural philosophy in the style of Friedrich von Schlegel, 
which, although employed with greater ingenuity than in Schlegel's case, 
nevertheless made not the slightest impression in France), has argued in 
support of this primitive Catholicism in his journal Le Catholique; in 
particular, he has gained the government's support for the scholarly projects 
of the Congregation, with the result that it has even commissioned expeditions 
to the Orient to discover new treasures in the hope of obtaining further 
information regarding its more profound doctrines, especially on the remoter 
antiquity and sources of Buddhism, thereby furthering the cause of Catho-
licism by this circuitous but scientifically interesting method. 
1 Lamennais, 1782-1854, leader of the Catholic democrats in France 
and editor of the journal L'Avemr, 1830-2. 
2 Hegel refers to the Congregatio de propaganda fide, founded on 21 June 
1622 by Pope Gregory XV, usually known simply as the Propaganda. 
3 Remusat, Jean Pierre Abel, 1788-1832, Professor of Sinology at the 
College de France. 
4 Saint-Martin, Marquis de, 1743-18o3, theosophist; author of L'homme 
de desir (1790) and De /'esprit des choses (18oo). 
5 Eckstein, Ferdinand Baron von, 179o-I86x, partisan of the Restoration 
and of Ultramontanism, historiographer to the French Foreign Ministry 
until 1830. 
48 Bailly [Histoire de l'astronomie ancienne, 1775] has written with superficial 
knowledge on the astronomy of the Indians. In our own age, it has admittedly 
been shown, e.g. by Lambert [Cosmological Letters on the Constitution of 
the Unirerse (Kosmologische Briefe iiber die Einrichtung des Weltbaues), 1761 ], 
that the Indians did possess some knowledge of astronomy; for example, 
the Brahmans predicted eclipses of the sun by means of unreflectingly 
applied formulas. But the spirit which once inhabited these formulas 
(albeit in a purely mechanical fashion) has long ceased to tenant them. 
In fact, the methods they have inherited from tradition do not possess that 
excellence with which they were formerly credited. 
49 The MS reads instead: 'b. Process of World History.' 
50 The MS reads: 'it'. 
51 Karl Hegel amends this to 'logic'. 
52 Marginal note: 'Love.' 
232 

NOTES TO PAGES 152-226 
NOTES TO APPENDIX 
1 Metaphysics, A, 2, g82b. 
2 Ritter, Karl, 1779-1859, the founder of scientific geography. 
3 Pradt, Dominique Dufour de, 1759-1837, Archbishop of Malines from 
1808, politician of varying leanings, published his Mernoires historiques sur 
Ia revolution d'Espagne in I8I6. 
4 From the lecture course of 1824-5. 
5 Herodotus II, c. 33; ")'O'I)T!lS £lva• aTt!lVT!lS. 
6 Giovanni Antonio Cavazzi, Istorica descrizione dei tre reg11i Congo, Matarnba, 
Angola. Bologna, 1687 (quotations here are from the edition published in 
Milan in 1690). 
7 Cavazzi, p. 55· 
8 James Bruce, Travels to Discover the Sources of the Nile, 1768-73. 
9 T. E. Bowdich, Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee. London, 1819. 
2 vols. 
10 Resident in Kumassi in 1817. 
II Cavazzi, pp. 149ff. 
12 Lasson's edition reads 'results'. 
13 On the previous holograph manuscript to the Introduction, cf. the present 
editor's preface. 
233 

SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER 
READING 
The following bibliography is limited as strictly as possible to works dealing 
with the text to which it is here appended: it contains only literature on Hegel's 
Lectures on the Philosophy of World History, even in cases where this is not 
immediately evident from the titles listed. 
Relevant sections from comprehensive studies of Hegel and from other works 
of a wider scope have also been included. But works dealing with problems of 
the philosophical theory of history or historicity with reference to Hegel's 
other writings (particularly the Logic and the Phenomenology of Spirit) are 
omitted, as are all studies which discuss the philosophy of history in the light 
of the Lectures 011 Aesthetics, the Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion, and the 
Lectures on the History of Philosophy. 
Inevitably, no absolutely clear distinction can be made in this bibliography 
between the Philosophy of History on the one hand, and the political theories 
of the Philosophy of Right and the doctrines of the Encyclopaedia concerning the 
objective spirit on the other. For in the latter work Hegel assigns the philosophy 
of world history its place within his system, and in the former he discusses it in 
outline (cf. Elements of the Philosophy of Right, §§ 341-60, and Encyclopaedia 
of the Philosophical Sciences, third edition, §§ 548-52). 
The following list is intended as an aid to further study. As such, it does not 
claim to provide an exhaustive bibliography on the theme in question. Above all, 
a complete bibliography would have to include further references to works of 
non-German origin. 
The titles are listed in chronological sequence. In general, this arrangement 
gives some impression of the history of interpretations of Hegel's philosophy of 
history, and, in individual cases, it at once informs the reader of the chronological 
relationship between a given title and other relevant works. 
[Buhl :] Hegel's Lehre vom Staat und seine Plzilosoplzie der Gescluchte m ihren 
Hauptresultaten. Berlin 1837. 99 pp. 
Chalybiius, Heinrich Moritz: 'Philosophic der Geschichte und Geschichte der 
Philosophic. In Bezug auf Hegels Vorlesungen i.iber die Philosophic der 
Geschichte [etc.]'. In: Zeitschrift fur Philosophic und spekulative Theologze, 
I (1837), pp. 301-8. 
234 

FURTHER READING 
Mager, Karl W. E.: Brief an eine Dame iiber die Hegelsche Philosophie. Berlin 
1837· pp. 52-8. 
Michelet, Carl Ludwig: Geschichte der letzten Systeme der Philosophie in 
Deutschland von Kant his Hegel, Pt 2. Berlin 1838. pp. 791-801. 
Binder: [Review:] 'Hegels Vorlesungen iiber die Philosophic der Geschichte '. 
In: Jahrbiicher fiir wissenschafiliche Kritik. Jg. 1839. pp. 801-24. 
Rosenkranz, Karl: 'Hegel's Vorlesungen iiber die Philosophic der Geschichte'. 
In: Hallische Jahrbiicher fiir deutsche Wissenschafi und Kunst, I (1838), 
PP· 132-56. 
See also: Rosenkranz: Kritische Erltiuterungen des Hegel'schen Systems. 
Konigsberg 1840. Reprinted Hildersheim 1963. pp. 149-77: 'Hegel's 
Philosophic der Geschichte '. 
WeiBe, Christian Hermann: [Review:] 'Hegels Vorlesungen iiber die Philo-
sophie der Geschichte'. In: Bla"tter fiir literarische Unterhaltung, Jg. r84o, 
No. 69-72. 
Ulrici, Hermann: Ueber Princip und Methode der Hegelschen Philosophie. 
Ein Beitrag zur Kritik derselben. Halle 1841. pp. 195-208. 
Rosenkranz, Karl: Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel's Leben. Berlin 1844. Reprinted 
Darmstadt 1963. pp. 373-9: 'Die Philosophic der Geschichte und der 
Orient'. 
Staudenmaier, Franz Anton: Darstelluug und Kritik des Hegelschen Systems. 
Aus dem Standpunkte der christlichen Philosophie. Mainz 1844. Reprinted 
Frankfurt a. M. 1966. pp. 563-640: 'Die Philosophic der Geschichte'. 
Springer, Anton H.: Die Hegel'sche Geschichtsanschauung. Eine historische 
Denkschrift. Tiibingen 1848. VI, 93 pp. 
Haym, Rudolf: Hegel und seine Zeit. Vorlesungen iiber Entstehung und Entwicke-
lung, Wesen und Werth der Hegel'schen Philosophie. Berlin 1857. Second edition 
1927. Reprint [of the first edition] Hildesheim 1962. pp. 443-53: 'Geschichts-
philosophie '. 
Rosenkranz, Karl: Hegel als deutscher Nationalphilosoph. Leipzig 1870. Re-
printed Darmstadt 1966. pp. 163-74: 'Die Philosophic der Geschichte '. 
Bahnsen, Julius: Zur Philosophie der Geschichte. Eine kritische Be spree hung des 
Hegel-Hartmann'schen Evoluttonismus aus Schopenhauer'schen Principien. 
Berlin 1872. IV, 86 pp. 
Dieterich, K.: 'Buckle und Hegel. Ein Beitrag zur Charakteristik cnglischer 
und deutschcr Geschichtsphilosophie '. In: Preujlzsche Jahrlnlclzer, 32 (1 873), 
pp. 257-302 and 463-81. 
Stieglitz, Theodor: Paralogismen 
tn Hegel's 
Plzilosoplzze der Geschicllle. 
(Prachatitz:) Verlag des Realgymnasiums (1878), pp. 1-16. Prachatitz, k. k. 
Staats-Realgym., Progr. 1878. 
Levi, Giuseppe: La dotll·ina dello stato di Gzorgto F. G. Hegel. [\"ol.] 2. Trieste 
I 881. pp. :!.j.0-57· 
Morris, G. S.: Hegel's Philosophy of tlte State and of Htsto!J'. Chicago 1887; 
London 1888. 306 pp. 
235 

FURTHER READING 
B:uth, Paul: Die Geschiclwphilosophie Hegel's und der Hegelianer bis auf Marx 
und Hartmann. Em knwcher Versuch. Leipzig 1890. 148 pp. 
Tiinnies, Ferdinand: 'Neuere Philosophic der Geschichte: Hegel, Marx, 
Comte'. In: Archivfiir Geschichte der Philosophie, 7 (1894), pp. 486-515. 
Barth, Paul: 'Zu Hegels und Marx' Geschichtsphilosophie'. In: Archiv fiir 
Gesclzichte der Philosoplzie, 8 (1895), pp. 241-55 and 315-35. 
Fischer, Kuno: Hegels Lebm, Werke und Lehre, val. 2. Heidelberg 1901. 
Second edition 1911. Reprinted Darmstadt 1963. pp. 74o-8r3: 'Philosophic 
der Geschichte '. 
Rubinstein, Moses: Die logischen Grundlagen des Hegelschen Systems und das 
Ende der Geschichte. Halle 1906. 73 pp. Freiburg i. B., Phil. Diss. 1906. 
Brunstiid, Friedrich: 'Vorrede'. In: G. W. F. Hegel: Vorlesungen iiber die 
Philosophic der Geschichte. Leipzig 1907. pp. 3-26. 
Completely revised in the second edition, Leipzig 1924. This version is 
reprinted in: Brunstad: Gesammelte Aufsiitze und kleinere Schriften. Berlin 
1957· pp. 48-68. 
Croce, Benedetto: Cio che e vivo e cia dze e morto della .filoso.fia di Hegel. Studio 
critico seguito da un saggio di bibliogra.fia Hegeliana. Bari 1907. pp. 129-43: 
'La storia (Idea di una filosofia della storia) '. 
German version: Lebendiges und Totes in Hegels Philosophic. Heidelberg 1909. 
pp. 109-21: 'Die Geschichte (Idee einer Philosophic der Geschichte)'. 
French version: Ce qui est vivant et ce qui est mort de Ia philosophie de Hegel. 
Paris 1910. pp. 109-21: 'L'histoire (Idee d'une philosophic de l'histoire)'. 
KaulfuB, Otto: Die Grundprobleme der Geschichtsphilosophie mit besonderer 
Beriicksichtigung der Hegelschen Anschauungm. Bromberg 1907. 78 pp. 
Brunstad, Friedrich: Untersuchungen zu Hegels Geschichtstheorie 1. 46 pp. 
[printed in part]. Berlin, Phil. Diss. 1909. 
Dittmann, Friedrich: Der Begriff des Volksgeistes bei Hegel. Zugleich ein Beitrag 
zur Geschichte des Begriffs der Entwicklung im 19. Jahrhundert. Leipzig 1909. 
109 pp. Leipzig, Phil. Diss. 1908. 
Mayer-Moreau, Karl: Hegels Socialphilosophie. Tubingen r9ro. pp. 77-83: 
'Philosophie der Geschichte '. 
Lasson, Georg: 'Zur Staats- und Geschichtsphilosophie Hegels '. In: Zeitschrift 
fiir Politik, 4 (I9II), pp. 581-7· 
Roques, Paul: Hegel. Sa vie et ses a:uvres. Paris 1912. pp. 269-83: 'Philosophie 
de 1 'histoire '. 
Dittmann, Friedrich: 'Die Geschichtsphilosophie Comtes und Hegels. Ein 
Vergleich '. In: Vierteljahresschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Philosophie und 
Soziologie, 38 (1914), pp. 281-312; 39 (1915), pp. 38-81. 
Cunow, Heinrich: Die Marxsche Geschichts-, Gesellschafts- und Staatstheorie, 
Vol. r. Munich 1920. pp. 224-44: 'Hegels Geschichts- und Staatsphilo-
sophie'. 
Lasson, Georg: Hegel als Geschichtsphilosoph. Leipzig 1920. vr, 180 pp. (Phil. 
Bib!. 171 e.) 

FURTHER READING 
Rosenzweig, Franz: Hegelund der Staat, Vol. 2: Welte poe hen. Munich and Berlin 
1920. Reprinted Aalen 1962. pp. 174-84. 
Brunswig, Alfred: Hegel. Munich 1922. (Philosophische Reihe, Vol. 54) 
pp. 20o-12: 'Die Philosophic der Weltgeschichte'. 
Leese, Kurt: Die GeJchichtJphiloJophie Hegels auf Grund der neu erJclzlossenen 
Que/len untersucht und dargestellt. Berlin I922. 3I3 pp. 
Dannenberg, Friedrich: Der Geist der Hegelschen Geschichtsphilosophie. Langen-
salza 1923. 48 pp. (Fr. Manns Piidagog. Magazin, H. 9I9) 
Koeper, Otto: Lotzes geschichtsphilosoplzische Auseinandersetzung mit Hegel. 
vr, 77 pp. [MS]. Munster, Phil. Diss. 1923. 
Blaschke, Friedrich: Hegels System und seine Geschichtsphilosophie. Crimmit-
schau 1924. 35 pp. 
'Einfiihrung in Hegels Geschichtsphilosophie'. In: Wiirttembergsche Lehrer-
zeitung, 83 (1924). 
Meinecke, Friedrich: Die Idee der Staatsraison in der neueren Geschichte. 
Munich and Berlin 1924. pp. 427-60: 'Hegel'. 
Simon, Ernst: Rankes Verhiiltnis zu Hegel. vn, 17I pp. [MS]. Heidelberg, 
Phil. Diss. I924. [printed 1928, see below]. 
Mehlis, Georg: 'Die Geschichtsphilosophie Hegels und Comtcs'. In: Jahrbuclz 
fiir Soziolagie, 3 (1927), pp. 91-110. 
Breysig, Kurt: Vom geschichtlichen Werden. Umrisse einer zukiinftigen Geschichts-
lehre, vol. 2: Die Macht des Gedankens in der Geschichte in Auseinandersetzung 
mit Marx und mit Hegel. Stuttgart and Berlin I926. pp. 166--420. 
Breysig, Kurt: 'Zeit und Begriff als Ordnungsformen des geschichtlichen 
Geschehens'. In: Philosoplzischer Anzeiger, 1 (I926), pp. 427-77; see esp. 
pp. 431-45: 'Zeit und Geschichte bei Hegel'. 
Also in: Breysig: GesellschaftJlehre. Gmhicht.1lehre. 1958. pp. 127-39. 
Herrmann, Wilhelm von: Gott in der Geschiclzte. Eine Untersuchung des Hegel-
schen Gottesbegriffis auf Grund seiner Geschichtsphilosophie. Berlin, Theel. 
Diss. 1926. 
Kronenberg, M.: [Review of] Hegel: Die Vernunft in der Geschichte. In: 
Kantstudien, 33 (1928), pp. 265-8. 
Kupfer, Johannes: Die Aujfassung des Sokrates in Hegels Geschichtsphilosophie, 
Ill, 46 pp. Leipzig, Phil. Diss. 1927. 
Lowith, Karl: 'Burckhardts Stellung zu Hcgels Geschichtsphilosophie '. In: 
Deutsche Vierteljahressclzrift fiir Literaturwis.lensclzaft und Geistesgeschichte, 
6 (1928), pp. 702-41. 
Simon, Ernst: Ranke und Hegel. Munich and Berlin I928. (Historischc Zeit-
schrift. Beiheft I 5) [ = revised version of the dissertation of 1924, above]. 
Particularly pp. I2I-94: 'Rankes Ideenlchre und Hegels Philosophic dcr 
Geschichte '. 
Hartmann, Nicolai: Die Plzilosophie des deutschen I deal ism us, Part 2: Hegel. 
Berlin and Leipzig I 929. pp. 350-65: 'Philosophic der Geschichte '. Second 
edition Berlin I96o. pp. 539-52. 
237 

FURTHER READING 
Kayser, Ulrich: Da.t Prohlem der Zeit in der Geschicht.tphilosophie Hegels. 88 pp. 
Berlin, Phil. Diss. 1930. 
Moog, Willy: Hegelund die Hegelsche Schule. Munich 1930. (Geschichte der 
Philosophic in Einzeldarstellungen. 32/33) pp. 345-54: 'Weltgeschichte'. 
Plenge, Johann: Hegel und die Weltgeschiclzte. Ein Vortrag. Munster/W. 1931, 
72 pp. (Published by the Forschungsinstitut fiir Organisationslehre und 
Soziologie bei der Universitat Munster. Kleine Schriften 3) 
van den Bergh van Eysinga, G. A.: Hegel. 's Gravenhage 1931. Second impres-
sion Den Haag 1960. pp. 131-58. 'Hegel als historisch denker'. 
Wittfogel, K. A.: 'Hegel uber China'. In: Unter dem Banner des Marxismus, 
5 (1931), pp. 34&-62. 
Lenin, V. I.: A us dem plzilo.toplmclmz Nachlafl. Edited by V. Adoratski, German 
edition by M. Furschtschik. Vienna and Berlin 1932. Reprinted Berlin 1949 
and in subsequent years. pp. 165-77: 'Zur Kritik der Vorlesungen Hegels 
iiber die Philosophic der Geschichte'. 
Mell, Josef: Die Geschichtsplzilo.wphie Deutingers und Hegels. Ein Vergleich. 
8o pp. Bonn, Phil. Diss. 1933. 
Plachte, Kurt. 'Die Schicksalsidee in Hegels Philosophic der Geschichte '. 
In: Logos, 22 (1933), pp. 273-94. 
Gunzel, Karl: Der Beg riff der Freiheit bei Hegel und Lormz von Stein. Leipzig, 
Phil. Diss. 1934. pp. 23-50: 'Das Werden der Freiheit des Geistes'. 
Heimsoeth, Heinz: 'Politik und Moral in Hegels Geschichtsphilosophie '. 
In: Blatter fiir Deutsche Philosophie, 8 (1934-5), pp. 127-48. 
Also in: Heimsoeth: Studien zur Philosophiegeschichte. Cologne 1961. 
(Kantstudien. Erganzungshcfte 82) pp. 22-42. 
Spanish version: 'Politica y moral en Ia filosofia de Ia historia de Hegel'. 
In: Revista de Occidente, 46 (1934), pp. II3-49· 
Flater, Hans H. F.: Die Begriindung der Geschichtlichkeit der Geschichte in der 
Philosoplzie des deutschen Idealismus (von Herder his Hegel). Halle/S. 1936. 
152 pp. Halle, Phil. Diss. 1936. 
Stich, Herta: Von Herders' Ideen zur Philosophic des Geschichte der Menschheit' 
iiber Kallt, Fichte, Schelling, bis zu Hegels 'Vor/esungen iibcr die Philosophie 
der Geschichte '. Ein Beitrag zur Philosophie der Geschichte. [MS]. Vienna, 
Phil. Diss. 1936. 
Thyssen, Johannes: Geschichte der Geschiclztsphilosophie. Berlin 1936. pp. 69-86: 
'Hegel'. Third edition Bonn 1960. pp. 69-86. 
Bulow, Friedrich: 'Hegels Staats- und Geschichtsphilosophie als Giirstolf der 
abendliindischen Geistesentwicklung '. In: Zeitschrift fur die Gesamten Staats-
wisselzschafien, 100 (1940), pp. 457-76. 
Muller, Gustav Emil: Hegel iiber Sittlichkeit und Geschichte. Munich 1940. 
pp. 85-IOo: 'Die Geschichte'. 
Liiwith, Karl: Von Hegel b1s Nietzsche. Zurich/New York 1941. pp. 283-312: 
'Hegels Philosophic der Geschichte und Goethes Anschauung des Geschehens 
der Welt'. 

FURTHER READING 
From the second edition, under the title: Von Hegel :;;u Nietzche. Der revolu-
tioniire Bruch im Denken des neunzehntenJahrhunderts. Mar.r und Kierkegaard. 
Stuttgart [simultaneously in Zurich] 1953 etc. pp. 232-51. 
Also in English, Italian and Japanese translation. 
Marcuse, Herbert: Reason and Revolution. Hegel and the Rise of Social Theory. 
London and New York 1941. Second edition 1954. pp. 224-48: 'The philo-
sophy of history'. 
German version: Vernunft und Revolution. Neuwied and Berlin 1962. 
(Soziologische Texte, 13) pp. 20o--2o: 'Die Philosophic der Geschichte'. 
Vanni Rovighi, Sofia: La concezione hegeliana della storia. Milan 1942. VIII, 
228 pp. (Pubblicazioni dell'Universita Cattolica del S. Cuore. Ser. 
1,35) 
Hoffman, Rudolf: Die Weltgeschichte und der deutsche Geist. Munich and Berlin 
1943. pp. 97-120: 'Hegel'. 
Sistig, Peter: Die gesch.ichtsphilosophischen Beziehungen von Giirres zu Hegel. 
Ein Beitrag zur Geschichtsphilosophie der Romantik. 123 pp. [MS]. Bonn, 
Phil. Diss. 1943. 
Collingwood, R. G.: The Idea of Hi.1tory. Oxford 1946. pp. 113-22: 'Hegel'; 
pp. 122-6: 'Hegel and Marx'. 
German version: Philosophic der Geschichte. Stuttgart 1955. pp. 122-31: 
'Hegel'; pp. 131-5: 'Hegel und Marx'. 
Hyppolite, Jean: Introduction d Ia philosophic de l'histoire de Hegel. Paris 1948. 
98 pp. (Bibliotheque philosophique) 
Steinbiichel, Theodor: 'Ranke und Hegel'. In: Grofle Geschichtsdenker. 
Tiibingen and Stuttgart 1949. pp. 173-215. 
Kaufmann, Walter: 'The Hegel Myth and its Method'. In: The Philosophical 
Review, 6o (1951), pp. 45g--86. 
German version: 'Hegel- Legende und Wirklichkeit'. In: Zeitsclzrift filr 
philosophische Forschung, ro (1956), pp. 191-226; see esp. pp. 206--14: 
'Geschichte. GroBe Manner und Gleichheit'. 
Plebe, Armando: Hegel. Filosofo della storia. Turin [1951]. VII, 148 pp. (Studi 
e ricerche di storia della filosofia, 7) 
Schmitz, Gert: Die List der Vernunft, 135 pp. Zurich, Phil. Diss. 1951. 
Bloch, Ernst: Subjekt- Objekt. Er/iiuterungen zu Hegel. Berlin 1952. pp. 
212-29: 'Hegels Philosophic der Geschichte'. Second enlarged edition 
Frankfurt 1962. pp. 226--44. 
Litt, Theodor: Hegel. Versuch einer kritischen Emeuerung. Heidelberg 1953. 
Second impression 1961. pp. 95-159: 'Der objektive Geist'. 
Lowith, Karl: Weltgeschiclzte und Heil.1geschehen. Die theologischen Voraus-
setzungender Geschichtsphilosophie. Stuttgart 1953. Fourth edition 1961. (Urban-
Biicher, 2) pp. 55-61: 'Hegel'. [The book first appeared in English under the 
title: Meaning m History. Chicago 1949.] 
Liebrucks, Bruno: 'Zur Theorie des Weltgeistes in Theodor Litts Hegelbuch '. 
In: Kant-Studien, 46 (1954-5), pp. 23o--67. 
239 

FURTHER READING 
Ritter, Joachim: Hegel u11d die franziisische Revolution. Cologne and Opladen 
1957. (Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Forschung des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen. 
Geisteswissenschaften. No. 63) pp. 19-22. Reprinted Frankfurt a. M. 1965. 
(edition Suhrkamp, 1 14) pp. 24-30. 
French version: 'Hegel et Ia revolution fran~aise '. In: Archives de philosophic, 
26 (1963), pp. 323-56; 516--42. 
Schultz, Werner: 'Der Sinn der Geschichte bei Hegel und Goethe'. In: 
Archiv fur Kulturgeschichte, 39 (1957), pp. 209-27. 
Also in: Schultz: Theologie und Wirklichkeit. Kiel 1969. pp. 128-46. 
Wein, Hermann: Realdialektik. Von hcgelscher Dialektik zu dialektischer Anthro-
pologie. Munich 1957. pp. 23-38: 'Hegels Metaphysik dcr Geschichte'. 
Adams, Alfons: Transzendenz der Erkenntnis und Eschatologie der Geschichte. 
Munster 1958. pp. 68-102: 'Die idealistische Geschichtsmetaphysik Hegels'. 
Cornelius, Alfred: Die Geschichtslehre Victor Cousins. Umer besonderer Beruck-
sichtigung des Hegelschen Einflusses. 79 pp. Cologne, Phil. Diss. 1958. 
Reprinted Geneva, Paris 1958. (Kolner romanistische Arbeiten. New Series, 
No. 14) 
de Ruggiero, Guido: Storiadella Filoso.fia. Pt. 8: Hegel. Bari 1958. pp. 22cr4o: 
'La storia'. 
Findley, John N.: Hegel. A Re-Examination. London/New York 1958. pp. 
328-33: 'Philosophy of history'. 
Schulin, Ernst: Die weltgeschichtliche Erfassung des Orients bei Hegel und Ranke. 
Gottingen 1958. x, 325 pp. (Veroffentlichungen des Max-Planck-Instituts fur 
Geschichte, 2) Gottingen, Phil. Diss. 1958. 
Beerling, R. F.: De list der Rede in de Geschiedenis.filoso.fie van Hegel. Arnhem 
1959· 180 pp. 
Massolo, Arturo: 'Per una lettura della "Filosofia della storia" di Hegel'. 
In: Studi Urbinati. Urbino. Nuova Serie B. 33 (1959), pp. 5-26. 
Also in: Massolo: La storia della .filosofia come problema. Florence 1967. 
pp. l'fl-92. 
Glasenapp, Helmuth von: Das lndienbild deutscher Denker. Stuttgart 1960. 
pp. 39-60: 'Hegel'. 
Kroner, Richard: 'Vom Sinn der Geschichte '. In: Erkenntnis und Verantwortung. 
Festschrift fur Theodor Litt. Dusseldorf 1960. pp. 194-206. 
Lowith, Karl:' Mensch und Geschichte '.In: Lowith: Gesammelte Abha11dlungen. 
Zur Kritik der geschiclztlichen Existenz. Stuttgart rg6o. pp. 152-78. 
Walentik, Leonhard: Der Begriff des Endzweckes der Weltgeschichte bei Hegel. 
102 pp. [MS]. Vienna, Phil. Diss. 1960. 
Nitsche, Roland: 'Von Hegel his Droysen. Wandlungen der deutschen 
Geschichtsauffassung'. In: Der Monat, 13 (1g6crl), No. 145. pp. 5()-68. 
Fessard, Gaston: 'Attitude ambivalente de Hegel en face de l'histoire'. In: 
Archives de philosophic, 24 (1961), pp. 207-41. 
Also in: Hegel-]ahrbuch. Edited by W. R. Beyer. 1961, first half-volume, 
pp. 25-6o. 

FURTHER READiNG 
Gulian, C. Jonescu: 'Les idees de Hegel sur lc sens de l'histoire et ses lois'. 
In: Hegel-Jahrbuch. 1961, first half-volume, pp. 61-72. 
Litt, Theodor: 'Hcgels Geschichtsphilosophie'. In: G. W. F. Hegel: Vor-
lesungen iiber die Philosophie der Geschichte. Stuttgart 196r. pp. 3-34. 
Mann, Golo: 'Die Grundprobleme der Gcschichtsphilosophic von Plato bis 
Hegel'. In: Der Sinn der Geschichte. Edited by L. Reinisch. Munich 196r. 
pp. 11-30. 
Seeberger, Wilhelm: Hegel oder die Entwicklung des Geistes ;:ur Freil1ezt. Stuttgart 
1961. pp. 561-8. 'Die Weltgeschichte und der Weltgeist'. 
Avineri, Shlomo: 'Die Endlichkeit der Geschichte nach Hegel'. [Hcbr.] In: 
Jubiliiumsbuch des hebraischen Gymnasiums. Jerusalem 1962. pp. 109-q. 
Goldstein, L.].: 'The meaning of" State" in Hegel's" Philosophy of history'". 
In: Philosophical Quarterly, 12 (1962), pp. 60-72. 
Schweitzer, Carl G.: 'Hat die Weltgeschichte einen Sinn?'. In: Ar1s Politik 
und Zeitgeschichte. Supplement to Das Parlament. Bonn 1962. pp. 285-90. 
Sichirollo, Livia: 'Hegel und die griechische Welt. Nachleben der Antike und 
Entstehung der "Philosophic der Weltgeschichte'". In: Heidelberger Hegel-
Tage 1962. (Hegel-Studien. Beiheft 1) pp. 263-83. 
Also in: Sichirollo: tltaMymiJa•- Dialektik. Hildesheim 1966. pp. r85-2o6. 
Italian version: 'Note su Hegel e il mondo greco'. In: Sichirollo: Storititti 
della dialettica antica. Vincenza 1965. pp. 285-310. 
Kimpel, Ben: Hegel's Philosophy of History. Boston 1963. v, 131 pp. 
Chi-Lu-Chung, A.: 'A Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of History'. In: Chinese 
Culture. Yang Ming shan, 5 (r964), pp. 6o-77. 
Christensen, Darrel E.: 'Nelson and Hegel on the Philosophy of History'. 
In: Journal of the History of Ideas, 25 (1964), pp. 439-44. 
Dumery, Henri: 'Logique et phenomenologie de l'histoire'. In: Memorias del 
XIII Congreso Internacional de Filosofia. Comunicaciones libres. Vol. 6, 
Mexico 1964. pp. 221-31. 
Fleischmann, Eugene: La philosophic politique de Hegel. So us forme d'un com-
mentaire des Fondements de Ia philosophic du droit. Paris 1964. pp. 355-72: 
'L 'histoire mondiale '. 
Gollwitzer, Heinz: Europabild und Europagedanke. (First edition 1951) Second 
revised edition, Munich 1964. pp. 212-27: 'Hegel und Ranke'. 
Kudrna, Jaroslav: Studien zu Hegels Geschichtsauffassung. [Czech] Prague 
1964. 169 pp. 
Schmidt, Hans: Verheiflung und Schrecken der Freiheit. Von der Krise des 
antik-abendla"ndischen Weltversta"ndnisses dargestellt im Blick auf Hegels 
Erfahrung der Geschichte. Stuttgart, Berlin 1964. 350 pp. 
Costa, E.: 'Hegel y Jaspers ante Ia historia universal'. In: Universidad. Argen-
tinia, 66 (Oct.-Dec. 1965), pp. II9-29. 
Kaufmann, Walter: Hegel. Reinterpretation, Texts, and Commentary. New York 
1965. pp. 254-96: 'Hegel on History'. 
Papaioannou, Kostas: 'Hegel et Ia philosophic de l'histoire'. In: G. W. F. 
241 

FCRTI-IER READING 
Hegel: La 1·aison dans l'Hwoire. Traduct1011 nouvelle ... par K. Papaioannou. 
Paris 1965. (Le monde en 10/18. No. 235-36) pp. 5-40. 
Bec:rling, R. F.: 'Kleine overdenking over geschiedenis, zin en vrijheid '. In: 
Vrijheid. Horizon der gesclziedems (Festschrift fiir H. J. de Vos) Nijkerk 1966. 
pp. 6o-n 
Flechtheim, Ossip K.: History and Futurology. Meisenheim/Glan 1966. pp. 
3-13: 'Hegel'. 
d'Hondt, Jacques: Hegel, philosophe de l'histoire virallte. Paris 1966. 486 pp. 
(Epimethee. Essais philosophiques. Collection dirigee par Jean Hyppolite) 
Lowith, Karl: 'Geschichte und historisches BewuBtsein '. In: Lowith: Vortrage 
und Abhandlungen. Zur Kritik der christlichen Uberliejeru11g. Stuttgart 1966. 
pp. 119-38. 
Heftrich, Eckhard: Hegel und Jacob Burckhardt. Zur KriSJS des gw·hichtliclzen 
Bewufltseins. Frankfurt a.M. 1967. 42 pp. 
Wilkins, B. T.: Hegel's Philosophy of History. Cornell University Press. 1974. 

INDEX OF NAMES 
Abyssinia 176, 218 
Acton, Lord xv 
Adam 132 
Africa 155, 157, r6o, 163, 172-91, 194, 
215-20, 225 
Alexander the Great 45, 85, 87, 142, 195 
Alexandria 171 
Algeria 173 
Allegheny Mountains r62, 169 
Alps 172, 194 
Altai Mountains 191 
Altona 166 
Amazon 163 
America (see also New World, North 
America, and South America) 155, 
159, 162-72, 183, 191, 215, 225 
Amur 191 
Anaxagoras 34f., 230 
Andes r62f. 
Antigone 94 
Antoni, Carlo xxvn 
Apollo 145 
Appalachians 162 
Arabia 157, 192, 194 
Arabs rs6f., 174 
Araks 192 
Aral Sea 192 
Araxes 192 
Aristophancs 146 
Aristotle xxii, 34, 38, 54, 77, 131, 135 
Armenia 192, 194 
Ashanti 182, 185-7, 219f. 
Ashanti-Dahomey 189 
Asia 45, 87, u3f., 135, 155, 157-60, 162, 
165, 172f., 190-<)7, 199, 202, 216,231 
Asia Minor 154, 192, 194 
Assassins 45 
Athena IOJ, 145 
Athenians 2 12 
Athens 17f., 74, 97, IOJ, ro8f., 148, 171f., 
184, 204 
Atlantic Ocean 173 
Australia 162 
A vineri, Shlomo xxx, xxxiii 
Babylon 193 
Bachem, Rolf 9 
Bailly, Jean Sylvain IJJ, 232 
Balkan Peninsula 195 
Barbary 157 
Belurtag 191f. 
Bible (see also Scriptures) 21, 45, IJ2, 228 
Bight of Benin 216 
Black Sea 157, 194 
Blue Mountains 162 
Bohemia 159 
Bowdich, T. E. 23J 
Brahmans 232 
Brandenburg 217 
Brazil 157, 163, r65f. 
Britain r6o 
Brittany I 6o 
Bruce, James 187, 233 
Bruford, W. H. 56 
Brunstiid, Fritz 225 
Buddha 2J2 
Burke, Edmund xxvii, xxxii 
Butterfield, H. xv 
Byzantine Empire 174 
Cadiz 159 
Caesar, Julius 14f., 45, 76, 85, 87, 89, 142, 
172, 195 
California 164 
Canada 162, 169 
Cape Guardafui 174 
Cape of Good Hope 174ff. 
Capuchins 218 
243 

INDEX 
Caribbean I6J 
Carouge I66 
Carthage J2, 6J, I7I, I74, I90 
Caspian Sea I57, I92 
Catholicism !OJ, Io8, 125, I64, I66f., 2I8, 
23If. 
Cavazzi, Gio,-anni Antonio 
r8o, 2I8, 
2JJ 
Ceylon r 57, I75 
Charlemagne 206 
Chile 157, 163 
China, Chinese 102, I2I, I28, rJ6, I40, 
144f., 159, r6I, 19Iff., I98, 2oo, 2I6, 
232 
Chitomen I8of., 184, 2I8 
Christ 207 
Christians, Christianity ixf., xii, xxvi, 20, 
40ff., 45, 51, 54, !OJ, I06f., IIO-IJ, 
II5, I2I,I24, 129, IJI, I40,144,I48, 
171, 189, 2o6f., 212 
Chronos 145 
Church 42, 208 
Cicero 89 
Colchis 194 
Collingwood, R. G. xxii 
Columbia 163 
Confucius 144 
Congo 175, 182, I89, 2I8 
Constantinople I7I 
Cordilleras I62f. 
Courland I6o 
Creoles I 64, I 67 
Croce, Benedetto xiv, xvif., xix, xxiv 
Curtius, Mettius 45 
Cyrus River 192 
Dahomey r85, r87, I89 
Danto, A. C. xxv 
Danube I95 
Darius 87 
Delphi I7r 
Denmark I6o, 195 
Diodorus Siculus 228 
Dray, W. H. xxi, xxv 
Dutch I65, I69, 2I7 
Dzungarian Mountains 191 
East Indies IOJ, I 59 
Eckstein, Ferdinand Baron von 232 
Egypt 159, 17Jf., I90f., 20I 
Eichhorn, Karl Friedrich 23, 230 
Elbe 159 
Eleatic philosophy I40, 144 
Elysium I2 
Engel-Janosi, F. xv 
Engels, Friedrich xxxi v 
England, English 16, 45, IOJ, I6o, I62, 
I64-7, I69, I75, I8J, I8;f., I88, 2I8, 
220 
Enlightenment x 
Epicurus J4, 2IO 
Episcopalians I67 
Estonia I6o 
Euphrates I92 
Europe, Europeans xxxi, I02, 109, II], 
122, I29, IJ5, I44, IS9f., 162-70, 
I72-7, 18I, 183, 185, r89f., 192, 
I94-7, 215-I8, 220 
Eyio I87 
Fackenheim, Emil ix, xi, xiii 
Fas 173 
Fenelon, Fran~ois de Salignac de Ia Mathe 
II7, 2JI 
Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas xiif., xxxiv 
Fez (see Fas) 
Fidenates r 8 
Findlay, J. N. xiii, II, 20 
Finland I6o 
Foster, M. B. xix 
France, French ISf., 22, 45. 159. 17]f., 
I94, 2I7, 229, 231f. 
Franciscans 185, 2I8 
Frankfurt I66 
Frederick the Great I 5 
French Revolution xxxi, 2of., 159, I7o, 
2JI 
Fula people 176 
Furth I66 
Gallic, W. B. xxv 
Gambia I75f., 217 
Ganges I 59, 192 
Gans, Eduard 5f., 222, 224f. 
Gaul, conquest of 172 
Geneva I66 
Genghis Khan I 58 
Germanic Age 131 
Germanic nations 54, 135, I72, 206 
Germanic world 206 
German Imperial Cities 59, I67 
Germans, Germany 16, 22f., 29, 135, r6o, 
I70, 195. 229 
Ge)l, P. xv 
Gibbon, Edward XX\'iii, 2JO 
Gihon I92 

INDEX 
Goethe, Johann \\ olfgang \on I 7, 87, I 8 5, 
2]I 
Golden :\~~c I 45 
Gothic cathedrals I 2 I 
Great Lakes I62 
Greece, Greeks xii, xxvi, I7, 2I, 34ff., 38, 
45, 54, 6z, 87, I06f., I I Iff., 120f., 
IZ9f., I40, I45f., I55, 17I, I77, 184, 
I95f., 20iff., 2I] 
Griesheim, Gustav von 223 
Guicciardini, Francesco 227 
Guinea 217f. 
Guinea, Gulf of I74 
Hamburg I09, I66 
Harris, H. S. x 
Hebrew I32 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. Works: 
Encyclopaedia 
of the 
Philosophical 
Sciences xi, xiv, 234 
Phenomenology of Sp~rit viif., xxii, xxiv, 
2]I, 234 
Philosophy-~{ Right vii, xiv, xxi, xxiiif., 
xxvii, xxix-xxxii, II, 20, 234 
Science of Logic xiii 
Hegel, Karl xxxviii, sf., 8, 22If., 224-9, 
232 
Hermes (see also Mercury) I02 
Herodotus I2, I4, I 18, I79• 216, 227, 233 
Himalayas 191 
Hindu Kush I9I 
Hippolyte, ]. xxx 
Hoffmeister,Johannes vii, xxxviif., 7f., 231 
Hiilderlin, Friedrich xi 
Holland 160 
Holy Roman Empire 20, 203 
Homer 88, I40, I43, 154, 228, 23I 
Hondt, Jacques d' xxix 
Horace I6I 
Huang-Ho I92 
Hugo, Gustav 23, 230 
Hutchinson 188, 220 
Imaus Mountains I9I 
Incarnation I o6 
Independence, War of 169 
India, Indians IJ, 102, 106, I28, I]zf., 
I35ff., I4o, I4Jff., I64, 178, I92f., 
196, 200, 2I6, 232 
Indian Ocean 174 
Indus 159, 192 
Ionia I 54, 194 
Italy 194 
Jagas I8o, I8g, ZI8 
Jakas (.<ee Jagas) 
James, William xm 
Janissaries I 22 
Jerusalem 171 
Jesuits 164 
Jewish religion (see also Judaism) 51 
Jews 41, 106, I II 
Judaea 194 
Judaism (see also Jewish religion) I7I 
Kamenka, E. xxx 
Kant, Immanuel 23I 
Kaufmann, W. vii, xiv 
Kehler, Hauptmann von 223 
Kelly, G. A. xxix 
Kepler, Johann I]8f. 
Kierkegaard, Siiren xii 
Kingera, Dr I65 
Knox, T. M. xxxvii, 20 
Kura 192 
Lafayette, M. J. P. Y. R. G. du Motier, 
Marquis de II8 
Lambert, Johann Heinrich 232 
Lamennais, Hugues Felicite Robert de 
23If. 
Lappland 155 
Lasson, Georg 5-9, 221, 227-30, 233 
Laue, T. H. von xv 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 42 
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim 125, 230 
Livonia I6o 
Livy xviii, 17f., 228 
Llanos 165 
Loango I75 
Louis Philippe 23 I 
Liiwith, K. ix 
Machiavellism xxvii 
Maciver, R. M. xxvi 
Madrid 159 
Magdalena River I63 
Magi II7 
Manchus 191 
Mandingo people 176 
Marx, Karl xiif., xxii, xxix-xxxv 
Mecca I7I 
Medina 171 
Mediterranean Sea 171-4, 194f., 215 
Meinecke, F. xv, xxvif. 
Menenius Agrippa 17 
Mercury (see also Hermes) 24, 31 
245 

INDEX 
Mexico r62ff., r66, 169 
Mexico, Gulf of 162 
Middle Ages 15, 228 
Minerva r8 
Mississippi r62, I69 
Missouri 162 
Mnemosyne I2, I35ff., 227 
Mohammedanism, Mohammedans ro6, 
III, 124, I28, 171, 177, 188, 206 
Momigliano, A. D. xv 
Mongolia 232 
Mongols rs6ff., 2oo 
Montesquieu, Charles Louis de Secondat, 
Baron de 22, 102, 229 
Moors r88 
Morocco 173 
Mosaic tradition 98 
Moslem faith 171, r88 
Mountains of the Moon 175 
Mozambique 175, 217f. 
Muller, G. E. xiv 
Muller, Johannes von 17, 21, 228f. 
Miiller, Karl Ottfrii:d 230 
Munro, Neil xiii 
Mure, G. R. G. xiv 
Muses 145 
Mussart I9I 
Mustag Mountains I9I 
Napoleon xxiv, 85, I7o, 229 
Near East I92-5 
New Holland 162 
New World I62-71, 2I5 
Niebuhr Barthold Georg xvi, 22, 229f. 
Nietzsche, Friedrich xu 
Niger 173ff., 216 
Nile 159, I73f. 
l\"orth America 109, 162-70, 215 
l\' orwa y r6o 
l\'iirnberg r66 
Oder I59 
Offenbach 166 
Ohio River I62 
Old Man of the Mountains 45 
Old World IS6, 162f., 171-96, 215 
O'Malley,]. xxx, xxxiif. 
Orange River 175 
Orient, Orientals 32, 54, II3, II5, I2o, 
128, 130, 159,. r6I, 190, 192, Ig6, 
rgS-203, 2o6, 2I6, 231f. 
Orinoco 157f., I63 
Oxus Hj2 
Pallas Athene I45 
Palmyra 32 
Panama, Isthmus of r62 
Paraguay I57, r64 
Patagonia r64 
Peloponnesian War 18 
Penates roo 
Pericles r 4, 228 
Persepolis 32 
Persia, Persians 45, 1 17f., I92, 2oof. 
Peru 157, r63 
Philip II I69 
Phoenicians 174, Igo 
Phoenix 32 
Pischdadier n8 
Plataea, Battle of r 8 
Plato xiv, 34, 54, II7, I46, r8g 
Poland I6o, 195 
Polish Diet 122 
Polybius I4, 17 
Portugal, Portuguese r 6o, I 64f., 17 5, I So, 
187, 215, 217f. 
Porus 87 
Pradt, Dominique Dufour de 173, 233 
Protestantism 103, ro8, r66ff. 
Prussia I6o 
Pseudo-Smerdis I r 7 
Punjab 192 
Puritans I 67 
Pyrenees I 59, I95 
Pythagorean philosophy 140, 144 
Ranke, Leopold von xv, 19, 227, 229 
Reichenbach Falls xiv 
Reiss, Hans xxxviii 
Remusat, Jean Pierre Abel 232 
Restoration xxix 
Retz,Jean F. P. de Gondi, Cardinal de IS 
Reyburn, H. A. xxviii 
Rhine r6o 
Rio de Ia Plata r63 
Ritter, Karl 173, q6, 233 
Romans, Rome xvi, 17, zrff., 29, 32, 45, 
54, 63, 74, 76, Sg, 108, 12of., 127, 
I29f., 171f., 174, I84, 196,201, 20Jf., 
228, 230 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 122 
Rubel, M. xxx 
Russell, Bertrand xxviii 
Russia 195 
Sahara Desert 173 
St Lawrence River I62 

INDEX 
Saint Martin, Marquis de 232 
Sanskrit 135 
Saxony 159 
Scandinavia 195 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Josef 132 
Schiller, Friedrich Jliv, 66 
Schlegel, Friedrich von 132, 178, 231f. 
Scott, Sir Walter, 19 
Scriptures (.<ee al.<a Bible) 36 
Senegal 175f., 217 
Senegambia 217 
Shelley, Percy Bysshe xxviii 
Siberia 191 
Sibree, J. xxx,·iii 
Sicily 18 
Sidon 194 
Sihon 192 
Silesia 159 
Singilla 2 1 Sf. 
Slavonic nations 195 
Smerdis (see Pseudo-Smerdis) 
Socrates 34ff., 62 
Solomon 45 
Sophocles 94, I 46 
South America 157, 162-7, 170, 215 
Spain, Spaniards rsgf., !64-7. I7Jf., 215 
Spanish Republics r63 
Spartans r8 
Spinoza, Baruch 98, 140, 144, 200 
Stace, W. T. xiii 
Stephanus edition of Plato 34 
Stoics 145 
Sweden 160 
Swiss 21, 158, 228f. 
Switzerland 195 
Syria 171f., 192, 194 
Tamerlane I 58 
Thersites 88 
Thucydides xviii, 12, 14, 18, 14fi, 227f. 
Tibet 232 
Tigris 192 
Tovey, Donald Francis xv 
Trinity 51, 232 
Tripoli 173 
Troas 194 
Tschudi, Aegidius 17, 229 
Tunis 173 
Turkey, Turks 106, 122, 154, 174 
Tyre 194 
United States of America (see al.<a North 
America) r6g 
Vandals 174 
Vistula 16o 
Volga 194 
Volney, Constantin Fran~ois Chasseboeuf, 
Comte de xxviii 
Volscians I 8 
Walsh, W. H. xxiif. 
War of Independence 169 
Washington 169 
West Indies 163 
Xenophon 14 
Yangtze-Kiang 192 
Yaxartes 192 
Zeus 18, 145, 147, '77 
247 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 
Absolute ix, xi, xiii, xxi, xxv, xxviiff., 
xxxiii,26, 2Sf., S21 77, Io6f., 112, I24, 
I27, I46, ISO, I77f., IS2, I9S 
adolescence (of the spirit) 202 
agriculture 114, IS6--{), I67, I69f., I93 
alienation xii, xxx, xxxii 
amulets 21S 
anarchism, anarchy xxif., xxix, 168 
ancestor worship I8I, 2I9 
animals, animality 2S, 37, 39, 49f., 64, S6, 
9I, 97· 114, 120, 12S, IJJ, I44, ISS. 
IS8,I6J,I7S,I77f.,I8o,I8J,2I6-I9 
a priori knowledge 13Sf. 
aristocracy xxxii, 117, 119, I2J, 200 
art xix, xxif., 23, 46, s6, sS, 6sf., 93, 9Sf., 
IOI-71 I09-IJ, 118, I201 I301 IJ2f., 
I38, I42ff., IS9o ISI, 2021 211 
astronomy IJJ, IJ9, 178, 232 
authority xxxivf., IS, 76, I36, I79, IS6, 
207f., 2I40 2JI 
autocracy 2os 
barbarians I 24 
barbarism 79, II I, I74-7, IS6, 2o6ff., 216 
battle, battles I7f., 2u, 2I9 
beauty 32, n I, I4J 
being 2Sf., 41, 4S, 53, s8, 6I, 64, 74, 77, 
79. 9J--6, 98, I02-5, 119, I2I, I47o 
I77, I90, I97. zosff. 
botany I55 
boyhood (of history) I99 
brandy drinking I 64 
bureaucracy xxxii, xxxiv 
cannibalism I8o, I82f., IS9, 2I9f. 
capital I69 
caste system I 36 
chance 34ff., 41, 66, 90, 136, IS7 
change 3If., 64, I2o, I24-S, IJ6, I9J, I99 
childhood (of the spirit) 129f., I3J, IS4. 
I65, I74· I97f., 202 
civilisation xxii, xxv, xxxf., I42f., ISS, 
163, I66, I94 
class, classes IJ, IS, So, ns, I36, IS9. 
I6S, I96, 215, 227 
climate uS, I54• IS6f., I9I, I96 
coastal regions I 56f., I6o, I62f., I69, 
I72-6, 196, 2I7 
cognition 42, 99, 112, 139 
cold region I 54f: 
colonisation I6S, 174, 2I7 
commerce IQ9, 114, I66, I9Jf., 2I7 
common sense 143 
communism xxxiiif. 
concept (Begr({f) ix, xxxiii, 20, 2sff., 30, 
4If., 46, 50f., 53, 55f., 5S, 6o, 62-6, 
68ff., 74f., S2f., Ss, 92, 96, 9S, Ioi, 
I04, IID--I3, J>I6--I9, I2Iff., I2S-S, 
I3I-41 IJS, I4Jf., I49ff., I7I, I78, 
204, 2oSff., 212f., 2I7, 230 
conscience 55, 62, 731 92, 104, I4I, 197, 
200, 2I4 
consciousness x, 12-IS, 30, 33, 37ff., 
.pff., 46f., SI-5, 62-5, 74f., 77. 94f., 
99f., Io6f., no, 113, 126, I29, IJI, 
I3Jf., I36, IJSf., I42-6, ISOf., I54o 
I76f., ISO, ISJff., I90f., I97f., 2001 
2o6f., 2Q91 2U, 213, 2I7, 2I91 227 
conservatism xxix, xxxi 
constitution 2o, 23, 54, sS, 6s, 76, 91, 
Ioif., Io4, 1o8ff., 114-23, I25, IJSf., 
I3sr., 167__,o, ISs, 203, 21s, 2HJ 
contingency xff., xvi, xxviif., xxxi, 2S, 30, 
Js,66,90,92,97, Io7,126f.,135, I95 
crime 7S, I271 141 
culture XiX, IJ-I71 I9, 23, J2, s6f., 62, 
97ff., I02, u4f., uS, 126f., 132, I3S• 
I4I-4, 147· ISS. 157. 16J-6, I72, I74· 

INDEX 
culture (cont.) 
176f, I84, 190ff., I94, 200, 2I5f., 
227f., 231 
cunning of reason xxv, xxviii, S9 
death xi, xx,·iii, 32, 59f., 63, 128, 146, ISO, 
I85 
degeneration 6off., 133, I6J, 199, 2I3 
democracy xx, xxix, xxxi, xxxivf., 109, 
u6f., ug, 123 
deserts I 57, I73ff, IS7, 192 
despotism I I7, IS6f., 2oof., 205 
destiny 55, 69, go, gS, IOif., I25f., I7S, 
216f., 230 
determinateness(Bestimmtheit) I I, ISJ, I 56 
determination (Bestimmung) II, 35, 47, 
70, 76, 79, 81, IOI, 105, I07f., IIO, 
1I5ff., IIgff., 125ff., IJO, IJSf., I42, 
I45, I47f., I50, 152ff., I7I, I9J, I97, 
201, zoS, 217 
development xxiii, xxv, I9, 30, 32, 34ff., 
40, 42, ssff., 59, 64f., nf., SI-4, 92, 
I03, I09, III, 114, uS, 120f., I2J, 
125ff., I2gff., 134, I36-9, 143, I46, 
ISI, I53ff., I5Sf., I63, I76f., I84, Igo, 
I93f., 2o6f., 213, 215f., 230 
dialectic, dialectics xi, xiiif., xvif., xixf., 
xxiiiff., xxvii-xxxi, xxxiii, 13 I 
duty 79-82, 97, I07, I36, I44f., 213 
education xxxiii, I2, so, 52, ;6, 79, 94, 
1I7, 122, 125, I64, 184, 2JOf. 
elements 71f., ISS, I59. I6I, I79, 2I4 
emanation, system of IJ3 
emigration I66, 170 
emotion 39f., 69, 87, 99f., I04, 129, IJ4, 
IJ6, 227 
enthusiasm 86, 9 I, I 68, I So 
essence 58, 61, 63, 67, 75f., 92, 94f., 99, 
105, I26, I2gf., 147f., 184, 209 
Estates xxxiv 
ethical life (Sittlzchkeil) xx, 51, 65, 71, 77, 
79, Sif., 93ff., 97, 99-102, 104, IIO, 
I 13, 122, IJ41 I38, I4I, I45f., 173, 
IS4, zg8, 202f. 
ethics 53, 5S, 8I, go, 92f., IOO, I04, IIJ, 
135, 212, 2JI 
etiquette II3 
evil 42f., 68, 9of., IoS, IJ4, I4I, I78, 212, 
2I6f. 
l'Xistence ix, 43, 53, 58-6I, 64, 6gf., 72f., 
78tr., 82f., 8s, 89, 91, 93ff., 98f., 
106f., IIOff., II6, I2J, I26, 128, IJI, 
134, I46f., ISO, I52, I77f., Ig8f., 
202-6, 208, 2IO, 2IJ 
experience x, xiii, xvi, xxif., 13, I6, I8f., 
21, 26, 49 
faith 2Sf., 36f., 4If., Ig8, 2JO 
fame S7f. 
family xxxiif., 6S, SI, ggff., IIJ, I2I, 
I34f., ISS, IS4f., ISg, I9J, I98, 200 
fanaticism III, 122, I45, ISS, I92 
fate xi, 69, 7I, Ss, IJS, 204, 2IJ 
feeling 4Sf., Ioo, 104f., I68, I77, 229 
fetishism I Sof., I Sg, 2 I Sf. 
finitude x, I47, 152 
freedom xii, xiv, xx-xxxii, xxxivf., I9, 21, 
26, 32, 46ff., so, 54f., 62ff., 6S, 7of., 
nf., So, Sg--<)4. 97ff., IOif., I04-7· 
I IJ, II4ff., II8-23, I27, IJOf., IJ4, 
I37-40, 143ff., I53ff., 161, 16sff., I73. 
ISJf., rR6, 1Sg, Ig2, I96f., 199, 20iff., 
2osf., 2oS, 21o, 213f., 230 
genius I4o, 142 
geography 153, 169, 172ff., q6, zgif., 
l94ff., 224f., 233 
geology 162 
God x, xxvif., 27, 36-42, 44, 46, Siff., 67, 
77f., !OJ, 105f., I I2, 132ff., 141, 150, 
177-80, 1S2, I98, 200, 212f., 2I6 
gods 38, I32, I81, 204, 232 
gold I74• 214 
government I4f., 2I, 54, Iog, II6, ngf., 
I22, r6S, z8sf., 2oo, 23If. 
grammar I37 
gravity 47f., 72, 8I 
guilds I66 
gunpowder 102, II4, 21S 
habit sgf. 
happiness 78f., 85, gof., 97, u7, I45 
heathens 2 I 2 
hedonism xi 
heroes 83, S6ff., 94 
history, critical xix, 22f. 
history, definition of xvii, 135 
history, original xviif., I2-15, I7, 228 
history, philosophical xvi, xix, 12, 23-7 
history, pragmatic xviiif., Ig-22, 26 
history, reflective xvii-xxi, 12, 16-23, 228 
history, specialised xix, 23 
history, universal xxii, 228 
holiness I 49 
horse 165 
249 

INDEX 
Idea (Idee) 
vii, ix, xvf., xxif., xxvif., 
xxxiv, 22, 24, 28, 30, 38, 46f., 51, 53, 
6o, 63, 66ff., 71, 76-g, 81ff., 86f., 89, 
94ff., 104, 106, 118, 120, 128, 134, 
IJ9, 141, ISO-J, 184, Ig6f., 20If., 
2o9f, 217 
ideality 49 
imagination 43, 59, 65, 83, 105, 112, 136f., 
143, 168, 178, 195, 199ff. 
immortality 182 
impulse 4g, 55, 65, 70, 73f., 76, 78f, go, 
gg, 112, 114, IJI, Ij6, IgJ 
individual, individuals 14, 1gf., 3 I, 36, 43, 
51f., 58-63, 6s, 68ff., 76r., 8off., 8s, 
Sgf., g2ff., g6, gg-103, 11of., IIJ-I7, 
ng, 121ff., 134, 141, 143, 146, 151, 
154, 167, 177, 179, Igo, 1g6-2oo, 
20J!f., 211f., 214f., 217f., 227, 22g 
individual, world-historical 21, 35, 45, 52, 
79. 83-9. 141, 22g 
individuality 30, 53, 73, 76ff., 86, go, g5, 
g7, II8, 141, Ij2, 167, 1g7, Igg, 202, 
204, 214 
industry IOif., 114, 138, 166-70, 193 
injustice 66, gg, 141, 182, 184f, 207 
innocence gi, g8, 134, 178, 216f. 
instinct 76, 86, 97, 123, 183 
intuition (Anschauung) xvi, 13, 16, 38, 4g, 
98, IOJ, 105, 107, 112, 146, Igg, 21 I 
iron n4, 165 
justice xx, xxix, 19, 26, 53, 66, 68, 71f., 75, 
77, 79, 81, gi, 93f., 99, 101, 104, IIO, 
II2, IIS, 122, IJI, '34. 138, 141, 
145f., 159, 167f., 177, 17g, 182, 202, 
2I2ff. 
knowledge 41ff., 46-g, 53f., 56f., 61, 64f, 
77f., g2f., g5, IOOf., 104f., 107, 109f., 
120, 122, 126, 129, IJ2ff., '4Sff., 
15of., 178, 197f., 202, 2o8, 213 
language 70, 135, 137f., 143 
law, laws xxf., xxviiff., xxxiii, 23, 34, ;8, 
65, 6gff., So, Sz, 8g, g4, g6ff., 1oiff., 
105, 107, I II, IIS, 122, 124, '34. 136. 
139, 141ff., 145f., Ijg, 168, 177, 17g, 
185f., 188f., 197, 200, 202f., 2IJf., 220 
learning 61, 138, I42, 2I I 
legends 132, 227 
legislation I2I, 125 
light 196 
logic 46, 74f., 130, 232 
10\e x-xiii, xxxiif, 26, 51, 68, 99f., I34ff., 
I84f., 2]2 
luxuries II4 
magic I8I 
manhood (of the spirit) 130, I95. 203 
marriage I 13, I85, I87, I go 
mathematics 115, I39 
matter 47f., 79 
metaphysics x, xii, 78, 144 
metempsychosis 32 
missionaries 175, 177, 179f., 185 
monarch ~xxiv, I87, 200 
monarchy XXX, 117ff., I2J, 169, 200 
monotheism 128 
morality (Moral) xxxviii, Ij, 2of., 3gf., 
55, 62, 68, 8of., 87f, goff., 97, 1 Io, 
140ff., 144f., 177, I82, 190, 20If., 212 
mountain regions I56f., ISg, 162f., 173, 
qsf., Igi-4 
mythology 140, 2JI 
myths I32, q8 
nation (Vulk) xxvi, xxviii, IZ-16, 2of., 
2Jf., 28-3I, 34, 36, 38, 46, 5Iff., 55f, 
58-64, 71, 76f., 8If., 95f., 99-Io3, 
I05, I07-I4, II6, II8-2I, I24, 128f., 
IJ2, 134-8, 14I, 143f., I46, q8, 
152ff., 158f., I62f, I76, I88f., 193, 
I97, I99, 202, 204, 20g-I4, 217ff., 
227ff. 
nationalism xxvi 
natural history us, IJ9, 155 
nature xvf., xxiv, xxviii, 33f., 37f., 44, 46, 
50, 53, 6I, 63, 68, 71, 74, g5, g7- IOO, 
I02, 105f., 114f., I24, 126ff., IJo-4, 
139, I45, I53ff., I7I, I77-82, Igl, 
Ig6, Igg, 201, 2o8f., 212, 2IS, 217f., 
230f. 
nature, state of IJI!f., 137, q8, 184, 216 
navigation 23, 193 
necessity 26, 28, 38, 41f., _:;2, 55, 62, 7I, 
Sgf., 92, 97, u6, uS, I38, ISS. I71, 
Ig6, 210, 2I3f. 
negation, negativity ix, xif., xxi, xxviii, 43, 
49. 59ff., n. 84, I27f.. I47. Igo, Ig8, 
212, 214, 230 
negroes I6j, I76f., 179-85, I88, 1go, 
2I8ff. 
nomads I56f, I91, IgJf. 
objecti,·ity 79, 97, no, 145, 147, 177 
old age (of the spirit) 205 

INDEX 
oracles III, r81, 219 
organism 1 1 o, r 15, I 26 
paganism I 29 
pantheism I o6 
paradisiac condition 132, I78 
parliament I 03 
particular, particularity xif., xix, xxviff., 
I9, 2I, 30, 33, 42, 5Iff., 57, 61, 66, 
71f., 74, 76, 78f., Srf., 89, 92, 104, 
106, I08, I I4, 119, I2J, I28, IJO, 139, 
144f., 147f., 153f., 159, r68, 173,200, 
2I41 2JI 
passion, passions xxv, xxviii, 20, 30, 32, 
35, 46, 54, 61, 68, 70-4, 78, 8;ff., 89, 
91-4, 98f., 125, 146, 177, 213 
pastoral existence 157f, 193 
patriarchal condition roo, 120, 123, 130, 
156, r;8, 185, 198, 2oof. 
perfectibility 125, 149 
philologists 30 
physics II5 
plants so, 6r 
poetry 102, 136, 140, 142ff., 154, 227 
politics 86, I04, II6, 122, 141, r66, r68 
polygamy 185, 189 
power 27, 35, 63, 66, 76, 83ff., 95, 109, 
117, 126, IJI, r86f., 190, 197, 2oof., 
204f., 208, 219 
pragmatism (see also 'history, pragmatic') 
25 
prayer 45 
pre-historical period r 34, r 38 
primogeniture xxxiif. 
process xf., xxiii, 26, 33. 42, 5sff., 61f' 
64f., 74, 76, 101, 110, 12J, 125-31, 
134, IJj, 142, 148f., 172, 184, 191, 
196f., 199, 206, 209, 213, 215f. 
profit r68 
progress x, xxiii, 13, 54, 6r, 64f., 82, 99, 
124ff., 128f., IJI, 137f., 141,143, 149, 
!84, 199. 205, 208, 216 
property xxxiif., 23, IOJf., r ro, 1 13ff., 
148, 159, 167f., 187, 193, 205 
providence 35-8, 40f, 43, 67, 69, 141, 
J79, 210, 2JO 
psychology 87f. 
quantity I 54f. 
quinine I65 
rational, rationality xiif., xxiii, xxvff., 
xxxi, 19, 28ff.,37,67,7I,77, 93f., 97, 
101, 120, 133f., 137, 143, 167, 197, 
2o8ff., 213, 215ff. 
reality ixf. xiiff., xxi, xxiv, xxvi, xxixff., 
xxxiv, r8, 20, 25, 27, 35f., 43, 46f., 
49f., 52f., 55-9, osff., 69, 71, 74, 76ff., 
!Soff., 84, SS, 93-8, ro2f., 11off., 
I16-19, 12Jf., 126, IJI, 134, 137f., 
143, 149, 152f., 155f., Ij8, 182, 197f., 
207ff., 2IIf., 215, 227, 231 
reason vii, xff., xvi, xix, xxvii, 27-3 r, 
33ff., 37f., 41-s, sr, 55, 6;-8, 72, 74, 
78, 89~4. 104, ro6, 122, r38f., I4Jff., 
149, 171, 182, I97, 20I, 209-13, 229f. 
rejuvenation 33 
relativism xxvi 
religion x, xii, xvii, xix, xxif., xxvi, 23, 34, 
37. 39-42, 46, 51-4, s6, s8, 6;, ,s, 
92f., 95f., roo-rs, II8, I22, r24f., 
I3J, IJS, IJ8, I4I, I4Jff., 147, 149, 
I66ff., 177-82, I96, 203, 207, 21 If., 
2J4f., 2Ij, 231f. 
representation ( Vorstelltmg) xiv, I df., I 5, 
IS, 21, 23, 4I, 76f., 105, I07, III, 113, 
129, 146, I83, I99, 2I I, 229 
republic I I8, I66, I68ff., I89 
revelation 39f., 5 I 
revolutions 125, IJ6f., I4I, I58, I66, I74 
right (Recht) xxix, 5 If., 72, 77, So, 82ff., 
8gf., 92f., 97f., IOif, I q, I24f., 136, 
144f., I 56, I66, 198, 201, 204f, 2IJ 
rivers (and ri\·er plains) I57-6o, I62f., 
I74f., I78, 19I-5, 216, 218f. 
salvation I49 
savagery 98, I64, I74• I77, 202, 206, 2I6, 
220 
scepticism xiii 
science, sciences viiff., xif., xiv, xvi, xix, 
XXi\·, 54, 96, IOI, 1041 108, IIO, 112, 
IIS, IJJ, 139, I42f. 
sea I 57. I59-62, I71ff., I82, 192, I94, I96 
sects r66 
self-consciousness xxviii, 5 I, 53 f., 6r, 64, 
77f., 84, 96, 102-6, I IS, IJJ, 138, J40, 
I44ff, 150, I 52, 176, I9?, 215 
self-indulgence 59 
sense, senses xi, I2, 29, ;6, 98f., 107, I I2, 
147, 15Jf., I85, zoo, 210, 219 
slavery 18, 48, 54, r 13f., I48, r6s, r8Jff., 
187, I89, 215, 219 
solar system 34 
sorcerers, sorcery 179ff., 183, 2I8 
sovereign 14, I 59, 202 

INDEX 
sovereiF:ntY 6o, 76 
space 128f., 135, 152, 198 
speculation 25, llo 
speeches 14, 17, 2 28 
spirit(Geist)(seealso 'world spirit') viii-xi, 
xiv, xviii-xxi, xxiii, xxv, xxviiff., I 2f., 
16f., 19-24, 28-34, 40-4, 46ff., 50-
64£., 69, 74. 77. 79ff., 8]-8, 93. 9s-8, 
Ioo-8, uo-15, uS, 121, 123-34, 138, 
I4If., 144-53. ISSf., !63, 173. 176-9, 
182, 186, 188, I9of., 195, I97-201, 
204ff., 208f., 212-19, 2JOff., 234 
stability 125, 201 
state vii, xii, xixff., xxii-xxxv, I 5, Igff., 23, 
JI, 36, 44f., s3f., 66, 73. 76, So, 82, 
t)2-IOI, IOJff., I07ff., II 1-25, IJO, 
I34-8, I42f., I45, I59, 162, 164-71, 
176f., 184, 186, I96-9, :zoo-s, 2o8, 
211, 214, 228-31 
subjectivity 39f., 70, 74. nf., 93. 104, 
I07, II2, 122, 131, 145f., 153. 176, 
199. 201, 204-&, 214 
sublimity III 
substance 27, 30, 43, 47, 52, 55, 66, 72, 
74ff., 81, 84f., 87, 92, 94, 97, 103f., 
II8f., 121, 125, IJOf., 137, 143, I48, 
172, 190, 197, 199ff., 210, 2I]f., 217 
taxes 168f. 
temperate zone 15 5 
theocracy 1 co, 200 
theodicy 42 
theologians 132 
theology 37, 133 
thought 25-8, 3of., 34, 36, 39-42,44, 46f., 
49, 56f., 6of., 63, 76, 82, 95, 99, Io3ff., 
107, 112f., 127, 132ff., IJ7, 139, 
142-50, 156, 203, 206, 208, 211, 213 
time 127ff., I45, 147, 152, 198 
torrid region 154f. 
trade IOI, IOJ, I·f4, 161, 166, 169, It)J, 
218 
tradition, traditions 12, q, 98, 135, 175, 
178, 232 
transience 32, 6o, 68, 227 
truth x, xiif., xvf., xxf.. xxiii, 21f., 26-30, 
35-40, 45· 51, 55. 57· 64f., 67, 74. 77. 
81f., 94, 96f., 105f., 110-IJ, 115, 125, 
132f., 150, 153, 2o6ff., 210, 227 
tyranny 182 
unconsciousness 8 5 
understanding (f'erstand) xif., xvi, xviiiff., 
xxii, xxviiif., 18f., 3of., 34, 36, ?I, 73, 
96,106, 11If.,II4,II8,I37,139, 142, 
I§t), I6J, 167, 182, 2IOf., 230 
unity 48f., 62, 73, 77, 79, 86, 94, 101, 104, 
106,109, IIS, 117,119,121,123,143, 
146, 168, 172f., 177, 197-20], 205, 
211, 2I]f., 217 
uni\·ersal, universality 
xif., xx, xxviff., 
19, 30, 36, 39, 49, 
57, 6o, 69, 
71ff., 76f., 79, 81ff., 86f., 89f., 93-6, 
IOOf., 106f., I 12-15, I 19-23, 130, 
142f, 145. 147ff., 152f., 159. !68, 173. 
177. I82, I8;f., 191, lg6f., 20]-6, 2II, 
214 
uplands 156-8, 172, 174, 191, 194f. 
utility 112 
valley regions 156ff., 16o, 163, 172f., 19If., 
I94 
virtue 21, 45, 68[, 73, 91, 120, 140f., 146, 
213 
war xx, xxviif., 59, 97, 102, 105, 116, 124, 
IS6-g, 169, r76, 185-9, 218f., 229, 
231 
will 13, 24, 28, JO, 46, 50, s8, 6s-g, 71-4, 
76f., 79ff, Bsf., 88, go, 93ff., 97, 99, 
101, 103f., II6f., IIQ-2J, 126f., 130, 
134, I]7f., 141, 14S, 153, 177, 180ff., 
18S-iJO, 197f., 202f., 2o6, 210, 2IJff., 
217, 231 
witchcraft 181 
world spirit (Weltgeist) xii, XX\iiif., JO, 
S2f., 6], 76, 82, t)2, 124, 2IJf. 
youth (of the spirit) 12gf., 195 
zoology ISS 

