~ 
GW.EHegel 
Thejena ~ystern 1804-5: 
~ic and lVIetaphysics 
~ 
TRANSLATION EDITED BY 
John W. Burbidge and 
George di Giovanni 
INTRODUCTION AND 
NOTES BY 
H. S. Harris 

THE JENA SYSTEM, 1804-5: LOGIC AND METAPHYSICS 
G. W. F. HEGEL 
Translation edited by John W. Burbidge and George di Giovanni 
With an introduction and explanatory notes by H. S. Harris 
Translated into English for the first time in this edition, The ] ena 
System, 1804-5: Logic and Metaphysics is an essential text in the study 
of the development of Hegel's thought. It is the climax of Hegel's 
efforts to construct a neutral theory of the categories of finite cog-
nition ("logic") as the necessary bridge to the theory of infinite, or 
philosophical, cognition ("metaphysics"). 
As .he worked on the Jena system, Hegel's understanding of the 
nature of logic and its connection with metaphysics underwent changes 
crucial to his later system. As a result, logic acquired a new and ex-
panded significance for him. This text is thus the key to an under-
standing of the works of Hegel's maturity, and to their relation to the 
major works of Schelling and Fichte that preceded them. 
Scholars from the universities of Guelph, Lethbridge, McGill, 
McMaster, Toronto, Trent, and York have prepared this translation, 
a work of critical analysis in its own right. The introduction by H. S. 
Harris adds a concrete dimension to Hegel's abstract categories, show-
ing how, in developing these categories, Hegel was even at this early 
date thinking deeply about the structure and life of society. 
JOHN w. BURBIDGE is a member of the Department of Philosophy, 
Trent University. 
GEORGE DI GIOVANNI is a member of the Department of Philosophy, 
McGill University. 
H. s. HARRIS is a member of the Department of Philosophy, Glendon 
College, York University, and author of several books on Hegel. 

MeGILL-QUEEN'S STUDIES IN THE HISTORY OF IDEAS 
1 
Problems of Cartesianism 
Edited by Thomas M. Lennon, John M. Nicholas, 
and John W. Davis 
2 
The Development of the Idea of History in Antiquity 
Gerald A. Press 
3 Claude Buffier and Thomas Reid: 
Two Common-Sense Philosophers 
Louise Marcil-Lacoste 
4 Schiller, Hegel, and Marx: 
State, Society, and the Aesthetic Ideal of Ancient Greece 
Philip J. Kain 
5 John Case and Aristotelianism in Renaissance England 
Charles B. Schmitt 
6 
Beyond Liberty and Property: 
The Process of Self-Recognition in Eighteenth-Century 
Political Thought 
J. A. W. Gunn 
7 John Toland: His Method, Manners, and Mind 
Stephen H. Daniel 
8 Coleridge and the Inspired Word 
Anthony John Harding 
g The Jena System, 1804-5: Logic and Metaphysics 
G. W. F. Hegel 
Translation edited by John W. Burbidge and George di Giovanni 
Introduction and notes by H. S. Harris 

G. W. F. HEGEL 
THE JEN A SYSTEM, 1804-5: 
LOGIC AND METAPHYSICS 
Translation edited by 
John W. Burbidge and George di Giovanni 
Introduction and 
explanatory notes by H. S. Harris 
MeGill-Queen's University Press 
Kingston and Montreal 

© MeGill-Queen's University Press 1986 
ISBN o-7735-1011-7 
Legal deposit 2nd quarter 1986 
Bibliotheque nationale du Quebec 
Printed in Canada 
The translation of Hegel's text is from G. W. F. Hegel, Gesammelte Werke, 
volume 7,]enaer Systementwilrfe II, edited by Rolf-P. Horstmann and Johann 
Heinrich Trede and published by Felix Meiner Verlag, Hamburg, 1971. By 
permission of the Rheinisch-Westfalischen Akademie der Wissenschaften in 
Dusseldorf. 
This book has been published with the help of a grant from the Canadian 
Federation for the Humanities, using funds provided by the Social Sciences 
and Humanities Research Council of Canada. 
Canadian Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1776-1831. 
The Jena system, 1804-5 
Translation of: Jenaer Systementwurfe II. 
Bibliography: p. 
Includes index. 
ISBN o-7735-1011-7 
1. Logic. 
2. Metaphysics. 
I. Burbidge, John, 1936-
II. DiGiovanni, George, 1935-
Ill. Title. 
B2944.J42E5 1g86 
193 
C85-<>99954-5 

Contents 
PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION 
VII 
PREFACE TO THE COMMENTARY 
XI 
GENERAL INTRODUCTION 
XIII 
THE JENA SYSTEM, 1804-5: 
LOGIC AND METAPHYSICS 
LOGIC 3 
SIMPLE CONNECTION 3 
Quality 
3 
Quantity 
8 
Quantum 
13 
Infinity 
29 
RELATIONSHIP 38 
Relation of Being 40 
Relation of Thinking 78 
PROPORTION 
109 
Definition 
110 
Division 
1 1 3 
Cognztion Is Poszted 
116 

VI 
Contents 
METAPHYSICS 131 
COGNITION AS SYSTEM OF FIRST PRINCIPLES 
133 
Principle of Identity or of Contradiction 
136 
First Principle of the Exclusion of a Third 
138 
Principle of Ground 
140 
METAPHYSICS OF OBJECTIVITY 
144 
The Soul 
145 
The World 
149 
The Highest Essence 
157 
METAPHYSICS OF SUBJECTIVITY 
161 
The Theoretical I, or Consciousness 
165 
The Practical I 
1 70 
Absolute Spirit 
172 
GLOSSARY 
187 
WORKS CITED 
191 
INDEX 
193 

Preface to the Translation 
At the 1978 meeting of the Hegel Society of America, held at Penn-
sylvania State University, John Burbidge called together all the mem-
bers in attendance from Ontario and Quebec and suggested that the 
group meet regularly somewhere in Toronto to discuss issues of com-
mon interest. He also suggested that, as a catalyst for discussion, the 
group undertake a common project, such as the translation of a Hegelian 
text. H. S. Harris proposed the Jena Logic as a suitable candidate. 
Both Burbidge's idea and Harris's specific proposal were accepted, 
and a meeting that was to be the first of a long series was soon called 
at Trinity College in the University of Toronto. In the early stages 
the group was able to work from a draft prepared by Andre Dekker. 
Subsequently, those named below undertook in turn to provide pre-
liminary translations, which were then submitted for discussion and 
revision to the group as a whole. Burbidge, Donogho, di Giovanni, 
Harris, Pfohl, and Schmitz formed a core group that provided con-
tinuity. Peter Preuss contributed valuable editorial comments from a 
distance. 
At first the group had no intention of ever publishing the results 
of its work. Over the years, however, as the group became more 
cohesive and was drawn more and more into the problems of inter-
preting and translating an early Hegelian text, its members slowly 
came to appreciate the complexity and the value of the project they 
had undertaken. They decided at one point to extend the translation 
to include the Metaphysics, too, and to see to it that the translation 
would eventually be published. The Logic and Metaphysics represent, 
in effect, half of Hegel's 1804-5 system. The group chose not to tackle 
the third and largest part, the Philosophy of Nature, because its trans-

Vlll 
Preface to the Translation 
lation would require specialized knowledge that none of the members 
has and also because it is removed from the interests of all of them. 
The final text was edited by Burbidge and di Giovanni, and the index 
prepared by PEohl. 
The text we used was that edited by R.-P. Horstmann and J. H. 
Trede in volume seven ( 1971) of the critical edition of Hegel's work, 
which will be referred to as CE. The bracketed numbers in our text 
indicate the beginning of the pages in the critical edition. We have 
not felt bound by the German editors' decisions, however, and have 
frequently preferred the original manuscript to their emendations. 
We have on occasion incorporated suggestions from two previous 
editions, that of H. Ehrenberg and H. Link (Hegels erstes System) and 
that of G. Lasson (/ enenser Logik, Meta physik und N aturphilosophie). Most 
of our emendations involve punctuation (locating the comma that 
demarcates the range of a subordinate clause; introducing semi-colons 
into run-on sentences, and so forth), providing auxiliary verbs where 
only an infinitive or participle is present, and variations in grammatical 
suffixes and pronominal genders. At many points we compared our 
proposals with the French translation of D. Souche-Dagues, Logique 
etMetaphysique, lena 18o4-18os. Unfortunately, the Italian translation 
of F. Chiereghin et al., Logzca e metafisica di J ena, appeared too late to 
be of use to us in the translation. 
The manuscript proper is a good copy (or reine Schrift) prepared 
by Hegel himself. In the first part minor amendments appear, indi-
cating that Hegel made editorial revisions on a later reading. From 
the beginning of 'The Syllogism,' however, there is less evidence of 
careful revision, and in the sections on the syllogism and proportion 
we find a number of comments entered in the margin and extensive 
underlining, which suggests that Hegel used this material either for 
lectures or in preparing a later manuscript. 
Hegel's numbering of the sections follows no consistent convention, 
and in the Metaphysics it becomes quite confused. The major sections 
are numbered: 1. Cognition as System of First Principles; B. Meta-
physics of Objectivity; c. Metaphysics of Subjectivity. The subsections 
of I are labelled A, B, and c; those of B as I, B, c; and those of c as I, 
n, 111. We have left these numberings in the text, but the table of 
contents is structured on the underlying principles. We have indicated 
the relative level of the titles of the various sections by means of 
typography. 

Preface to the Translation 
IX 
Some pages of the original manuscript are missmg. Hegel used 
large sheets, folded in four, and numbered each set of four. Missing 
are sheets I to 3, the inner half of sheet 6, all of sheet 7, and the 
inner half of sheet 39· 
Although a good copy, the manuscript is written in a language that 
is just as cumbersome and obscure as only Hegel (and especially the 
younger Hegel) would use. In our translation we have endeavoured 
to get to the meaning of Hegel's text and render it in a language that, 
while faithful to the original, yet retains as little as possible of its 
cumbersomeness. Any translation is first of all appropriation. It can 
therefore make the text much more accessible by clarifying it in the 
very process of translating it. That task in part resolves itself into the 
development of certain conventions, and the most important of the 
conventions we adopted are summarized in the glossary. Some must 
be noted here, however, because of their especially broad application: 
To distinguish formelle, ideelle, and reelle from formate, ideale, and 
reale, we use with the English "formal," "ideal," and "real" the sub-
script • (for example, "formal.") to indicate the German form that 
has two /s. 
The article ein used with a neuter adjective or participle we translate 
"something ... "; da.s with an adjective is translated "what is .... " 
For example, ein gesetztes: "something posited"; das gesetzte: "what 
is posited." 
In German the gender of a pronoun frequently allows a precise 
reference to the appropriate noun. In our translation we have often 
substituted nouns for pronouns when the reference is clear in Ger-
man but would become problematic in English if the pronoun were 
kept. 
Occasionally, where a root is common to several different German 
words used in the same discussion, we have included the originals. 
We have done the same where our translation has had to deviate 
from conventions to clarify meaning. 
We have used parentheses as punctuation, along with frequent 
dashes and semi-colons, to bring some order into the long, intricate 
sentences of Hegel. Square brackets, however, indicate insertions 
either by the German editors or by the translators. 
The translators express their appreciation to the provost of Trinity 
College, Professor F. K. Hare, who most graciously provided facilities 
for our use and encouraged us with our venture. They also wish to 

X 
Preface to the Translation 
acknowledge grants from Trent University and McGill University that 
helped to defray some of the costs of the translation and of the prepa-
ration of the final manuscript. 
Lorraine Code 
William Carruthers 
Martin Donogho 
HenryS. Harris 
Helga Hunter 
Kern Luther 
JOHN BURBIDGE 
Trent University 
Lee Manchester 
Jeff Mitscherling 
David Pfohl 
Kenneth Schmitz 
Donald Stewart 
GEORGE DI GIOVANNI 
McGill University 

Preface to the Commentary 
In writing the Introduction and headnotes to our translation I have 
found the much more ambitious commentary provided by the Italian 
translators very helpful. This translation, Logica e metafisica di Jena, 
edited by F. Chiereghin and others, came to our notice too late to be 
of assistance in the making of our own, English version. But the 
commentary (which is about twice as long as the translated text) de-
serves the attention of all readers who can use it. Chiereghin and his 
collaborators have traced both the earlier and the later evolution of 
the main categories of the present work. 
My own aim here is much humbler-and rather different. The best 
summary and analysis of Hegel's argument in its own terms that I 
was able to give when this translation was still in its infancy will be 
found in my Night Thoughts, chapter 8.' So instead of repeating that, 
I have here tried to interpret the structure and goals of Hegel's logical 
construction in terms of the "real philosophy" that it was designed to 
lead to-and especially in terms of the "First Philosophy of Spirit,"• 
which Hegel had only recently composed and clearly intended to 
revise as the climax of the manual that he was here trying to write. 
It will be clear to any careful reader that the theory of social con-
sciousness that forms the main thread of my interpretation is not the 
only concern in Hegel's mind. Indeed, the student of the text may 
even be tempted to think at some stages that this concern is not in 
l. Hegel's Development II: Night Thoughts Uena 1801-6), hereinafter referred to as 
Night Thoughts. 
2. In Gesammelte Werke, VI, 268-331; and in Harris and Knox, trans. and eds., System 
of Ethical Life and First Phzlosophy of Spirit, pp. 205-50 

Xll 
Preface to the Commentary 
Hegel's mind at all. I have, however, focused attention on the way in 
which the argument of the Logic and Metaphysics is exemplified in 
social experience because I believe that this is the best way to show 
how Hegel's project arose from (and is related to) the earlier projects 
and problems of Kant and HegeJ.3 The manuscript here translated 
is the earliest formulation of Hegel's conception of "pure thinking" 
that has survived. But because the projects of the later Phenomenology 
and Science of Logic are united in a single undertaking in this Logic 
and Metaphysics, Hegel's own determination to develop logical theory 
from a neutral standpoint does not obscure his preoccupation with 
the more "subjective" logic of Kant and Fichte. I have relied on this 
generally evident preoccupation to justify my own reading of the 
whole argument in terms of the emergence of consciousness (or sin-
gular subjectivity) in the social substance.4 
H. S. HARRIS 
Glendon College 
York University 
3· If we forget about Kant's "deduction of the categories" and Fichte's "self-positing 
of the Ego," then the affinities of Hegel's work with the Parmenides of Plato, with 
Aristotle's theology, and with the Cartesian tradition may lead us to agree with Michael 
Rosen, in Hegel's Dialectic and Its Criticism, that the short answer to the question "What 
is living in the logic of Hegel?" is "Nothing" (p. 179). 
4· Even the Italian commentators could perhaps learn from my few pages to con-
centrate their attention on Leibniz, rather than Spinoza, as Hegel's philosopher of 
"substance" in the present text. 

H. S. Harris 
General Introduction 
On 29 September 1804 Uust a month or so after his thirty-fourth 
birthday) Hegel appealed to Goethe to see to it that he was not passed 
over when certain other licensed private teachers (Privatdozenten) of 
philosophy at the University of Jena were promoted to the rank of 
professor. At that time he had been teaching philosophy at Jena for 
three years and he was the senior Privatdozent in the field. Also, since 
Schelling's departure to Wurzburg in the spring of 1803 Hegel had 
been for more than a year the principal representative at J en a of the 
kind of natural philosophy that he knew Goethe was anxious to foster. 
He had some right, therefore, to count on Goethe's support, and he 
duly received it.' 
In his appeal to Goethe Hegel dismissed his own published work 
as unworthy of the great man's attention.• But he did think fit to 
mention to Goethe the manuscript that he was currently working on: 
"the purpose of a work that I hope to complete this winter for my 
1. But the promotion, when it came, still brought him no salary-it took Goethe 
another year to procure the tiniest pittance for him (a mere one hundred dollars)-so 
his financial situation, which was already very straitened, soon became critical. 
2. His published essays, being mainly technical philosophical criticism and polemic, 
were not likely to interest Goethe much. But he no doubt expressed himself in this 
way because, ever since the departure of Schelling, he had been expounding his philo-
sophical system in quite a different way. As the reader will soon see for himself, the 
"purely scientific treatment of philosophy" that Hegel was willing to lay before Goethe 
as soon as it was ready was just as technical as the Difference essay or Faith and Knowledge 
or the essay on Natural Law. (And we should remember that we only know definitely 
which of the major essays in the Critical Journal of 1801-3 [Gesammelte Werke, Band IV] 
we:e Hegel's because he had to submit a curriculum vitae, including a list of publi-
cations, before his promotion could be approved.) 

XIV 
General Introduction 
lectures-a purely scientific treatment of philosophy-will allow me 
to lay it before your excellency, if you will kindly permit me to do 
that."3 
From the evidence of the handwriting we can say with considerable 
security that the Logic and Metaphysics here translated formed the 
first part of this "purely scientific treatment of philosophy." Some of 
it was recopied from earlier drafts-for Hegel had been lecturing on 
logic and metaphysics regularly, and he had been announcing the 
imminent publication of a textbook ever since his second semester. 
But the structure into which the older material was incorporated was 
itself new. After two years spent in the elaboration of a four-part 
system in terms of a number of fundamental dichotomies and anti-
theses established by Schelling, Hegel began, in October 1803, to 
articulate his thought in terms of the great triad of logic, nature, and 
spirit that is familiar to students of the Berlin Encyclopaedia. The trea-
tise that he mentions to Goethe was to be articulated in this way. But 
we can see from the manuscript as we have it that he did not finish 
it; and from the subsequent lecture announcements and the surviving 
manuscripts of the system in its next state we can infer that it was 
precisely a revolution in his concept of logic that caused him to aban-
don our manuscript about half-way through the Philosophy ofNature. 4 
To reconstruct the early evolution of Hegel's conception of philo-
sophical logic is not easy, because the evidence is very fragmentary 
and inadequate. Any reconstruction must contain much that is hy-
pothetical and some elements that are mere conjecture. But certain 
basic facts are clear enough to be relatively uncontroversial; and it is 
important for the reader of this first surviving version of Hegel's logic 
to be familiar with them because the mature logic (which anglophone 
readers first met in the pages of Stirling's Secret of Hegel in 1865) only 
began to emerge as a result of the revolution in Hegel's thought that 
caused him to abandon our manuscript unfinished. What we have here 
is the final form of his early logic. A preliminary account of how the 
3· Bnefe von und an Hegel, ed. Hoffmeister and Flechsig, 1, 85. 
4· We have not translated the incomplete Philosophy of Nature. A short note about 
it appears at the end of our translation of the Logic and Metaphysics. 
The next phase in the evolution of Hegel's logic itself does not survive in the manu-
scripts. But we have both lecture announcements about the new logic (no longer "Logic 
and Metaphysics") and the new logical structure of the "real philosophy" (the Philosophy 
of Nature and Spirit of 18os, which does survive) as evidence for the revolution in 
Hegel's logical theory. 

General Introductton 
XV 
early concept of logic differs from the later one is therefore essential, 
even though it has to be somewhat schematic, and some rather con-
jectural statements about its evolution must be asserted dogmatically. 5 
"Logic," in the essays that Hegel thought unworthy of Goethe's 
notice, is "the extended science of the Idea as such."6 "Idealism" is a 
synonym for logic in this more general sense. The "Idea of reason" 
in its "extended" form in human experience and in the sciences re-
quires to be collected and organized into systematic coherence. The 
collecting is a "critical" task, since the elements cannot be organized 
just as we find them. Thus, "transcendental philosophy" (another 
synonym for "idealism, or logic") has two great branches: critical the-
ory and speculation.7 When Hegel gave courses under the traditional 
title "Logic and Metaphysics," he used these more specific terms for 
the two branches of "idealism, or logic," generally. In this narrower 
usage logic is critical idealism, the necessary preamble to speculative 
metaphysics properly so called. Our manuscript is divided in this way. 
Logic is distinguished here as a preparatory or introductory study for 
philosophy proper. The systematic exposition of philosophy begins only 
with "metaphysics." When Hegel himself gave systematic survey courses, 
he either dispensed with the critical preamble altogether or supplied 
only a minimal version or substitute for it. So what he called logic in 
these systematic courses was (at least in the main) metaphysics ac-
cording to the technical division of the two topics in our present 
manuscript. 8 
5· The story can be found in full detail in Harris, Night Thoughts; see pp. 22-73, 
2oo-2o6, 226-37, and chap. 8. 
6. This definition actually comes from Hegel's draft for the first lecture of his 
Introduction to Philosophy (Oct. 1801). The text will be found in Gesammelte Werke, v, 
25g-65. But see also Harris and Cerf, trans. and eds., The Difference between Fichte's and 
Schelling's System of Philosophy, pp. 8g-117. 
7· The identity of philosophy with "idealism, or logic" (and the resultant possibility 
of its reduction to logic in the narrow, or "critical" sense) is clearly explained in Cerf 
and Harris, trans. and eds., Faith and Knowledge, p. 68. For Hegel's use of "transcen-
dental philosophy" in this sense see especially the announcement of the "System of 
Speculative Philosophy" for the winter semester of 1803-4 (Hegel-Studien 4: 54; Night 
Thoughts, pp. 228-2gn). 
8. It is clear, for instance, that the lost "Logic" of the "System of Speculative Phi-
losophy" of 1803-4 was in the main a metaphysical theory of "Substance" (see the 
retrospective summary of the argument at the beginning of the surviving "Philosophy. 
of Spirit," in Harris and Knox, trans. and eds., System of Ethical Life and First Philosophy 
of Spirit, p. 205. The fragments of the introductory lecture for the "Delineatio" of 1 Bo3 
(Gesammelte Werke, v, 365-69; see Harris, Night Thoughts, pp. 20o--202) show that critical 

xvi 
General Introductzon 
Logic-both in the broad, speculative sense and in the narrow, 
critical sense-was an innovation introduced into the "transcendental 
idealism" of Schelling's identity philosophy by Hegel himself. He insisted 
that the critical approach to the "absolute identity" must be "objective," 
in the sense of being neutrally applicable both to thinking subjects 
and to the objects of thought.9 Thus the logic of his first course on 
logic and metaphysics began with the theory of the "finite categories" 
taken in this logically neutral or objective sense. This approach was 
critical, first, in the obvious sense that it was founded upon a critique 
of the "subjective formalism" of Kant (whose categories are the forms 
of subjective manifestation for a problematic absolute object, the "thing 
in itself'). But secondly-and much more importantly-Hegel's logic 
was critical in its own internal method. It proceeds dialectically, or (to 
use the language of Plato's Republic) by the "destruction of hy-
potheses." In the first phase the categories are brought forth one by 
one, only to be "nullified" in their relation to the absolute. 
From Hegel's essay The Difference between Fichte's and Schelling's System 
of Philosophy ( 1801) we can reliably infer that the finite categories 
that were here engulfed in the absolute must have included Kant's 
first three triads but not the final triad of modality, for in that essay 
Hegel dismisses the categories of modality as principles of "the non-
identity of subject and object." 10 We can also infer from this passage 
that these nine categories were not the only ones treated in his first 
course; and we know that Kant did not treat them in the proper 
order, 'just as they come forth from reason." But what this proper 
order was we cannot say. The Logic of 1804 proceeds from the triad 
of quality to that of quantity and arrives finally at the categories of 
relation. But Hegel's insistence in 1801 that "we must always keep 
before our eyes the archetype that it [understanding] copies" might 
logic was replaced (at least in that instance) by a discussion of the cultural "need of 
philosophy." In the Berlin Encyclopaedia, by contrast, the systematic exposition of the 
need of philosophy (in the Phenomenology of Spint) was replaced by something more 
nearly akin to the critical logic of the early Jena years. (This comparison helps us to 
recognize that the introduction to the Encyclopaedia is only a pedagogical expedient.) 
g. See Gesammelte Werke, v, 271-72, for Hegel's programmatic outline for this course. 
The slightly abbreviated quotation by Rosenkranz is translated in Cerf and Harris, 
Faith and Knowledge, pp. g-10, and the omissions are made good in Harris, Night 
Thoughts, pp. 36-37. 
10. Gesammelte Werke, IV, 6; Harris and Cerf, Difference, p. So. 

General Introduction 
XVII 
be taken to imply that the "dynamic" categories, and particularly the 
category of "substance and accident" (which is called in the Difference 
essay "the true relation of speculation")," came first. Schelling had 
already inverted the order of the dynamic and the "mathematical" 
categories (in the deduction offered in the System of Transcendental 
Idealism).'" It was Fichte who was the first to begin from the categories 
of quality,'3 as Hegel does in 1804 (and always thereafter). Hegel was 
consciously proud of his logic as a novelty in 1801, but it seems al-
together probable that he would follow Schelling's lead at that stage. 
The model offered by Fichte would more naturally have attracted 
Hegel's serious attention when he adopted the new phenomenological 
approach (through the concept of "consciousness") in 1803.' 4 Ac-
cording to the Difference essay, the "negative absolute" in which the 
finite categories of our intuitive spatia-temporal experience are nul-
lified is the understanding itself. So the second phase of the logic of 
1801 was the theory of finite intelligence in its active construction of 
concepts, judgments, and syllogisms. '5 
This construction is engulfed, in its turn, in the "true infinite of 
reason." Wha:t Hegel calls "the speculative theory of the syllogism" 
leads us in 1801 to a metaphysics that was apparently an exposition 
of the "Idea of philosophy" combined with a critique of the systematic 
forms that it has assumed (dogmatic, transcendental, idealistic, real-
istic, and sceptical) during its history.' 6 From the Idea of philosophy 
11. Gesammelte Werke, IV, 33; Harris and Cerf, Difference, p. 166. 
12. F. W. J. Schelling, System des Transcendentalen ldealismus, in Siimmtliche Werke, l, 
iii, 467ff., 505ff.; Heath, trans., pp. 103-12, 134-54. 
13. J. G. Fichte, Grundlage der gesammten Wissenschaftslehre(1794), in Samtliche Werke, 
1, 125ff.; Heath and Lachs, trans., pp. 122ff. 
14. The view taken in Night Thoughts (pp. 42-43) that the order in 1801 was probably 
the same as that of 1804 now seems to me less probable because of these antecedent 
models, to which my attention was drawn by the commentaries of Chiereghin and 
Maretta in the Italian translation. 
15. In Night Thoughts (pp. 43-52) I have shown how this part of the program can 
be interpreted in terms of the reconstruction of Kant that Hegel offers us in Faith and 
Knowledge. But Werner Hartkopf has rightly pointed to the "mechanism of intelligence" 
in Schelling's System of Transcendental Idealism as a probable model for Hegel's logical 
theory (Kontinuitat und Diskontinuitat in Hegels jenaer Anfangen, esp. pp. 254-55). 
16. Hegel's first course broke up early and he retired to his study to write a textbook 
before he attempted to teach the subject again. So it is quite possible that the first 
project for metaphysics never existed in written-out form at all. We know that the first 
textbook draft contained a systema reftexionis (logic) and a systema rationis (metaphysics); 
but how these two systems were related either to one another or to the earlier and 

XVlll 
General Introduction 
Hegel's version of the identity system moved to "real philosophy," or 
the theory of "the universe." This differed from the "philosophy of 
nature," which succeeds metaphysics in our manuscript, because it 
embraced the whole of finite reality. The philosophy of finite spirit 
was itself one of the two parallel aspects of the "absolute identity." It 
was also higher than the theory of physical nature because it dealt with 
the practical reconstruction of identity as the intuition of ethical nature. 
But it was itself part of nature as a whole; so the relation of spirit and 
nature was more positive and direct than that which exists in the 
tripartite system to which our Logic and Metaphysics belongs. In the 
earlier system it is only the theory of absolute (or free) spirit that 
stands apart as the "resumption into unity" of the whole extension of 
"idealism, or logic."•7 
We do not know how the systema refiexzonis et rationis of 1802 was 
organized. It seems possible (for example) that the cyclic parallel treat-
ment of Cartesian, Spinozist, and Leibnizian themes that is to be found 
both in the Logic and in the Metaphysics of 1804 had its origin here. 
For this cyclic parallel can be viewed as a reflection of the historical 
treatment of metaphysics projected in 1801. But this is mere specu-
lation (and unless more of the manuscripts are found, it can never 
be any more than that). What we know for certain is that as soon as 
Schelling left Jena (so that Hegel was obligated to lecture on the 
identity philosophy as a whole), the Kantian conception of a moral 
opposition between nature and spirit began to take on greater signifi-
cance in Hegel's mind. At the same time the theme of consciousness as 
the discursive medium of experience became the focal topic of his 
philosophical system. In the pure abstraction of logic this theme ap-
pears as the concept of "cognition." The task of logic generally is to 
later versions of Logic and Metaphysics is not certain. (Parts of this first textbook may 
survive in our text, and even the basic pattern of our text may go back to 1802. But 
Hegel continued to employ the critical-historical approach to metaphysics too. So there 
is no solid ground even for conjectures here.) 
17. This emphasis on the contrast between the finite world (nature, and finite spirit, 
subjective and objective) and the infinite (transcendental philosophy and absolute spirit) 
is maintained in the system of 1805, but is there successfully conciliated with the triadic 
structure of 1803-4. The conciliation thus achieved remains valid in Hegel's maturity; 
and for that reason the PhenomenologJas the final instrument of this conciliation-
remains essential to the encyclopaedic synthesis. (It supplies the mature form of the 
critical survey of the Idea in its "extension"; this is what is "resumed" in the mature 
theory of absolute spirit.) 

General Introduction 
XIX 
construct the concept of "absolute cognition": "The Idea of cognition 
is the first Idea of metaphysics."' 8 
The fragments dealing with Hegel's logic and metaphysics in this 
first year after Schelling's departure are rather exiguous. We have a 
draft for two "notes" that were probably part of the continually evolv-
ing textbook, and the summary outline for a discussion of metaphysics 
that would have occupied several lectures. The two notes are also 
concerned with the foundation stone of metaphysics; the remarkable 
thing about this stage in Hegel's logical reflections is that the starting-
point of metaphysics is taken to be a unitary principle. Instead of 
beginning (as our Metaphysics does, in 1804) with a "system of prin-
ciples," the Metaphysics of 1803 apparently began with a "funda-
mental proposition." We do not know for certain what this basic thesis 
about philosophical cognition was; but the most plausible inference 
from the evidence that we have suggests that it was a formulation of 
the "principle of ground."•g In any case this proposition with which 
metaphysics began was also the terminus of philosophical speculation. 
Thus, the ideal of philosophy as a self-grounding circle was perfectly 
realized. 
The ideal of this perfect circularity, however, creates a problem. 
For it is now hard to see how the initial approach to this closed circle 
of speculative knowledge can be a logical one. The comprehension of 
one's time and of its "need of philosophy" seems now to be the only 
natural path to the discovery of this absolute beginning (and end) of 
metaphysics. 
This is the solution that Hegel eventually adopted in the "system 
of science," which combined the "science of the experience of con-
sciousness" with the "science oflogic." But before he could be satisfied 
with that solution, he had to find a way of resolving all of the logical 
content of his critical logic into the unitary science of speculative logic 
(which is this circular metaphysics under its general name). In 1804 
the Metaphysics begins with a system of principles and proceeds to 
18. Gesammelte Werke, VII, 341. This sketch for lecturing on or writing up the topic 
of metaphysics cannot be dated at all precisely because of its brevity. But it must be 
later than April 1803, and it does not fit into the plan for our manuscript, which was 
certainly clear in Hegel's mind before September 1804. (Someone, however, did insert 
it into our manuscript at a more or less appropriate point.) 
19. See the "Zwei Anmerkungen" in Gesammelte Werke, VII, 343-47; the discussion 
in Night Thoughts, 226-37, depends heavily on the interpretation proposed by J. H. 
Trede (Hegel-Studien 7: 16o--6s). 

XX 
General Introduction 
deal with the Kantian "Ideas of reason" (which are the topic of the 
Metaphysics outline of 1803-4). But at the climax of the very first 
phase of the Logic we are already faced with the true infinite. Ad-
mittedly, the true infinite is introduced at this point only by antici-
pation: in the Logic it actually functions only negatively. Thus the 
essentially critical (or dialectical)•o character of logic in the narrow 
sense is preserved. But the very fact that the true infinite can legiti-
mately be introduced so early in the discussion shows how easy the 
move to a completely speculative conception of logic and metaphysics 
has now become. 
In order that this speculative conversion may occur, critical logic 
must lose its externally reflective character, that is, its dependence upon 
the contingent consciousness of a particular thinker. Even as the logic 
of understanding (which is what we find in the first phase of the 
present manuscript), logic must be the work of absolute reflection. This 
implies that the problem of how the historically contingent conscious-
ness of the rational animal is to overcome its contingency and arrive 
at the absolute standpoint of "pure thought" must be consigned to a 
different science. The "need of philosophy" and the evolution of 
consciousness to the point where this need is absolutely compre-
hended-that is, the point where it is comprehended as the self-sufficient 
goal of rational cognition, or as the very concept of cognition-must 
become the object of quite a different logical science, the science of 
time, and of our "experience of consciousness" in time. 
The logic of our manuscript is ready for this conversion. Since 
we know that Hegel had already experimented with a historical 
approach to his "system," it is no surprise to learn that in the semester 
following his promotion Hegel announced a course on his system as 
a whole but actually gave one on "Logic."•• And we find also among 
our manuscript remains, at the very moment of this change, the 
earliest scraps that are demonstrably connected with the project of 
the Phenomenology.•• 
20. In all his Jena writings. but especially in this manuscript, Hegel uses the noun 
and adjective "dialectic," "dialectical," to refer to an essentially negative, destructive 
process, phase, or method. The process is progresszve because the overthrow of each 
thought-hypothesis (or the breakdown of a real institution) indicates or leads us to its 
replacement). 
21. The announcement for summer 1805 is in Hegel-Studien 4: 54· We know about 
the actual course because we have the list of the students who enrolled in it (ibid., 62). 
22. Rosenkranz, in Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegels Leben, p. 202, considered that 

General Introduction 
XXI 
It is likely that the course on logic in summer 1805 dealt with 
phenomenology and speculative logic together. We know that once 
the manuscript of the Phenomenology existed, Hegel used it in his 
course on "Speculative Philosophy or Logic" (summer 18o6, the last 
course that he actually gave at J ena); and he even included the topic 
"Phenomenology of Spirit" separately in the announcement for winter 
18o6-7 (when he actually gave no classes because the military and 
political crisis coincided with, and contributed to, his own personal 
crisis, and forced him to abandon his first academic career). In the 
summer course of 18o6 the speculative logic was dealt with only briefly 
at the end of a much fuller treatment of (at least some parts of) the 
Phenomenology. 23 
Possibly Hegel's new speculative logic was still only a skeleton when 
he left Jena. For his most urgent task was to work out the application 
of the new logical method to his "real philosophy." He lectured on 
this steadily in 1805 and 18o6, and the manuscript-which has come 
down to us-shows that the whole system was reorganized in accor-
dance with the fully developed pattern of what is called in the work 
of Hegel's maturity "subjective logic." Every stage-from the basic 
theory of space and time onwards-is conceived as an evolution from 
"concept" through 'judgment" to "syllogism." 
This whole task of reorganizing the "real philosophy" was achieved 
after the abandonment of our manuscript (in which the philosophy 
of nature is organized in quite a different way). But K. W. G. Kastner 
(who attended the class for which our manuscript was written, before 
passing on to Heidelberg as professor of chemistry the next year) 
wrote to Schelling in March 18o6 that "according to the J ena lecture-
list Hegel's system is appearing at Easter, and as I have heard tell it 
is in four volumes at one time."•4 Kastner misunderstood the lecture-
list (which announced only the "System of Science," meaning phen-
Hegel conceived this project as early as 1804. But the rightful assignment of our present 
manuscript to that period makes his hypothesis rather implausible. The earliest frag-
ment that can plausibly be interpreted as part of such a project is a sketch dealing with 
the clash of divine and human law (Gesammelte Werke, IX, 437). This was written on the 
back of one of the drafts for Hegel's letter to Voss (May 1805). 
23. The course announcements are in Hegel-Studien 4: 54-55; for the content of 
the 1806 course on "Logic and Metaphysics or Speculative Philosophy" we have the 
testimony of Gabler, who took it (ibid., 71). 
24. G. Nicolin, ed., Hegel in Berichten seiner Zeitgenossen, report 43 

xxn 
General Introduction 
omenology and logic together). But either Hegel himself or someone 
close to him had obviously said or written that the system would be 
in four parts and that it would appear soon. Had it not been for the 
battle of Jena (and the imminent arrival of an illegitimate child), 
Kastner's forecast might have been fulfilled within a year or two. In 
actual fact it took Hegel ten more years to complete the Logic, and 
he never did produce the "real philosophy" in a proper book form 
at all. 
From this bird's-eye view of the evolution of Hegel's logic we can 
see that there is indeed, as J. Heinrichs suspected, a close relation 
between the Logic of 1804 and the program of the Phenomenology!s 
But the relation is both closer and more distant than he believed. The 
whole system that the Logic of 1804 is designed to introduce was 
conceived and structured phenomenologically (that is, as a logical 
evolution of consciousness). It is therefore right to look for the prin-
ciple of consciousness in the Jena Logic from the very beginning. 
"Consciousness," or the subject-object opposition, appears there as the 
principle of "reflection"; and in the brief analyses of each stage of the 
argument that are offered here as aids to the user of this translation, 
I have tried to show how the dialectic of subject and object in con-
sciousness can provide a key to difficult transitions. •6 
But Heinrichs' claim that the pattern of the Logic and Metaphysics 
of 1804 can be directly mapped on to the Phenomenology of 1807 is 
highly dubious, since the Phenomenology of 1807, although itself an 
introduction and first part to the system of philosophy, repeats the 
whole sytem of 1803-5 (not just that introduction and first part that 
the Logic and Metaphysics was to be). A mapping of this kind may 
still be possible, because of the internal mirroring that can be observed 
in properly selected "wholes" within Hegel's system. The Logic and 
Metaphysics is one such whole, and it does share with the Phenomen-
ology the peculiarity of being both an introduction and a first part. 
But the problem of the relationship between them must be ap-
25. Die Logik der "PhiinomenologJe des Geistes." 
26. This is a novelty in the analyses offered here as compared with the more detailed 
examination of the argument in Night Thoughts, chap. 8. I was well aware of the phe-
nomenological character of the system when I wrote that chapter, but I was more struck 
then by the continuity of the 1804 Logic with the logic program of J8o1-which requires 
that the initial evolution of the categories should be objective or neutral. I think now 
that both emphases are present. But the reader must decide for himself which of them 
is predominant, or how they are equilibrated. 

General Introduction 
XXlll 
proached cautiously; and the very different structure and goals of the 
systems that they introduce must be kept firmly in mind.•7 With that 
preliminary caveat the reader can be left to study the texts for himself. 
Certainly the close affinity between this text and the great book that 
emerged only two years later is one of the most compelling reasons 
why we should study it with passionate care and attention. 
27. This is difficult because very little of Hegel's discussion of the goal of the system 
in 1803-5 survives. But it seems clear that a complete system whose discursive principle 
is phenomenological aims at scientia intuitiva, or "absolute intuition." The goal of a 
systematic phenomenologzcal introduction, on the other hand, is the system itself as discursive 
science (or cognition). 

THE JENA SYSTEM, 1804-5: LOGIC AND METAPHYSICS 

Logic 
I I Simple Connection 
A I QUALITY 
Hegel's manuscript originally consisted of 102 doubly folded sheets that he 
numbered himself. The most serious lacuna in what survives arises from the 
loss of the first three of these sheets. The inner half of sheet 6 and the whole 
of sheet 7 are also missing. For this reason the reconstruction of the first part 
of the argument, and even our conception of its formal articulation into 
sections and subsections, is somewhat hypothetical. The very title "Simple 
Connection" is a conjecture. Hegel may (for instance) have called the whole 
section "Quality" and begun the use of subheadings only when "Quantity" 
emerges from this initially undifferentiated unity. In the translation, however, 
we follow the articulation proposed by the editors of our German text. 
Later on, Hegel refers back to this first section as "the logic of understand-
ing."• He apparently began with the three categories of quality in Kant's table: 
reality, negation, and limitation (but perhaps he called negation "ideality"). 
Kant began his deduction of the "mathematical" categories-with which "Sim-
ple Connection" is plainly concerned-with the triad of quantity. It was Fichte 
who first began with the triad of quality. Fichte is certainly in Hegel's eye as 
a critical target here; but this should not cause us to overlook the fact that 
he is also the obvious inspiration and first model for this logic of consciousness. 
I. See CE 175, I. 3, below. Hence, when he tells us here that the independent 
subsistence (Fiirsichseyz) of terms is the "general principle of the logic of understanding," 
he is speaking of the basic hypothesis of natural consciousness, according to which 
everything exists on its own account and is "simply connected" with everything else. 

4 
Logzc 
Near the beginning of the Metaphysics (see CE 129, below) Hegel says, "the 
Logic began with unity itself as the self-equivalent." This "unity or being" (cE 
154-55) is certainly not the mathematical unit (which we shall meet later on 
under "Quantity"). There may-as the Italian commentators think-be an 
implicit reference to the "first hypothesis" of the Parmenides.' But it is probably 
safer not to look beyond the fundamental tenet of the understanding as 
formulated by Bishop Butler: "Everything is what it is, and not another thing." 
This is the fundamental hypothesis of the logic of understanding (and we 
should notice how it involves both reality and negation). The view that what-
ever is real is self-identical and has only "simple" (that is, external) connections 
with everything else is plainly quite inadequate for the fundamental "con-
nections" of physical forces and the philosophical connection between con-
sciousness and its world.' 
At the point where our manuscript starts, Hegel has reached the third 
moment of quality-the logical "totality" of the triad in the category of limit. 
The fragmentary text begins in the midst of a discussion of the "construction" 
of consciousness in Fichte's theory. Hegel argues that this construction only 
shows that our sense consciousness is a "limit" that arises because two opposed 
"forces" have arrived at an equilibrium. A conceptual limit of this kind is quite 
different from the limiting boundary between two physical objects that lie next 
to each other; and even the "force" of gravity that holds those two objects in 
place on the earth beneath them is again a limit of this conceptual kind, for 
it logically involves the inward character of the earth and of the objects thus 
held in place. 
The "unity" of which Hegel is speaking in the first complete sentence is 
apparently the unity of the self, or of cognitive consciousness conceived in a 
Kantian "formal" way. The "highest unity" will then be the Fichtean Ego, 
within which all finite knowers subsist, and "the multiplicity" will be the objects 
of consciousness, including the other selves. The unity with which transcen-
dental logic begins is the being of the finite self and its finite world. This self 
moves from its possible connection with everything to the necessary "proportion" 
2. See Chiereghin's discussion in Logica e metafisica, p. 231. The suggestion of Mor-
etto (ibid., p. 266, n. 4)-that the general progression of the Logic as it moves from 
the indeterminacy of simple connection to the determinate concreteness of proportion 
owes something to the progression in the Philebus from the apeiron through peras and 
mikton to aitia-also deserves serious consideration. Certainly the inspiration of Hegel's 
"objective logic" is more Platonic than Aristotelian. 
3· We can also get some idea of what Hegel sought to show in his discussion of 
reality and ideality (or negation) from the retrospective summaries below (CE 5-7). 
Compare Harris, Night Thoughts, pp. 347-49· 

Simple Connection 
5 
of philosophical cognition. The proper explication of this highest unity is the 
theme of this Logic and Metaphysics. When it reaches its climax, this phe-
nomenological theory of absolute cognition is one long search for the right 
solution of Fichte's problem about the conscious reality of the Ego. 
[ ... the opposites ... ] are beings [ ... ]. One of the opposites is nec-
essarily the unity itself; but just for that reason this unity is not the 
absolute one, and since at the same time it is not simply to be as an 
opposite, but also to be in itself, it follows that, as unity of itself and 
of its opposite, it can be only limit; for as unity of both it would itself 
cease to be an opposite. Thus the so-called construction of the idea 
out of the opposed activities, of the ideal, and real. ones, as unity of 
both, has produced nothing but the limit. The ideal. activity has simply 
the same meaning as the unity; the double meaning of this unity 
determines itself as the unity of the antithesis because, as unity of 
itself and of the real, activity (that is, the multiplicity), it still remains 
outside itself as a non-unified unity and the multiplicity remains over 
against it; so that each such unity of opposites-as a moment of the 
whole and also as the whole, the highest idea itself as well-remains 
nothing but limit. The decision whether the unity is just limit or 
absolute unity depends directly upon whether, outside of or after the 
unity, what are posited in it as one are still self-subsistent beings. In 
the concept of limit itself the unity and multiplicity, or the reality and 
negation, still subsist on their own acount, and their principle, as the 
general principle of the logic of understanding, is recognized as not 
self-subsistent, because it is truly sublated and is not just something 
that is to be sublated. Just for that reason the construction out of 
opposed activities that is called idealism is itself [4] nothing other than 
the logic of understanding, inasmuch as the steps of the construction 
arise within this principle; and this idealism remains this logic too, 
inasmuch as the result of its absolute syllogism is that the ideal, activity, 
the unity (which as beginning is altogether indeterminate and equiv-
ocal as to whether it is true unity or unity as quality), is only the latter, 
for the absolute unification remains just an ought, that is, a beyond 
over against the unity of the limit; and the two4 fall asunder. 
The same occurs with the construction of matter out of opposed 
forces, the forces of attraction and repulsion, in which the former signifies 
the (differentiated) unity and the latter the (differentiated) multi-
4· Trans.: That is, the absolute unity as a beyond and the unity of the limit. 

6 
Logic 
plicity. Like the opposed unity and multiplicity, these forces are as 
opposites nothing in themselves; but because they are set forth as 
forces, they are fixed as self-subsistent, as absolute qualities. Consid-
ered on their own account in this way, however, they turn out to be 
completely equal: insofar as there is attractive force, there is repulsive 
force; there is no distinction between them at all, save that of direction. 
But each of the opposed directions can be regarded equally well as 
an effect of attractive or as an effect of repulsive force; for direction 
is the empty connection, which is determined by anything fixed. The 
opposition of the directions is nothing but a completely empty op-
position; but that through which the directions are truly distin-
guished-a posited point-would already be the oneness of them both, 
in which all opposition and the directions themselves are dissolved; 
apart from this their being-dissolved they are nothing-that is, they 
have no reality at all. Matter is nothing but that one[ness], or its 
absolute equilibrium, in which the directions are neither opposed nor 
even forces, and apart from which they have just as little being. But 
they are after all posited as beings on their own account, and the 
differentiation of matter is supposed to be a resolution into these entia 
rationis; in other words, these forces are supposed to emerge from 
the equilibrium that sublates them and to have a being apart from it. 
However, the differentiation of matter is essentially just this: that 
matter, the equilibrium itself, remains equal to itself; the differentia-
tion cannot [be] a differentiation of the force of attraction and that 
of repulsion, [5] for that would be a sublating of matter itself. This 
differentiation would consist of a more of the one and a less of the 
other; but they have significance simply as connected with each other, 
as opposed directions: to the extent that one went beyond the other, 
to that extent it would itself cease to be. In their equilibrium, however, 
both are just as sublated within their distinction, but they are to have 
being not as sublated but rather as qualities or as subsisting on their 
own account; and that they should be so is clear because, apart from 
the equilibrium, their being one, they should yet have being. There-
fore, this equilibrium is not itself the true unity because a oneness of 
those things -which have being essentially, on their own account, is 
just their nothingness; so it is not matter, not a true reality that has 
been posited, but only a limit, the nothingness of the opposites and 
their being. 
2 I In the limit the nothingness of reality and negation is posited, as 
well as their being apart from this nothingness; zn this way quality itself 

Simple Connection 
7 
is realized in the limit; for the limit so expresses the concept of quality 
as the being per se of the determinacies, that in it both determinacies, 
each on its own account, are posited as indifferent to each other, as 
subsisting apart from each other. At the same time each, in accordance 
with its content, expresses not determinacy in general (as it does in 
the concept) but rather determinacy as determinate, as reality and 
negation; in other words, with respect to each [each expresses] what 
it would be only in the antithesis or in connection with the other; this 
connection with the other (being taken back into itself and because 
as relation it is only external to it) [is] now itself posited with respect 
to it;s the one, itself the nothingness of the qualities, the other, their 
being. 
This indifferent subsistence of the nothingness and of the being of 
the qualities, however, does not exhaust the and of the limit; that is, 
the limit is not just this one side of reality, [the side] of the being per 
se of the qualities contained in it-the limit derives from the [6] ne-
gation, and the latter is only reality's being-external-to-the-limit-but 
also the connection with it; through this connection the limit in the 
form of connection is equal to its content. The one side of the content 
is the reality, the being or subsistence of the determinacies; in this 
way its determinacies-the being and the nothingness of the quali-
ties-subsist. The other side is their nothingness, and in this way they 
are related, yet they are nothing in the connection; no matter how 
the being of the qualities might be posited alone and their nothingness 
posited as falling outside of being, it would not be a nothingness that 
is so connected with the being that both subsist. The connection of 
the nothingness of the qualities with their subsistence, however, is one 
that excludes this being-that is, [it is] not an undifferentiated sub-
sistence of both but a negation that is connected with itself. In this 
self-connection, however, or in this positive connection, [the negation] 
sublates not being as such but only being in self-connection, that is, 
a negative connection. The limit is true quality only insofar as it is self-
connection, and it is this only as negation, which negates the other 
only in connection with itself. In this way the limit is now synthesis 
as well, unity in which both subsist at the same time, or real quality. 
But the quality that must become limit has itself, by the same token, 
become the contrary of itself; its concept is the being per se of the 
5· Trans : The reference for "it" is ambiguous. It could be ''connection" or it could 
be "each determinacy." 

8 
Logic 
determinacies. Since that gets expressed which in truth is posited in 
the negation, the quality becomes limit; it remains the concept of itself, 
namely, a negation connecting with itself [and] excluding reality from 
itself. But this quality no longer is the concept of quality, for negation 
in its connecting only with itself is connected with that which it ex-
cludes. For quality is not absolutely on its own account, but it is on 
its own account only insofar as [something] else is not. The concept 
of quality, however, is this: to be only equal to itself, without respect 
to an other. In the limit, quality becomes what it is according to its 
absolute essence, what according to its concept (posited essence), how-
ever, it is not to be, and into which at the same time its concept must 
pass, in that the latter is posited as what it is to be; the limit is thereby 
the totality or true reality, which, [when] compared with its concept, 
contains its dialectic as well, because the concept sublates itself therein 
in such a manner that it has become its own contrary. [7] As its concept, 
quality is the reality out of which it has come to be the contrary of 
itself, negation; and out of this it has come to be the contrary of the 
contrary of itself, and has thus come to be itself again as totality. This 
totality is itself quality and at the same time the concept of quality; 
but the concept both comes forth from the contrary of quality and 
expresses it in itself, and hence, in that at the same time it has in itself 
an other than it is, it has become the contrary of quality. The limit, 
as the totality, as this negation which excludes itself [as] an other in 
its connecting with itself, [and] thereby is connected with an other 
(the subsistence), posits that which was our necessary reflection upon 
quality, namely, that the determinacy that is on its own account, which 
the quality is to be, is not; [that is,] it is not a truly unrelated deter-
minacy but in its self-connection it connects itself negatively with an 
other; in other words, this limit is called quantity. 
B I QUANTITY 
The upshot of the argument of "Quality" is that the concept of quality as 
limit is a proper concept-that is, it is a unity of opposites. The concept of 
quality is every quality potentially and no quality actually. It is the limit to 
which all qualities are equally referred; and as such it is an absolutely unitary 
consciousness. The unitary consciousness that is the limit is thus the concept 
of "quantity"-the self-moving point that generates the line that Hegel calls mens 
in the Dissertation of 1801 (On the Orbits of the Planets). The whole mass of 
qualitative contents is "outside" it and exists for it as a positive field, patterned 

Simple Connection 
9 
in accordance with any discriminations that the qualitative mass offers. Thus, 
there is the extended world (as a "positive unity") on one side; and the 
"negative unity" of the self that quantifies it on the other. They are radically 
opposed, but they also belong to the same whole (the "world" proper). 
Since the world of quality is itself the world of consciousness, its manifold 
variety is within consciousness as sequentially unified. This temporal unification 
is a perpetual flowing. Consciousness is a continual emptying for refilling. 
The world of the self is now a "heap or collection of impressions." It is 
Allheit, or "allness."6 The self is not the all; but it is what makes everything 
into one heap. In thus comprehending its world quantitatively, the self is the 
total concept of quantity: it is a "quantum." 
In this headnote we have again concentrated our attention on the tran-
scendental idealist aspect of the logical dialectic. But the argument is objectzve 
throughout; that is to say, it has a transcendental realist application as well. 
The "one" and the "many ones" are not just conscious subjects but physical 
centres of attraction and repulsion-the thought-elements that are needed 
for the construction of a dynamic physical theory (compare the way that the 
fragmentary discussion of "Quantum" begins). This transcendental-realist 
concern is what makes the doctrine of the 1801 Dissertation relevant. 
a I Numerical One 
1 I Quantity according to its concept is immediately a negating self-
connection. What this negation excludes from itself is the subsistence 
of the qualities as distinguished, the being-many. This simple unity, 
connecting purely with itself, which excludes every many from itself 
[or] negates them with respect to itself, is the numerical one; unity as 
self-equivalence in general passes over into the one, one self-equivalent 
[8] in virtue of the fact that unity contains in it this reflection ex-
pressed: that it excludes the many. It is negative unity. This absolute 
limit is indifferently posited both as excluding the many and (qua self-
connection) on its own account, not a negating of the many, but, in 
its negating of them, a connecting only with itself, that is, a being 
6. We have translated Allheit in this literal way in order to avoid confusion with the 
Hegelian concept of "totality," which is a more organic category altogether. When 
Hegel writes, "the limit is ... the totality [Totalitiit] or true reality, which ... simulta-
neously contains its dialectic" (CE 16, II. 28-30), it is essential for the reader to be able 
to distinguish between this dynamic Totalitiit and the Kantian formal concept that Hegel 
calls Allheit. What he calls Totalitat here is the first appearance of "true infinity"-
compare CE 29 below. 

lO 
Logic 
negated or being excluded of the many in such a way that negating 
as the totality of quality is reflected into itself and does not go outside, 
and thereby has precisely the form of the absolutely qualitative. Here 
the true significance becomes clear of how quality, having become 
limit or quantity, is totality: it is totality in that its concept, determinacy 
as connection of determinacy with itself, has returned into itself; not 
just determinacy connecting with itself but determinacy as it has come 
to be the contrary of itself and from this has again come to be itself, 
and, as this its-having-come-to-be-its-contrary-and-again-itself, is not 
something bygone but, as this movement, constitutes the content of 
quality as of a totality. Quality, which thus as totality expresses within 
itself this its-having-become-other [than itself], is just on that ac-
count-in that it itself is-at the same time the other of itself; the 
concept is only this: the quality itself, its connections with itself;? the 
real concept, or the totality, however, [is] quality's having become itself 
from its being other, or [the fact] that in its being other it is itself. 
This quality's being-other-than-itself is the side of its antithesis, the 
determinacy of quality, or its content, a negative connection; for qual-
ity itself is simple connection only with itself. However, in this content 
the real concept is at the same time this: the quality itself; and this 
quality in respect to this content opposed to quality is this: that the 
content, the negative connection connected only with itself, is not for 
example a force, a unity differentiated from the other, but is, as a 
sublatedness of the other, equal to itself, or a numerical one. 
2 I That which is excluded from the numerical one is multiplicity in 
general, the being of qualities, which, however, since they are posited 
only as self-connections without negation, comes together into unity, 
is equal to itself, being, [g] the posztive, [and is] thus the many returned 
into itself which thereby ceases to be many, and is only the possibility 
of distinguishing, extension, which, equal to itself, at the same time is 
not the negative equality of the point, because nothing negative is 
posited [with respect] to it. This unity gets this determinacy of a 
positive only through its antithesis to the negative or numerical unity; 
the latter is excluded from it, but it is thereby also only the concept 
of this negatedness of the posited distinction; with respect to the unity 
this negatedness does not express itself as a negating. The quality of 
7· Trans.: The original has only a comma here, so that the succeeding nouns may 
be in apposition to "[quality]" and "connection." In our interpretation there is a contrast 
between "concept" and "the real concept." 

Simple Connection 
ll 
negation has hereby determined itself as negative unity, that of reality 
or position as positive unity; this determining is nothing other than 
that quality as real concept has gained a content, while it itself has 
come to be the form. Since the numerical one determined8 itself as 
limit through the antithesis of both absolute qualities, and is only as 
the unity of these yet (as being on its own account, as the totality) is 
their sublatedness, then the numerical one determines them in such 
a way that the limit on its own account is their concept, or quantity, 
with the result that they themselves become their concept and are 
only as opposed to the concept of quantity. This concept is negative 
one; the qualities are nothing but positive one. In other words, since 
the concept is connected with itself, so the qualities are connected 
with themselves and therein become self-equivalence. And because 
they are an excluded self-equivalence, whereas the first is the negative 
self-equivalence, they are the positive. But in this way again only a 
required, not an actual distinction is posited; for the antithesis of 
positive-and-negative9 expresses nothing but absolute opposition-
but only as a requirement, which, however, is not only posited with 
respect to the members, but [is] unity as that which both have in 
common. This common unity of both is the same positive unity as the 
possibility of multiplicity that was previously opposed to the negative 
unity, which, however, has been shown to be that rather in which 
both members are equal. In this positive unity positive-and-negative 
is itself opposed, but on their own account they do not have any 
significance, and they express nothing but this: that the one is not the 
other, or that they exclude each other, thus [are] both numerical ones; 
in other words, what is posited in truth is a multiplicity of numerical 
ones. [10] 
b I Multiplicity of Numerical Ones 
1 I Negative unity is exclusive and posits itself as being on its own 
account against the other, but in this excluding it is immediately con-
nected with the other; if what is excluded is conceived as multiplicity, 
8. Trans.: Reading bestimmt rather than bestimmte. (Hegel himself made such a cor-
rection on the next line.) 
9· Trans.: Hyphens are used to indicate that the definite article is singular and not 
plural. Compare I. 23 below, where a singular verb is governed by the phrase "positive 
and negative," straining the sense in English. 

12 
Logic 
then negative unity itself is immediately a many as well; for however 
many the many is, so many times is it negated by the unity; such a 
manifold negating, or such a manifold, is the unity itself; and•o neg-
ative unity is rather its contrary, positive unity, and as such, multi-
plicity, which, being internally differentiated, is posited as an aggregate 
of numerical ones. 
2 I This aggregate of the distinguished ones is reciprocally exclusive; 
their connection, positive unity, their common, quiescent medium or 
their subsisting is an out and out negative connecting, an absolute 
fleeing, a mutual repulsion of all parts, or the equilibrium of the 
nothing, a unity without distinction, with respect to which even the 
distinction of positive and negative unity disappears. 
N[ote] I The invincibility of being fortifies itself even more through 
the form which it gives to itself as negative being, as numerical one; 
being as such appears on its own account as empty, at least, and in 
need of an other; but the numerical one appears absolutely on its own 
account in that it excludes from itself the other of which being is in 
need, and is posited absolutely, without lack and as something indes-
tructible. But because it is negative unity, it is determinacy and sublates 
itself by passing over into its contrary; the negative is simply connected 
with an other, and as this connection it is the other of itself; in other 
words, it is ideal., it is sublated. The mere simplicity of the one is itself 
the nothing, but its negating simplicity is supposed precisely to pre-
serve its self-equivalence in that it excludes otherness from itself; but 
in this excluding it is itself one with the otherness [ 11] and sublates 
itself. This self-equivalence is the absolute quantity or that which quan-
tity is in truth, that is, its own sublatedness, and similarly that which 
absolute quality is, that is, just the sublatedness of quality, the self-
equivalent. 
c I Allness'' 
1 I This self-equivalence, however, is itself determined by [the fact] 
that it is absolute quantity, or that it springs from the multiplicity of 
the numerical one; it is not posited on its own account but as the 
10. Trans.: Hegel first wrote "instead of the negative unity it is." He deleted the 
preposition "instead" and changed the case of the noun to the nominative but did not 
delete the pronoun "it." We have assumed that this should have been done to complete 
the emendation. 
11. In the ms margm: A distinction of the one and the many which is also no dis-
tinction, or a connecting of the one and the many, which is also their unconnectedness. 

Simple Connection 
nothing of this determinate multiplicity. As the one that has passed 
into its contrary, the multiple one, and therefore is identical with it, 
it is all ness. 
2 I However, this allness is not the absolute equivalence but determines' 2 
the equivalence of this one and the many, of negative and positive 
unity. It is only their being sublated; insofcrr as they themselves are, 
in other words, it is conditioned through them. But since it is their 
unity, it is, only insofar as it excludes their being from itself, and it 
is itself quantity, a negative unity that is the being equivalent of the 
one and the many and [that] has excluded from itself their being not 
equivalent or their being on their own account. There is hereby pos-
ited a connectedness of the one and the many and, excluded from it, 
an unconnectedness of the one and the many. 
This allness is the totality of quantity; its concept is the negative 
unity which itself, as multitude of the many, becomes another, and 
as allness becomes itself again. But here in its totality, quantity in 
general has itself become an other than it is, and in its return into 
itself it has passed over into its contrary. Quantity itself, or its concept, 
was the simple negative unity which excludes multiplicity; [12] quan-
tity reflected into itself, its real concept, is negative unity, which is 
itself the unity of negative and positive unity, and likewise has ex-
cluded them both. What amounts to the same thing, quantity is a 
limited positive unity, for as the unity of both unities it is the possibility 
of multiplicity, which is posited in it as sublated; their unity is thus 
equivalence in the sense of commonality. It is limited commonality or 
extension, for apart from it [the unity is] also the unconnectedness 
of both unities. This real quantity is one quantity or ... 
c I QUANTUM 
The transition from "Quantity" to "Quantum" is missing because the inner 
half of sheet 6 is lost; and most of the first two moments of the argument 
are missing also, because sheet 7 is lost. So the reconstruction of the argument 
is necessarily hypothetical, and the inserted subtitle is a conjecture. Because 
of a later reference back to this point, however, we can be fairly certain that 
the first moment of "Quantum" was "A Whole and Its Parts" (see CE 62, 
below). Conceptual wholeness is not the wholeness of a heap that can be 
dissipated into separate parts, but is cumulative in an intensive way (like tern-
12. Trans.: Following the punctuation of the ms rather than the emendation of the 
CE. 

Logic 
perature). In what remains to us from the main argument of this stage Hegel 
is mainly concerned with the application of this concept to the objective world. 
But his primary concern with the conscious self is evident from the "dialectic 
of quantum," which survives in its integrity. 
At the beginning of sheet 8 we are near the end of the second moment of 
"Quantum." Probably we ought to call this second moment "Continuous and 
Discrete Magnitude."'' The review at the beginning of the third moment 
shows that the argument here was that every degree is a distinct quantum (as 
the self is a new and different self in every moment of sensory consciousness), 
although it can only be determined as this quantum by reference to all the 
other quanta that lie behind it or beyond it Gust as the self must retain its 
own past and project its own future). "Number" is the conceptual model of 
this real infinity (and the self is the zero point between two bad infinities, but 
also the one that occupies every place in the numerical sequence). 
The "bad infinity" of quantum is the topic of the dialectical third moment. 
The infinite appears as this "absolute contradiction" (the self is both zero and 
one and is neither of them "truly"). Hegel needs to resort to a long note (or 
a series of notes) at this point because in the first place he wants to put his 
discussion of the "bad" infinite into the context of the "good" infinite (the 
"absolute essence," which properly belongs to metaphysics); and secondly (in 
the sub-notes, marked o.o., 2, 3, and 4) he wants to state his conception of the 
methodology of the infinitesimal calculus. As opposed to the theory of con-
sciousness, this is "the externality of quantum." We should note two things: 
first, that (in section o.o.) consciousness is clearly identified as die Sache selbst; and 
secondly, that Hegel does not attack mathematics-he only criticizes loose 
and illogical ways of describing what we do when we perform the logical 
operations of differentiation, integration, and so on. It is essential to the 
progress of Hegel's own argument that mathematical calculus should be ac-
cepted as valid and that its validity should not be implicitly undermined by 
the way that we talk about it. (Hegel's concrete illustrations in this note throw 
valuable light on the argument of the previous sections; and the theory of 
motion as the primitive datum of "dynamic physics"-in sub-note 4-shows 
that his philosophy of nature should be studied as a kind of proto relativity 
theory). 
At the end of the long note Hegel returns to the main argument of the 
"dialectic of quantum" and sums it up. The concept of quantum has shown 
13. But perhaps the first two moments were to be called "Degree" and "Number." 
Since the third moment has no heading except a marginal addition, Hegel seems not 
to have come to a final decision about category headings for "Quantum." 

Simple Connection 
itself to be "infinity." Thus, the way that this category applies to the conscious 
self-with the explicit rejection of "degrees of consciousness" and the implicit 
rejection of "immortality" as a bad infinite-is peculiarly important. Con-
sciousness-as die Sache selbst-is "true infinity." 
... [it sublates]'4 itself in the simplicity of force. But the need for a 
distinction of magnitude remains, in order to determine it's as a quan-
tum-that is, to posit with respect to it a diversity that would not be 
a diversity of itself. The degree of simple force expresses as magnitude 
simply its connection with something else; and at the same time, as 
intensity, the degree is to express force as pure self-connection, as it 
is absolute for itself or simple within itself. The degree is to dispense 
with the absolute multitude of atomism as much as with this: that the 
diversity of matter be merely external and a diversity of figure and 
thereby of external placement, and be separation of the atoms through 
diverse empty spaces. Dynamic physics, alternatively, wants to cognize 
this diversity not as something external but as something in and of 
itself in matter. We have shown above that it is self-contradictory to 
explain, on the basis of a diverse relationship of forces over against 
each other, the diversity that is to be comprehended; there is nothing 
left but to posit one force in [ 13] a diversity of degree. Because it is a 
magnitude, however, the degree is so far from sublating multitude 
and externality that that is rather what it essentially is. A larger or 
smaller multitude of mass = heat = etc. particles transformed into 
a higher or lower intensity of mass or heat, etc., sublates, to be sure, 
the semblance of atomic multiplicity in what appears to be mass or 
heat; but if this [multiplicity] now has actually to be expressed as a 
determinate magnitude, then this can only happen through connec-
tion with numbers. Admittedly the fortieth, the hundredth, etc., de-
gree still does not express a multiplicity with respect to the degree 
itself but with its simplicity; however, this diversity has significance 
simply and solely in relation to another. This determinate intensity is 
not this at all, if it is not this for something external; and it is simply 
not at all what it would be for itself-what it is to be as dynamic. The 
simple itself (for instance, the speed, the specific weight, heat, etc.) 
14. Trans.: The verb particle auf, which alone remains, suggests that the verb was 
aufheben. 
15. Trans.: The gender of the pronoun suggests that it could refer either to "force" 
or to "magnitude." 

Logic 
escapes the determination of magnitude; and insofar as it is in general 
determined as magnitude, it is posited as a manifold, as something 
external. This is how the form of simplicity of magnitude, or of in-
tensive magnitude, does not wrestle it away from .... 
. . . [continu]ous magnitude; conversely, the many ones of the division, 
posited as the essential for which the connection is the external, [are] 
a discrete magnitude. The continuous magnitude has posited its limit 
wholly outside itself, not with respect to itself as an external [limit]; 
in order to be quantum on its own account it must necessarily posit 
itself as essentially limited, or as internally divided in an absolute way, 
in other words, as a determinate aggregate of self-distinguishing neg-
ative unities. Only number is the realized quantum, in which it ex-
presses itself as what it is; degree, just as much as a continuous 
magnitude, must' 6 [14] resort to number in order to be determined 
as quantum. In q.uantum connectedness in general is numerical one 
and the many are connected in the same way; in number this concept 
of quantum is not the form of something else, but the many are each 
of them a numerical one; and the whole [is one] too, since the nu-
merical onel1 has in it the double sense of being negative and exclusive 
yet, as unity, of being at the same time positive unity, in other words, 
the connection of the many numerical ones. The part of this whole is 
in this [way] completely determined through itself, because it is nu-
merical one and equal with the form of the whole, which itself is one, 
but not identical with its content, through which it is quantum. 
3 '8 I Quantum sublates itself not only insofar as it is connected with 
itself or is the unity of a whole and the parts, but also insofar as, 
excluding [this], it is on its own account the connectedness of the one 
and the many, outside of which there would be the unconnectedness 
of the one and the many. 
Concerning the relationship of the whole and the parts it has been 
shown '9 that in truth the whole as one and the parts as many ones fall 
asunder and are not connected. Quantum only is as an excluding 
from itself; what is thus excluded would be the unconnectedness of 
the one with the many ones. But in it indeed the one and the many 
16. Trans.: The ms has a plural verb here. 
17. In the margin: absolute measure. 
18. In the margzn: Dialectic of quantum. 
19. Trans.: In the lost parts of the original. 

Simple Connection 
ones are indifferent to each other: it is thus equal to what it negates 
from itself and is in truth non-excluding. Particularly as number, 
quantum should posit limit or otherness as self-subsisting [an sich selbst 
seiend]; however, it is manifest that number has no limit but is equal 
to what is excluded. What is here excluded (with which it is equal) is 
the unconnectedness of the one and the many. When quantum is 
formally considered as what it should be but is not ([that is as] some-
thing limited) and what is excluded likewise only as something equal 
to it, then only what is formal is posited: the requirement that what 
is limited or negative shall make itself equal to what is excluded, to 
which it is equal. Or rather the following has been posited: that what 
is negative posits [itself] as equal to that which it negates from itself, 
to that which [ 15] it posits as absolutely unequal to itself. In it indeed 
what was previously considered as indifferently falling asunder is by 
the same token the positing of itself as equal to that to which it posits 
itself as absolutely unequal. Number as numerical one is positive unity, 
which connects the many ones; but because as negative unity number 
posits itself as equal to the many ones, it posits itself as equal to them 
only as unequal to them, that is, as positive unity. Number is quantum 
only as negative one, as a determinate aggregate of the ones that it 
' comprehends within itself; but in these, number does not have a limit 
either, for as ones they are likewise unity, a connection of numerical 
ones. Hence, in that it connects a determinate aggregate-whereby 
alone it is quantum-number posits itself in fact only as an indeter-
minate aggregate; for the connected ones are indeed a unity that is 
equal to itself, or not limited; in this way as well [they are] as something 
limited, equal to what is not limited. Quantum posits itself as equal 
to what it excludes from itself, and so in truth it does not exclude it. 
Insofar as quantum is considered as a self-subsisting being from which 
an other is excluded, to this extent it has [ist an ihm selbst] positive 
unity or non-limitation, not-excludedness. Going out beyond the limit 
ad infinitum and dividing inwardly in znfinitum is one and the same for 
each, so that the limit or determinacy posited in it is no limit, no 
?eterminacy; in quantum the absolute contradiction or infinity is pos-
Ited. 
N[ote] 1 I The result of the dialectic of quantum is that quantitative 
distinction, insofar as it is a strictly external, accidental one without 
this necessary reflection, [is] a limitation that is in fact no limitation; 
for an absolutely external limit has thereby no relation with that of 
Which it ought to be the limitation [denn eine absolut ailssere ist darum 

18 
Logic 
nicht an dem, und fur das, dessen Begrantzung sie seyn soll]. But just for 
this reason it may seem therefore, as if this form of a merely quantitative 
distinction correctly expresses the way in which differentiation in general 
occurs in connection with [ 16] the absolute or in itself-namely, as an 
external differentiation not affecting the essence itself in any way. 
Since the absolute essence is thus that in which differentiation is simply 
sublated, we should avoid making it seem as if the distinctions them-
selves were outside the essence and their sublating took place outside 
it as well-as if the essence itself were just the sublatedness and not 
just as absolutely the being and sublating of the antithesis. The an-
tithesis is in general the qualitative. Since nothing is outside the ab-
solute, the antithesis itself is absolute, and only because it is absolute 
does it sublate itself in itself. In the repose of its sublatedness the 
absolute is just as absolutely the movement of the being or the sub-
lating of the absolute antithesis. The absolute being of the antithesis, 
or, if one likes, the being of the antithesis in the absolute essencr itself, 
is so far from making it into a mutually external, indifferent subsist-
ence of its moments that it is simply and solely this in which the antztheszs 
sublates itself-that is, it is through this that the antithesis is neither 
quantitative nor external. But the determinacy of the absolute essence 
considered singularly cannot be cognized any better through the more 
or less of one or the other moment, the predominance of what is 
called the one or the other factor. For what is here isolated only is 
because it is essentially in this determinate state, or because the de-
terminate state is posited as having being in the absolute essence itself. 
Since the essence is something real, or the unity of opposites, these 
are immediately of equal magnitude. They have no significance except 
insofar as they are opposed to each other; and this they are essentially. 
In other words, there is no quantitative distinction with respect to 
them. If there were any, what they are essentially as determinate 
would be something external for them. By the same token the op-
posites would not be absolutely with respect to themselves-that is, 
[they would not be] sublating the determinacy itself-if the deter-
minacy were an absolute, external, quantitative one, even to the extent 
that it is on its own account. Strictly only what is accidental to the 
determinacy would be on its own account, while their sublatedness 
would be outside them. 
If the antithesis only sublates itself beause it is in itself and is not 
quantitative or external, then the antithesis in general-let it occur 
with whatever particular determination there may be-is a true de-

Simple Connection 
19 
terminacy only as a qualitative one; [ 17] and insight into the nature 
of a determinate Thing [Sache] lies only in becoming cognizant of its 
determinacy as a determinacy in itself, not as an accidental, that is, 
quantitative one. The determinacy of quantum is one not posited through 
the Thing itself, or it is not such a one as is in the Thing itself. Because 
the quantum expresses the determinacy of the Thing itself only ex-
ternally, it is only the sign of the determinacy of the Thing itself (which 
can be designated by this quantum, but just as well by another one). 
We consider this externality of quantum as it appears in its diverse 
aspects. 
aa I The determinacy of quantum as a limit of the many is no deter-
minacy whatever of the Thing itself; its concept is not affected thereby. 
The realization of the concept is an otherness that is posited with 
respect to it and through itself, one in which [the concept] remains 
what it is, that is, one that is just as absolutely sublated within it. The 
other[ ness] of its quantum indeed leaves the concept what it is, but it 
is not otherness posited with respect to it, and therefore its sublat-
edness is not for and through the concept itself either; in other words, 
the concept is simply sameness, only the sameness of something dead. 
Therefore no becoming other, be it of space or time or mass or heat, 
colour, etc., or of sensibility, irritability, etc., or of subjectivity and 
objectivity, etc., is posited, be they posited as great or small as you 
will, and in both cases either extensively or intensively. The limit of 
quantum is something that does not touch them at all and which, 
where it is determined, can just as well be either drawn closer or 
removed further. The Thing does not disappear in the absolutely small 
any more than it goes beyond itself in the absolutely large; the disappear-
ance does not become intelligible by increase or decrease because it 
is of the essence of magnitude that it be not a determinacy of the 
Thing itself. "The disappearing of consciousness as of a force having 
a determinate degree, as resulting from a gradual diminution of this 
faculty of apperception,"•o is an empty [ 18] thought which in the first 
place introduces into the essence of spirit the determination of mag-
nitude (that is, the determination that a determinacy be absolutely 
external to it), whereas its essence is rather that no determinacy be 
external but be simply sublated within it, and so the diminution is to 
pass into a disappearing of consciousness. Of course, the sublating of 
20. Trans.: This is not a direct quotation, but a plain echo of Kant's refutation of 
Mendelssohn's doctrine of immortality; see Critique of Pure Reason, B 413-15. 

20 
Logzc 
magnitude would indeed sublate that to which it is ascribed, if [mag-
nitude] were essential to it; but it is of the nature of magnitude to be 
accidental, an excluding which in truth however does not exclude, a 
limit which in truth however is no limit. The disappearance of what 
is here intrinsically accidental to a magnitude is so far from resulting 
in the disappearance of that with respect to which it was posited that 
now this last rather comes forth purely as what it truly is in itself. Only 
consciousness havzng no degree is true consciousness. This is at the same 
time the true meaning of the disappearing magnitudes of analysis; the 
infinitely small is not to be nothing, and yet is no longer to have 
magnitude. After this concept had been in use a hundred years, it 
was made into a prize essay topic 2 ' whether it actually has a meaning, 
and we can see that the answers given have not come clear. In the 
infinitely small the magnitude in truth totally disappears; the infinitely 
small is notjust something relatively small in the way that Wolf (An-
fangsgrilnde der Algebra §6) explicates the matter: that in measuring a 
mountain a grain of sand blown away from the top by the wind makes 
it lower in fact, but considering the mountain's magnitude no account 
need be taken of it. The issue is not whether something relatively very 
small can be left out of account; that can be satisfied by an imprecise 
determination of the magnitude, be the imprecision as small as you 
like. But in spite of the small bit that is left out of account, the de-
termination made in the use of infinitesimal calculus is absolutely 
precise. In other words, when one lets a posited magnitude within a 
system of magnitudes disappear absolutely, just for that reason the 
concept of what is to be determined comes forth purely aS 22 an absolute 
ratio, which is all we want to know, not the determinate magnitudes. 
Therefore [19] the unchangeable magnitudes, which do notjust ex-
press how they are in a ratio but how they are on their own account 
outside of this ratio, fall away completely; the products in which the 
ratio of the factors likewise disappears set themselves up as sums, etc. 
The differentials are semblances of differentiations in magnitude that 
are forthwith sublated again; they are used where a system of recip-
rocally determining moments has been duplicated for the purpose of 
expressing it as an equivalence of diverse moments. In the duplication 
one moment appears in diverse magnitudes; but conceptually these 
21. Trans.: In 1784 Lagrange set a prize question for award in 1786: "Une theorie 
claire et precise de ce qu'on appelle Infinie en Mathematique." 
22 In the margin: 2 Absc[issae]. 

Simple Connection 
21 
two diverse magnitudes are completely the same, and since the di-
versity has been presented as a differential, nothing occurs but the 
elimination of the diverse magnitudes and the establishment of the 
concept. Similarly, in order to express that the subtangent of a curved 
line is completely determined by the abscissa and ordinate that it 
belongs to, the abscissa and ordinate are doubled, so that the deter-
minacy of this single moment is expressed by the others as an equiv-
alence of two ratios of the subtangent to the ordinate. In the deter-
mination thus arrived at there is no magnitude omitted whereby 
it would become imprecise, but the diversity of magnitude, the duality 
of ordinate and abscissa, is totally nullified, and hence the determi-
nation is a pure connection through its ratio, not through its mag-
nitudes as such or through them as concepts. This duplication is the 
same as the one employed by Euclid [to prove] his simple propositions 
that in a triangle the rest is fully determined by three elements (if 
there is a line among them, not only as to the ratio but also as to 
determinate magnitudes; if there is no line, and so only the angles-
that is, the pure ratio of the lines-are posited, just the ratios of the 
lines alone). The superimposition of the two triangles is the disap-
pearing of the differential, that is to say, not of them as a magnitude-
for they [are] not of diverse magnitudes-but [the differential] of 
their quite formal duality. The disappearing of the differential, al-
ternatively, is a disappearing of a magnitude; but this differentiation 
is just as much only a semblance of a diversity as is the duality of the 
triangles, for in the ratio [ 20] it is only the concept that is involved. 
The need for this division of a system lies in the task of mathematics, 
which is to treat the moments of a closed system as beings on their 
own account or as quanta. A system of moments is a unity of opposites, 
which are nothing apart from this opposition, apart from this ratio. 
They do not as it were still have a remainder with respect to each 
other, through which they would be on their own account; but they 
so match one another as it were that, since they are in fact presented 
as a system in their opposition or as unity, they sublate themselves. 
Thus the system as a whole that nullifies itself in its moments-as it 
must-is the presentation of an equation reduced to zero. But the 
moments as quanta are to set themselves forth as subsisting; and their 
unity in the system is thereby transformed into equivalence. The system 
as a whole is within itself a duality of itself, which is posited as one. 
The unity of the opposites is indeed each of these opposites, and as 
thus set forth it falls apart into an equivalence of its doubled being, 

22 
Logic 
or of its being in general. For, as has been shown with regard to 
quality,"3 reality is a doubling of unity; or unity zs only as unity and 
multiplicity, which are both the same, or [unity] itself. Now, the sys-
tem-which, if it is a system, posited in the form of unity, reduces 
itself to zero-comes to be an equivalence of diverse [terms]; and the 
positing of the differential of the moments is a form of doubling for 
the sake of expressing as an equation the determinacy of the moments 
by means of the whole, and so by means of each other. Because each 
single moment as differential acquires the semblance of a diversified 
magnitude, therefore, since the two wholes are the same in essence 
(that is, in their internal ratio of moments), an equivalence of ratios 
can be posited in which there are the moments as magnitudes. How-
ever, this determination of magnitudes disappears because it has no 
significance in connection with the internal ratios, which is the essential 
determinacy of the moment with respect to itself, not as the external 
quantitative determinacy but rather as its concept. And what results 
is determination as a determination within this [21] internal ratio. In 
this ratio the moments do not have magnitude on their own account 
but purely and simply a magnitude as ratio; and what is determined 
is not their magnitude as [the magnitude] of singulars, but only their 
ratio to each other. In other words, the moment is in truth sublated 
as quantum in the diminution ad infinitum, and it has a magnitude 
only within the system, an absolutely relative one, or one that is de-
termined with respect to itself by the whole. In this way, the hypo-
tenuse as a = Y(b• + c•) and the ordinate as, for instance, y = Y(px), 
etc., are set forth as they are in themselves, namely not as a line apart 
from the right-angled [triangle] or apart from the determinate curved 
line, etc., which is what they are simply as quanta, but as being es-
sentially hypotenuse, ordinate, etc. 
The limit of the meaning and usage of "disappearing magnitude" 
also results from this nature that it has. Just as, in the example of the 
doubled abscissa used above, only the one abscissa in the abscissa itself 
disappears, while the abscissa as such simply remains, so it is in general 
the case that the internal ratio and its moments remain simply as such. 
If the abscissa (for instance of the ellipse, taking its start in the centre) 
disappears, then the ordinate becomes equal to the small axis, and we 
can just as well say if we like that the abscissa equals zero as that it 
equals the large axis. But this is pointless; the ratio of abscissa and 
23. Trans.: In the lost parts of the original. 

Simple Connectwn 
23 
ordinate has in truth been sublated, and only its formal expression is 
left over. But wherever the ordinate remains as ordinate, the abscissa 
remains; and their determinate ratio to each other remains the same 
in their decrease ad infinitum, by which it is not at all affected. To let 
them become equal in the absolute diminution does not mean to 
decrease them or to sublate them as magnitude, but to destroy them 
as what they are essentially, or to destroy their concept. Thereby their 
ratio and the whole system is sublated; and from this result, the same, 
or any determinate case of it, simply cannot again arise. Therefore it 
is an absolute misuse of "disappearance" when even Newton makes 
arc, sine, and versed sine•4 equal to each other in the infinitely small; 
doing this means sublating not their magnitude but these [functions] 
themselves and their system. [22] To put the one determinacy in place 
of the others on the basis of this disappearance, then, while supposing 
that the system and its ratios nevertheless remain, must be taken as 
a complete misunderstanding. 
2 I It has been shown that the quantum as limit of the many is inde-
terminate in itself and how this external accidental determination be-
comes a determinacy of the Thing itself through its annihilation as a 
quantum in differential calculus. Moreover, this is just what will be 
necessary with respect to things as systems of moments; in other words, 
the opposition of the moments is not to be considered as this external, 
quantitative opposition but as opposition as it is in itself-that is, as 
qualitative opposition, or as determinacy. The quantitative differen-
tiation of the moment of a thing does not affect the concept of the 
moment or the concept of the thing; but the thing is only the system 
of its moments, and these only are what they are in relation•-' to each 
other, and the thing itself is this relation; in that the singular moment 
changes, it changes its relationship to the others; the whole relation, 
the thing itself, becomes something else. And it is in truth not a change 
of the moment that takes place; rather, the life cycle of the Thing 
itself is expressed since the moment is not on its own account, and its 
change is wholly determined solely by its relationship, by the being it 
has in the Thing itself. But this concept of the moment is precisely 
what the diversity as quantitative does not affect: the determinacy as 
it is within the Thing itself, or as it is in itself. And the rise and fall 
on the ladder of degree or of extensive magnitude is only to be re-
24. Trans.: Versed sine = 
1 minus the cosine in a unit circle. 
25. Trans.: "Relationship," "relation," and "ratio" all translate Verhiiltnis. 

Logic 
garded as an external indicator. The differentiation of the internal 
ratio turns the differentiation of the quantum as one of that sort"6 
into something quite other than [what] it expresses. 
In the number system itself this diversity is expressed as a diverse 
mode of considering the numbers vis-a-vis one another; the numbers 
are, on their own account, pure quanta, but in their reciprocal rela-
tions they get posited in a qualitative way. Addition is the purely 
quantitative change in which the diversity displays itself as one accru-
ing merely from outside; it lets the diversity stand on its own account 
rather than as a determinacy that in truth is only a moment in a 
system. Precisely through its merely seeming to be on its own account, 
whereby it is absolutely an aggregate or a diversity, the quantum is 
not on its own account; [it is] something external, [23] arbitrary. The 
ratio of the numbers expresses them as [they] are in their determinacy 
vis-a-vis another-that is, as they are in themselves; but the numbers 
themselves do not determine anything about this ratio, which is an 
entirely external one, or indeed a quantum; on the contrary, the 
numbers with respect to themselves also become ratios: 8 and g are 
23 and 3" respectively; each number is equal to itself, and its limit is 
at the same time an internal relation, the relation of a concept that 
produces itself, whereby the limitation expresses its law with respect 
to itself; the addition of 1 to 8 transforms 23 into 3". which the addition 
of 1 to another number does not do; in other words, the quantitative 
change does not express the change that occurs in a number as a 
system that is set forth with respect to itself. 
This very diversity between a merely quantitative distinction and 
the change of the Thing itself will become clearer through the ex-
ample of the temperature of water. The mere rise and fall on the 
heat scale lets cold take the place of heat, its direct opposite. With the 
temperature of water, though, the whole quantitative distinction be-
comes a quite superficial one that of itself in no way indicates what 
has changed in the Thing itself. A decrease in temperature of 30° 
from 8o° Fahrenheit exhibits a change in the volume of the water, 
namely a decrease; but a further decrease in the temperature does 
not diminish the volume of the water: the temperature being lowered 
to 32°, the volume increases and the water passes from the liquid," 7 
26. Trans.: The reference here is either to "indicator" or to "relation/ratio." 
27. Trans.: "Liquid, fluid" = tropfbar fliissigen; "gaseous" = elastisch flilssigen (cf p. 
25, I. 4l· 

Simple Connection 
fluid [state] into the solid one; and snow, changed by pouring water 
of a very high temperature on it, maintains the same degree of tem-
perature; similarly, the temperature of the boiling point resists change, 
although, in contrast, the water takes on a gaseous form. Thus the 
determinacies of temperature, as set forth quantitatively, articulate 
nothing but indicators of the change in the Thing, not the change 
itself. The qualitative interrupts the quantitative scale altogether; and 
the change in the Thing itself or in the internal relation, the change 
in temperature as it really takes place in water, is quite different from 
temperature as an ens rationis that on its own account is supposed to 
be purely simple and in this self-equivalence would be capable only 
of a quantitative progression. In the same way the quantitative [aspect] 
of the [24] change posits temperature as self-equivalent in its pro-
gression; but as this abstraction of the self-equivalent, the change 
becomes precisely something external to temperature, even as this 
externally posited, self-equivalent change contradicts all along this 
[fact]: that temperature is not this self-equivalent [ens rationis] but just 
a moment in a relationship; it is its consequent internal change, now 
inhibiting, now accelerating, that even-measured progression. If the 
abscissa expresses the congruent quantum of change, then the actual 
temperature will always be an ordinate, whose change, qua quantum, 
relates to the abscissa but whose absolute determinacy is posited by 
the nature of the curved line to which it belongs, and which alone 
remains always self-identical; once again it is the merely quantitative 
[and] external that changes. 
3 I The quantitative expresses [itself] contingently as the one in the 
same way as it does in its multiplicity-as that which is indeterminate 
in itself or as determinacy. In the form of numerical one, negative 
unity is posited as it is in itself, and number is its external, arbitrary 
composition. But as a determinacy quantum has a content whose 
determinacy it is. In pure quantum, numerical one is unity itself, and 
thereby an indeterminate [one]; and thus it exists in that it is referred 
to a quality, as determinacy posited externally with respect to it. The 
one, the scale, is in itself quite indeterminate, and it is as absolutely 
impossible to indicate the highest or the lowest degree for an intensive 
magnitude as it is to indicate what is largest or smallest for an extensive 
one; for since the one is unity, what is posited as one is itself a manifold, 
and capable of decrease as well as of increase. In other words, as 
negative one the one is essentially equal to what it excludes; as pure 
one it is equal to the many; so it is not at all a pure one but is a 

Logic 
requirement whose satisfaction in and of itself is impossible. Although 
with regard to degree, which has the form of something simple, a 
first seems even more likely to be able to present itself, this is illusory; 
for just as the extensive is absolutely divisible in itself, so the intensive 
is absolutely confinable from outside. Degree is just as essentially a 
magnitude as what is extensive; just for that reason the smallest mag-
nitude of degree is still not something simple but is posited as an [25] 
external connection. This expanse is itself strictly a manifold, some-
thing divisible in itself, contingent and susceptible of being made both 
smaller and bigger. Belief in the possibility of a smallest degree or a 
smallest extensive magnitude, [that is,] of magnitude as an absolute 
scale, has quite likely arisen because magnitude itself can be nullified 
as such entirely, and if the nullifying is not understood [aufgefasst], 
then the nullified magnitude is still taken for a magnitude. 
4 I Little as the determination of magnitude expresses the determinacy 
as it is in the Thing or in itself, even less is [it] capable of expressing 
it as a diversified determination of opposed qualities. Opposed qualities 
of this kind simply cannot emerge from their absolutely qualitative 
connection and equality; or, insofar as they are distinguished and 
determined as magnitudes, they are incommensurable through and 
through; for it is of their essence to be opposed to one another. Thus, 
for instance, the time and space of absolute motion are simply equiv-
alent to one another, [or] the same absolute relationship is expressed 
as time and as space; the velocity is their absolute relation to one 
another, and the magnitude is expressed in both according to the 
nature of this relation. The velocity is these [temporal and spatial] 
moments posited as absolutely one; but insofar as they express their 
antithesis (time being the square root, but space the square), this is 
not a determination of the magnitude of time as such and of space 
as such; rather it is their determinacy as it is in itself, or as space over 
against time and time over against space, each of them only in con-
nection with the other. But when each is posited on its own account, 
then time and space as one determinate magnitude are the root and 
the square of a determinate quantum; and if 9 space quanta are 
traversed in 3 time quanta, these magnitudes, 9 spaces and 3 times, 
are totally incommensurable. One hundred and thirty-five feet are 
neither greater nor less than 3 seconds, any more than the distance 
of a fixed star is; but if the foot [is taken] as the arbitrary space unit, 
and the second as the equally [26] arbitrary time unit, and motion [is 
defined] as free fall towards the surface of the earth, then the 135 

Simple Connection 
feet are perfectly equal to the first 3 seconds. In other words, the 
velocity of this fall in these 3 seconds is a magnitude that in time 
expresses itself as 3 seconds, in the space traversed as 135 feet; again, 
on its own account the magnitude is contingent. That the body trav-
erses some 15 feet in 1 second is just an indication of the fact that 
the motion gets posited as a fall on the surface of the earth; the 
expression of magnitude, however, in the way it is expressed as a 
peculiarly simple magnitude diversified with respect to time and space, 
is grounded in the absolute unity in motion of time and space, which 
as distinct are absolutely opposed moments and express this their 
determinacy or their essence (that is, their being in relation) in such a 
way that the one is a root, the other a square. 
Likewise, attractive and repulsive forces are simply equal to one 
another; neither [is] greater than the other; neither has a significance 
except within their oneness-that is, within their sublated state. One 
never exceeds the other. In other words, when they are distinguished 
and expressed as magnitudes and diversely determined, then they 
are totally incommensurable; and it can no more be said that a time 
is larger than a space than it can be said that what is called an attractive 
force is larger than what is called a repulsive force. They can no more 
emerge from their equilibrium than unity and multiplicity, which is 
what they essentially are. The pull that appears as coherence, separ-
ability, and the dis placability of the parts comes readily to mind when 
one talks of greater or lesser attractive force. But coherence has no 
antithesis in the repulsive force; it is posited as a pure quality, and its 
magnitude is compared not with the magnitude of repulsive force but 
with greater or lesser coherence. For that reason it is not coherence 
that is meant when one speaks of an attractive force that is greater 
or smaller, stronger or weaker than the repulsive force. Since matter 
[is] the absolute equilibrium of attraction and repulsion, which is noth-
ing but [the equilibrium] of the differentiated unity and the [27] 
differentiated multiplicity, they are purely ideal., pure entia rationis, 
determinacies that, sublated in and of themselves, have no reality. 
Neither can appear as singular; they are the moments of the cognition 
of matter. But matter is precisely in the totality of cognition the mo-
ment of their oneness (that is to say, their non-being), and this oneness 
is the first reality; the very differentiation of matter always remains 
in that one[ness], and if it were a separation, a diversity of attraction 
and repulsion, matter itself would be dissolved. The quantitative is 
something quite external, not an analysis of the one, or an internal 

Logic 
ratio. The attempt, which absolutely contradicts the concept of the 
quantitative, to conceive the quantitative as an internal ratio, as a 
relation within the Thing itself, in such a way that it is as this relation 
to remain quantitative, has made the difference in magnitude of mat-
ter into a dissociation of its ideal. moments. Specific gravity has as its 
moments only what is real., weight, and what is ideal., volume. Its 
quantum, however, is purely a diversified quantum of the simple, of 
extension, or of the absolutely communal, of the self-equivalent; and 
what has been thus posited as externally determined is nothing but 
the simple oneness of both these moments, specific gravity itself. 
The same is the case with the dissociation of centrifugal and cen-
tripetal force. Both of these so-called forces are nothing in and of 
themselves: the centripetal force is essentially nothing but the ap-
pearance of the restoration of the sublated unity; it has no antithesis 
at all with respect to a centrifugal force, [that is,] to a self-sustaining 
f!ilr sich selbstseyenden]•8 sublating of this unity; and the way of dem-
onstrating it as a self-sustaining force borders on absurdity. Where 
they are to be distinguished, these forces simply show themselves to 
be always equally great, so that it is always immaterial whether the 
magnitude of an appearance be determined through the so-called 
centripetal or centrifugal force. It is always the simple that is deter-
mined as quantum, and this simple is motion, not its magnitude as a 
result of the diverse magnitude of differentiated forces. Where one 
is taken to be greater than the other, as in the conception of greater 
speed of motion in the proximity of the sun or the earth and a lesser 
speed at a distance from the sun or the earth, it is completely im-
material whether the one or the other is posited greater at a given 
position; that is, both forces will always [be]•9 equally great; [28] for 
just as the one has been posited as greater, so also must the other be 
increased. The same is the case with the diversity of the two forces 
posited in order to account for [begreifen] the diverse rates ofpendular 
motion at diverse latitudes; what is posited as in truth diverse is one 
and the same: [it is] motion, greater in one place, less in another, not 
two types of forces, one greater than the other, both entirely incom-
mensurable. We shall come back to this topic later on. 
The way in which this applies to the diversified magnitude of sen-
sibility and irritability over against each other follows from what has 
28. Trans.: Compare with the fur sich in "in and of themselves." 
29. Trans.: CE proposes "both forces are always posited equally great." 

Simple Connection 
29 
been said so far: these also only rise and fall in common; their equi-
librium is not disturbed; their common magnitude is not a sum that 
maintains itself and that they would apportion unequally between 
themselves should each deviate from its normal degree, the one going 
down, the other going up. As opposed they are absolute determina-
cies, which cease ipso facto to be magnitudes over against each other; 
the determination of magnitudes affects only what they have in com-
mon, what is simple; that is, [it affects] them insofar as they are not 
distinguished. In other words, it is not their relation over against each 
other; insofar as the simple, conceived as relation, is posited, it is 
something internal and ceases to be capable of determination as a 
magnitude altogether. Sensibility is self-connection, in the same way 
as attractive force is, while repulsion and irritability, thought of as 
negative connection, are each a differentiated unity. 
33o I As a connection of unity with multiplicity, which is limited-that 
is, excludes from itself the unconnectedness of unity with multiplic-
ity-quantum posits itself in the extensive magnitude as what it is 
according to its concept. But regarding this magnitude it has been 
shown that, because it displays the connected multiplicity with respect 
to itself, it posits itself in truth as equivalent to the unconnected mul-
tiplicity, and, instead of being limited, is unlimited. What it excludes 
it rather has with respect to itself; it is no longer in our reflection that 
the other is excluded from it to make the magnitude accord with its 
concept, but this exclusion is in the concept itself. For this reason the 
absolute contradiction, infinity, has in truth been posited with respect 
to it. [29] 
D I INFINITY 
Infinity is not one of the categories of simple connection as such. Rather, it 
is a meta-category, for it is the total context of the dialectical movement that 
has brought simple connection to the recognition of "absolute contradiction." 
That Hegel emphasizes, as soon as this context has become explicit, that it 
was already implicit in every step of the dialectical progress we have made 
30. Trans.: If this were part of the note(s), it would be 5· If it were a new section 
of the main discussion, it would be 4· But all that Hegel does here is to sum up the 
argument of section 3 above {the "dialectic of quantum"). Thus his 3 can be interpreted 
as an indicator ("3 continued") that he is now returning to the main flow of the ar-
gument. 

Logic 
implies that logic is properly a speculative science. For the recognition of 
"true infinity" belongs at this climactic moment of "Simple Connection" pre-
cisely because this recognition transforms the dialectic of external reflection 
into a dialectic that is internally necessary to the concepts themselves. From 
this point onwards we know that concepts are constituted by their internal 
relationship. (Hegel draws attention to this transition in his last sentence about 
quantum-see CE 28.) But in that case, if the true infinite was implicit from 
the first, then the simplicity of simple connection was always a dialectical 
illusion, and what was taken to be a dialectic of external reflection was always, 
properly speaking, an internal dialectic. Thus simple connection as the first 
stage of logic "sublates" itself when it is forced to recognize that it was not the 
first moment at all. The "infinite contradiction" was properly the first moment 
(as it will be the last). 
Hegel's argument continues quite "objectively." But logical objectivity is not 
opposed to "subjectivity." It is important to grasp the subjective aspect of what 
it might be better to call this neutrality. The reflective self, which knows itself 
to be external precisely because it is a quantum (it is born and dies, but the 
world abides) has to recognize itself as the infinite contradiction because it is 
the fount of logical necessity and truth. That the world abides is a truth of its 
own cognition. 
"The world" is both internal and external to consciousness as understanding 
(that is, as simple connection). This contradiction means that consciousness 
is itself the infinite. Hegel gives us a preliminary discussion of this thesis as 
the fourth moment of "Simple Connection" because it cannot be spelled out 
in the next stage of logic proper. The whole argument of the Logic and 
Metaphysics is required to spell it out in detail. In giving "Simple Connection" 
a fourth moment, Hegel is showing us the place of simple connection (a first 
moment, which will also be the last one) in the general theory of logic as a 
speculative science. This contradiction of what simple connection itself is 
"forced to recognize" (according to the preceding paragraph) is deliberate. 
Both ways of stating the position are valid. 
The logic of quality began-according to Hegel's summary-with con-
sciousness as a pure aggregate of qualities. Its purity was revealed by its per-
manence in the sensory flux. This negative unity both is and is not identical 
with the consciousness of the present moment. Hence it embraces a bad 
infinite both spatially and temporally; but also, by definition, that infinity 
transcends and embraces it likewise. From this springs Kant's "unreasoning 
astonishment" over the starry heavens (as a positive infinite) and the sceptical 
confidence of von Haller that no mere created spirit can penetrate to the 

Simple Connection 
core of living nature (the core is precisely the emptiness of rational conscious-
ness itself). 
The genuine infinity of consciousness is comprehensive self-consciousness. 
Self-consciousness is mediated initially through the consciousness of another 
consciousness. Here consciousness becomes objectively aware of what it is. 
Only through seeing myself in another can I see what I am. With this step 
we shall pass from simple connection to "relationship." But in logic as the 
theoretical evolution of consciousness, this step is not made through a struggle 
for independence but through the recognition that consciousness is a social 
continuum, that our transcendent world is the world of our community, that 
as conscious beings we are moments of the social substance; and this recog-
nition matures slowly and goes through many phases ("the proof, not the one 
substance itself, is this absolute reflection"). 
The self only exists as consciousness, however, by excluding the world and 
asserting its independence of it; and the continuum of consciousness exists 
only because selves exist. So the existence of self-consciousness is not simple 
connection but relationship. 
1 I Simple connection is realized in quantum in that its concept, quality, 
as limit (the mutual exclusion of determinacies) became the contrary 
of itself in allness. That is, it became the connecting of the determi-
nacies; and from this contrary it returned to itself. As this totality it 
is quantum, namely allness recapitulated under limit, a connecting of 
unity and multiplicity that is simultaneously connected with a non-
connecting of unity and multiplicity and excludes this from itself. But 
therein precisely it is with respect to itself absolute contradiction, 
infinity, and thus has its genuine realization here. Since simple con-
nection is in truth infinity, each of its moments in which it displays 
itself is itself infinity and is quality and quantity as well as quantum. 
In other words, simple connection becomes infinity because it reflects 
itself into itself and only then posits itself as what it is according to 
its essence, whereas previously the dialectical in its moments was just 
our reflection. That in their essence the moments contradict them-
selves is now posited as a reflection of simple connection into itself, 
as absolutely dialectical essence, as infinity. But it is only purely and 
of itself as its own concept that this infinity is genuinely what it is, not 
as it appears with respect to the determinacy of its moments. Quality, 
quantity, and quantum are quality or simple connection; each has as 
its essence the concept of this whole sphere, and, because this concept 

Logic 
of the whole sphere has been cognized truly as infinity, each is itself 
infinite. But just for that reason this exposition of infinity is an impure 
one. With respect to a determinacy that is posited as permanent, this 
infinity (which we want to call bad infinity) can only express the striving 
to be itself; it cannot express itself in truth, for its essence is the 
absolute sublating of determinacy, the contradiction that determinacy, 
so far as it is, is not, and so far as it is not, is. This contradiction is 
the true reality of determinacy [30 ]-for the essence of determinacy 
is to nullify itself-and just for that reason it is, as immediate, true 
ideality. 
a I Infinity with respect to quality-that is, with respect to the simple 
concept of connection or of determinacy as purely self-connecting-
is to let the quality subsist as such and at the same time to display in 
it its contrary: the connection with another, that is, the multiplicity. 
Infinity is therefore an aggregate of qualities and, indeed, a pure 
aggregate, one that is not connected with the qualities themselves at 
all; that is, it is not a qualitative but an indeterminate aggregate of 
qualities, which is thus an infinite aggregate because it is simultane-
ously pure determinacy as quality and pure indeterminacy. Quality 
is posited as multiplicity or, compared with others in the form of 
limit, as excluding, and therefore as numerical one; the aggregate is 
an infinite aggregate of ones, and these qualities are self-connecting 
determinacies. 
b I When posited with respect to quantity, infinity, as allness, is at the 
same time both subsisting and quantum; that is, [it is] in the form of 
its opposite: limit. But subsisting as allness, the self-equivalent con-
nection-that is, the pure unity that is to be as such and the pure 
unity of quality, of which there is an infinite aggregate--can be posited 
tooY In that it is limited or becomes a determinate quantum, it is at 
the same time to be pure unity; the limit, which is an inequality or a 
negation, must have been surpassed. This sublating of the limit or 
the re-established unity must once again be limited. What has been 
posited is simply the contradiction that there be a limit and the pure 
unity, and that both be connected to each other and yet be not sub-
lated. This is bad infinity, and just an alternation of the positing and 
31. Trans.: The ms has only a comma here. Ehrenberg and Link introduce a semi-
colon after "quantum," making the next clause subordinate to what follows. CE puts a 
semicolon here (after "posited too"). We have followed CE. 

Simple Connection 
33 
sublating of the limit and of the self-equivalent unity. Because there 
is immediately in each of them the requirement of the other, both 
continue in infinitum. 
The contradiction that bad infinity expresses, both that of infinite 
aggregate and that of infinite expansion, stays within the acknowl-
edgment of itself; there is indeed a contradiction, but not the contra-
diction, that is, infinity itself. Both get as far as the requirement that 
the two alternating members be sublated, but the requirement is as 
far as they go. A limit is [31] posited; thus, the pure unity is sublated. 
The pure unity is re-established, and thus the limit is sublated. So, 
too, in the infinite aggregate beyond every determinacy there is an-
other, and beyond that yet another again. The subsistence of the many 
qualities as of the many quanta has simply the "beyond" of a unity 
that has not been taken up into them and that would sublate the 
subsistence if it were so taken up. In order to subsist, the aggregate 
is not allowed to take up this beyond into itself, but just as little can 
it free itself from it and cease to go beyond itself. The determinacies 
or limits seem to preserve themselves because they posit the unity 
outside themselves as a beyond; but because this beyondness of unity 
is necessary for their preservation or subsistence, they are essentially 
connected with it; and their exclusion of it, or their own preservation, 
is in truth a oneness with it-in other words, what is posited is true 
infinity or absolute contradiction. 
N[ote] I This bad infinity is the third [moment] to bad reality and bad 
ideality; these two come to themselves or are reflected within it, but 
still in the form of bad reality, or in such a way that bad reality and 
ideality subsist in it. Bad reality stays at the concept of quality as a 
posited, solely self-connecting determinacy; bad ideality likewise stays 
at the concept of quantity, the exclusion of the limit; and bad infinity 
connects these concepts with each other in just this way, in that it 
allows them both to subsist. Bad reality remains in that it is surpassed-
that is, in that ideality is posited with respect to it; and ideality is just 
this surpassing, a negating outside of which the negated still subsists, 
or (what comes to the same thing) pure unity, for which the necessity 
of limiting sets in as well. Or, because bad infinity stays at the concept 
of simple connection only, it is itself only the limit, the and of self-
connecting and other-connecting, with the reflection thereon that these 
two connections are as much self-positing as they are self-excluding-
a formal return of the simple connection into itself, in which it only 

34 
Logic 
goes over to negation because it leaves reality behind; and thereby 
also [32] [it is] reality because it goes over to negationY In other 
words, in that it comes to unity from the quantum of the determinate 
aggregate, it has that behind it; and in that it comes to quantum from 
unity, it likewise has unity as a beyond. Thus [it is] nothing but the 
movement of the and of the limit, through which it goes only from 
one to the other; [it] can stay at neither but, because each is affected 
by the and, is driven on through it to the other again. For absolute 
infinity [is], by contrast, the absolute and, the absolute return of simple 
connection into itself, or the simple immediate sublating of the opposites 
with repect to themselves. 
Bad infinity is the last step to which the incapacity to unify and 
sublate the antithesis in an absolute way proceeds, in that it merely 
sets up the requirement of this sublation and contents itself with 
displaying the requirement instead of meeting it. It reckons itself to 
be at the end because in intuition it passes beyond the limited and 
falls into an unreasoning astonishment in the face of what is im-
measurable and countless, whether it be the stars, or multifaceted 
organizations, or because in its return from intuition it salvages [its] 
activity, as pure unity over against the limited, in an infinite progress. 
In both, the incapacity is without presence: in the former it enlarges 
the positive quantum that has being, recognizing it as limited, and in 
passing beyond it arrives only at the requirement of the sublatedness 
of its limitation; alternatively, in the sublating of the quantum it again 
arrives at only the empty nothing and the requirement once more 
that nothing be filled. It has both of them, the bounded and the void 
lying outside each other--one as the "beyond" of the other. Let it 
posit no matter how many bounded [things], it still has a void outside 
in which nothing bounded is as yet posited; through its enlargement 
it still does not bring unboundedness into the bounded itself. In the 
latter case that incapacity is likewise without presence, in that it en-
larges the negative [33] quantum; the negation is simply just negation 
of this determinate, or the absolute negation is precisely that emptiness 
itself of which the absolute aggregate of determinacy is the opposite. 
Because this negation, emptiness, or freedom has been made into the 
32. Tram.: We follow Ehrenberg and Link by simply inserting "it is." Lasson and 
CE substitute "negation" for "reality" on p. 32; CE substitutes "reality" for "negation" 
here. Our reading appears to be confirmed by the following sentence. 

Simple Connectzon 
35 
positive, we have here the converse of the previous requirement: in 
the former case the filling of the empty, the being of the bounded 
within the nothing that is still at hand, is required; in the latter, the 
being of the empty and the sublatedness of the bounded that is always 
still at hand. Because this emptiness is on its own account, there is 
thus only the empty possibility that the bounded that is at hand outside 
the ideal. activity can be taken up. The sublatedness is the infinite 
progress, that is, a sublatedness that is simply not realized; and the 
sublimity of this activity is just as devoid of reason as the sublimity of 
that being, and is content in the same way with the display of the 
unmet requirement. 
2 I Genuine infinity is the realized requirement that the determinacy 
sublate itself: a -
A = o. It is not a series that always has its completion 
in some other yet always has this other outside itself. Rather, the other 
is in the determinate itself; it is a contradiction, absolute on its own 
account: and this is the true essence of the determinacy. In other 
words, [it is] not [the case] that a term of the antithesis is on its own 
account, but that it only is within its opposite or that only the absolute 
antithesis is, while the opposite, since it only is within its opposite, 
annihilates itself therein, and annihilates this other as much as itself. 
The absolute antithesis, infinity, is this absolute reflection into itself 
of the determinate that is an other than itself (that is, not an other in 
general against which it would be indifferent on its own account, but 
its immediate contrary), and as that, it is itself. This alone is the true 
nature of the finite: that it is infinite, that it sublates itself in its being. 
The determinate has as such no other essence than this absolute un-
rest: not to be what it is. It is not nothing, because it is the other itself, 
and this other, being just as much the contrary of itself, is again the 
first. For nothing, or emptiness, is equivalent to pure being, which is 
just this emptiness; and both of them immediately have with respect 
to them the antithesis of the something, or of the determinate, and 
just for that reason they are not the true essence but themselves [34] 
terms of the antithesis. Nothing or being, emptiness in general, only 
is as the contrary of itself, as determinacy; and this last is just the 
other of itself or nothing. Infinity as this absolute contradiction is 
t~ereby the sole reality of the determinate and is not a "beyond", but 
Simple connection, pure absolute movement, being-outside-itself within 
being-within-itself. As the determinate is one with its opposite and 
both are not, so likewise their non-being or their otherness only is in 

Logic 
the connection with them, and it is in the same way the immediate 
contrary of itself or their being: each of them posits itself just as 
immediately as it sublates itself. 
Infinity is [to be found] within this immediacy of otherness and the 
otherness of this other, or of being the first again, the immediacy of 
the duplex negatio that is once more affirmatio, simple connection that 
in its absolute inequality is self-equivalent. For the unequal, or the 
other, is just as much the other of itself immediately as it is an other 
according to its essence. The simple and infinity, or the absolute an-
tithesis, make no antithesis save this very one that they are absolutely 
connected, and insofar as they are opposed, they are by the same 
token absolutely one. There can be no talk of the going forth of the 
absolute out of itself; for only this can appear as a going forth: that 
the antithesis is, yet the antithesis cannot pause at its being; rather, 
its essence is the absolute unrest of sublating itself. Its being would 
be its terms, but these essentially are only as connected with each 
other-that is, they are not on their own account; they are only as 
sublated. What they are on their own account is: not to be on their 
own account. If the absolute antithesis is separated from unity, then 
the latter is on its own account just as the former is outside itself, but 
in this case the antithesis itself has only changed its expression, and 
the simple, which [is then] not infinite, is indeed a determinacy but 
quite remote from being the absolute. Only the infinitely simple, or 
that unity-and-multiplicity, is one, is the absolute. If a ground for the 
antithesis is asked for, the request presupposes just that separation 
of the ground (whichever way this may be posited) and of the anti-
thesis. It does, of course, bring both into a connection, but such a deficient 
one that each of them is still there on its own account-that is, since 
both are what they are only in connection with each other, both de-
terminate, therefore neither the one nor the other is on its own ac-
count and the request for a ground sublates itself. For what is asked 
for is one that would be in and of itself and yet is to be at the same 
time something determinate, not in and of itself. [35] 
It is evident that what is dialectical in the moments, in quality, quan-
tity, and quantum, and in their moments too, has been nothing else 
than their being posited infinitely. Each showed itself necessarily as 
something infinite; but the infinite itself [did] not yet [show itself] with 
respect to them; that is, it was not itself posited. It [has] been brought 
to mind that the moments were therefore only infinite; they were not 
the infinite itself, because they did not express with respect to them-

Simple Connection 
37 
selves the necessary connection with their opposites, or that the infinite 
was only the ground of their ideality. From quality the opposite is 
excluded; it is entirely on its own account, connected only with itself. 
Quantity is on its own account, but exclusive, and the opposite it 
excludes is not posited with respect to it either. With respect to quan-
tum, however, the excluded is itself posited; it is itself the connection 
of unity and multiplicity, and what is now excluded is the uncon-
nectedness of unity and multiplicity. To quantum pertain both terms 
of the antithesis itself; and what is to enter into antithesis within it is 
the connection of the terms themselves. Since each side now has the 
whole antithesis within itself, the one-and-many excluded from quan-
tum now pertains to quantum itself; all that it still lacks is just the 
reflection that what is thus excluded is within it as something just as 
much not connected to one another; and so it becomes the infinite. 
In other words, the simple connection of the one-and-many has be-
come something other than itself and has returned into itself; it has 
realized itself. In this way it is the infinite, because what is in each term 
is also in the other, or in each term itself its oneness with the other 
is posited; each has the same content. To keep the point in mind in 
a provisional way, this is the true cognition of the absolute: not the 
mere demonstration that the one-and-many is one [as if] this alone 
were absolute, but that with respect to the one-and-many itself the 
oneness of each one with the other is posited. The movement of that 
demonstration, the cognition of the oneness, or the proof that there 
is only one substance, proceeds as it were outside the one-and-many 
and their oneness unless this unity is conceived from the opposition 
itself-that is, unless it is unity as the infinite. But this movement of 
opposing itself (that is, of becoming other and of becoming the other 
of this other, or of the sublation of the antithesis itself) is within the 
infinite because the infinite is with respect to itself this oneness with 
its otherness. For that demonstration in which the substance is just 
one, not the infinite, [36] has on its own account, so to speak, the 
movement of the infinite, the becoming-other of the simple and the 
becoming-other of this other. In other words, the proof, not the one 
substance itself, is this absolute reflection. 
3 I According to its concept, infinity is the simple sublating of the 
antithesis; it is not the sublatedness. The latter is the void to which 
the antithesis itself stands opposed. The absolute contradiction of the 
infinite wipes out within the simple what is opposed; but the simple 
is simple only insofar as it sublates this opposite, and it itself is as a 

Logic 
result of its becoming-other. But therefore the otherness or the an-
tithesis is just as absolute; in that the simple is, the antithesis stands 
against it, and the simple's being per se, which is indifferent to the 
antithesis, would likewise be an indifferent being per se of the antith-
esis. However, the simple and the antithesis are just themselves the 
antithesis again; for each is essentially not to be what the other is, or 
is absolutely opposed only in the other and is self-sublating. Similarly 
the annihilating unrest of the infinite only is through the being of 
what it annihilates; the sublated is absolute just so far as it is sublated: 
it arises in its perishing, for the perishing only occurs because there 
is something that perishes. Thus what is in truth posited in the infinite 
is that it be the void in which everything sublates itself; and just for 
that reason this void is simultaneously an opposite, or one term of 
what is sublated, the connection of the one-and-many, a connection 
moreover that itself stands opposed to the disconnection of the one-
and-many, but that, from this standing-in-opposition in absolute in-
stability, is taken back into simplicity and is posited only as what is 
thus taken back [and] reflected. In other words, infinity is: 
II I Relationship 
The hypothesis of simple connection-that what is is self-identical, or "Every-
thing is what it is, and not another thing"-has sublated itself in the infinite 
contradiction: what is is its own opposite, or "Each thing is in itself what it is 
in relation to everything else." 
We should notice that Hegel uses the Kantian categories of modality (pos-
sibility, actuality, necessity) as stages in the logical evolution of the triad of 
relation. The modal categories are meta-categories, so to speak-and for this 
reason the two dynamic triads in Kant's table must be deduced side by side. 
The introduction of the modal categories at this stage is essential because 
"necessity" is just what distinguishes relationship from simple connection. 
"The rational as relationship" (Hegel said in his essay on "Scepticism") is 
"necessary connection with another." But "the rational ... has no contrary; it 
embraces within itself both of the finite [terms] of which one is the contrary 
of the other."" The terms to be related in the Logic (as a theory of cognition) 
are the knowing self and the known world. Thus the fundamental relationship 
is that between being and thought. But the equilibration of that contrast is 
33 Gesammelte Werke. IV, 220; cf. di Giovanni and Harris, trans., Between Kant and 
Hegel, p. 336£. 

Relationship 
39 
the task of "Proportion" (in which the Logic culminates). At the present stage 
Hegel develops the concept first of the real world and then of the scientific 
truth as a system of relationships. But his fundamental speculative concern is 
with the finite world of real selves, and the logical unity of the absolute self, 
which embraces the contraries." 
The world is both my world and not my world, because it is our world. 
Singular consciousnesses are accidents that come and go; but the continuum 
is indispensable, and it cannot exist without some singulars. Hence we must 
become conscious of the social foundation of our consciousness-and "we" 
means each one of us singly: "In all that is to follow, the relation stays together 
simply." It is the singular consciousness (as simple connection) from which 
the social concept of consciousness has been deduced. Thus far it is merely 
the (Kantian) formal concept of the self in its community that we have reached. 
Infinity as the reality of simple connection is the totality of it. Simple 
connection has itself become as infinity the other of itself, [3 7] namely 
a manifold connection and the connection of a manifold. For a) that 
which gets connected in infinity is not the simple one-and-many; rather 
a connection of the one-and-many and the non-connection of the one-
and-many, or the one-and-many posited as simple and the one-and-
many posited as manifold. 13) Similarly, the connection of these two 
terms is itself manifold: [first,] the pure self-equivalent connection or 
their non-being, the void wherein they are sublated; secondly, their 
and, or the same unity as their subsistence; for they are just as well 
not, within infinity, as they are. Simple connection, now that it has 
become infinity, is thus itself only one term; its opposite as well is the 
whole simple connection again, and its reflection or totality [is] the 
connection of its duplication and itself something duplicated within 
itself. On the one hand, [it is] the absolute ideality of both its shapes; 
on the other hand [it is] itself an ideality that is opposite to reality or 
only limit, the and of both its forms, which subsist outside it. 
Infinity thus articulated is relationship, and this whole that it is must 
likewise become an other than itself and reflect itself into itself; al-
though divided within itself and distinct, but also sublating its dis-
tinctions, infinity is something simple that must itself become infinite. 
34· Anyone who doubts this claim should compare the logical discussion of the 
"one and the many" in Knox and Acton, trans., Natural Law, pp. 72-74 (Gesammelte 
Werke, Iv, 432-33), with the opening paragraphs of the discussion of "Relationship" 
here. 

Logic 
In other words, against what is infinite the infinite itself must stand 
forth, and this, which it reflects into itself, must itself be the infinite. 
In that the relation stands forth against itself, it remains simple. In 
other words, the differentiation, which it posits itself as, is not an 
analysis of itself; for that would be nothing but a going back through 
the preceding moments to simple quality. In all that is to follow, the 
relation stays together simply; its internal dividedness, which we have 
taken note of, is held together throughout; and the only thing to be 
done is to determine more closely this oneness of what is divided. In 
the concept of infinity it is initially nothing but this reciprocal sublating 
and positing, being and being-gone [Verschwundenseyn]. It is itself only 
the concept of infinity, not the infinite, posited with respect to it as 
infinite; for neither that which is an other is the infinite itself, nor is 
the infinite something that has come out of itself, but it has come out 
of something other than it is itself, that is, out of simple connection. 
Its arms are not themselves infinites but the connected one-and-many 
and the unconnected one-and-many. Thus the infinite [38] has not 
come forth out of itself and is not something that has turned back on 
itself; only its concept, not its reality, is posited. 
With respect to the infinite, [each of] its unity and its separateness, 
its absolute self-equality and its absolute inequality, is distinguished. 
Each has been posited with respect to it or within its concept; each 
must be something that has come about through it, a returned unity 
and returned multiplicity, and since the infinite itself thus comes to 
be both of these, it is the other itself. It has fallen apart into a sub-
sistence of itself as something duplicated; its nature, however, is the 
oneness of the opposites and the self-sublating of itself as thus duplicated 
or of itself as the other, so that it has come into being out of itself. 
A /RELATION OF BEING 
What Hegel calls the "relation of being" is both the logical ground of a dynamic 
theory of nature and a theory of the evolution of social consciousness. The 
"substance" that is its "immediate" form is what appears in the Phenomenology 
first as "the soul of the world" and later as "the ethical substance." The 
application to nature is easily visible, but the ethical application needs to be 
pointed out. In the ethical substance all of the singular consciousnesses rec-
ognize that it is the community alone that counts. But in its peaceful existence 
the community is just the system of common utilities. The common good 
seems to be directly identical with private prosperity. This means that it 

Relationship 
41 
disappears-and with its disappearance the very possibility of private pros-
perity vanishes. The differentiated identity of self and community is the con-
dition of the possibility of both." 
Hence the community must itself be a negative unity, an authority. As 
executive authority it is no longer merely possible, but actual. But as the actual 
unity of the community, this authority must be ·such as to preserve the pros-
perity of the members distributively. It must be not arbitrary, but lawful. (It 
is clear that Hegel's analysis applies to substances generally and not just to the 
ethical substance. But I suggest that if we apply it to that case we can see 
better why no reference to Spinoza is made until later, and why Hegel takes 
the moments in the order that he does.) 
We take up relation immediately, as its concept has been determined. 
Its terms have significance throughout only in connection with each 
other; they are only as thus opposed to the other, and their unity is 
the duplicated, or positive, one that is what they have in common (or 
pure being) and hence just as much that in which they subsist as that 
in which they are sublated. Since they subsist in the unity, [the latter] 
is only their form; insofar as the unity is on its own account, it is the 
empty and of the terms outside which they both are. As this connecting 
and it is thereby immediately exclusive, negative unity, opposed to the 
terms of the antithesis, and itself a term whose other is the antithesis 
as such or with respect to itself. 
As this its concept, relation is [39] 
AA I The Relatzon of Substantiality 
1 I The relation of substantiality expresses the concept of relation 
immediately; and the distinction both of the relation in general as a 
relation of being and that the concept of relation as substantiality 
relation is opposed to other forms of relation- [all this] is an antici-
pated reflection whose content produces itself only in what follows 
and justifies itself only further on; for the present it has merely the 
significance of a sign. 
35· The discussion of "Ethical Life as Relationship" in the System of Ethical Life 
(Harris and Knox, trans., and Gemmmelte Werke, v) illustrates the social application of 
Hegel's logic. But in the System of Ethical Life the logical distinction between simple 
connection and relationship is not clearly drawn because the concept of"consciousness" 
has not yet assumed its guiding role. 

42 
Logic 
Since according to its essence the relation is infinite, its moments 
are themselves only the way they are within the infinite: in other 
words, they are posited only as sublated or simply and solely as such-
the way they are with respect to the other. 
a I Positive unity is initially, as it were, the space in which the moments 
of the antithesis subsist; or it is the being, the subsistence of the 
moments themselves. In this being the one is as good as the other; 36 
they are both indifferent and external to each other. The space of 
the positive unity, or the commonality of being, is at the same time 
the and of the moments, which, however, is not over against them but 
as and is not present [at all] for them. Hence negative unity, which 
would be the and standing over against them, is not posited either; 
and substance has only the significance of being or subsistence; prop-
erly speaking, only diverse qualities have been posited, with the re-
flection that their being is what they have indifferently in common. 
But in that the one determinacy is just as much as the other is, their 
essence is likewise only to be not indifferent to each other but simply 
and solely in connection with the other; and the being of each deter-
minacy is the non-being of the other. It is3' simply the case that not 
both are subsisting, but as self-sublating the one can subsist only in-
sofar as the other does not. But equally the one does not just subsist; 
on the contrary, each in like manner has being insofar as the other 
is sublated. But just as absolutely each is not, insofar as the other is 
not; for each is only in connection with the other; or each is only 
insofar as the other is not; yet it is, only as essentially connected with 
the other. As a result, insofar as this other is not, the first itself is not, 
and insofar as the first is, the other immediately is, just as much as it 
also is not. [ 40] 
The being or subsisting [subsistiren] that was posited previously is 
thus such that the determinacy is only insofar as the other is not; but 
insofar as the other is not, it itself is not. Thus its substance is only 
such that the determinacy is as a sublated one, and this substance is 
called possibility. The being of quality, having gone through infinity, 
has become what it is in itself; determinacy is only as a sublated, or 
36. Trans.: Both "one" and "other" are neuter. To what do they refer? Should it 
be das Glied (understood), meaning member' Or, as we think, das Bestehen, "the sub-
sisting"? 
37· Trans.· We follow the ms. by using the singular verb. CE substitutes a plural 
one. 

Relationship 
43 
as a possible one. Being itself has become substance or possibility, a 
being of the determinacy, which being only [is] as a positedness of 
the determinacy, that is, as a sublatedness. On its own account this sub-
stance is the nothing, the void, or the pure unity. Determinacy has 
not disappeared within it, so that there would only be nothing-the 
nothing itself would be only a term of the antithesis against the de-
terminacy, a form of the antithesis that has already been sublated-
rather, the determinacy remains what it is; but its being is substance 
as its possibility. The content is the same; but the form that previously 
was being is what the being of the determinacy is in itself, namely, 
possibility. The content expresses nothing other than determinacy 
itself; whereas the form expresses the oneness of the determinacies 
that are kept apart from one another (that is, what they have in 
common), and this is the substance thus determined. 
b I This substance, or being as a sublatedness, is thereby immediately 
something inwardly split; it is the nothing of the determinacies and 
their subsistence: as their nothing it is negative unity excluding them, 
the empty point; and at the same time the possibility of both or their 
being as sublated. The empty point, however, since it is at the same 
time positive unity, opposed to them and connected with them, is itself 
something determinate; it is no longer the nothing that is on its own 
account, but the sublatedness of determinacy, and hence [it is] itself 
a determinate sublatedness, or the being of determinacy as of some-
thing sublated. Determined as the sublatedness of both, the point is 
always something determinate, which has the other term of the an-
tithesis outside itself. It is, as it were, the restricted substance, which 
is posited only as one determinacy, and as negative unity excludes the 
other from itself, determinacy in the form of the numerical one. And 
the substance, which is not pure numerical, but rather determinate, 
one-a determinate being with the exclusion of the other but in such 
a way that even the determinacy in being [ 41] itself is just something 
possible, something such that the other can just as well be in its place, 
or something that has, immediately, no more force of subsisting than 
the other-this substance is actuality. Quantity or connecting that ex-
cludes, having gone through infinity, is negative substance, or a de-
terminacy that is only self-connected in such a way that it excludes 
the other as quantity does, but as an excluding determinacy it is itself 
only posited as a possible one. It is only something possible, which 
excludes the other possible; and the posited possible is substance. 
Within actuality substance splits what it is as possibility into two and 

44 
Logic 
steps to one side against itself or becomes an other than it is itself. It 
is actuality as its being posited in the mode of [als] negative unity, 
which now introduces an inequality into the positedness of both and 
has the one possible as something posited but the other as something 
not posited. What is thus not posited, the possibility that stands op-
posed to actuality, has become what is excluded and does not subsist. 
c I The dialectic of possibility, the being of the determinacies as a 
sublatedness of them, makes the substance into negative unity or 
actuality, but actuality as well has its dialectic in itself and cannot stay 
with itself. 
Substance as actuality is a posited possible, the one accident which 
is in being; but this its positedness does not sublate its essence of being 
posited only as sublated. This accident is strictly connected with the 
other, and substance or being is in truth not the being of the one but 
the equal being of both, the and of both, posited in their sublation.:l8 
One is just as much something actual as the other and both are just 
as well possibles. Their substance is this: that each of them alike is 
actual as possible; that in its being or in its self-connection as actuality, 
it is essentially only as something sublated or as something possible. 
In other words, insofar as its inner essence as possibility is opposed 
to it as its becoming sublated, it must simply pass into this possibility, 
[42] that is, display its essence; and its possibility, as the opposite of 
itself, must rather be the actual. The genuine substance is this con-
tradiction: that what is actual is a possible or that the possible is the 
actual. The differentiating and of the opposites, the immediate in-
version into its opposite, or the substance, is necessity. 
The concept of relation-that is, infinity-is posited in necessity as 
what it genuinely is. In possibility the moments of the antithesis only 
are as sublated-possibility itself is ideality, without being so in itself; 
possibility must posit itself as ideality, in which the moments are not 
as sublated but are sublated. But this numerical unity is itself a de-
terminate one and is thus posited as actuality, in which relation as the 
ideality of the antithesis is rather the contrary of itself, that is, itself 
subsisting within it; or this numerical unity is determinate substance, 
which, as one with the opposed determinacy, is only infinite, or is 
necessity. Necessity expresses infinity as the self-equivalent unity of 
the opposites in the mode of absolute possibility, and at the same time 
expresses possibility as twofold within actuality, in one case being 
38 Trans.: The ms has a semicolon after "both," only a comma after "sublation." 

Relationship 
45 
determined as in being, in the other as possible. But in necessity both 
are simply and equally as much actual as possible. 
2 I Hence substance or necessity is nothing but the displaying of 
infinity as it is within itself: in its moments something which as pos-
sibility became other in actuality and is reflected out of actuality into 
possibility; but in such a way that these moments are not themselves 
what is infinite. What suolates itself within the other has not (as is 
required) been posited as something in being, yet it has to be like that; 
for the sublating, the ideality of infinity, is indeed only insofar as it 
sublates beings, in other words [only insofar as] those it sublates are 
in being. Within this relation of substantiality, however, only necessity 
or substance is in being; but since, with respect to its being as sublating, 
it still lacks its nourishment, so to speak, or the being of the moments, 
it is therefore not itself genuine. The moments themselves are truly 
in being; what is actual is with respect to itself, in its essence, something 
possible; likewise, within necessity the possibility excluded from the 
actual is just as well a posited or [actual]39 possible. The infinite as 
substance or necessity is [43] in truth the contrary of itself, something 
not simple, but the connection of the sort of things that themselves 
are the unity of possibility and actuality, [that is,] necessary [things] 
or substances; and what is posited is: 
BB I Causality Relation 
If we take the ethical substance as our model, we can see why Hegel asserts 
that the genuine substance must be not the self-conscious God of Spinoza but 
a Leibnizian community of substances. That he is still primarily concerned 
with the evolution of rational consciousness is confirmed by the preamble to 
his analysis of the causality relation (see page 428 above). 
According to Hegel's analysis the Spinozist definition of substance as "cause 
of itself" necessarily involves the mutuality of social recognition. The com-
munity is the "original Thing" (Ursache), which is manifest in its effective 
members. The law that expresses "necessity" relates its terms (this is true 
whether the law is natural or social, but the relationship is more obvious 
where the terms are "sovereign" and "subject"). The abstract law is merely a 
real possibility: it is actual only in the solar system or the polis (whose members 
are not mortal singulars but substantial families). These are the examples in 
39· Trans.: The ms has "possible"; CE emends to "actual." We have not replaced 
hut added. 

Logic 
which we can see clearly the identity of cause and effect, or of force and its 
manifestation. 
Hegel deals with the conception of causal explanation in Hume and Kant 
in the first of the two following notes, and with the prevailing scientific con-
ception of force in the second one. The relegation of these external conceptions 
of cause to the notes is further confirmation that his main argument is con-
cerned with the concept of cognitive consciousness itself. The notes are rel-
atively easy to follow; and they are especially interesting for the light that 
they throw upon the parallel discussions in the third chapter of the Pheno-
menology ("Force and Understanding"). 
In his two notes Hegel has shown the identity of cause and effect in the 
"external" applications of the category. Force in its relational sense is what 
must reveal itself. The cause is what is completely revealed in its effect. The 
two forces soliciting one another (or consciousness recognizing one another) 
are the two sides of one substantial reality. If we regard them as distinct, then 
their real nature is hidden and the effect revealed by their equilibrium is only 
a limit. But when we apply this insight to the community (whether it be the 
natural substance in the sky, or the ethical substance on earth), we find that 
the regression is not quite to the level of limit but rather to that of quantum 
(or whole and parts). Here the whole is a "true" infinite, not a "bad" one, but 
the distinction of the parts is not "real." Absolute possibility (that is, freedom) 
has vanished. 
1 I It is the substance or necessity as a connection of opposites that 
are themselves necessary, or are substances. Substance as necessity is 
the disappearance of actuality. The actual opposed to the possible 
perishes in necessity; in other words, its essence has perished therein. 
We see that if it is to subsist, then it can subsist only in antithesis to 
an actual, and substance falls apart into opposed substances. The 
actual preserves itself in the face of necessity only by sublating it as 
unity and by dividing it into a duplicated necessity. The actual as 
something necessary in which there is no longer any necessity is self-
connected, and within itself is infinite. In other words, its possibility 
is not outside the actual but rather inherent [an ihm selbst]; and it is 
thereby free. But it is connected with itself only in that it excludes 
out of itself this [fact]: that its possibility is outside it, and so what it 
excludes from itself is something actual. In that it excludes this, it is 
connected with it; it is thus only truly actual in that, in itself infinite, 

Relationship 
47 
it is connected with something actual by exclusion. Thus it is a Thing 
[Sache], and indeed a cause [Ursache].4o 
The cause has its possibility not outside but within itself; it is itself 
something actual and is connected with an actual. Since both are 
actuals, the necessity is just the equal actuality of both; that is, necessity 
is outside them, and so is actuality (or seW-equivalence). This [fact], 
that the "both" is actual,4' is a reflection that is not posited with respect 
to them themselves; with respect to them themselves there is only 
their being per se, not this connection nor their being equal to each 
other. Not only is an actual outside the self-subsistent [fur sich seyenden] 
cause, but also [it is] actuality itself as the unity of both; hence the 
cause would not in truth be actual. [44] 
Now the cause, as infinity, which itself only is in the form of pos-
sibility and has its actuality outside it, is called force; it is substance 
that has been held up in its positing of itself as actuality. Necessity 
did, of course, split into two actuals, but when this duplication of 
actuality is regarded as what it is in truth, then the actual that has its 
possibility within itself proves itself to be such that it excludes another 
actual from itself; and this exclusion is strictly essential to it. This 
connection is a differentiated connection; in other words, it is relation. 
What is excluded is of its essence just this: to be the contrary of what 
is posited. Since both are actuals, it seems, indeed, that infinity or 
necessity is sublated; each actual is posited on its own account. But 
these, which are posited thus solely as self-connecting, are in truth 
(or in their essence) not on their own account. What is posited as 
actual, the cause, is so only because it is the cause of itself, or has its 
possibility absolutely within itself [that is, because it is]4• the deter-
minacy whereby the cause, as connected thereto within infinity, is 
sublated; and this its ideality is in the cause itself. The cause is the 
one[ness] of itself and of its contrary; but then its contrary, what it 
excludes from itself, is not actual, and we would be thrown back to 
the substantiality relation. But since this its contrary is actual, the cause 
itself is determined merely as something possible. Thus each of the 
40. Trans.: In german the Uris stressed. 
41. Trans.: The ms has a singular verb; CE substitutes a plural. We have returned 
to the ms, taking the sense of "both" to be a singular conjunction, not a plurality of 
terms. 
42. Trans.: The text has a semicolon here. The location of the verb in the next 
clause suggests that it is still governed by "because" We have therefore moved the 
semicolon to the next line, prior to a main clause. 

Logic 
two is connected with itself as infinite unity of actuality and possibility; 
and each is substance. But at the same time each is simply posited as 
excluding, as connecting negatively with the other. Each is in like 
manner an actual over against the other; the other is thus determined 
as a possible; and thereby in its actuality it is determined as a possibility 
at the same time. The cause is substance only insofar as it determines 
as its actuality precisely the possible excluded by it-in other words, 
because it acts [wirkt]. As this agent [Wirkende], or as determining what 
is excluded as its actuality [Wirklichkeit], [the cause] itself is strictly 
opposed to what is excluded from it; for it is only on its own account 
as excluding or negating. Since this excludedness is actual and is the 
contrary of itself, the cause is thereby determined as merely possible 
or as force, which in order to be or to be as cause must utter43 itself 
or must sublate this antithesis. 
In this heaping-up of contradictions, each moment only is to the 
extent that it is held fast before it passes into its contrary. But since 
it is thus secured only as [45] connected with its contrary, then its 
determining as something held fast is itself the display of its having 
already passed over into its contrary. 
The cause is what is necessary in itself, which [is] thus necessary in 
itself only because it excludes an other from itself but is connected 
with the other in such a way that this other is only something effected 
[bewirktes] by it, that is, [in such a way] that in what is effected the 
cause posits itself explicitly [als sich selbst] as actuality. But in this way 
this other, the self-subsistent substance that is separated from the 
cause, is simply sublated. For this other substance is only that in which 
the first substance posits itself as actual; this other substance is nothing 
but the first actual substance. If the first substance were to be on its 
own account, and [if] the other in which the effect [Wirkung] happens 
[were likewise to be], then the former would not be cause-in fact, 
no effect would occur at all. There would be no relation, only a plurality 
of absolutely self-subsistent substances. But just for that reason these 
several self-subsistent substances would not be substances, not intrins-
ically [in szch] infinite, intrinsically necessary, for they would not be 
connected with another, as indeed they are. To the extent that they 
are indifferently on their own account they would merely be numerical 
ones, of which the dialectic has been displayed earlier. Thus the cause 
43· Trans.: Awsern means both "externalize" and "utter." Baillie sometimes trans-
lates it as "expression." 

Relationship 
49 
is absolute only in the effect. Since it is only qua effective [wirkend], it 
is connected with another substance; yet at the same time as effective 
it is not so, for this other substance is in fact the cause itself as the 
actual substance. In that the latter is held fast as something other than 
the cause, this other than the cause is the cause as actual substance; 
and the cause is what it is itself as not this other, only as the possible 
actual substance; in other words, it is only as force. 
We can see that, properly, force expresses the whole causality re-
lation within itself, or the cause as one with the effect and in truth 
actual substance, but [that] also the causality relation is sublated. In 
other words, because cause is inseparable from effect and the dis-
tinction is null and void, their unity as force is the actual substance; 
for only because it posits itself as an actual outside itself [is] the cause 
outside itself only a possible. In force the antithesis remains as a quite 
ideal, one; it remains, for this actual substance is an actual simply and 
solely as being outside itself; it is an ideal one because the substance, 
being outside itself, is something that is on its own account merely 
possible-the whole-and the same as what it is qua being self-equiv-
alent. Force as the merely possible actual substance has over against 
itself the form of actuality once more; in that the cause makes itself 
into actual substance, it [becomes] rather just a [46] possible one, just 
force. Its positing of itself outside itself in an other is rather a being-
within-itself of the actual substance or its concept, since only thereby 
does it correspond to its concept. Through this coming to be outside 
itself it has become not its reality but its own ideality-that is, merely 
its possibility; and this possibility has its antithesis in its actuality. But 
this actuality of the cause is now no longer a substance proper, but 
merely form. [Inasmuch] as that possibility or force is the sublatedness 
of the duplicated substantiality,44 force is what the cause is in truth; 
but against force itself there stands something purely ideal,-that is, 
something that is only posited in sublation, the mere determinacy of 
actuality. Thus cause is not realized in force itself, but in order to be 
actual force must pass over into its opposed determinacy, actuality; it 
must utter itself. 
In the utterance of force nothing else is left for the alteration or 
for the becoming other of force in its realization but the form of 
44· Trans.: The "is" of the subordinate clause is in the wrong place for our reading. 
However, the "as" was inserted later, and Hegel may have overlooked rearranging the 
clause. 

so 
Logic 
actuality. If force were essentially just a possibility, then in giving itself 
actuality it would cease to be. Force, which as possibility is connected 
simply with its actuality, would simply and solely be as actuality; but 
at the same time, in being actual it would cease to be what it is. The 
essence of force is thus its content, substance (or the oneness of ac-
tuality and possibility); and the antithesis-that this oneness itself [is] 
posited again as possibility-[is] a completely empty one over against 
the pure determinacy of actuality, an antithesis that has only pure 
determinacies as terms and dissolves itself in itself into nothingness. 
There is nothing in the utterance of force that is not in force itself; 
it is a completely empty distinction-the distinction between force and 
its utterance [Ausserung], or between inner and outer [ausserem] gen-
erally. Since force is opposed to actuality only [inasmuch] as actual 
substance [is] under the determination of possibility, therefore the 
positing of actual substance (or of the substantiality relation) as a 
possibility-that is, force-is something just as completely null and 
void. The dialectic that the causality relation has with respect to itself 
drives necessarily beyond this relation; but the reality that the actuality 
of the cause gained in force is a determination just as superfluous as 
it is null and void. [ 4 7] 
N[ote] 1 I The causality relation, as the one in which relation generally 
[is] determinately fixed in the duplication of substances and seems to 
unite within itself both the being per se of a numerical plurality and 
also their connecting with each other, that is, [both] empirical intuition 
(or the being of nature) and the concept, offers itself just as much at 
first to the consciousness that relates itself to nature as its dialectical 
nature stimulates it to contradiction against itself. 
The superficial concept that does not come to infinity takes THE AB-
SOLUTE BEING PER SE OF THE SUBSTANCES to be fundamental, and then 
connects them with each other. It posits them together as one, but 
just slightly so, so that their remaining on their own account does not 
suffer by it. But rather there cannot be any connection at all between 
such absolutely self-subsistent beings; for every connection, be it ever 
so slight, would be a sublation of substantzality. Because each is in this 
way on its own account, there also emerges in truth no opposition, no 
difference, for that would be a connection such that each of them would 
not be on its own account but only in its connection with the other; 
but the substances are to be strictly on their own account. In fact, no 
relation at all has been posited in general-and neither cause nor effect. 
The cause is to be something other than what it is as effect; yet both 

Relationship 
remain strictly the same. And what is separated is not something that 
is cause and something that is effected; on the contrary, just the one 
substance (which was to distinguish itself as cause and what is effected, 
yet remains the same) is posited at one time quite externally separate 
from another: two things that have nothing to do with each other 
and are quite accidental to each other and then are bound up with 
one another-just so externally, however, and in the bonding remain 
so much on their own account that they are connected with one an-
other neither before the bonding nor when they are bonded; that is, 
they get bonded by something quite other than what they are them-
selves. Thus, for instance, the rain is posited as cause of the wetness 
of the soil, the wetness as effect; and the causality relation has the 
form A: a + B, where A signifies the rain, B the soil. The rain is at 
one time cause, but then also, as effect, is no longer rain but wetness, 
a property or condition [48] of the soil; and the dry soil has become 
something other than it was before through the agency [Eznwirkung] 
of the rain. In this relation both rain and soil are and continue to be 
substances; but the rain is the actual that posits itself as actuality to 
the extent that it sublates the possibility that is outside it, that is, the 
dryness; and only thereby is it in truth rain as cause of dampness. 
But what has been posited here [is] not in truth a relation but merely 
its semblance; the rain does not therein become genuinely actual sub-
stance or infinity. Its opposition as rain and as dampness is radically 
null and void; [for] it is always one and the same thing that is to be 
separated into rain and dampness. There is in truth no separation 
here, and the causal action of the rain, [namely,] in producing wetness, 
is a completely empty tautology. Or if the opposition is conceived in 
such a way that on the one side rain, on the other dryness, are opposed 
absolutely, then the one is the possibility of the other. Yet in its acting 
[Wirken] the rain does not make itself so infinite that it posits its 
possibility, dryness, within itself, but only sublates the dryness with 
respect to this place, this determinate soil. This sublation would be a 
pure negating of dryness but never a positing of its possibility within 
the rain itself, not a genuine actualization [Verwirklichung]. However 
it is not even a sublation but purely a change of place of the dryness 
and the rain, or of the identical wetness; for the dryness has, so to 
speak, only gone to where the rain was previously. The rain itself has 
gone over to the other substance; but this is perfectly contingent for 
both: the wetness could have remained dampness of the air, even as 
it is now dampness of the soil,just as the wind that is cause of a motion 

52 
Logic 
of the leaf might as easily not have moved it-the soil could have 
stayed dry, the leaf at rest. Still less is necessity or the necessary con-
nection to wetness or to wind posited in this determinate soil or in 
this determinate leaf-and spil and leaf are nothing if they are not 
"thises." Just as it is contingent for both to be bound, so they are 
contingent for each other within the bond itself; the damp substance 
and the inherently dry substance must simply continue as what they 
are, for they are both posited as beings on their own account. [49] In 
all the moments of this alteration nothing is posited of the essence of 
the relationship, [that is,] the being in connection with an other, or 
determinacy as it [is] in itself, namely infinite. 
What is often called explaining is nothing else but the positing of 
a so-called causality relation of this kind. It is a requirement of ex-
plaining that the determinacy so posited be shown as an other, as its 
own contrary; but in truth, explaining by means of this causality re-
lation does nothing but show the same determinacy in another quite 
contingent form, such as wetness as rain. Instead of infinity. or the 
transition into what is absolutely opposed, the absolute principle is 
rather that what is to be explained has already been present previously 
in all its determinateness, before it is there where it appears. The 
explaining is nothing but the production of a tautology--cold comes 
from the dissipating of heat; heat comes from incoming or outgoing 
calories, rain from water, oxygen only from oxygen, etc., motion from 
impulse (that is, from a motion that was there all the time before). 
The fruit of the tree comes from oily, watery, salty parts, etc. (or in 
more learned language, from carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, etc.), in brief 
only from what it [is] itself. Likewise, what is animal arises from ni-
trogen, carbon, etc.-it is indeed essentially nothing but these-and 
the causes that constitute it are the same things that it is itself, to which 
singular [things] an other is mingled only externally and yet an other 
is sundered. The whole process is a change of place of the parts, but 
the determinacies are what has being absolutely in and of itself, is 
indestructible, and remains strictly self-same. What appears in a body 
has always been preserved in it merely hidden and now comes forth 
from it, or was outside it and now comes to it; and the explanation 
is nothing other than the consequence of this identity or the displaying 
of the tautology. The differentiation or opposition, the essence of the 
determinacy, becomes a merely external one instead, something from 
elsewhere, something that is to have been together with another; and 
in truth no relation, no infinity is posited. 
This absence of relationship in the causality relation is what justified 

Relationship 
53 
Hume in denying the necessity that after all ought to lie in it, and in 
explaining it as a mere illusion. In fact the necessity is just the sub-
stance as relation-that is, as the oneness of opposed determinacies, 
[5o] which are not, like those materials, absolutely on their own ac-
count, absolute qualities or substances, but such as are in themselves 
this: that they are connected with another-in other words, essentially 
their own contrary. The identity that there is in the tautology of 
explanation that wetness is the cause of the wet, heat the cause of the 
hot, is oneness to be sure, but not the oneness of necessity, which 
passes from one determinate to the opposite determinate. In this 
causality relation an other appears as well-there are two substances, 
and the latter constitute the side of opposition; but it has nothing to 
do with the former identity. The substances are not in relation to 
each other; they endure [bleiben] on their own account, apart from 
each other and externally combined. The former identity remains 
simple tautology; the latter diversity a particular being per se of the 
substances; and the identity and diversity both fall asunder. The con-
nection of the diverse substances is not a necessity, because they are 
not connected with respect to themselves. Kant has said the same as 
Hume; Hume's substances, which follow one after the other or are 
next to each other [and] are anyway indifferent (each on its own 
account) towards one another, remain so in Kant as well. It matters 
not at all that what Hume calls things are [for Kant] sensations, per-
ceptions, sense representations, or whatever else he likes-[ for in any 
case] they are diverse, self-subsistent; the infinity of the relation, the 
necessity, is something separate from them. That being per se of the 
diverse in its objective aspect Kant calls a contingent togetherness; 
and the necessity remains something subjective. That appearance is 
on its own account; and necessity as a concept of the understanding 
is likewise on its own account. Experience, of course, is the conjoining 
of concept and appearance-that is, the setting in motion of indif-
ferent substances, sensations, or whatever you will, whereby they be-
come determinate, existing only in the antithesis. But this relation 
itself is ... -that is just what is hard to say; at least it is not what the 
things in themselves are! It is, to give it a name, something merely 
subjective. For with respect to them in themselves, what is connected 
is supposed to be outside the connection-the sensations are4s self-
subsistent singulars; and likewise the infinity of the connection, the 
45· Trans.: We follow the ms. CE emends to "what is connected are supposed to be 
sensations, self-subsistent singulars, outside the connection." 

54 
Logic 
concept of the understanding in and for itself, is to be outside what 
is connected. And yet those self-subsistent beings are supposed to be 
only appearances, not what they are in and of themselves; they are 
supposed to be likewise the infinite connection, capable of a signifi-
cance and a use in no other connection save with what are thus sep-
arated; [51] thus they are supposed separately to be empty entia rationis 
without truth. In truth what are falling asunder-sensations, objects 
of experience, or whatever one wants to call them-are mere ap-
pearances. And if the word "appearance" is not to be meaningless, 
then it can only signify that those diverse [entities], thus posited as 
self-subsistent, are not essentially in themselves but are rather in them-
selves strictly infinite, identical as their own contrary. In the same way, 
what has been called "concept of the understanding" is the infinity of 
the connection, as a connection that connects nothing, whose terms 
would not be those absolutely relative [entities]; 46 [it is] the pure unity, 
a perfectly empty identity, or nothingness with respect to the concept 
itself. And in themselves those [entities] (that is, sensations, objects) 
as well as this concept (that is, the absolute relation) are both one and 
the very same. The appearance alone of the sensations or objects is 
what is objective, just as the ens rationis alone of the empty concept is 
what is subjective. But precisely on that account what is objective in 
the one case as what is subjective in the other is a nothingness; and 
what is in itself is only the infinite relation. It would not hurt to call 
this "experience" and thereby to [re]cognize experience as the in-itself 
of the antithesis, if only experience itself did not in fact express the 
relation again in the form of the subjective instead of in the form of 
mere relationship and if only it did not usually rather signify the 
contrary of mere relationship, to wit, precisely the causal linkage set 
forth above, in which the diverse [entities] are not opposites, not terms 
of a relationship, and [in which] the connection likewise is not the 
infinite one, not the connection of relationship. 
N[ ote] 2 I Rising above the causal linkage that we have just explicated 
is the concept of force. Force unites within itself both of the essential 
sides of the relation, identity and separateness, and unites the former 
precisely as identity of separateness or of infinity. The substance, 
which gets posited as cause and effect, is this not in and of itself but 
only in connection with something else; and this connection is strictly 
contingent for it, something other than it [and] not in it. Water can 
46 Trans.: We follow CE's emendation. 

Relationship 
55 
be rain, but it need not be; it is perfectly free, not under the necessity 
of wetting; the condition that it does wet lies entirely outside it, and 
hence this too [lies outside it]: that it be cause and effect. As force, 
on the other hand, substance is cause with respect to it; substance as 
cause is, of course, connected with an other, but it is not essential for 
it to be cause. But force is essentially the determinacy that makes 
substance into this [52] determinate substance; and at the same time 
it is posited as connecting with what is opposed, or as having its 
contrary with respect to it, so that [it is] cause not contingently but 
through itself. The moving force is not, for instance, a body that as 
mass is indifferent to motion and rest, but it is in itself the cause of 
the motion, being posited strictly as one with it. Force is the whole, 
the whole magnitude of the motion, the product of mass and velocity, 
whereas in causal linkage, on the other hand, mass is on its own 
account, and it makes no difference to it whether motion is conjoined 
with it, whether it connects with other substances through motion, and 
whether it is cause, or not. Just so attracting force is not a substance 
that is on its own account and to which the determinacy of attracting 
may or may not be added externally as a connection with others; 
rather, attracting force is in itself simultaneously the connecting with 
another. Since force thus expresses the idea of relationship itself and 
what falls asunder in causal linkage is sublated, the duality of sub-
stances falls away too. Force itself is just substance that (as relation) 
has necessity in itself, is inherently self-equal, and as this equality is 
the unity of opposites. Moving force is with respect to itself product 
of mass and velocity, a self-equal product, and at the same time a 
mass that, through itself as one with velocity, is the alteration of motion 
with respect to it. Just as the attracting force is self-equal and infinite 
within itself as the connection of one to an other with respect to it, 
and the connection itself embraces this one as well as the other-each 
is contained in its simplicity-so moving force not only grasps the 
opposites of location within itself, as motion does, but also compre-
hends within itself motion and mass together as one. In the same way, 
magnetic or electric force, etc., is not a substance that would have 
what is magnetic or electric outside itself, but it is posited with respect 
to it as one with it, so that this being is not contingently, but essentially, 
magnetic or electric. Whereas substance as such would only possibly 
have in itself what is electric or magnetic as well as motion, but would 
have the actuality of what is electric or magnetic outside it, substance 
as force has its actuality immediately within its possibility. On the 

Logic 
contrary, the substance that is cause is to be cause with respect to it 
only possibly, and has actuality outside itself. [53] 
In that force thus expresses relationship in truth, it is no wonder 
that the so-called discovery of attractive force or of general gravity, 
of the irritability of the organic, or of the force of chemical affinity 
has been accounted such an enrichment of knowledge in general, and 
that also what is relation has penetrated elsewhere (for instance, the 
relationship between mass and volume, density, what is dynamic as 
one energy, and the magnitude of what is thus simple, of force as an 
intensive magnitude). Just as attracting force is nothing but the im-
plicitly posited connection of one with an other, so likewise irritability 
is this infinite that in itself connects with an other, since here the 
connection with an other as it were first appears as a posited effect 
of something else,47 which is reflected, however, into itself or displays 
itself as a connecting not with an an other but with itself. In the same 
way the force of chemical affinity is just this: that it [is] the essence 
of this body not to be on its own account but to have its essence in its 
connection with an other. Just as dynamic density is the relation of 
space to mass, posited simply (so that this pair [diese beyden] is one and 
their difference is reflected into itself), so too irritability embraces 
both what the body is on its own account and what it is through 
something else, and establishes its own self-equality; likewise density 
saves the weight of the mass from its ideality as pure space, which 
destroys that reality; it establishes the weight, [and]48 maintains against 
its otherness as space its self-connection in the infinity of the simple 
oneness of mass and of space. The force of affinity is likewise the 
connection of the determinacy with its opposites, but in such a way 
that both these opposites [are] one in the relationship and the deter-
minacy that exists only in connection with an other, or only as outside 
itself, maintains itself at the same time connected with itself in its 
being-outside-itself, as what it is. 
Force thus ex[presses] relationship itself and the necessity to be 
within itself even in its being-outside-itself, or to be self-equal; in other 
words, it expresses infinity. But in order to express infinity truly, it 
must not, in the first place, be distinguished any longer from the 
substance or the thing, or whatever one wants to call the subsistence 
4 7. Trans : Lasson retains the original draft that Hegel later corrected. "effect of 
an other[ness]." 
48. Traru.: CE adds a subordinate conjunction here. 

Relationship 
57 
of the one determinacy; for substance is in truth nothing more in 
particular but necessity-that is, force itself; and force is not a pos-
sibility to which actuality still stands opposed as substantial being. [54] 
Hence force, if it is to be infinite in truth and not express infinity 
(that is, relationship) merely in a formal. way, must express its inner 
opposition truly in itself; it must express its determinacy in these its 
ideal. moments and be just their connection. Force must not [run] 
together again into an identity and thus set itself against its actuality, 
its utterance; nor must it be again the differentiation that it has with 
respect to its [actuality] (as in ordinary causal linkage, a diversity of 
substances subsisting on their own account). But both alternatives are 
involved in force: it does oppose itself to its actuality, and in order to 
be it must first utter itself; it inheres as some such merely possible 
[being], or ens rationis, in a substance that is not force itself but is 
distinguished from it and that, as force without its utterance, it needs 
as its bearer. Because it is thus simply something possible and because 
as this identity it is a connection of opposites-though a simple one, 
just pure connection-what are connected fall outside it: set over 
against force and against each other, they are self-subsistent beings; 
they are not the idealities of the infinite, but substances. 
Force must utter itself, for relationship as force is just something 
possible; it has actuality opposed to it. But what matters about this 
antithesis has been shown: to wit, it is the pure antithesis devoid of 
content, [or] force itself is in truth the whole relation. It is an entirely 
useless distinction to define relationship as force and oppose it to its 
utterance; there is in fact nothing but the relation itself; it does not 
distinguish itself from itself as ideal relationship, force, and as real, 
existing relationship. The utterance of force, the relation as an ac-
tuality (for instance, the actual attraction, the actual irritation, mag-
netism, electricity, etc.), is always and everywhere relationship itself, 
self-equivalent in its utterance. Relationship appears as a manifold of 
utterances; but this manifold ness is nothing but the multiplicity of the 
moments of the relation itself. For it is not something purely simple, 
an empty identity, but an infinity or unity of opposites; and the mul-
tiplicity that has been posited in utterance is the same in the force 
that is posited as not uttering itself. If the relationship is a restricted 
one, then its actuality depends, to be sure, upon conditions that are 
not within the relation itself; in other words, the force can be posited 
as one that does not utter itself-magnetism, electricity, motion, etc., 
appear actually in a single body (that is, they are not necessary), and 

Logic 
utterance or actuality is separate from possibility. But this actuality 
has nothing to do with relationship, with the [55] infinite itself as such; 
the relationship is, purely and simply because the determinacies that 
are its moments are posited. For a relation that is itself just a moment 
in the system of relations, its condition is the relation opposed to it; 
but it is actual in the absolute system of relations. Its singularization, 
however (and the violence that can be done to it in this singularization), 
does not concern it as relationship. Thus, for instance, electricity is a 
relationship infinite within itself; at the same time it is a determinate 
relation, a moment within the system of relations or of absolute in-
finity. As this moment it has absolute actuality; it always is, and always 
utters itself. But the isolated display of it through the friction of a 
glass plate is no more its absolute actuality than the magnetism of 
magnetic ore or of iron. As to these single determinacies electricity 
may or may not utter itself; it is free from them. But its existence in 
these singularities is immediately something contingent. This lies in 
the concept of the matter at hand [Sache], since we are only talking 
about the singular positedness and that is something accidental, ar-
bitrary, external. A singular positedness of this kind, however, is not 
the absolute actuality of relationship at all; it is actual even without 
this utterance in such single [cases]. Hence, relationship [as] distinct 
from such single utterances is not a force-that is, not the relation 
posited as merely possible; quite to the contrary, it is the absolutely 
actual and possible simultaneously-that is, what is simply necessary. 
And the singular activity, that being as a determinate phenomenon, 
is rather in itself an ens rationis, something that is not, in that it is. 
Singularized actuality of this kind will be dealt with in a moment; the 
relationship that would have its utterance and reality in the singular-
ized actuality would have in itself to be opposed to it and would have 
to be determined as possibility in connection with it; and this may 
well be what should be said once relations have been defined as forces. 
But relationship as absolutely actual is removed from this actuality 
only in the sense that actuality is [re]cognized as ideality or as nothing 
with respect to it; and actuality is thus in fact also posited in the place 
of what is called force, since the entire infinity of relationship has 
been transposed into force. However, the determinacy of relationship 
as force, as possibility against actuality, is something quite empty. 
Relationship, however, being thus qua force only as possibility, must 
simultaneously have its actuality with respect to it; for force only is 
as connection with actuality. And since it is strictly fixed as possibility 

Relationship 
59 
and is not to cease to be possibility (or force) in its connection with 
actuality, [56] and is not to be one with actuality (wherein possibility 
would be destroyed)-[that is] it is not to be necessity-it follows that 
its connection with actuality is just a bad external bond, in which force 
still remains sundered from actuality and each of them (force as well 
as actuality) is on its own account. This is expressed by saying that 
force inheres in a substance. This being of force would again be 
nothing but the substantiality relation itself-in other words, the ne-
cessity in which one determinacy is connected with the other. But the 
force that inheres in a substance is not locked within itself or within 
the substance but has passed over to the causality relation, since this 
whole of the force as bound up with the substance is connected with 
an other that is necessary in itself; in other words, it is opposed to 
utterance. 
That substance and force [are] now external to each other in this 
bond, that in truth each of them [is] on its own account, is expressed 
by saying that the nature of matter (which is precisely the substantial) 
is unknown, and that therefore we do not know whether force is of 
the essence of matter or whether it has been implanted in matter from 
outside. The bond of force with substance is also conceived more 
determinately as an imparting of force. In order to make this im-
parting clearer, force is better still posited as a substance or matter, 
specified again from universal substance or matter; and the bond is 
supposed to be a mingling of the specific substances, like the mingling 
of wine with water-so that, for instance, magnetic substance is poured 
into iron substance, or repelling substance is poured into light sub-
stance, or into the substance of the celestial bodies. In short, whether 
it be done by implanting, pouring, accumulating, piling up, or im-
pulsion, force gets to be inside substance in a completely external way. 
But as we have shown, this substance sundered from force is nothing 
but the actuality opposed to force (since force is relationship posited 
under the determinacy of possibility); but this empty actuality is a 
pure determinacy, entirely the same as pure possibility, pure simplicity 
in general. The infinite relationship, however, is itself this self-equiv-
alent simple, and this [57] its self-equivalence is the genuine sub-
stance-though it is not at all the form as opposed to the self-nullifying 
determinacies but is precisely the one[ness] of their nothing[ness] 
instead; not something that is separated from the relation, but rather 
the essence of it. When the relation itself is something bounded, then 
it is, qua determinacy, itself a moment-just as, for instance, quality 

6o 
Logic 
and quantity are things infinite within themselves, reflected, and at 
the same time moments; it is not the absolute unity itself but an 
expression of infinity that is only formal (that is, one posited in a 
determinacy), whereby, however, infinity as such is not affected. In-
stead, determinacy is, as it were, the colour of the unity of the relation 
which displays [itself] as infinite without stress or hindrance in this 
self-equivalence of the determinacy. Thus the relation, qua moment, 
is not connected with itself but with its determinacy, which is opposed 
to it. lt is connected not according to its infinity but according to its 
determinacy, and as single moment it is distinguished from the whole 
of which it is a moment. But this whole is itself the infinite, the re-
lationship; it is the substance-with which whole, however, the sub-
ordinate relationship, which is only a moment, is not bound up in a 
contingent way but is rather an essential moment of it. And qua mo-
ment it is not a fixed self-subsistent being (as force is defined to be) 
but is strictly just a determinacy; and this determinacy, as the whole 
relationship, only is in its connection with its own opposite relation, 
since its substantiality is just this unity with its opposed moment. Force 
is neither something separate from substance and over against it nor 
self-subsistent over against other forms of the relation embraced within 
the unity of the substance (any more than the substance as empty 
unity is). As force, the determinacy is even more fixed than quality 
in general, because determinacy as relation is infinite within itself. We 
shall soon have occasion to discuss this point when we consider what 
is dialectical in the causal relation itself, since the two substances in a 
causal relation are nothing but two things necessary or two relations 
which merge into One within it. 
The relationship as it, defined qua possibility, is to inhere in a sub-
stance and is thus not to be absolute substantiality in itself, is on its 
own account separated from the substance that is its actuality, sub-
sisting [seyende] with respect to it. But qua force the relationship is also 
connected with its actuality as something opposed to it, upon which 
it utters itself. The actuality bound up with [it] is its positiveness; qua 
essentially infinite it must be negatively connected with an actuality 
and hence must have it outside itself and sublate it, perhaps partially, 
in the connection. [58] Force thus becomes a connection between 
mutually opposed, self-subsistent substances, opposed to force as iden-
tity, [or] it becomes something purely formal. What are differentiated 
are outside it; they are not the moments of force itself as of something 
infinite; since it has these moments outside itself, force itself ceases 

Relationship 
61 
to be infinite. Devoid of its moments it is something merely identical, 
a form in which any determinacy [is] posited; and it ceases thereby 
to be anything else but the same empty tautology as the causal linkage 
and serves only for the same nonsense as the tautological type of 
explanation. [The] attracting force of diverse substances, the force of 
affinity, etc., express a connection, but what is connected are49 not 
absolute opposites, not moments of the infinite, but self-subsistent 
and indifferent [indifferente] beings; and the connection itself is thus 
not an infinite one but an identical or self-equivalent one, apart from 
which there is the opposition. Diverse mutually connected substances 
contain the contradiction: of being per se because they are substances, 
and of not being per se because they are connected. Since the sub-
stances are absolutely on their own account, the connection is what is 
absolutely alien to them. And the request for explanation that arises 
itself presupposes that the ground to be indicated for the connection 
is outside the substances, and it requires this indication. What gets 
indicated is the force of attraction or of affinity; or in other words, 
nothing else but the connection itself. It must be something other 
than the substances that it connects, for they are not connected with 
one another through themselves; on the contrary, they are only on 
their own account; they are connecting only with themselves. This 
other that connects them, what is it? It is nothing but the connection 
itself. Once that being per se of what are connected as substances is 
presupposed, there is no possible answer except this tautology. In 
order for it not to be a tautology, the connection would have to be 
an infinite one, so that what are related would be their own contrary. 
But the substances are only self-equivalent; and thus there remains 
for the connection nothing but their pure self-equivalence, or the 
tautology of their essence. "The substances are connected by con-
necting force" means nothing more than "they are connected just 
because they are connected." What is absolutely incomprehensible is 
the binding of self-subsistent substances with their connection, which 
posits them more [or] less as one and sublates them. And what is 
absolutely incomprehensible leaves one nothing more to say but "That 
is just how it is." Comprehension-in other words, positing the ne-
cessity-would be nothing else but the [59] substances' being con-
nected with each other through themselves-that is, their absolutely 
not being per se, absolutely not substances, but being with respect to 
49· Trans.: The singular and plural verbs are as in the ms. 

Logic 
one another each only in its opposite, outside itself, the contrary of 
itself. But upon the presupposition of absolute being per se, this ne-
cessity is not possible. So there is no necessity at all, but instead the 
connection is on its own account, separate from the substances, as 
they are from it and from each other; and the ground of their con-
nection is the tautology that they are indeed connected. The pure 
being of "That is how it is" is empty identity, the absence of necessity; 
[it is] the space of absolute contingency, in which all things have their 
places, lying quietly and indifferently beside one another without 
mutual hurt, [or] particular substances that stay as they are on their 
own account; then, in addition, there is also a connecting-that is, a 
sublating-of the substances. But the staying as they are on their own 
account and the not staying so are external to each other; they do not 
touch each other; they lie quietly next to each other; all relationship 
has disappeared. 
The tautology that explains the determinate connection has been 
driven to an antithesis by the need for explanation, which looks for 
necessity (that is, for the being of one in its opposite), and thus it 
hides its tautology from itself. The antithesis, which explanation then 
puts in the determinacy that has been made identical, is precisely the 
formal one of possibility and actuality, of force-of [its] inward[ ness] 
and its utterance. This antithesis, however, is not posited in the re-
lationship itself in such a way that the relationship would in truth 
divide itself thus with respect to it and be its infinite connection; 
instead, the relation has been made into the pure simplicity of a name 
and defined as possible. Force is exactly the same as it is qua appear-
ance, or in uttering itself-distinctions that have nothing to do with 
force in itself (namely as relationship), [that are] not moments of force 
itself. Hence that explaining has indeed an opposition in its tautologies 
as well; but the opposition is just a semblance, since it has nothing to 
do with the essence either of the explanatory connection or of what 
are connected. To explain the rock's falling to the ground (that is, 
uniting with the ground) it is said that it unites with the ground not 
because it unites with the ground but because a force in the rock 
unites it, namely, the force uniting the rock with the ground. The 
explanation of the turning of the magnetic needle towards north or 
south, or the attraction of iron [6o] filings to the poles of the magnet, 
or the repulsion between homonymous poles, does not just assert that 
the magnet turns to the north or the south because that is how it 
turns, that the magnet attracts iron filings because it attracts, that 

Relationship 
homonymous poles repel each other because they repel; but rather 
because in the substance in which all this is exhibited there is some-
thing other than the substance, namely a magnetic force, and this 
magnetic force is capable of turning the substance that way, of at-
tracting such filings, of making homonymous poles repellent. Likewise 
electricity or irritability is explained as force in the way it appears. 
The content of the appearance and of the force is the same; the totality 
[Ganze] of utterances is gathered together within the force. Internally 
sundered as the relation may be, it still counts as one in name, a simple 
togetherness; and the separating that is posited with respect to the 
relation is one that is alien to it, a separating of force as something 
possible from force as something actual; so that the tautology of the 
explanation remains the same. From this it follows that for the cog-
nition that is infinite in itself [and] is only concerned with the infinite 
and the necessary, there is no force; and that it does not consider 
moving or accelerating force but motion, acceleration, etc., not the 
magnetic, electrical force, etc., but magnetism, electricity, etc. Just as 
little does it consider the force of imagination, of memory, or the 
faculty of imagination, memory, understanding, reason, etc., but 
imagination, memory, understanding, reason themselves; and least of 
all does it consider attractive force or the force of affinity. For, al-
though the electrical, magnetic, intellectual, etc., forces are nothing 
but pure identities and, despite the differentiation [produced] by ex-
planation, are tautologies, these names do signify this determinacy of 
electrical, magnetic connection. But the forces of attraction and of 
affinity are completely empty; they express nothing at all except con-
nection as such. It is indeed remarkable to find investigations of the 
question whether attractive force may not be an entirely universal 
force of nature, perhaps even of spiritual nature. This is in fact the 
case, for attractive force is connection as such, and there is, to be sure, 
no force more universal than the force of connection. The force of 
affinity is in fact much too empty, as is also the attractive force. To 
say "Alkali combines with acid because it has affinity for it" does not 
truly mean anything more than that they posit themselves both as one 
because they posit themselves as one; to say "Sulphuric acid combines 
with the lime of a lime carbonate [61] and drives the carbonic acid 
off, because sulphuric acid has a greater or closer affinity with the time 
than the carbonic acid has" means in effect nothing else but that the 
lime prefers to combine with sulphuric acid rather than with carbonic 
acid. The metaphorical expression "affinity" can quite well be replaced 

Logic 
by "drive to bond" or even "friendship," etc.; and in that case one 
might say "Alkali combines preferentially with acid, because it has a 
preferential drive to bind with it." We have remarked already that 
force expresses [the fact] that the connection of one substance with 
another is in the substance itself, or that it is in the relationship---
[that is,] that it is of the nature of an acid to connect with alkali. Hence 
explanation in terms of the force of attraction or of affinity also ex-
presses the fact that the connection is not a contingent but a necessary 
one. But the formula "Acid connects with alkali" signifies this necessity 
immediately, whereas "force" leaves it open whether acid or alkali 
could not be something sundered from their necessary connection (as 
if that connection were not their definition) and whether there could 
not be an acid without this force, just as there could be a magnet 
without magnetism, etc. Chemical affinity stands higher in the sig-
nifying of relationship, since whatever has this affinity is in fact noth-
ing but something relative or (when posited with respect to itself) its 
own contrary. But just for that reason the utterance-for instance, 
the neutralization of alkali by acid-does not in actuality sunder itself 
from possibility or force. There is simply and solely one and the same 
necessity; and one can think of no diversity of actuality and possibility, 
or of a separateness of utterance and of force, even in connection 
with ordinary actuality, or the actuality of the singular. Iron is con-
ceivable without magnetism, but not acid without alkali; that is, iron 
may be posited as self-equivalent or neutral without the differentiation 
of the magnetic poles, but acid and alkali are not neutral at all. In 
other words, when as salt they are neutrally bonded, then they are 
devoid of alkalinity and acidity, like iron without magnetic poles. But 
this again is just how their affinity is not to be taken; fixed by their 
nature as acid and alkali, each defined to be the contrary of the other 
and hence, as necessarily connected, the contrary of itself, this isolated 
determinacy is yet to remain substantial and be strictly self-subsistent. 
And while they fulfil their nature, or display themselves as what they 
essentially are (that is, to become as self-sublating [62] neutrals in the 
neutralization so that neither the one nor the other [actually] is), both 
are yet to remain what they are in their isolation. In other words, the 
affinity is posited in fact as alien to their essence, and they are posited 
as connected by something alien, still having these connections outside 
themselves even in the neutralization, and still abiding on their own 
account. Chemical affinity (which expressed the infinite or relation-
ship immediately) thus itself comes to be once more a connection 

Relationship 
6s 
without differentiation or relationship; it comes to be quantum, the 
connection between a whole and its parts. 
2 I Force, divested of its superfluous determinacy, is causal relation-
ship in which substance, or what is necessary, doubles itself, and in 
this redoubling posits itself as actuality. Substance, as cause, connects 
through its effect with an other, and this its connection is its very 
actuality. This connection is the same infinity, the same relation, that 
each of its members is; and it is itself infinite. In that substance is 
cause-and it is in virtue of its essence that it connects with another 
through itself as determinacy-this other itself is substance (for the 
infinity of substance is cause) [and] only is infinite, the sublating of 
the otherness, in that the other is. However, the connection of cause 
with the other substance is nothing else but cause positing its deter-
minacy in the opposite substance as effect, yet just in that way sublating 
its own determinacy as well as that of the other and positing both as 
one only as sublated. The substantiality of the two necessary [terms] 
disappears as a being per se, for each is essentially infinite determinacy 
reflected within itself; the positing-in-one of both is the sublatedness 
of both determinacies and the becoming-one of doubled being. The 
actuality of what is necessary, as a positedness of its determinacy, is 
the oneness of the doubled necessity. Substance realizes itself only as 
going out of itself, and only as going out of itself to itself, [or] as 
absolutely self-opposed. The other substance is nothing but this op-
posed determinacy substantialized; and the effect is not the severing 
of the determinacy from the cause, but the going over of its essence 
(which is determinacy) to its opposite, not to some indeterminate other 
being. What is wholly annihilated is the empty duplication of sundered 
being. The determinacy itself is not annihilated as one with its op-
posite. It is only sublated as self-subsistent; at one with [63] the other, 
however, [it] is their mutual, complete permeation, so that they are 
posited-for each was infinite, reflected into itself; they were not pure 
determinacies-but they are posited as sublated. Actuality is the prod-
uct-this oneness with respect to which only the possibility occurs of 
sundered, self-subsistent determinacies, in which, however, they have 
ceased to exist as determinacies of this kind.Y' 
50. On an inserted page: That is green, moved; this derives from a green-making 
cause, thrust; it is effect. About the cause, force, we know effects; that is, we know 
nothing but the green, the moved. Therefore, not even that it is effect. 
Rightly have the limits of reason been laid down just here: that we do not penetrate 

66 
Logic 
The character of the substances conceived in the causal relation is 
thus determined. Both are posited as infinite or necessary, yet they 
are at the same time mutually opposed. The one [is posited] as passive, 
self-connecting, expressing the concept of necessity with respect to it. 
The other, however, [is posited] as possible, [as] the cause that has its 
actuality outside itself; as force, therefore, but in such a way that its 
actuality consists in its connecting with its opposed determinacy, in 
itself, yet as with another substance; as having its actuality, then, only 
in this connection, that is, in the sublation of the self-subsistent ac-
tuality posited outside it. This other substance is infinity connecting 
with some other infinite, the unity that is infinite only in that it is not 
a determinacy but sublates an infinite determinacy. It is on its own 
account, connects with itself, but only through the sublatedness of 
something infinite. The actuality that comes to be in this way is not 
the actuality posited in the concept of infinity-which infinity is for-
mally a positedness that in itself is only possible or in its positedness 
excludes the other, though in truth [it] does not exclude but is con-
nected with it. Here the positedness has excluded the other in truth, 
in that the latter is another substance; and at the same time it truly 
connects with it as with something [64] that [is] within it, and thus its 
very excluding has become sublated. The infinite thus ceases to be a 
being; with respect to itself it is this movement, over against another 
substance that is passive but self-connecting. The essence of each is 
the opposed determinacy; and actuality, the causal relationship itself, 
is the unity of these determinacies, which only are as sublated. 
The actuality that has thus come to itself from infinite determinacies 
or from the sublating of substances is simply and solely one substance, 
one necessity. How [it] distinguishes itself from the concept of necessity 
is demonstrated, since for this concept what sublates itself was only 
simple, not infinite, connections: the connectedness of one and many 
and the non-connectedness of one and many-in other words, pos-
sibility only as simple motionless unity (an indifferent being of op-
posites), [and] actuality, the negative determinate being of one together 
with the exclusion of an other. 
In this actuality of the causal relationship, however, the being per 
to the inner of the matter of force, of matter; for reason starts from here; it is totally 
unreasonable to make of green [or] of what is moved something distinguished from 
itself as cause and effect, for both are always just one and the same green [or] moved. 

Relationship 
se of the infinite collapses. The product (and it is only product) is their 
unity; their separateness is sublated. Relation is quite simply as this 
sublatedness, or as the product, since the self-subsistent substances 
are essentially determinacies-necessary, infinite determinacies, but 
only reflected into themselves; and in truth they have therein no 
subsistence. What the causal relationship is in itself is this product: 
the having-disappeared of the self-subsistent determinacies; a third 
in which they are united in such a way that they no longer distinguish 
themselves and their self-distinguishing lies outside it. Quantum has 
emerged again, but in this way: [a] the product, the connection, is 
something completely simple, not distinguished into whole and parts; 
and [b] what is excluded is the being-distinguished of what are not 
distinguished in the product (what are distinguished outside the prod-
uct do not thereby continue at the same time within it); rather [c] the 
continuity is broken altogether; the distinction is not this external one 
of the limit of quantum, but an absolute one; [d] what are distin-
guished are sublated in the product as they are outside it-within it 
their unity is as actuality. [It is] a unity that is a positedness, something 
purely self-equivalent and not something empty; [it is] rather one that 
has emerged out of infinity, or is determined with respect to itself as 
a sublatedness of opposites. The opposites, as separated outside the 
product, are only sublated, purely possible, absolutely unequal to 
themselves. [65] Thus absolute being stands opposed to and uncon-
nected with absolute possibility. The product is perfectly self-con-
tained; and in causal relationship it is rather its contrary-not diverse 
substances, not a cause and its effect in some other substance, not an 
opposition and infinite, self-generating connection; rather, something 
simple as substance. 
cc I Reciprocity 
The reciprocal dependence and independence of the substance and its sub-
stantial member-elements must emerge. In "Reciprocity" Hegel shows us the 
problem from the side of the atoms or monadic selves. At this stage the bad 
infinite triumphs. The whole-whether physical or ethical-is infinitely div-
isible. 
The world as an infinite community of independent substances within one 
substance is logically projected in the Monadology of Leibniz. This is the topic 
of Hegel's two notes. First he shows that only God is real in this system, and 
that he is a "paralysed infinity." Then he shows that this infinite cognition is 

68 
Logic 
inconsistent with the reality of life. Living nature is not a perfect "chain of 
being." The life that is free cognition must "rend" this harmony. 
The transition from the relation of being to the relation of thought is nec-
essary because of the freedom of cognition. The consciousness that the single 
member brings to the ethical substance is the concrete fulfilment of the sub-
stance. Being and thought are its necessary attributes. Thus the true reciprocity 
of being is the interaction and dependence of human culture, through which 
the consciousness of the social substance is maintained. The transient mor-
tality (which appears first as the bad-infinite divisibility of being) is the means 
by which the true infinity of thinking is maintained. 
Instead of realizing itself in the relation of causality, the infinite has 
rather fallen apart in it. The infinite is in itself the connection of the 
unconnected; it is the simple that becomes an other to itself, which 
in turn is the other of its self and thereby the first simple. In the 
relation of causality, the becoming-other is sublated; the simple is only 
the sublated otherness; and the opposition, which likewise is in the 
infinite, is nullified. It is, however, the essence of the simple in the 
relation of causality to be a sublatedness of the determinacies; its 
simplicity is only an abstraction from their being per se, yet their being 
is for that very reason essential to it. The simple substance, posited 
only as their sublatedness, is itself a determinacy, to which stands 
opposed the other, from which it abstracts; it is not connected with 
them; they are separated by the void. But its essence is thereby no 
less connected with the opposition; and as this abstraction it does not 
display in itself what it is according to its essence. Its substantiality, 
its being per se as what it is posited, contradicts this conditionedness 
through the opposition that, instead of being in what is simple, is 
rather completely outside it. 
Through this isolatedness, the other outside the simple first comes 
to be for it a genuine being per se, an absolute substance. In the relation 
of causality, substance is realized only as one; here the multiplicity is 
posited simply through its not being connected. What is excluded 
from the simple product is the separating of what are opposed; it is 
itself, however, a being per se and as such, self-equivalent as the prod-
uct is, or in truth it is something just as simple. It is the [66] pure 
possibility of the former [that is, the product]; inversely, the latter 
[that is, the separating] is just as much on its own account, and the 
former is its pure possibility. In this way they are equal to each other, 
properly undifferentiated and undifferentiatable; for in the second 

Relationship 
6g 
[possibility] as the separateness of the determinacies this [separate-
ness] likewise falls away, and the determinacies [fall] together. For 
they are connected not with the first substance but with themselves; 
and they are connected in that they are on their own account. "Being 
on one's own account" means being connected with oneself, or a 
sublatedness of the opposition; that is, outside of the first, a simple 
substance is also posited, and again outside of that there is also the 
separateness, which collapses into simple substance. This self-positing, 
the positing outside itself (or otherness) and the sublating of this 
otherness is infinity, albeit bad infinity, since the other[ ness] of what-
ever is posited is outside it-so that whatever is posited subsists. In 
truth nothing but the bad-infinite multiplicity of numerical ones would 
be posited. As the simplicity of opposed determinacies, however, sub-
stance is determined in itself to be simplicity, and the separate, op-
posed to simplicity, is determined with respect to itself as separated. 
In other words, in the equal simplicity of both, they are opposed; the 
antithesis does not fall outside of them as bad infinity. For it is in 
general the basis of quantity that is posited, [that is,] unity susceptible 
of multiplicity (which in bad infinity is posited as falling outside of 
the many), and thereby in truth opposition as well. Through this 
being, which is something communal-that is, separating them--op-
position is posited with respect to them and itself stands over against 
the simple product initially as something separate within itself. They 
are, but as pure possibilities for each other; they are both unconnected 
substances. What is simple as self-determined thereby expresses de-
terminacy with respect to itself; in other words, in the simplicity of 
what are thus opposed, it is, as compared with something else, exter-
nally just as much the separation, having determinacy in it as its 
essence. The other is just as simple; both [are] simple in the same way 
and in their simplicity determinate, mutually opposed. In that the 
determinacy vis-a-vis each other, thus taken up into the simplicity, 
substantiates each on its own account, it is indeed posited under the 
form of externality, of quantum; and infinity (as negative unity) is 
external to them. Bad infinity occurs with respect to them-the sub-
sistence of determinacy which just for that reason is indeterminate 
vis-a-vis an other, [that is,] as quantum. The absolute determinacies 
are as something simple in the substances that have this same content. 
[67] The simplicity is this same content-is at once an externally, 
quantitatively determined one; and the pure neutrality of what is 
simple is a continuity to the point of their separation. In other words, 

Logic 
as determinacy it is an indeterminate continuity of transition into its 
absolute opposite. What are absolutely opposed are the same con-
nections of determinacies; within the medium of the commonality of 
this content they are indifferent to each other. Their connection is a 
continuity, and their opposition is the external one of quantum, ac-
cording to which that continuity is divisible in infinitum. For as con-
tinuity and determined by means of quantum it has simply no immanent 
limit, does not have negation, absolute opposition in itself, but has 
limit as an external, indeterminate one, only as limit in general; as 
external it is only something called for. 
In this way, where a quantum is posited, actuality is something 
infinitelys' divisible within it and likewise something infinitely extend-
ible outside it. It goes through infinite mediations over to what is 
opposed; and the latter itself is not [absolutely opposed]. For as ab-
solutely opposed it would have its limit-determinacy-in itself, not 
as something external. 
In this way self-realizing infinity has once again fallen back into 
quantum; paralysed in the product of the causal relation, it ceases to 
be the annihilating of what arises as separate. And it is their sublat-
edness whereby it [is] an external, purely possible, empty, negative 
connection; the unity [is] a subsisting continuity of infinitely divided 
differences-not empty unity but the simplicity of opposites, a sim-
plicity that itself expresses the difference as something external. This 
fulfilled continuity is the unity of what is infinite; the being of its 
opposites is the subsisting of what is thus distinguished. And their 
sublatedness as determined vis-a-vis each other is that each singular 
determinacy has its opposite purely outside of itself; the sublatedness 
of each is only the equal being of this other. In the relation of causality 
the one substance as connecting with itself is something to be sublated 
vis-a-vis the other that is connected with what is thus passive; it is 
determined as the opposite of the latter, and the cause is likewise 
determined thereby through that on which it acts. However, it is only 
posited as determining or as the connecting of opposed [68] deter-
minacies. Here each one in the same way is connecting with itself and 
is nots• posited as being negated through the other, each as deter-
mined through the other. However, this determinateness, as there-
ciprocity of the substances, sublates just thereby what is negative in 
51. Trans.: Following ms rather than CE. 
52. Trans.: This "not"' could govern only the first clause; or it could apply to both. 

Relatzonship 
the connection, in that each is hereby posited equal to the other, and 
their distinction is indeed posited with respect to them but as an 
indifferent one, connecting only with itself, neither of them positing 
itself in the other nor on its own account connecting with the other. 
Instead of bringing genuine movement forth-the reciprocal being 
of each in the other-reciprocity posits them rather in the calm of 
equilibrium in that it sublates the distinction with respect to them. 
Each [in] its essence is equal to the other; each is the same simplicity 
of what are opposed; and the distinction, which just thereby must be 
posited, is only something external. 
N[ote] 1 I The activity in the relation of causality shows itself to be 
rather a non-activity too immediately for [it] not to have had to go 
over into reciprocity. For if the activity is the positing of the deter-
minacy of the one substance in the other and therewith the sublating 
of the determinacy of the latter substance, so it is just as immediately 
the sublating of the first. And insofar as the first is active, it is precisely 
not active. The activity as the sublating of both determinacies is their 
simpleness; in truth it is what we have called product. When substance 
is posited as active, its determinacy is sublated too; and with that the 
other is in truth also active. In place of an effect of the first on the 
second, rather the reciprocity is posited-the equal activity of both 
absolutely opposed determinacies, a duplicated active state. The dou-
bled activity, however, is nothing but the expression of the fact that 
each of the two determinacies is sublated in the same manner. It 
cannot be that the one meets the other, so to speak, at any other point 
than where this other is active, so that each would be divided into an 
active and a passive side. For the activity is simply and solely the 
connection of determinacy to the opposed determinacy; and only this 
opposedness, or the negation, the ideality of the antithesis in itself, is 
the activity. Thus neither is active towards another that is not opposed 
to it, or that would not be the very activity of the other. That is, there 
is only one activity or, what comes to the same thing, only a product; 
[there is] no reciprocity. Both determinacies reduce [6g] to a simple 
unity. And only in that this [unity] itself is a determinate one does it 
indeed have external determinacy,"3 antithesis against another. This 
its reciprocity, which is a determinateness of both as connected with 
one another, is their indifferent being per se, a rest without relation, 
a positive, not a negative, positing of determinacies, or the multiplicity 
53· Trans: Lasson reads ''does it have determinacy, howe\'er external." 

Logic 
of diverse substances. The relation, the absolute activity, is simply not 
in the being of the same whole or the same sim pie as would be doubled 
and should have the external form of opposition in it; it just reaches 
this paralysed infinity. 
N[ote] 2 I This reciprocity is no more a living entity than it is what it 
displays itself to be in truth: namely, rational cognition as an infinite 
mediation of transition. Cognition is thus only cognition as infinite, 
in absolute opposition. As the otherness of spirit, nature has in itself 
infinity only in this external way of mediations; in that it is the same 
simple unity of opposites, it [dis ]plays this opposition itself, not as 
being infinite in itself, but simply, and only externally as separation, 
as a determinacy that is in the more or less of the emergence and 
preponderance of one or other opposite. Cognition must first rend 
this unity absolutely, display the extremes purely and simply, and thus 
sublate them as qualitatively opposed. The transition, mediated zn 
infinitum, has already given the moments of the antithesis; in what is 
simplest, where such cognition begins, there are at least the traces of 
the antithesis that subsequently emerges and articulates itself further. 
What is essential to the idea-[ that is,] the relation of determinacies-
does not come into consideration as relation, as infinite; but [it does 
so] as an appearance of determinacies, which are here the same as in 
all forms of mediated transitions and are distinguished solely through 
the more or less, the one and the other. And just as what is essential 
here, namely, the relation, does not come into consideration, so too 
it does not come into consideration in connection with its diverse 
determinacies, which are themselves once more the relation among 
themselves; rather, the qualitative is reduced to a quantitative. The 
metamorphosis, which forms a system of its conditions, is only a range 
[characterized by )"4 a diverse, quantitative mixture and [by] stronger 
and weaker emergence. [70] The identity of determinacies (which 
thus in the relation ought to be a diversity of aggregates over against 
one another and which alone is what is rational) and equally [the 
identity] of the determinacies as inner (that is, as moments of the 
relation itself, as its own in the way the relation appears in them as a 
whole) becomes rather a self-equivalence of the separated matters 
which only increase and decrease; but in addition each is on its own 
account already and originally presupposed as present. The inter-
ruption of the uniform streaming forth of the waxing and waning 
54· Trans.: The German has the genitive case. 

Relationship 
73 
aggregate (through what is qualitative in the pure moments of rela-
tion, over which the quantitative or formal in nature cannot become 
master) creates gaps in the ranges and scales, which no longer pertain 
to this historical view of what is simply present. 
2 I Relation is realized in reciprocity since its moments preserve a 
subsistence; they are themselves necessary infinite relations. But this 
reality is at the same time the sublating of relation, its absence. Since 
relation as paralysed infinity or reciprocity is the reality of relation, 
it must be set forth in respect to each of its moments as just this bad 
infinity-that is, in its two forms, the relation of substantiality and the 
relation of causality-not with respect to their immediate determinacy 
of relation. For this is not yet the totality of relation; but insofar as 
they [are] relations at all, [they are] this totality under the determinacy 
that they only are just as relations, that reality is expressed with respect 
to them-which at the same time can be, not this indifference of 
reciprocity, but reciprocity only under the determinacy of the form 
of the relation. In other words, the substances in the reciprocal re-
lation itself, as determinacies according to their essence, are them-
selves only under the form of incomplete, ideal, relation; and the 
relation that has gone back into itself as reciprocity displays in itself 
the moments of its going back into itself; that is, it displays itself as 
formal reciprocity. Since it reverts in this way to its ideal. moments, it 
thereby preserves, as it were, the moment of ideality that it lacks, 
although it affects it with the subsistence of the substances. 
a I The relation of substantiality, as the concept of necessity, is the 
positedness of substance as of one determinacy with exclusion of the 
opposite one; [71] and since necessity [is] absolute possibility at the 
same time,55 it [is] indifferent to it which of the opposed determinacies 
substance may be under. Through the causal relation this indifference 
is sublated. The substance as actual is opposed to the other as possible; 
but in reciprocity each has equal actuality again. This equal actuality 
contradicts the relation of substantiality; in this actual the essence, the 
simplicity of the opposites, is this very [actuality]. In the relation of 
substantiality this simplicity is indeed only empty unity, connected 
with both, only their possibility. The separated accidents are the ful-
filment of possibility. But in this way the unity is fulfilled-the pos-
sibility, the pure substance itself, what is simple in the opposites. 
Possibility over against this posited simplicity [is] the same simplicity 
55· Trans.: Lasson has a comma before "at the same time" 

74 
Logic 
in a determinacy (or stage of transition) other than the posited one. 
The connection is that the one substance only is, in that the other is 
not; and at the same time [it is] the equal necessity of both. The 
positedness of each determinacy in the relation of substantiality is 
only something hypothetical, something possible; if the substance is 
in one accident, then it is not in the other. Here, as the simplicity of 
both, it is in itself necessary-as determinate substance. Not in the 
equal possibility, not in the empty unity of the two opposites but in 
itself, the accident is at once the contrary of itself; thus it is the 
totality of the relation of substantiality, not merely one side within its 
unity. This actuality of the determinate substance is at the same time 
only a possibility of the actual substance that is determined in the 
opposite way; and vice versa, this [that is, the actual substance that is 
determined in the opposite way] is just as necessary. And they cease 
to stand indifferently beside each other, in that the fulfilled unity of 
both is the same. In this way again there is only one possibility on its 
own account. It is the reflection on this unity of their essence or of 
their fulfilment that puts the relation of substantiality back into re-
ciprocity, whereby the substances as such [become]: the one becomes 
actual over against the other as possible. Since each is equally nec-
essary, the being of the one is the non-being of the other; and the 
being of each is as necessary as its non-being; that is, the one must 
pass away and the other arise. The opposition of both is infinitely 
mediated; and the passing away, just as much as the arising, is this 
infinitely mediated transition [tfbergehen] itself, not as an already com-
pleted transition [tfbergegangenseyn] (as [72] in the concept of reci-
procity itself) but [as] negatively posited. In this way transition, the 
mediation itself, is the unity that, in the form of substantial unity, 
separates into the opposed accidents of arising and passing away, and 
is thus realized. Reciprocity is the concept of transition or mediation, 
a unity in which there is posited in an indeterminate, external way 
an otherness that progresses in accordance with an absolutely arbitrary 
unity by continuous addition-that is, precisely by external incre-
ments. TRANSITION is in truth substantiality, the determinacy of sub-
sistence itself. In the pure relation of substantiality there is subsistence, 
the pure self-equivalent being. As transition it is this inherently self-
determined and differentiated being; but differentiated only as some-
thing indifferent, as something diverse, multiple, as expressing only 
a tendency towards [gegen] opposition,"6 that is, as expressing every-
56. Trans.: The German could equally well read "direction against opposition" 

Relationship 
75 
where just the demand for the same [opposition]. The negative pos-
iting of this demand, the actuality that excludes, is itself thus merely 
a demand for actuality. It is connected with its not-having-been only 
as one that comes to be (that is, timelessly, a being of the determinate 
substance, in that its other ceases to be); and [is] passing away (a not-
being of what is posited, in that its other'is). The transition or me-
diation divides, sets itself against itself; it is the actuality of the de-
terminate substance connected with its possibility. This connection is 
just as much possibility qua the first, which posits itself as actuality-
arising-as [it is] the contrary, the actuality that posits itself as pos-
sibility-passing away. [This is] a separation that occurs only in reci-
procity, since in it is the necessary qua one-that is, itself under the 
opposedness of the determinations; and so it is something necessary 
both as possible and as actual. The necessary that is possible, however, 
must connect with actuality-arising; [and] the necessary that is actual 
[must connect] with possibility-passing away. In the relation of sub-
stantiality itself this connection is one only external to both; the ne-
cessity [is] not in itself the antithesis of the possible and the actual, 
but each [is]just as much possible as actual: either the one actually and 
then the other possibly or the reverse. Here each [is] itself the two 
[together] and at the same time, the two separately. 
The opposition is, however, a formal one, simply required, in that 
the arising [73] and the passing away is something absolutely me-
diated, something external to the substances. What is arising has pos-
ited the other of itself absolutely, as a being outside it, as another 
determinacy not reflected with respect to it. The simplicity, in which 
the substance is turned back into itself, is its undifferentiated basis, 
which has outside itself the being of the determinacy as an opposite, 
and only one as actual. The negation is being excluded, a not-being-
actual, merely a having-been, or a possibility of arising; and the in-
determinacy of the antithesis makes the arising and the passing away 
into something absolutely mediated. 
b I The arising and passing away, however, is essentially only through 
the in-itself the necessary connectedness of the determinacies with 
one another, [that is to say,] through their ideality with respect to 
~hem, or through their absolute though only formal opposition-that 
Is, the relation of causality. And through the latter it is the mediated 
arising and passing away. Determinate substance arises or comes into 
~ctuality as the possibility of an other that ceases to be. But "It comes 
mto actuality" means nothing other than that it does not exclude the 
other but is active [thiitzg]; it sublates the opposed determinacy as its 

Logic 
possibility, its ideality; and only so, as acting [wirkend], is it actual 
[wirklich]. Its arising is through itself, through its activity, the self-
equivalence, which is infinite-that is, which takes its possibility, its 
other, back into itself, that is to say, acts [wirkt]. But in that substance 
arises through itself, just so is this immediately its perishing; for this 
is what it is: this determinate [substance]. In that [it] equates itself to 
the opposed, [in that it] acts, becomes actual, it [sub]lates itself in itself; 
it perishes through itself. Just as before only the concept of arising 
and perishing was posited, so it is here with respect to substance itself. 
This transition is, however, infinitely mediated; it is at the same time 
posited as something external with respect to the substances. "With 
respect to themselves and external to them" means that they are di-
vided; through the essence of reciprocity they are separated,s7 each 
for itself, and in their actuality at the same time connected-they are 
so only in part, [and] separate themselves determinately into an un-
alterable and an alterable part. This is not the pure accident; for in 
the opposed substances, determinacy qua reflected within itself is the 
essence itself, not the void of unity; yet at the same time [it is] substance 
subsisting too, thus something simply parted within itself into several 
substantialities. 
In its becoming actual the substance passes away; or rather its be-
coming actual is the arising of another substance, though one part 
iss8 passing away with respect to the active and passive substance. But 
by the same token this substance that has arisen is actual only [74] 
within activity; it is a determinacy, opposed immediately to what is 
separated, whose simplicity it is: a determinacy reflected within itself, 
but as a being-reflected, not through this substance itself, [not] through 
its activity. The substance that has arisen must likewise have on its 
own account, negatively, the one opposed to it, must sublate the latter, 
actualize itself, and in its actualization thus pass away, become another 
substance than it is. If the perishable seems thus to be diminished in 
that only one part passes away, enters into the new substance, and 
one part is always thrown down, precipitated, as separate, self-sub-
sistent, imperishable, this is nevertheless only one determinacy, and 
now actual just as the other is. The line of arising and passing away 
proceeds forwards and backwards ad infinitum, and in the same way 
57· Trans.: Following Lasson, we omit the comma before "separated." The ms 
requires "They are through the essence of reciprocity, separated each for itself." 
58. Trans.: We read als as ist. 

Relationship 
77 
there are infinitely many lines and infinitely many parting and starting 
points. This infinite criss-crossing and entanglement of arising and 
passing away makes actuality into an arising-and-therein-perishing 
being of substances. The essence of its movement is the self-equivalent 
simplicity of opposites; yet this simplicity is what is latent, not posited, 
in this entanglement. Because such-fulfill~d-unity lies outside it, it 
falls wholly into bad infinity; and there appears in general this simple 
unity of opposites qua substance, the fulfilled and self-equivalent being, 
and alongside it a multiplicity of arising and perishing substances. 
But what is arising and passing away is in fact nothing but the deter-
minacies. The reflection of determinacy into itself-singular sub-
stance-is infinite only in this way: that precisely in the simplicity it 
is as de_terminate, and as determinate sublated or the contrary of itself. 
But this contrary of itself is only in the simplicity something sublated 
(the singular substance itself being something sublated); yet something 
posited as the other is not. This inequality equalizes itself through its 
becoming sublated, in which the substance itself becomes the sublated 
one as well, yet in which it is a posited one, as the other is. But, to be 
sure, if both are here posited and sublated in the same manner, their 
sublatedness (the simplicity of opposites) falls outside their alternation 
[Wechseln]; as the substantializing of determinacies it is itself multi-
plied. And if the simplicity is the same for all, it is, of the separated 
determinacies, numerical one, not infinite unity or their sublation. 
Since what is simple is posited thus in the form of numerical one, it 
falls outside the unity of sublating; it is rather its multiplicity. But in 
fact it is rather the equivalence of all these determinacies posited as 
substances, is fulfilled being; and in this there is [75] no distinction 
at all. The determinacies as such are distinguished only vis-a-vis one 
another. Their distinguishing is not a subsisting of the one and the 
non-being of the other, but rather they are for their part immediately 
sublated, posited as sublated and ideal 2 • [It is] not a non-posited, a 
vanishing into simplicity, but [it is] rather what the determinacies are 
inherently, something posited in the same manner, though as sub-
lated, in their one self-equivalent simple unity, a unity that is their 
non-positedness. 
Reciprocity, thus returned to itself, is the sublatedness of the sep-
arated substances. It is simply and solely a substance, but absolutely 
fulfilled substance, the rendering indifferent of all determinacies that 
are posited in it as sublated. Relationship has fulfilled its concept; it 
has not stepped outside itself. And the fulfilling of its concept is that 

Logic 
it posits itself as what [it] is in itself, a fulfilled oneness of opposed 
determinacies, and zn this sublatedness at the same time their being-
posited as sublated. But relationship has thereby become the contrary 
of itself. For in its concept the opposites were in being, [while] their 
oneness [was] itself something differentiated, connected negatively 
with them. Yet here those are merely posited as sublated; this latter 
is self-equivalent, connected purely with itself, the connectedness of 
what are ideal,, or the ideality in them. It has gone over into the 
relationship of thought, into unzversal and particular. 
B /RELATION OF THINKING 
The proper model for the paralysis of the infinite, which we arrived at in the 
"Relation of Being," is not the One Substance of Spinoza;" but the divine 
Monad of monads in Leibniz. The "paralysed infinite" is the Great Chain 
of Being. The thinking consciousness of the cognitive subject breaks the 
paralysis that the completed cycle of the categories of being has produced. 
On the objective side it produces a Platonic theory of science, in which life is 
viewed as the universal that specifies and individuates itself necessarily (yet 
freely, and subject to contingency). This universal is identical with its own 
logical process of division (or judgment); and in cognition it comes to self-
possession as the mortally singular rational animal. (Formally speaking, this 
identity of the concept with its process of determination is an impossible 
operation-like the imaginary number j- 1) But now that we have passed 
over to the territory of "subjective logic" (though only relationally, just as 
Hegel proceeded from the categories to the forms of finite cognition in "con-
cepts, judgments, and syllogisms" in J8o1),"" it is quite evident that the appli-
59· As the Italian commentators (especially Chiereghin, Logica e metaftsica, p. 342) 
believe. Chiereghin's interpretation of the transition in Faith and Knowledge (Logica e 
metafiszca, pp. 35o--51; Gesammelte Werke, IV, p. 354· II. 27-34, and p. 359· II. 1-3; Cerf 
and Harris, trans., pp. 107, 113) deserves study because Hegel does have Spinoza's 
substance in mind in the preface to the Phenomenology. But his own account of the 
relation of substantiality here points forward to his mature rejection of Spinoza's theory 
as acosmic. The Leibnizian conception of the Great Chain of Being gives the finite 
term of the relationship of being its necessary place. Evidence of the importance of 
Leibniz in the evolution of Hegel's logic and metaphysics is supplied by his "Scepticism" 
essay (Gesammelte Werke, 1v, 2 2gf; di Giovanni and Harris, trans., Between Kant and Hegel, 
PP· 346£). 
6o. See Rosenkranz, Hegels Leben, p. 191 (Cerf and Harris, trans., Faith and Knou•l-
edge, p 10); compare the Introduction, pp. xvif above. If the parallel between 1801 
and 1804 is valid and can be extended, then "Proportion" corresponds to the transitional 

Relatzonship 
79 
cation of Hegel's argument to the mortally singular rational animal is what 
matters most. In this context it is the "ethical substance" perfectly stabilized 
by its constitutional customs that is the paralysed infinite-and the single 
consciousness is the moving particular, a mortal "identity of non-being and 
being," which subsists stably as a reproduction process (as the family, which 
is the unit of the polity). 
In the ethical substance, universal and particular are immediately "in one 
another." This is the "determinate concept." The universl here is (negatively) 
the customary law that makes all citizens members; and positively it is the 
common territory that they share. Socrates the Athenian knows that his whole 
existence is at the disposal of "the laws"; but the injustice of the verdict upon 
him is the "contradiction of the determinate concept within itself." 
As realized reciprocity, the infinite has become paralysed. It is the 
fulfilled oneness-that is, a oneness of [opposites] that are not qua 
opposites-and equally a oneness of the same, so that they are qua 
opposites, but as sublated; and their connection, their simple unity, 
is just that oneness. This it is that has arisen; contradiction (or the 
infinity that [consists] in a oneness of opposites, wherein as such they 
are not at all posited and wherein as ideal2 they are at the same time 
distinguished) is what is dialectical in this relation, which [76] in its 
very realization has to posit itself as our reflection. Right here nothing 
concerns us but what has thus necessarily arisen; and just as infinity 
is brought to rest in it, so we too must bring our reflection to rest, as 
it were, and only take what is there. Our reflection will become the 
reflection of this relation itself. 
The universal, as has been shown,6 ' is not pure but fulfilled unity, 
the self-equivalent oneness of the opposites. The particular is not a 
substance; but what is distinguished is something posited as sublated, 
what is as what is not: a determinacy, yet not determinacy in general 
but in itself, infinite, or posited as such. The determinacy is in itself 
in this way because it is reflected into itself out of being per se and is 
itself posited as the identity of non-being and being. It is not-that 
discovery of the speculative meaning of the syllogism in 18ot. The connection of the 
syllogism with mathematical "proportion" is made through the Platonic doctrine of the 
"truly beautiful bond" (Timaeus, 31c-32a, compare Difference, in Gesammelte Werke, IV, 
P· 65, II. 31-37; Harris and Cerf, trans, p 158n). 
6t. Trans.: The ms includes "not" with "shown," separating it from "pure" with a 
comma. 

8o 
Logic 
is, it is not connected purely with itself; as what is not it is not sublated, 
not at all. 6• Rather, it is the unity of both: it is connected with itself, 
sublated; and, in this state of having become the contrary of itself, 
connected with itself, equal to itself. This self-equivalency in its sub-
latedness, its form, is substantiality as something universal. Yet this 
universal is not merely this form, but it is what is fulfilled, what is 
simple in the determinacies thus posited as distinguished in their 
ideality. [ideellseyn]. The universal as this connection of what is distin-
guished [des Unterschiedenen] is its ideality and negative unity; but as 
the sublatedness of this opposite [it is] hence the indifferent connec-
tion of just these that are63 not set against one another negatively, in 
that they are so with respect to themselves. Likewise the universal is 
not opposed to the particular, but it is immediately the form of the 
particular; determinacy is, as sublated, reflected into itself, and the 
universal is this its reflection. 
A I Determinate Concept 
The connection of the universal and the particular just now deter-
mined, their simple being-in-one-another without antithesis, is the 
determinate concept. Determinacy is no longer substance, not some-
thing posited as positive numerical one, but as something universal, 
something reflected into itself; and determinate being has received a 
completely different [77] meaning. For it is in truth nothing other 
than the determinate concept, realized being, just as the relation of 
being is properly the realizing of it; that which is usually understood 
as determinate being is rather the determinate concept. The accident 
of substance that is something actual has its connection, its otherness, 
outside itself and therefore is not; it is only something possible, not 
something that is in itself. Only the reflected accident, the determinate 
concept, is within itself; it is something determinate, and thereby itself 
only something possible, one only in connection with another. But as 
this possible, it is posited; it is, not for the reason that it is something 
possible-on the contrary, this [its being possible] is its coming-to-be-
sublated; but it is for the first time, through this its being posited as 
62. Trans.: Lasson omits a comma, to read "It is not what is not, sublated, not at 
all." 
63. Trans.: There is a shift from singular to plural here, because the universal is a 
species of itself 

Relatzonship 
81 
something possible. What is determinate inherently disintegrates within 
infinity; it is a nothing. That it is something that is not is for it an 
alien reflection; it is in itself only this [thing] that is not; and [when)64 
posited as something sublated-that is, as determinate concept-it is 
posited as it is in itself; or for the first time, it is. This being is simple 
infinity, infinity brought to rest; it is the existing of what is determi-
nate; its being is synonymous with universality. It is something de-
terminate, but as something particular; [it is] as something determinate 
that, just because it is outside of itself, is, with respect to itself, con-
nection with another; for in the relation of being, determinacy is with 
respect to itself not at the same time reflected into itself; rather, it 
goes only outwards. 
In the determinate concept determinacy (and reflection) is strictly one, 
simple. Determinacy without reflection is not the particular, else it would 
be nothing; likewise reflection is of itself th-e void; for it is only as 
what has come back out of opposition-that is, out of determinacy. 
But the determinate concept is in truth not this simple [thing], of 
which the concept has been established. It may be considered from 
the side of its having come back out of opposition, out of the relation-
then it dissolves itself into the relation again. But [when] this relation 
[is considered] as simple, in the way it has come to be, then this 
simplicity must carry this determinacy of being conditioned upon itself 
as a trace in another way. It has the form of freedom; but that it does 
not in fact have it absolutely, as we realize (even though the bridge 
has been broken off through its simplicity), this it must therefore 
display in itself. 
The determinate concept is subjected to the same dialectic of which 
it [relation] is the quality; which quality is determinacy in the form of 
pure being, into whose place reflected being, being-in-itself, has here 
stepped. There is in fact a contradiction [78] present between deter-
minacy and being reflected: the former is only one side of the op-
position; the latter is the unity of both. The relation of causality was 
the negative, the moment of reflecting itself into itself, wherein de-
terminacy was to sublate itself; but it was only a formal sublating. 
Similarly, what is reflected did not of course remain the initial [de-
terminacy] (for that became one with its opposite); yet this one[ness] 
is itself something just as determinate and therewith has being-in-
itself only as form in itself, to which in truth it is not equal. It can 
64. Tram.: Replacing es, or "it." 

Logic 
just as well be posited again as one with its opposite, but it still remains 
something determinate; for as something reflected thus it is on its 
own account and simple, yet just thereby opposed to those whose 
unity it is. It exists indeed in a two-fold mode: in one way as being 
something determinate and thereby as connecting with negative unity, 
which is its infinity; however as unity reflected into itself it is itself 
negative unity, though of a kind wherein the negated is [as] sublated. 
It is negative unity posited in the form of positive unity, as simple 
positive unity; in other words, as universality. Through this it is itself 
preserved in that connection, whose infinity is thereby formal, op-
posed, a negative one instead of negative unity. In this mode of subsist-
ing determinacies that are reflected into themselves, it is this substance 
as negative one. The substance is their separated being per se, yet is 
like the determinacies. However, their65 dead one, as this one, is in 
connection with the being per se of determinacy, or their universality; 
[it is] what is determinate and indeed what is absolutely determinate, 
what is negative, the particular, which is contingent to the universal. 
Universality as reflection is the non-being of particularity; and the 
singularity of the substance is what is accidental or merely possible. 
The singular or the substance is a particular, not a mere singular, in 
the positive connection with the univesal-a particular that is in the 
universal as in its universal space wherein it is connected as excluding. 
Conversely, substance is equally the universal as (negative) unity, in 
which apart from the determinacy, which is the universal, something 
other is also posited, or in which this universal in just the same way 
is connected negatively as determinate, excludes the other from itself, 
though the other is its like, such as is equally in the form of being per 
se, [ 79] of positive universality-just as in it the negative one [excludes] 
other ones. The universal is one PROPERTY of substance along with 
others; substance is something particular, something posited in the 
universal along with other particulars. Each is subsumed under the 
others, but these two subsumptions go in opposite ways: the particular 
is negative one and the properties according to their determinacy and 
in opposition are; the universal is the positive unity of numerical ones. 
This our reflection about what is essential in the determinate con-
cept, developed with respect to it, is its realization or the reflection of 
the same into itself. The determinate concept is determinacy com-
prehending itself, or determinacy reflected into itself. Reflection as 
65. Trans. !hr. ihre could be singular and refer to "substance," rather than plural. 

Relationship 
the simple, or the universal, is in the form of determinacy; and the 
latter is the self-subsistent being and the sublatedness of the deter-
minacies, the negative unity, the merely possible, posited precisely as 
possible; substance is absorbed in it. Insofar as substance is posited, 
the universal is what is essential and this substance is posited as some-
thing sublated; in other words, the negative one is subsumed under 
the universal. Conversely, substance is the particular, what is sub-
sumed, connected with the universal, posited in it as sublated, indeed 
positive unity as well, something universal; and the determinate con-
cept is through its determinacy something only posited as sublated 
and therewith posited rather as what is subsumed. For, since it is 
something reflected into itself, substance cannot disconnect itself from 
that; just as, opposed to this reflection, [it is] connected with its op-
posite and thereby with negative unity, in its being per se having in 
itself only to be as the connection with negative unity. Thus, the 
contradiction of the determinate concept within itself is that it [is] this 
doubly opposed subsumption in itself; the determinacy is contradic-
tory to the reflection within itself, and the positing of the determinate 
concept is this ± v'- 1. Its positing is its square; its reality, its concept 
is this opposed possibility. 
The determinate concept, expressing what it is in itself-[express-
ing] not the determinacy reflected into itself but that the determinacy 
equally sublates [itself] therein and that the concept is a one that posits 
the determinacy at the same time as sublated, but simultaneously 
[is] a universal that posits this its being sublated as sublated-is 
judgment. [8o] 
B I judgment 
Here "bad reality" follows the "bad ideality" of the determinate concept (con-
trast the order in "Simple Connection," CE 31 above). In the first moment we 
reflected. Now Socrates himself is the subject whose judgment "subsumes" 
the whole community of the Athenians (including himself); and through him 
the laws speak-so the subsumption goes both ways. 
Hegel's treatment of the forms of judgment is itself formal. But if we take 
him to be concerned about how the community is present to the citizens as 
the laws, we can see why he orders the forms of judgment as he does. "The 
law-abiding Athenians are Athens" is convertible; "All Athenians are Greeks" 
is inadequate; "Socrates is an Athenian" is accidental; only "If Socrates heeds 
the laws, then Athens is," is necessary. (Note that Hegel gives the hypothetical 

Logzc 
judgment this odd form.) This is "the reflection of Socrates the Athenian into 
himself." 
The reverse subsumption goes: "Socrates is not just the human animal that 
he was born" (because of his education-but this is accidental); "Socrates is 
not a lion, but an Athenian" (which is a necessary truth but a superfluous 
statement, even though a circus lion might be called "Socrates"); "Socrates is 
an Athenian, or he has not heeded the laws but has fled to Boeotia" (which 
is a choice that he does have). The disjunctive is the absolute judgment because 
it expresses the freedom of choice implicit in Socrates' being a "human animal" 
to begin with. What is realized in judgment is contingency or freedom; and 
that is not yet named. Hence the advance to syllogism is necessary. 
1 I Judgment is the moment of otherness of the determinate concept, 
or its (bad) reality, wherein what is posited as one in it goes asunder 
and is distinguished on its own account. In the determinate concept 
there is reflected determinacy as taken back into itself out of the 
otherness; yet it is not so in truth, but rather still determinacy, and 
still in otherness. And the reflection into itself is the negative one, or 
the posited side of the sublatedness of the determinacy. 
Judgment is the expression of what the concept [is] in truth; there-
fore it includes within itself a negative one: a substance that, however, 
[is] no longer posited as such on its own account (as in the relationship 
of substantiality) but rather [is] what is reflected into itself, itself con-
nected with the reflection into itself, with the universality, [and is] 
subsumed under what is reflected into itself [and] posited as merely 
a sublated one. In other words, substance is something particular, or 
subject. But just as [substance] is posited through the universal as 
sublated, so in its turn as a negative unity it posits this universal (which 
at the same time is a determinacy) as something sublated. This uni-
versal is not posited as being in itself but rather only with respect to 
an other as subject; and it is a property of it, something other than 
it itself is. This otherness, or the being in an other, is necessary; [it 
is] the expression of substance as of a determinacy, [it is] what is 
opposed to opposed determinacies whose negative unity is the subject. 
The substance has [them] next to itself as other properties in general, 
not as [things] that are connected with each other through themselves 
([that is,] are only as [each] the negative of the other) but [has them] 
rather as reflected, self-subsistent, and indifferent to one another, 
[things] that do not relate to each other as their possibilities but rather 

Relationship 
each of which is on its own account as opposed to the other ([that is,] 
is only an other like the others). [They are] qualities whose being per 
se, as subject, is however just as much opposed to them as it also is in 
them; they are in the form of the subject. 
To this subsumption of the universal under the particular, under 
the subject, is tied the opposite [subsumption]. These properties are 
universal, positive [81] unities; [they are] a self-equivalent being per 
se in which the negative unity is sublated or (insofar as it is posited) 
is designated with this determination: to be posited only as sublated-
that is, not as substance but rather as subject. Just as the predicate, 
regarded from the perspective of the subject, was also posited only 
as something sublated and this expressed itself in the fact that it had 
others beside itself, so too this positedness of the subject as something 
sublated through the predicate is expressed in the subject [an ihm]. 
And regarded from the perspective of the predicate, the subject sim-
ilarly has others beside it, against which it [stands] even as it is indif-
ferent to them. Its connection with them is outside of it. Just as the 
connection of the properties is outside of them, namely in the subject, 
or rather the subject is this connection itself, so is the connection of 
these subjects something other than they-namely, the predicate. It 
is their equivalence; [it is] what in this its otherness, the diverse sub-
jects, remains self-equivalent as reflected into itself, and thereby posits 
this its otherness only as ideal., as sublated. 
These two opposed subsumptions are unified in the judgment; in 
the concept they are in simple unity; what the judgment expresses is 
a reflection alien to the concept itself. The subject and the predicate 
are what is essential in the opposed subsumptions; in whichever, when 
one is the essential, the other is posited as the ideal. or sublated. The 
simplicity of the concept has vanished; its reflectedness of determinacy 
has divided (or doubled) itself under opposed determinations. And 
the simplicity of the connection of their connection66 doubled is not 
the concept, but rather the copula is, empty being, non-reflected con-
necting. And the judgment does not so much accomplish the reali-
zation of the concept, but rather in it the concept has come outside 
of itself. That it may be maintained in the judgment, the subject and 
predicate must make themselves equal even in their antithesis, must 
both express in themselves the determinate concept, a simple oneness 
66. Trans.: Here we follow ms; CE omits the second "connection." 

86 
Logic 
of universal and particular. The question is how the judgment is able 
to do this in itself, how this necessity is displayed in it and, in the 
inability of having the concept in itself, drives it out of itself. [82] 
2 I The subject and predicate coupled in the judgment, the former 
the particular and the latter the universal, contradict themselves through 
their antithesis to themselves and through the opposite subsumption 
that they exercise over one another. Each is on its own account, and 
each is connected in its being per se with the other and reciprocally 
posits the other as something sublated. One just as much as the other 
must display itself as positing this ideality in the other; in the manner 
in which they are connected with one another in the concept of judg-
ment, the contradictory being per se of each is posited. Each is, how-
ever, only on its own account in that the other is not on its own account; 
in the manner in which they are in judgment, each is on its own 
account. Thus the being per se of the one must make the other into 
something other than what it is posited as immediately in the judg-
ment. This self-preservation through the coercion of the other under 
it is therefore immediately the becoming-other of this other; but at 
the same time the nature of the judgment must equally validate itself 
in this alteration and simultaneously sublate the otherness; it is thus 
the path [of] reflection of this other into itself. The realization of the 
terms of the judgment is in this way a doubled one; and both together 
complete the realization of judgment, which, however, in this its to-
tality has itself become something other. For the determinacy of the 
members essential to judgment has sublated itself through its reflec-
tion into itself, and it is rather the empty connection that fulfils itself. 
a I Being per se of the Predicate, and Reflexion 
of the Subject into Itself 
The fact that in judgment the predicate on its own is not subsumed 
under the negative unity of the subject makes it cease to be a prop-
erty-makes the predicate into what is self-subsistent and the subject 
into what is posited as sublated. 
ex I The subject is itself a universal when posited immediately as sub-
lated in its determinacy of particularity. It is not a numerical one, but 
itself something positive, a determinate concept. It must at first be so 
posited, for it should be on [83] its own account and not as substance, 
as actuality. Rather, it should have in itself the being per se such as it 
has now become-that is, universality. In order that the judgment, 

Relationship 
however, not cease to be a judgment, the subject must still retain vis-
a-vis the predicate the relation of a particular to its universal; besides 
the subject there must be contained in the universal other determinate 
concepts. "A is A" or "Matter is heavy" is no judgment, for "What is 
heavy is matter" or "A is A" is just as correct; that is to say, the possibility 
of converting the relation proves that what was previously posited as 
particular is likewise a universal and that the universal still loses noth-
ing of its universality in being posited [as] particular; [it proves] that 
for these terms the distinction of subject and predicate is something 
quite external, not expressed in their essence. 
As this determinate concept that retains vis-a-vis the predicate the 
relation of particularity, the subject still remains thereby a negative 
one. But a one, taken up in universality, expresses itself as allness; and 
the judgment "All A are B" (or, when the negative unity is brought 
out even more determinately, "Every A is B") determines the subject 
equally well as negative one and also as something universal. 
This restoration of particularity in universality itself, however, is 
not a positing of what the subject as such is. The subject should be 
on its own account, and precisely as subject. Yet as allness it is in fact 
not subject but has the universality of a predicate and is something 
particular simply and solely in this connection with it. And the pred-
icate does not preserve itself in its universality; rather, the subject is 
likewise something that subsumes, something universal, just as the 
predicate is. The latter only remains the universal in that the subject 
becomes a negative one and is posited as such above all. The subsuming 
of the predicate is sublated by the universality of the subject; for the 
subsuming to occur, the universality must be restricted and must 
express in itself this becoming subsumed. 
13 I The judgment in which the universality of the subject has been 
restricted in this way is the particular one67 "Some A are B." Here the 
subject is no longer something universal, particular only in connection 
with the predicate; rather, it expresses negativity with respect to the 
predicate itself. 
But the particular judgment ceases in fact to be a judgment. It is 
through and through only a problematic judgment, for the subject 
"some A" is something wholly indeterminate. [84] A distinction is 
drawn [in] the sphere, [that is to say, in] the universal A, but only a 
67. Trans . In the following, particuliire and besondere are used as indifferent syn-
onyms and translated indiscriminately as "particular" 

88 
Logic 
quite general distinction, one that is without any determinacy; and 
the opposite judgment "Some A are not s" is equally correct. Precisely 
because the connection of B with A is possible in the completely op-
posite manner, it is an indeterminate connection just as well positive 
as negative: B is connected and also not connected. Suppose, however, 
that the negation is connected with the predicate and this is deter-
mined as not-B; the predicate would then cease altogether to be a 
determinate concept; it would be, rather, something fully indeter-
minate, something sublated, instead of being what it ought to be: 
something that preserves itself. In that the connection of the subject 
in a particular judgment generally is considered without reference to 
the possibility of [its] opposite or negative, the predicate is connected 
in truth not with some A but with A generally (partly positive, partly 
negative, from which we here abstract)-that is to say, we would have 
again the previous universal judgment altered only by the require-
ment of a restriction. The particular judgment only claims "s should 
not subsume A as universal"; for the subsumed is immediately a par-
ticular just because it is something subsumed. It is also nothing but 
the mere "should," however, that is asserted; the requirement that 
the subject be posited as a negative one is not in fact fulfilled. 
'Y I The mere "should" of the particular judgment is sublated; and in 
that the subject is a numerical one, something singular, what is proble-
matic in it is determined in the singular"'8 judgment "this is B." A "this" 
is per se a particular, a negative one; it is opposed to the universal and 
freed from it. But just because of this, it is rather only a singular, not 
a particular, for the singular qua particular is at the same time posited 
as connected with the universal. And in that the subject thus posits 
itself on its own account-what it is vis-a-vis the universal of the pred-
icate: to be only subsumed under it-its connection with the predicate 
is in fact sublated in it too. In the way it must express in itself the 
connection, the subject is no longer a particular. Just as the subject 
as universal has destroyed individuality within itself-it is not posited 
as particular-just as little is it posited as singular in that it has now 
destroyed universality. The middle between the two, particularity, is 
the negative unity of both, something merely required in the positing 
of universality and singularity as one. [85] 
8 I The true union of both consists in singularity being posited, but 
as a sublated, as a merely possible one. The subject expresses its nature 
68. Tram.: "Singular" translates both singuliire and einzelne. 

Relationship 
8g 
in this way since its content is a substance, a numerical oneness, and 
this oneness (as at the same time only possible) is both distinguished 
from its possibility and connected with it; [it] is thus itself expressed 
as a proposition. When the subject is posited in judgment in this form, 
the latter is the hypothetical judgment "If this is, so is B." The "this" of 
the singular judgment is the subject of the judgment, but in such a 
way that this "this," this actuality of the numerical one, is posited at 
the same time as only a possible, as a sublated one. The predicate B 
governs the whole judgment. It is the universal that this subject sub-
sumes under itself, so that the subject is not something positive but 
only something possible; or so that it expresses at the same time its 
determinateness by means of the universality (since it is a "this") and 
displays fully developed in itself the nature of particularity. 
In the hypothetical judgment the preservation of the predicate has 
been established. In the universal judgment the predicate is equal to 
the subject, and the relation is lost. In like manner, since the subject 
expresses only its connection with the predicate-[that is,] its being 
in the universal-it is for its part not as particular; it is this, rather, 
only relative to the predicate. As merely for this relation it is thus 
subject: [that is,] what it is in itself in the relation;69 and its becoming-
other is its coming to be on its own account. In the particular judgment 
the predicate is indeed the universal, but it dispenses with the subject. 
It both connects with "these" subjects and also not with "these"; that 
is to say, it connects with some of them and not with others. And that 
with which it connects in general throughout its duplication, or in 
respect to which it does not have this indifference, is in fact the A, or 
the subje<;t as universal. The subject in this particularity is something 
other than the way it is merely in relation, connected with the uni-
versal. But it [is] an otherness only externally, formally posited with 
respect to the relation, something that should be, something non-uni-
versal, not a "this." In the singular judgment the predicate is indeed 
the universal that subsumes the subject but is itself still a property of 
the subject, something determinate; and its subsumption of the subject 
under itself is not expressed with respect to the subject. This is ac-
complished only in the hypothetical judgment. But thereby the judg-
ment is in general a problematic one, for the "this" is posited as 
6g. Tram.: The German reads: "es ist so Subject bloss fur diss Verhaltniss, was es 
im Verhaltisse an sich ist." An alternate English reading: "It is thus as subject what it 
is in itself in the relation, that is, merely for this relation." 
. 

go 
Logic 
sublated; and the predicate has not emerged from its [86] subsump-
tion under the subject by means of the developed particularity. The 
subject is indeed posited on its own account as what it is in the relation; 
but because of this, were the subject posited ideally. by means of the 
predicate, the universal for which the subject is posited as sublated 
would itself come to be negative unity. But the subject of the hypo-
thetical judgment is thus posited on its own account as something only 
possible. From the side of its "this" it is connected with the predicate, 
but not as something sublated; or "this" is not its substance whose 
accident it would be, its necessity. The condition is a possible cause; 
but it would cease to be cause and necessary precisely in virtue of this 
non-identity. Both are connected, to be sure, but in such a way that, 
since the subject is only as possible cause (as ideal. cause, that is), it 
is in truth as something separate. The connection of the universal and 
particular is a simple being of the particular in the universal. In judg-
ment the two separate; the connection must become again the dif-
ferentiating one [that we saw] previously in relation. The realization 
of the judgment comes to this point in that what has come apart 
connects. But it becomes necessarily a realization that is not that of 
the cause but that of the condition: the condition, namely, that the 
subject not become an other in the predicate; or [that] its otherness 
only consist in its remaining identical, its own self; and in its being 
bound only with another. In this being bound with another, its simple 
being per se as cause would stand out against this bonding of itself 
with another as with the effect. Rather, the cause remains as subject 
on its own account; and its connection with another is not a bonding 
of itself to another in which the connection would be a real, crossing 
over. On the contrary, what is here identical, which is [also] in the 
other, falls away. The cause is posited ideally.; necessity is a connection 
that does not express itself as identical. The relation of causality is A: 
a + s; that of condition, A: B. 
The hypothetical judgment is thereby a requirement of necessity, 
which as such (that is, as the identity of opposites that are at the same 
time self-subsisting) had disappeared until now in this relation and 
[which] first comes in again with the hypothetical judgment; for here 
the opposites are posited again as self-subsisting. But necessity emerges 
simply and solely as something required, as something negative; for 
in the being per se of the subject that has realized itself, and in the 
being per se of the predicate (for the preservation of which this hap-
pened) in their very selves, something positive in identity is not ex-

Relationship 
91 
pressed: that the A might be in B, or B in A, the one or the other a 
uniting of both. Rather, what is identical is [87 ]just the negative: the 
fact that just as the predicte is a universal that is posited as sublated, 
so too is the subject (which as unity of actuality and possibility is the 
resolved universality) the realization of the previous relation as itself 
something connected, or as one term of the connection. This relation 
of the relation of actuality and possibility to the universal, to the 
predicate, is a necessity that should be. The terms are posited as ideal.; 
they are what is fluctuating, unstable; and what is required is the 
middle term that would be their expressed necessity, their posited 
identity. This demand is what is last in the realization of the subject; 
it can be satisfied only by the realizing of the predicate, of the uni-
versal. 
~ I Being per se of the Subject and 
Realization of the Predicate 
aa I The subject preserves itself as a posited particular in that it realizes 
the subsumption of the predicate under itself or displays it as sub-
sumed under the subject according to its determinacy, just as previ-
ously it preserved [itself] in the contrary way, namely, as reflected into 
itself, as universal, as that which already on its own account would be 
the sublatedness of opposed determinacies. Displaying the predicate 
as something determinate in itself (as it is in itself qua one property 
of the subject) can be nothing else than its self-sublating and its being 
posited as one with the opposed determinacy, whereby a new unity, 
a higher universal, originates. 
The immediate display of the judgment "B is A"-that A, the pred-
icate, is something determinate and subsumed under the subject B, 
in other words, something sublated through its negative unity-is the 
positing of A as not-A. It is the expression of the negative judgment, 
in which the predicate is posited according to that moment in which, 
as determinate, it is in fact something that is not in itself but rather 
something going under within its opposite through its negative unity. 
Negative judgment, however, is just for that reason problematic, 
like the particular judgment; for the subject is not connected with 
something universal. There is posited only the universal form of the 
judgment, not a judgment itself; in other words, it is problematic 
whether there be a judgment. The predicate is not-A. This universal 
just as it is is somethin~ absolutely empty, a determinacy not reflected 

92 
Logic 
into itself. However, this not-A, as reflected into itself or as positive, 
can also be the determinacy opposed to A. The negative is something 
with a double sense: the "not" in general, pure nothing or being; or 
the "not" of this determinate A whereby it is itself a determinate "not," 
which is [88] opposed to A as positive. If the former is intended, the 
judgment is something completely indeterminate in its predicate; it 
is no judgment. If the latter, it is something determinate; what it is, 
however, is totally problematic and such that one just as much as the 
other, and the one as little as the other alone, must be intended. 
Were not-A itself something positive, then the judgment "B is not-
A" would in fact be a positive one, "B is c." And since c is expressed 
not as c but as not-A, then the subject would connect with c as with 
something opposed to A and thereby with the unity common to A and 
c-the higher universal that incorporates A and c in the same manner 
and is their negative unity or their universality. 
Since B is connected nonetheless by means of A with a higher sphere 
not yet posited, what is required-the sublatedness of the predicate 
as a determinacy-has not been achieved through the negative judg-
ment. As we have shown, it can only [be] realized (or the predicate 
be completely displayed as something annihilated) [in] that this equiv-
ocation of not-A cease, and it be posited as nothing. And this can only 
happen [in] that the connection ofB with the higher sphere n, common 
to A and c, completely fall away. 
~~I In negative judgment lies an unexpressed but indirect connection 
of B not with A but through A itself with the not-A opposed to the A 
as c, and the higher sphere of A-and-c. "B is not green; it does not 
have this colour." By that is meant: ex) it has some other determinate 
colour, and ~)it has colour in general. For the predicate to be posited 
as sublated, the other colour, as colour in general, must fall away, 
and with colour in general also every other determinate colour falls 
away. The negative judgment has become an infinite one: "Feeling 
does not have a red colour"; "The spirit is not six feet long"; and any 
nonsense of the same kind. That is to say, it has simply to do with 
the fact that the connection of the subject with the sublated predicate 
is at the same time a sublating of the sphere, which as unity has the 
negated predicate for a negated term opposed to it. The predicate as 
such is negated: in the negative [8g] judgment the subject does not 
have this predicate; in the infinite it has no predicate. The negative 
expression of the infinite judgment must therefore be so constituted 
that not through this determinacy does the connection with its uni-

Relatzonship 
93 
versal still [subsist], but rather that this universal just as well, hence 
the predicate, is sublated in general. 
An infinite judgment of this sort therefore presents itself imme-
diately as an absurdity because, since the predicate is completely ne-
gated, no judgment at all occurs, but only an empty semblance of one 
(a subject and a connection with a predicate having been posited), 
which dissolves into nothing. As the negative judgment to the partic-
ular, so the infinite judgment corresponds to the singular judgment; 
the latter's subject is posited completely on its own, but just thereby 
it steps out from under subsumption and in fact, in its not being 
subsumed, [its] not being reflected under the universal, is not on its 
own and is also no judgment. 70 So in the infinite judgment the pred-
icate is completely negated by the subject; at the same time, it has 
thereby stepped outside the subsumption under a subject and is com-
pletely on its own,just as the subject is. But just thereby the judgment 
falls apart and is no more. 
However, the negation, the nothing, is not at all something empty; 
it is the nothing of this determinacy and [is] a unity that is the negative 
of opposed determinacies. It must thus be posited with respect to the 
predicate as it has been determined by us under the negative judg-
ment. 
'Y'Y I The negated predicate, or (as it is for the subject in relationship) 
the property that is posited as determinacy only in a sublated way, is 
such that, being determined as A, it is connected strictly with its op-
posed determinacy and is a not-e, just as c is a not-A. And in that 
both of them are as reflected into themselves, the connection, [or] 
their negative unity, is equally something reflected into itself, a uni-
versal, what is common to the two, which are particulars for it; yet 
[they are] not as negative one but [them]selves as universal. For each 
on its own account is not the one of opposed determinacies but a 
formal one of this kind, reflected into itself, determinacy, [so that)7' 
outside of their own reflection [there is] equally a reflection into itself. 
Their sphere is indeed one of this kind but it is also at the same time 
[go] opposed to the subject. It is the positive unity, the subsisting of 
the opposites; it is just their common reflection-that is, a universal. 
70. In the margin: subject in the particular moves towards the being of actuality, in 
the infinite the predicate towards nothing. 
71. Trans :The ms reads "determinacy, which one, outside of their proper reflection 
[is] just as much a reflection into itself." We have followed cE's emendation. 

94 
Logic 
With respect to the subject as such the opposed determinacies do not 
in fact subsist. The subject is their negative unity; its properties are 
completely indifferent to each other. As the being of its properties it 
is a formal universal, not negative unity but unity. The properties are 
only other for each other, not differentiated as against one another. 
The subject is the empty one, paralysed substantially, or determinate 
substance, which, as not particular, not posited in the universal itself, 
connects its determinacy infinitely with the other and sublates its ac-
tuality. On the contrary, the subject as one reflected into itself is par-
ticular substance; or the essence of this one, posited in the form of 
negative one, is universality and is thus its determinacy reflected into 
itself, not sublating itself as actuality. In connection with their deter-
minacies, the higher universal is their negative unity; but opposed to 
the subject [it is] what is self-equivalent in these particularities. Op-
posed to the subject, the negative unity is a universal and does not 
appear as negative unity; but rather the determinacies just on that 
account [appear] in it not as self-sublating but as sublated and thereby 
external, independent of it. The negative unity is only their common 
space; the determinacies are not its accidents but its specifics [Beson-
dern]. The negative unity is in this their otherness the self-equivalent, 
but the determinacies as this its otherness are equally such as are self-
subsistent in their determinacy. 
The predicate, posited in the judgment in this way ([that is to say,] 
that the subject is connected with the predicate and its opposite and 
thereby with what is universal in both of these), is something that 
excludes its opposite, and the opposite does the same; thus both subsist 
in the same way. The subject that is connected with the one cannot 
be connected with the [other]; yet it must be connected in this way 
with both. It is connected with both at once in such a way that the 
connection with the one excludes the connection with the other, hence 
also not with both at once and positively only with their universal. 
This judgment is called the disjunctive. It is the counterpart to the 
hypothetical; as in the latter the subject, so in the former the predicate 
attains its totality (which is here developed as determinacy reflected 
into itself). It is determinacy, and thereby at the same time is with its 
opposite and hence is also their universal.?" The judgment in which 
the predicate is thus developed is disjunctive-the [91] subject con-
72. Trans.: We follow CE. The ms could read ". 
and hence also their universal 
is." 

Relationship 
95 
nected either with A or c. That is, the predicate excludes its opposite 
from the determinacy; yet it is equally excluded by it; and one no 
more and no less than the other. The subject is connected with each 
in such a way that in this connection it excludes the other, yet in the 
connection is thus also connected at the same time with this other. 
Through this totality of the predicate, the subject has genuinely 
preserved itself, or has made the predicate into what it is in truth in 
this relation, namely, a determinacy, something posited as sublated 
in the negative unity of the subject. This now pertains to [ist an] the 
predicate in that it is not the predicate that is the exclusive determinacy 
of the subject; rather, its opposite is connected with the subject in the 
same way. They are both at the same time not nothing, as in the 
infinite judgment (which is no judgment at all), but both pertain to 
the subject just as much as neither the one nor the other does; and 
right through them the subject is connected determinately only with 
their sphere, which is present as undeveloped. 
The judgment is thus completed through the two opposed subsump-
tions: of subject under predicate [and] of predicate under subject. 
a I In the first, the predicate preserved itself as universal; and the 
subject was posited with respect to it as what it is, not outside this 
relation but rather [as] what it is in it. In other words, it travelled the 
path of reflection into itself and set itself forth as determinateness of 
negative unity through universality. Thus, in the [second] subsump-
tion the subject remained a particular, undeveloped, and the predicate 
developed itself as what is determined by the negative unity of the 
subject. The determining [term] (in the first case the predicate, in the 
other the subject) was posited as the one that remained whatever it 
is, as the self-subsisting; but in fact it is rather the other, which displays 
its reflection into itself, the self-subsistent or real •. For it displays in 
itself the totality of relation, while the other preserves itself only as 
the fixed term of the relation. And the bad and true reality stand in 
converse relation: in the first subsumption wherein the subject is de-
termined through the predicate, the subject is rather reflected within 
itself, real., just as the predicate [g2] is in [the] second. In this their 
genuine reality, both cease to be something positive. In the hypo-
thetical judgment the subject is posited as something sublated, and 
similarly in the disjunctive judgment, the predicate; and so they are 
both posited as what they are in themselves in truth. The subject is 
in itself not a particular, a self-subsistent being, but rather a singular 

g6 
Logic 
that is only posited as something possible; the predicate is not a uni-
versal as determinacy (in other words, not the determinacy as reflected 
into itself, as self-subsistent); but rather it is in itself only as the either-
or, the equal being or the contingency of opposed determinacies. 
Thus it has come about here for the first time that what we have 
hitherto opposed ([that is,] the bad and the true reality) and what in 
each fell outside one another in the exposition (namely, the one as 
the determinacy of the concept, the other as its totality) are here 
opposed in one and the same relation. But at the same time the 
doubled subsumption falls apart, and the true realization of subject 
and predicate is itself a bad realization of judgment; for judgment 
has not returned into itself out of its duplication. In the duplication 
judgment has only come outside itself, for this doubled judgment is 
a problematic one; [it is] the hypothetical Uudgment) as necessity 
merely called for, with respect to which the identity of necessity is not 
posited. The disjunctive judgment is equally problematic, for the sub-
ject is in fact not bound to the posited predicate and its antithesis. 
Rather, that with which it is necessarily connected, namely, the sphere 
of both, is what is not posited; thus there is necessity in it in like 
manner.73 In the hypothetical judgment the predicate is what is ne-
cessary, while the subject is contingent to this necessity and the other 
[that is, the subject] is lacking. And conversely, in disjunctive judgment 
the subject is posited as one term of the necessity, but the other, the 
predicate, is lacking to it. In both, what is posited as essential is not 
even connected with that with which it stands in connection (rather, 
this is posited as ideal., as sublated); but through this [it is connected] 
with an other that is not yet posited. The subject of hypothetical 
judgment is ideal., like the predicate, and at the same time a "this," 
but the "this" is not posited. In disjunctive judgment the predicate is 
ideal., but the determinacy is similarly not posited. In virtue of the 
fact that previously the subject was one-sidedly identical with the pred-
icate and now the predicate is one-sidedly identical [93] with the sub-
ject, the principle of necessity is present. And in the hypothetical 
judgment the predicate, through its identity with the subject (which 
at the same time is also something determinate, a singular), can be 
bonded with the singular that is posited, which is just thereby identical 
with this subject. So too the subject in disjunctive judgment is identical 
with the predicate, which is posited on the side of its determinacy; 
73· Trans.: That is, the necessitv called for (explicitly added by CE). 

Relationship 
97 
this predicate is at the same time a universal, and the subject can thus 
be bonded with something of the sort through the realized predicate. 
For the subject and predicate there is present the form of the necessity 
of a connection with something not yet posited. But it must be posited. 
The hypothetical and the disjunctive judgment are problematic, but 
there must be a judgment; and it can only happen now because in 
hypothetical judgment the particular, outside of this subject in which 
it is as sublated, is posited [as] self-subsistent in the way it was in the 
disjunctive judgment-because the subject of the hypothetical judg-
ment connects with the subject that is self-subsistent and with it con-
stitutes indeed a judgment, which it can do since it is itself a universal. 
Likewise, [it can only happen now] in that the predicate of di~unctive 
judgment connects with its sphere, or rather only posits this connec-
tion; and with it constitutes indeed a judgment, which it can do since 
it is itself something determinate, thus takes up the self-subsistent 
universal in the hypothetical judgment. In this [way] both these judg-
ments, the di~unctive and the hypothetical, are united; the self-sub-
sistent subject of the disjunctive and the self-subsistent predicate of 
the hypothetical are posited; and the realized predicate of the former 
and the realized subject of the latter are both one and the same; [they 
are] the middle between the extremes, between the self-subsistent 
subject and predicate. There is hereby posited one judgment split 
within itself, its middle being a fulfilled, developed universality, the 
unity of particular and universal; and subject and predicate cease to 
be bonded through the empty "is" of judgment. They are interlocked 
[zusammengeschlossen] through the fulfilled middle, which is their iden-
tity, and thereby through necessity; and the judgment has come to 
be the syllogism [Schlusse].H [94] 
c I The Syllogism7 ; 
Judgment establishes freedom in its problematic aspects: contingency and 
choice. Syllogism realizes freedom as reason. The concept of the ethical sub-
stance (formulated in the "Relation of Being") is now "reflected into" Socrates 
74· Trans.: Schluss means both "syllogism" and "conclusion"; the English does not 
catch this. 
75· In the margin. Concept of the syllogism 
Trans.: The marginalia and the frequent underlinings in this section suggest 
that the ms was used later either for lectures or for preparing another ms. The text 
is not as carefully edited 

g8 
Logic 
the thinking subject. As the incarnation of the laws he is not just the singular 
subject but the middle term through which the concept of the ethical substance 
becomes the syllogism of self-definition. He "subsumes" both his own sin-
gularity and the universality of the law in his own activity of self-realization 
(and as family member and citizen he is also subsumed). 
As freedom of choice the subject is "the actual itself as universal." As family 
member he is resolved, and the contingency of his decision is wiped out. 
Through birth and education Socrates is one of "the Athenians," and this is 
his identity (as it is the identity of the family also). The hypothesis of the 
judgment is positively asserted. Socrates is an Athenian because he is the "son 
of Sophronisus," born of an Athenian, and now head of the family. The 
ethical Thing contains many such particular universals, and they have both 
different private interests, and different social functions. But the absolute 
determination of all of them is that they are Athenians. Because they are free 
agents, however, this determinacy is not necessary. Socrates can abandon Ath-
ens just as Athens can condemn Socrates. The disjunctive syllogism is vol-
untary. The subject realizes itself by defining itself. 
The community has its own logical process of realization. It must sublate 
the privacy of the family. Hence it divides into the government and the 
governed. It does not depend simply on voluntary consent (which is a con-
tingentjudgment). The citizen as middle between city and family must obey 
or perish. (The form of rationality here is inductive: what a good citizen does 
is what all must do.) The sovereignty of law is "the calm simplicity of the 
connection." 
The infinite in the "Relation of Thinking" is stable but not "paralysed." At 
this stage the new transcendental logic has sublated the older tradition of 
rational ontology. Up to this point the "critical" Logic of 1804 should be read 
and interpreted as a reconstruction of the Kantian position. "Practical faith" 
is not necessary because the logical structure of scientific language is the real 
supersensible world. The theory of the finite categories (including the forms 
of subjective cognition-concept, judgment, and syllogism-which serve an 
architectonic function in the critical philosophy) is the formal identity that 
understanding produces by copying reason. In "Proportion" the finite reflec-
tion of the understanding sublates itself and becomes "absolute reflection." 
Absolute reflection--cognition as self-conscious self-position-forms the tran-
sition to authentic speculation (metaphysics).'" 
76. Thus Hegel can say that "Logic ceases at the point where relationship ceases" 
(cE 126, I. 2); but this is ambiguous. As the S}Siem of reflection, logic includes the 
bringing of the two great "relationships" into the "proportion" that makes them one. 

Relationship 
99 
1 I The subject and the predicate preserve themselves in the realization 
of the judgment as what they are in determinacy vis-a-vis each other; 
and at the same time-in that each realizes itself in itself, each con-
stitutes itself with respect to itself to be the totality of relation-they 
both coincide. Each in itself [ex]presses the development of univer-
sality in itself, the particular as much as the universal, since each is 
equally a determinacy reflected into itself. The subject that remains 
in its determinacy connects, not determinately with a predicate thus 
developed, but through the predicate with the sphere of the predicate 
as something determinate. And conversely, the predicate that remains 
determinate [connects] not with the subject thus developed but through 
it with something determinate. Both judgments are one syllogism, since 
the developed subject and predicate are the same development. In 
this manner the subject and predicate, thus interlocked, are not im-
mediately as in the judgment; but [are] through this development, 
which has taken the place of the empty "is" of the judgment and 
through which the judgment has become something necessary. For 
the middle term is the posited middle of the extremes; it is universal 
and particular at once: a) it is a determinacy, hence equal to the 
subject, [and] a universal, hence equal to the predicate; and (3) the 
connection of its relation is the converse of this equivalence, for this 
allows no relation. It is the universal over against the subject and 
subsumes it; it is the particular over against the predicate and is sub-
sumed under it. Both these subsumptions, expressed as judgments, 
are common, simple judgments, and precisely the interlocking of sub-
ject and predicate. But the interlocking no longer has as judgment 
any meaning at all; rather, what is essential to it is not their connection 
in general but their connection through a middle, or the necessity of 
connection. The judgment is not as such on its own account, but is 
returned into the concept and subsumed under it. The [95] deter-
minate concept obtains its reality in the syllogism. As middle it is the 
simple oneness of universal and particular, since the development 
For the struggle of the understanding to cop_,, reason, see the outline of 18oJ (Rosen-
kranz, Hegels Leben, p. 191; Cerf and Harris, trans., Faith and Knowledge, p. 10) and the 
Difference essay (Gesarnmelte Werke, IV, 16-19; Harris and Cerf, trans., pp. 94-98). The 
philosophers who pushed this effort to the limit were Plato and Aristotle, who thus 
"perfected natural consciousness" and made logic (as systema >ejlexionis) possible. The 
systema ratioms is a distinctive!} modern achie\"ement. for which the long journe} from 
the Stoics to 1789 was essential. 

100 
Logic 
preserves itself in the unity. Its moments are simultaneously set apart 
from one another as the extremes and determined vis-a-vis each other. 
As relation of the extremes to the middle, the judgment is realized as something 
duplicated; but it zs at the same time posited as sublated, for what is subject 
in one of these two subsumptions is predicate in the other one, and so the 
determinacy of the judgment is destroyed through the opposite. n Yet 
ideality is not merely posited through78 this duplication of opposites 
but-in that the interlocking of subject and predicate as extremes 
does not have the meaning of a determinate judgment but rather of 
not being a judgment at all-is immediately to be the identity of the 
mediating concept, the emanations of which are the extremes and 
only as such are taken up in it. The simple circle of the concept has 
narrowed itself and cast itself apart into the line, whose middle is the nar-
rowed circle itself, gathered together into a point, and whose extremes 
are the universal and the particular. 
2 I In the syllogism the concept has returned through the judgment,7Y 
in that it is this casting apart through the judgment of its antithesis 
yet is the essential middle term of the antithesis. But the syllogism 
has immediately also the higher standpoint of being relation returned 
into itself generally, the identity of the relation of being and thought. 
Relation in its first realization has become something other than itself, 
though the realized other relation is the other[ ness] of this other[ ness] 
and the return to it. In the self-realizing judgment, in the hypothetical 
one, the entire universality, distinct from the particular, steps aside; 
but the universality becomes precisely for this reason purely negative 
unity, numerical one. The subject of the syllogism is in fact particular 
only in connection with its [g6] subsumption under the middle--that 
is, as enclosed in the circle of universality; but it is just as much 
opposed to this middle, and on its own [is] pure singularity of sub-
stance. Yet substance is no longer mere substance itself; rather, as 
what has gone right through the concept and emerged out of it, the 
alternation of accidents is brought to rest; [and these] accidents are not self-
sublating and opposed but are other only for one another, and there-
fore other in accordance with bad infinity. In other words, this sub-
77· In the margm: falling apart of the realiwtion of IUbject and predicate in hypothetical 
and disjunctive syllogism. Ideality of both. 
78. Trans.: We follow ms and not CE by placing "posited" before "but immediately" 
and by not inserting a sondern before "is to be the identity ... " later on. 
79· In the margin: subject of the syllogism is the substance returned into itself. 

Relationship 
101 
stance is an INFINITELY DETERMINED one. Substance has returned into 
itself; for as the negative unity of absolutely altering accidents it is this 
one-that is, their self-equivalence. It is opposed as much to the par-
ticular as to the universal. The universal is the predicate, the particular 
the middle of the syllogism; for it itself is, as particular, the unity of 
singularity and universality; and its singularity is therewith particu-
larity-universal over against the subject, and unity of singularity and 
universality, or particularity, over against the universal. 
80ln the syllogism the subject, as a "this" to which the relation of 
universal and particular has returned, is connected with the universal 
through the particular, not through itself; it stands only in immediate 
combination with the former and in subsumption under it. Three 
levels of ASCENDING or DESCENDING are herewith posited: a pure "this," 
absolutely singular; a partzcular, at once this and universal (that is, as 
taken up into the positive unity, the negative, infinitely determinate 
one); and a pure universal. Just as the two extremes of the pure "this" 
and the pure universal a) are contained within the middle, f3) so are they 
also opposed to it-they are on their own account. The determinate concept 
of the middle is as such the szmple unity of the universal and singular, 
and as such zts doubled connection is for the concept something external. 
It is our reflection that has developed it into these extremes. The 
concept is the universal unity of the two; but over against it as well 
stands the pure universal, which, just as the "this" is no longer the 
particular, is equally no longer determinate concept, but purely uni-
versal. Since this has appeared outside the middle,just for that reason 
the middle is not at the same time the genuine middle, subsuming 
both. The unity of both extremes in the middle and [97] their sepa-
ration in it are not themselves united again: in the separation the middle 
is merely the means that is not on its own account but [is] the point of transition 
in the ascending of singular to universal or m the descending of universal to 
singular. In the concept of the syllogism, that which is opposed to itself 
is thus this being-subsumed of both extremes under the middle, as well as 
the being per se of both and their relation to each other, by which the one 
as purely universal subsumes both positively, just as conversely the 
subject subsumes both negatively. The middle is what is common, on 
the one hand in that it is subsumed under both in the opposed, positive 
and negative, manner, and on the other in that it subsumes them 
8o. In the margin: Contradiction in the syllogism a) the being subsumed of extremes 
under the middle [3) the not being subsumed. 

102 
Logic 
both. In the middle the extremes are related by way of opposition, 
equally as subsuming each other and being subsumed. The syllogism 
must realize its concept, in that it displays this contradiction in itself. 
The middle displaying itself as subsuming both would be the universal 
itself, and the realization of the middle would coincide with that of 
this universal; over against that realization stands the realization of 
the singular, which displays itself as sublating the particular and uni-
versal in negative unity. The two paths are opposites. But in this 
current, flowing opposite ways, both will be penetrated; and the equi-
librium of both will be the realization equally of each singular.81 
a I The Realization of the Subject as Singular 
The subject as "this" infinitely determined [singular] (which is also 
called the individual) emerges here not merely into actuality; rather, 
the actual itself[emerges] as [something] universal. The actual as "this" 
is the negative unity, which is connected through determinacy simply 
and solely with the opposite. In the particular this connection, which 
turns its actuality into possibillity, is wiped out, and the determinacy 
is posited in the form of universality reflected into itself, although 
only in the form of being per se. For this form is opposed as the 
universal to the particular, and the latter has not freed itself from 
this connection. [g8] As subject in the syllogism8 • it emerges from the 
ideality in which [it] is still posited in the hypothetical judgment; and 
as negative [one] it is in and of itself determined absolutely, or absolutely 
in its determinacy,83 the unzty of many, indeed of infinitely many determi-
nacies. For as negative unity the subject is the unity of opposed de-
terminacies; but having UNIVERSALITY in itself, AS SUBSUMED, these 
determinacies are other only relative to each other, and each is freed 
from that for which it is only a possible [determinacy]. The subject 
has subsumed under itself not only particularity, the middle, but uni-
versality, the other extreme. It is something universal, but in such a 
way that its negative unity [is] what is essential (the universality with 
respect to it, posited only with respect to it as something sublated) in 
this way: that it has infinitely many properties. Universality is just this: 
their being with respect to the subject, indeed their being only as the 
81. In the margin: Opposite realization of the subject and of the universal. 
82. In the margin. Subject in the syllogzsm. 
83. In the margin singular or subject is unity of absolutely many determinacies as univenal 

Relationship 
being of others and according to bad infinity. For their being per se, 
their unity, is not just their sublatedness; but it is outside of them, as 
one[ness]. It [is] moreover infinitely many; its multiplicity is not de-
termined through the unity. This so-called individuality should have 
reality: "it is" is what is said of it, since the merely possible being in 
the hypothetical judgment is expressed as actual.M4 Thereby the hy-
pothetical syllogism is posited, since the subject of the hypothetical judg-
ment turns itself into a positive proposition. The "is" of this subject 
is, however, nothing else but wholly empty being, which is perfectly 
equivalent to nothing. "This c is,"or "cis a this," means the same thing. 
The "this" is the "is" added to the subject as predicate. The reality of 
the subject remains an empty thisness. It should have reality only in-
sofar as it is a "this," not insofar as it is the unity of these determinacies. 
For this reality would be quite another necessity, an inner necessity: 
unity of positive and negative unity in which the numerical one is 
completely lost in the positive unity. 
It is the simplicity of the "this" that as absolute being and as absolute 
certainty [gg] validates itselfM:> in ordinary cognition as absolute truth. 
It is the concept of infinite determinacy: the pure "this" dissolves itself 
immediately into nothing; the "this" is not thus empty but rather 
reflection into itself, determinacy as totality, whose form is just the "this," 
the numerical one. As totality, however, it has a content: it is the unity 
preserving itself in the opposite; and the opposite is, as shown, the 
determinacy as multiplicity, though as completed multiplicit_v, as absolute 
determinacy. Yet the multiplicity zs not completed,H6 for these many are 
properties reflected into themselves. They are on their own account 
as many; they have unity outside themselves; and so they are simply 
not [the] all.H' What is completely determinate, or the "this," is a mere 
ens rationis. Of course it seems as though the mere "ought," an un-
fulfilled demand, is only this: to display these properties, these ab-
solutely many determinacies to thought, and to exhaust them; [it 
seems] as though the subject in and of itself, without connection with 
this enumeration, is yet something completely determinate precisely 
insofar as, in that independence, it would be a "this." Now, the subject 
in the syllogism should be on its own account, not as subsumed under 
84. In the margin: the h\pothetical syllogism expresses the "is" of this subject. 
85. In the mmgin: In the mdinan cognition th1• stmple this ts absolute tnlfh. 
86. Iu the marg'lll: The p>operties me not fulfilled. 
87. In the marg'lll: The prope>ttes me neut>al l'i.1-il-1•i• one anothn. 

104 
Logic 
the universal, not posited as sublated, but rather as subsuming the 
universal in general under itself. However, just this being in and of 
itself of the absolutely determinate is this: that it have infinitely many, 
separated determinaczes, neutral [indifferente] to one another, outside of 
which their one is precisely indifferent to them; and this [is] an ens rationis, 
for it is null, this indifference of the determinacies whose essence is only 
to be in connection with another; and this their connection or their 
differentiation over against one another is their immediate negative 
unity, their essence, which is not simply outside of them, not indif-
ferent to them. 
So the subject is essentially not a "this," something absolutely deter-
minate and subsuming the universal under it, but rather equally some-
thing subsumed; and subsumed, indeed, not merely through the 
determinate universal or the particular-[not] through this, since it 
is itself something subsumed through the pure universal. But this is 
in [ 100] fact not the pure universal, for it is immediately the universal 
of this particular that constitutes the middle. The subject is not a pure 
"this" but essentially something subsumed in a necessary way through one 
determinacy under a higher one, just as it subsumes it. 88 In this way the 
universal itself [is] just as much not a pure universal, for the reason 
that it is subsumed under the negative unity by the particularity and 
through this by the subject, [and that it] is hence opposed to another 
and is itself something determinate. So the subject's being per se con-
sists in this: that in the twofold manner of subsumption it is interlocked, 
not immediately with one determinacy, but through this wzth a higher, relatively 
unzversal one, so that the connection of the subject with a predicate is 
a necessity; and in essence this necessity alone is what is real 2 • 
But the question is whether this necessity is posited through this znterlocking. 
To begin with, the subject must be connected with the middle term; 
as numerical one and at the same time [as] something particular it 
must be determined as universal. But as subject it is absolute determinacy 
and therefore equally as opposed to the infinite multiplicity of the determinaczes; 
it is indifferent to the determinacy of the middle term. The determinacy is 
a "this," just as the subject came to be considered as a this and as such 
is equally null. The subject thus determined would be this singular 
determinacy; but just as little as it is a singular, a numerical one, so 
little is it a singular determinacy. 8Y In the disjunctzve judgment it is 
connected in the same way with A = - c and with c = -A. To sublate 
88. In the margin· the subject is subsumed through ONE determinacy. 
8g. In the margm: But it is indifferent vis-a-vis this its determinacy. 

Relationship 
this ezther I or and to posit the one with respect to the subject while 
excluding the other in the DI~JUNCTIVE SYLLOGISM means nothing else 
but to posit here as this predicate what is in the hypothetical syllogism 
as a "this" subject. It is of course the pure unmediated positing, the 
minor of the disjunctive syllogism, about which we are talking. But as 
numerical one the subject is posited essentialjy as substance and simply 
indifferent to the opposed predicates, which as accidents in their 
actuality (in which they are to be posited as singular determinacies 
[ 101]) are affected by possibility-in other words, by not being posited. 
Insofar as the determinacy would be neutral beside the infinitely many 
others, however, it has as "this" no priority at all to be posited before 
another; in other words, infinitely many others are just as good as it. 
And in respect to the subject as non-substance yet as infinitely deter-
mined, it is contradictory to posit only a single determinacy. However, 
it is not this determinacy of the subject, either, but rather its necessity 
as reciprocity that is to be posited. For the connection of the subject is 
not with this determinacy but rather THROUGH IT only with another, 
and indeed, in such a way that it is reciprocally subsumed under the 
universal as well. Since as "this" it is DETERMINED, just for that [reason] 
it is also SUBLATED. This sublating of the subject through the universal 
is, however, itself always a determining sublating, a determinate being-
bound to a predicate. But this, too, cannot so come about that it would 
not be bound up with it immediately, but only through another, through 
the syllogism in general or the szmple syllogism. But the syllogism in 
general binds the subject to the predicate not with necessity. The 
latter, although universal, is itself something determinate; and the 
subject as this determinate substance is through its determinacy pre-
cisely the contrary of this determinacy, and through this is interlocked 
with the contrary of the predicate. 
golf the predicate with which the subject is to be interlocked has 
only the appearance of subsuming the particular, the middle, but is 
in fact equal to it and the judgment is only a tautological proposition, 
then in general all that is present is a judgment in which in place of 
the predicate only another expression is substituted. If the middle and 
the other extreme are in fact related as particular and universal, then the 
interlocking of the subject with this last is rather a sublating of its de-
terminacy,Y• which is its connection with the middle as a determining 
go. In the margin· ldentzcal judgment in the syllogism. 
91. In the margzn: as relation of universal and particular the interlocking is a sub-
lating of its determinacy. 

106 
Logic 
of the subject. Insofar as this universal is itself a determinacy, It IS 
[an] absolutely contingent [matter] to interlock the subject with it. For 
the latter as absolutely determined can be interlocked with znjinztely 
[many] others-which just thereby must also contradict themselves. [102] 
For the subject through its nature as negative unity is the unity of 
opposites, equally connected with the opposed determinacy and in-
terlocked through the latter with the determinacy opposed to the 
previous universal. Thus, instead of the necessity of the bonding, its 
contingency and the contradiction of what zs combined is posited. And what 
comes to be through the syllogism is something quite other than this 
bonding. As absolutely determined through the determinacy with the 
determinate universal and through its infinite determinacies with the 
pure universal, the subject is in fact in and of itself something universal 
in its determinacy. It is the neutrality of infinitely many determinacies, 
their reflectedness into themselves. It is negative unity, though posited 
as a universal, not as substance; rather [it is posited so] that in and of 
itself the possibility is not connected with the determinacies or only 
with respect to them, but is in itself. And the subject is not znterlocked 
with the universal through the determinaaes but zmmediately in and of itself.9 2 
The subject completely sublates the separation that is in that line of the 
syllogism in which the subject and the universal are combined through 
a middle dividing them; the subject is a universal. Its absolute deter-
minacy, reflected in this way into itself, is itself something simple, not 
the pure empty negative unity but determinate, just as its universality 
is the determinate one. But this determinacy, excluding the opposite, 
is posited as being in itself, as the essence of reflection into itself. The 
subject is a particular; this determinacy is what remains the universal 
self-equivalent in its pathway of becoming-other. Particularity is a 
particular;~3 through its determinacy it is connected with other negative 
ones and opposed to them. It has its completion outside itself; but its 
completion is just as universally reflected into itself, in and of itself. 
The subject is the middle that has come to be itself,94 the middle that, 
turned against another, is opposed only in diverse connections. This 
subject is realized particularity, which in itself, turned inward and 
92. In the margm: subject is not contingent, that is, interlocked through one deter-
minacy with the universal; rather with all[ness] it is inherently universal turned back 
into itself. 
93· In the margin: it is a particular. 
94· In the margin: the middle that comes to be itself 

Relationship 
107 
outward on its own account, is on its own account; [it is] itself reflected 
into itself only by being determinate, [103] for through this it is other 
to itself. But in this its otherness it itself is; that is, it is determinacy 
as such, which reflects itself into itself. Determinacy as a universal or 
as a particular is only formally reflected into itself as unity of opposites. 
But the third or synthesis-what proceeds. forth posited as simple-
became something other; and this other again an other, the first once 
more; but this first, insofar as it has become the third, distinguished 
itself from the first simple through this very having-become. It is the 
realized particular, however, which in its proceeding forth is already 
itself: [the] "this" that has become, and thus maintains itself on its 
pathway of reflection. That is to say, the subject is its definition. 
b I Realization of the Universal 
The universal in the syllogism-how the subject realizes itself as par-
ticular in that it posits the universal with respect to itself-must realize 
itself in that it posits the middle and the subject with respect to itself. 
Its essence is to posit determinacy within ztself as sublated; it is opposed to 
negative unity as to the particular in that it, as universal, does not 
exclude the opposite of the determinacy but is equal to it, or is the 
positive of the disjunction. The subject is negative unity, positing the 
opposites as sublated, and thus itself universal; but as universal it is 
something determinate. The universal (negative unity, but as such 
only the universal [on condition] that it itself is again something de-
terminate) is the side of the subject in which the universal comes into 
consideration in connection with the subject as subsumed under the 
same. But as a universal, as it is on its own account, it is not connecting 
with a subject through the determinacy but as the reflection into itself, 
dividing itself into the opposed determinacies, and positing them as sublated9"-
self-enclosed reflection into itself. 
What is more determinate in this totality of the universal is that it 
connects with the "this" that is posited as sublated in the hypothetical 
judgment; but it connects not only with that: it has likewise other con-
ditions. Its reality is not only the interlocking with this determinate 
and with a "this"; [ 104] it subsumes the same46 and posits it as sublated, 
95· In the margzn: the universal as self-subsisting divides itself into opposed deter-
minacies. 
g6. In the margzn: it is the subsumed "this." 

108 
Logic 
in that it posits others equal to it. Through this equivalence the "this" 
ceases to be a negative one, for as such it would exclude all equivalence, 
all connection; there is one particular and beside it several more par-
ticulars. But this their indifference is sublated through their deter-
minacy; they connect with one another in that they exclude each other 
in the disjunctive judgment. But just as little as the hypothetical syllogism 
posits the universal in its reality, so little does the disjunctive; rather, 
the universal is the contrary of both. The universal is not through 
the being of the "this" in the hypothetical, nor through the exclud-
edness of some other determinate in the disjunctive and through the 
being of this determinacy alone, but in like [manner] the universal is 
linked to the other; and it is not purely on its own account but only 
in connection with these particulars; it is their negative unity. This is 
the realization of the universal: that like the subject it is negative and 
positive unity at the same time, not in such a way that according to 
its determinacy the universal would have the opposite outside itself, 
but rather it embraces both and posits them as sublated. And it is not in-
terlocked with negative unity through a middle but is immediately the 
unity itself. The reflection of the universal into itself is this: that as A 
it becomes the antithesis of the B = - c, and c = - B, and in this it 
is equal to itself, recapitulates itself out of it, for it sublates [it] in its 
self-equivalence. The reflection of the subject is that it [is]97 as equal 
to itself, as B, in that it becomes something other than + B against 
c = - B, and again sublates this "plus" of its determinacy. 
The positing at the same time of the universal as a particular (in 
other words, its realization, but as self-subsistent being that would at 
the same time not be negative unity) would be the demonstration of 
the major premise of the syllogism or of the subsumption of the 
middle under the predicate. That with which it is interlocked cannot 
be something singular, for in the connection, in its determinateness 
through the universal, it is a particular. The syllogism, which displays the 
universal as subsuming, interlocks it through singularity with the par-
ticular, and is induction. The fact that the subject is this universal does 
not exhaust it in its [ 105] universality; it is absolutely many, this uni-
versal. For the universal to be posited as it is, the whole aggregate of 
this many must be posited under it; and in that this aggregate together, 
as subject, as one, confronts the universal, it is itself a universal against 
97· Trans.: Lasson and CE insert "determines itself' as the \'erb here 

Proportion 
109 
the singularity of the aggregate and a particular against the univer-
sality of the predicate; what previously was the nature of the middle 
is posited as an extreme in that the subject has become the particular 
from being the singular. But this interlocking is no more valid; for 
the singularities, whose togetherness the subject should express, are 
as singularities absolutely many and have- as such no reality. The 
connection of the universal sublates the negative unity and is thereby 
immediately bound up with the particular, separating itself precisely 
as negative unity into the particular. 
The syllogism is the connection of the singular with the universal 
through the particular. The pathway of reflection is that the singular 
at first becomes the particular and displays its subsuming of the middle 
and of the other extreme under itself. In this the universal is not 
satisfied; its subsuming must display this as well. And an immediate 
oneness comes to be out of the mediating connecting. In the relation 
of being, the simple infinity of the connection passes over into the 
infinite mediation, into synthesis. In the relation of thinking it passes 
back into the calm simplicity of the connection; and in this it is itself 
complete. The connection is that of equivalence, and each side of what 
is connected is itself a relation, under opposed forms that are posited 
as ideal •. Each is a universal and a negative unity, and the unity of 
both; and the determinate form under which they are opposed is each 
of these two that are sublated with respect to them, namely, each with 
respect to the other. 
III I Proportion 
"Proportion" completes the Logic by providing a synthesis of self-conscious 
relation and the simple connection of consciousness. (Thus it is analogous 
with "Reason" in the Phenomenology.) It is probably called "Proportion" in 
homage to Plato's doctrine of the "truly beautiful bond."ox 
g8. See Timaeus, 31c-32a. Hegel quotes (and translates) this passage in the Difference 
essay. His version (in a literal translation) goes as follows: "The truly beautiful bond 
is that which makes itself and what it binds one [ ... ]. For whenever, of any three 
numbers, or masses, or forces, the middle is such that what the first is for it, it is for 
the last, and conversely, what the last is for the middle, the middle is just that for the 
first, then since the middle has become the first and last, and the last and first conversely 
have both become the middle, in this way they will all necessarily be the same; but 
things which are the same as against each other are all one" (Harris and Cerf, trans., 

110 
Logic 
The first section is the theory of self-definition. This is no longer regarded 
formally. It is now applied. The concept of self-definition explains why (in 
natural science) living species are defined in terms of their self-preservative 
capacity. But the actual self-definition of reason makes the singular con-
sciousness into a concrete universal. This is not a static concept-it involves 
the motion of division and is achieved in cognition. 
In the animal process division is sexual. ("The universal sunders itself into 
two mutually connected definitions"; quite apart from the influence of Plato, 
the natural model of sexual division explains Hegel's insistence on a dicho-
tomous theory of logical specification.) The species emerges here as the true 
subject, and the definition applies to all species members. The wholeness of 
the breeding community involves the syllogistic structure of cognition. 
The Italian commentary points out, very aptly, that there is an important 
correspondence between "Definition" and "Division" and the two sections of 
"The Syllogism": "(a) The Realization of the Subject as Singular"; and "(b) 
Realization of the Universal"-see especially CE 97, lines 20-21; 103, lines 10, 
29-30; 107, line 33·"" This is just what we should expect, since "Proportion" 
in 1804 has entered into the place of "the speculative meaning of the syllogism" 
in the outline of 1801 (compare page xvii, note 16 above). 
The equivalence of both relations is the connection turned back into itself. 
It is so simply as this connection; and the opposed are themselves the 
two relations posited ideally". The concept is realized in that it has 
preserved itself and both its [ 106] sides have been posited with respect 
to it just as it has been. The syllogism as the bad reality of the concept 
has gone back into its circle. Out of the absolute inequality of its 
extremes it has become the contrary. 
a/ DEFINITION 
The oneness of the posztzve and negatzve unity,"'" the subject as a determznac_v 
both posited and reflected znto itself,"" is something real that is immediately 
interlocked with the universality in its determinacy, an absolute being 
p. 158). That this passage expresses what Hegel called in 1801 the "speculative meaning 
of the syllogism" is confirmed by his discussion of it in the Lecture.\ 011 the HisiOI)' of 
Philosophy, Theorie Werkausgabe, XIX, 89-91; trans. Haldane and Simpson, II, 75-77. 
99· Franco Biasutti, in Chiereghin et al , Logica e metajlS!ca, p 397. 
100. In the margin. oneness of the positive and negative unit}. 
101. In the margm. determinacy reflected mto it.1elj. 

Proportion 
ll l 
per se that in its determinacy is on its own account. The excluding is 
here for the first time real; the positive connection with what is ex-
cluded ceases; and it is the going back into itself. What thus far sublated 
the determinacy was that it only was in connection with the opposite; 
now, however, it has its reality. The subject is something determinate 
only according to this determinacy. It cease's to be something infinitely 
determined in manifold ways; and only this determinacy is the sub-
ject's essential determinacy. For the essence is the being per se or the 
having been returned into itself. 
The subject that is equal to its definition and nothing but this is 
thereby not something singular. Its essential determinacy is the one in 
which the subject [is] turned against other particulars and in this bezng-
turned-against-them preserves itself. ' 02 In the definition of living things, 
therefore, the determination of the weapons for attack or for defence has 
necessarily been taken as [the determination] of that whereby they 
preserve themselves vis-a-vis other particulars. [One] must determine 
the weaker plant kingdom [Pfianzengeschlecht] according to that whereby 
it likewise preserves itself, yet only as universal; as singular, however, 
it goes aground, namely through relation of [ 107] generation [ Geschle-
chtsverhi:iltnis]. The inorganic, weaker still, does not ever preserve itself 
as genus in its going under but therein ceases altogether to be what it is, and 
its essentzal determinacy is that IN WHICH IT GOES UNDER. What is essential 
to the subject that preserves itself thereby as an individual, as a sin-
gular, is that it be self-equivalent in this its being-turned-against-others, 
[that it] be connected only with itself. It remains self-equivalent since 
in its becoming-other it does not cease to be what it is but rather 
sublates what is thus other than itself. Self-preservatzon or definition has 
as immediately one what was hitherto separated, or was only our re-
flection: that the one as universal in its otherness is immediately equal 
to its concept, to the universal; it is, only because it has separated off 
this otherness or its determinacy from itself as something other. Ac-
cording to its determinacy it is completely on its own account in virtue 
of the fact that it annihilates what is opposed to its determinacy. Its 
being per se is not an abstraction from the opposite; but it is connected 
with it. And the oneness of both is not the sublating of both; but the 
one is itself the universal in its determinacy, or the sublating of the 
other. 
102. In the margm: The subject preserves ztseif through its determinacy or it is through 
the determinacy turned back absolutely into itself. 

112 
Logic 
This genuine reality of the "this"-that its particularity is, subsists, 
and, having been taken up as such into the universality, is on its own 
account--expresses the concept of proportion in general; in it the 
relation goes completely to one side; the particular is immediately 
incorporated within the universal, and the "this," connected imme-
diately with both, has only their unity for its essence. It itself is that 
side of the relation according to which [the] "this" is negative unity, 
the one. And the two relations that are posited equal to each other 
are that of the negative one (the essence of the relation of being) and 
that of the positive one (the essence of the relation of thinking), so 
that the merely self-sublating determinacies of the first at the same 
time subsist in the universal element of the second-are in and of 
themselves-and the indifference of those that fall outside of each 
other in the second disappears through the negative unity of the first. 
w3y et this reality, or the definition, is in fact a reality of singularity, 
or of what is determinate in general. The universal has not achieved 
its due; and the determinate that is posited as self-preserving can not 
in fact preserve itself. The determinacy is posited as being in itself 
and as [1o8] determinacy equal to the universal; and it is so posited 
that the universal [has] separated off its otherness as an other from 
itself and is so connected with it in a nullifying way that it is as universal 
in its sublating and preserves itself as this determinacy. Yet in truth 
only the side of its universality is what is thus self-preserving-what 
is equal as the unity of the opposites; and the sublating of the deter-
minacy is not the sublating of one and the subsisting of the other but 
absolutely the sublating of both. In definition, therefore, the propor-
tion is not completely expressed; the one side is only that of the 
negative one (not its expression as relation) or the "this" that should 
be simple; the other is its expression as of a relation but not of it as 
of a negative unity. For embodied in the universal, the determinacy 
subsists; that whose negative unity is the one side is the universal and 
particular. The former, however, is not a genuine universal,for it is only 
posited as subsuming one of the opposed determinacies. These terms 
are not posited as what they are in truth; the determinacy [is] not 
something ideal.; at the same time the universal is not a real, non-
negative unity. 
Definition therefore expresses only the demand for the absolute 
reality to have returned back into itself. Directed outwards it is a 
103 In the margin: Dialectic of deftnztion; it posits in fact a singular. 

Proportion 
113 
negative one that excludes others from itself and preserves itself, is 
on its own account. Its positive connection is not at the same time a 
sublating of its own determinacy but its persisting. And the moment 
of universality in it is not true universality but rather is the whole 
under the determinacy of particularity. The particular is a unity of 
universality and determinacy, but conversely the universal [is] not also 
as unity of determinacies [that are] opposed as a universal and a 
particular; that is, the universal is only posited as determinate. And 
the same [the determinate], as reflection of the determinacy into itself, 
is therefore only formal., not real., as expressing what it is with respect 
to it [the universal).' 01 Reflection into itself must not have the other 
as an other separated off from it, indifferent to it, vis-a-vis which it 
posits itself in a differentiated way and sublates itself in the connec-
tion; on the contrary, this other is in it according to its essence; it is 
the unity of both, and the sublating is the sublating of both deter-
minacies. It is the ideality just as much of itself as of the other; in 
other words, the subject is essentially a universal. As reflecting itself 
into itself and sublating the determinacy, it sublates its own [deter-
minacy] and is as a universal. That is to say, definition passes over 
into division. [ 1 og] 
b I DIVISION 
a I Since in its immediate oneness with determinacy the universal is 
itself something determinate, this unzty of both is a determinate unity, and 
something particular; this particular, as it thus reflects itself into itself, becomes 
rather a universal, one that sublates its determinacy. "'5 This universal is 
the equivalence of both opposites-that to which they return-and 
one is what the other is. Thus the self-preservation of the particular 
is rather its ideality, and a production of the universal. Since its self-
preservation, its reflection into itself, its being per se, is this universal, 
it does not properly [re]turn to universality. Universality is not the 
product or the result; it is rather the being per se of the particular-
that from which [the particular] originates just as much-the first, but 
in general the essence of the particular. 
104. Trans.: We have introduced "the determinate" and "the universal" as our 
interpretation of an ambiguous text 
105. In the margin: The particular sublates rather its determinacy, and becomes a 
universal. 

114 
Logic 
This universal is as such the empty undifferentiated space, the 
subsisting of the determinacies. It is yet more: it is the reflection into 
itself, the absolute being per se, which in its otherness is self-equivalent. 
The determinacies thus posited in it are themselves this other, this op-
posedness or the duplication of the universal, so that this [is] the essence 
of both; and they are in virtue of this alone. As something determined, 
in the necessity of the universal alone, they are themselves to be an other. 
But this their reality is essentially the equivalence or the sublatedness 
of both, and as strictly simple or self-equivalent the universal is the 
sublatedness of its otherness, or of its duplication, the negative unity 
of its parts. 
The division that the universal makes with respect to itself renders the 
definition ideal., for the universal sunders itself znto two mutually connected 
definitions, 106 which, as indifferent to one another, subsist both in the 
same manner. [It is] not [the case that] the other of one is sublated 
through the other as in the one-sided definition. But this their equiv-
alence is their substance, and because of this it posits them both ideally 2 • 
The determinacy that is reflected into itself is at the same time [ 110] 
sublated, and sublates itself. It is simply and solely in connection with 
what is opposed to it, and just in this connection it is itself ideal.. 
The terms of the division in which the universal realizes itself-
posits itself as opposed to itself, and as finding itself-are determined 
immediately through the nature of the universal itself; !07 for the latter 
is only such insofar as it becomes an other, and becomes itself out of 
this other. The two moments whose unity the universal is (it as some-
thing simple, and it as an other to itsel£)"'8 are the moments of its 
concept, and just these are the terms of the division. As moments of 
the concept they are only opposite, purely ideal 2 • When posited in the 
one, however, each is as it is in itself or really", having in itself the 
determinacy of the other, so that it is posited as the essential. In the 
universal as such they are completely equal to each other, so that 
neither is what is essential with respect to the other; both are rather 
equally ideal 2 ; the universal is the ideality of both. However, the reality 
of the concept is this: that each is alternatively what is essential, and 
106. In the margin: In the division the universal sunders itself into opposed defi-
nitions. 
107. In the margm: The terms of the division are determined through the nature of the 
universal itself. 
108. In the margm it as something simple, and rt is other. 

Proportwn 
115 
the other is what is posited ideally. in it. For the concept of the uni-
versal, insofar as it is the equal ideality of both, is itself the determinacy 
of the universal vis-a-vis the particularity, and the concept is itself 
again the one term of the division; as opposed to the particularity it 
is itself something particular. This determinacy of the terms of the 
division is as such ideal.; but it is as reflected into itself, as posited 
equal to the universal, and the duplication of the definition. In this 
reality both are indifferent to each other; each is in and of itself, for 
each has in itself the essence of the whole. They are not per se turned 
against one another, as in the case of the singular definition with 
respect to the opposite determinacy; for each preserves itself in the 
same way as the other, and neither can do so at the expense of the 
other, for both have equal rights. 
Because of this the determinacy obtains just this indifferent [ expres-
sion]. (Its differentiation vis-a-vis the other is, as it were, outside it). 
On its own account [it] is a pure quality that abstracts from its contrary; 
and the most indifferent expression of this determinacy is number. 
The universal, the genus, becomes through this embodiment some-
thing purely universal, something communal; and the division is a 
multiplication of definitions whose unity is outside them [and] is indif-
ferent even for them. For as negative unity the universal is, only in 
that it posits the [ 111] determinacies (whose negative unity it is, in 
virtue of sublating them), !09 to be their other. This otherness, while 
it remains itself, is the dividing up of the universal, so that the universal 
is as the continuous unity, outside of those in which it is. 
b' w I Division makes the subject of definition into something universal; 
and the relation of the definition itself is converted into an aggregate 
of subjects. Division brings out the universality that was suppressed 
in definition, which had not received its due in that it was not posited 
as preserving itself in otherness, in multiplicity. In the division itself, 
however, universality preserves itself only as falling outside the many. 
Connected with the terms of the definition, it is the same in A, B, c; 
but [it is] not [thus] on its own account. A, B, c, are indifferent with 
respect to one another; instead of the universal being on its own 
account, it is rather each singular that is on its own account. There 
just must be, not this [universal] divided into particulars, but rather 
109. Trans.: We follow CE in inserting a comma here. The ms would read "since it 
posits the determinacies 
to be sublating them as their other." 
110 In the margzn: Dialectic of division. The divided are indifferent to each other. 

116 
Logic 
simple negative unity, which just because of its simplicity is what sub-
lates their multiplicity in connection with them. 111 The species must 
stand in connection with one another simply and solely as moments 
of the one whole of the genus. And because of this, the genus itself 
is a negative unity, 112 which posits the moments in itself as ideal, [and 
posits] itself as undivided. As a result [it is] a substance that sublates 
within itself the differentiation and is on its own account. But it sub-
lates the differentiation only insofar as the differentiation was [pre-
viously] present. It is the universal posited as singular, as pure point 
of unity, as a positive (a manifold in itself) that disintegrates into parts 
and equally sublates this disintegrating once more. 
C f COGNITION IS POSITED 
Here we have reached the self-definition of rational consciousness. Thus the 
reflective character of logic is overcome. Cognition is the form of the "true 
infinite" (which will be realized in metaphysics) reflecting upon itself and con-
structing itself. The discussion is a recapitulation of the earlier reflective 
argument in this light. Logic concludes by discussing its own method. 
It seems that Hegel's object in comparing logical proof with geometric proof 
(the heading "Proportion" comes from Euclid) is to show us how cognition 
continues to be reflective. Self-cognition is reconstruction and involves supple-
mentary constructions, but the argument dictates these step by step. The 
"circle" of cognition goes from the "fact" to the "reasoned fact"; and this is 
the whole pattern made (deductively) by the Logic. We should notice that 
although the explicit criticism of geometrical construction is the same one 
that is made in the preface to the Phenomenology, the attitude towards the 
mathematical model of reasoning is different. The Italian commentary points 
out that this phase of Hegel's argument seems to be guided by Plato's dis-
cussion of the "third hypothesis" in the Parmenides. ,., 
11 L Trans.: We follow ms, not CE. 
112. In the margin: The genus itself is negative umty. 
113. Franco Biasutti in Chiereghin et al., Logtca e metaftsica, 408-g. This insight 
comes from earlier works by F. Chiereghin that are there referred to. The influence 
of Plato's "truly beautiful bond" can still be seen in the theory of the "speculative 
proposition" given in the preface to the Phenomenology (or so I would argue). But the 
mathematical terminology (like the Spinozist parallelism implicit in the concept of a 
"proportion" between being and thought) is there abandoned. Dialectical development 
is regarded as a kind of organic growth rather than as a kind of construction. But it was 
the fact that logical thought is a self-directing process of accumulation-that is, it was the 

Proportion 
117 
The way up from singular to universal, and the way down again, met in 
the singular consciousness as family member. "What passes through the circle 
of reflection is not itself this absolute circle." Cognition belongs to the historic 
link in the chain of generation. Thus the empirical self that is the sublated 
content is perpetually novel, but the content of absolute cognition is the circle 
of self-determination. This Fichtean contradiction is what makes the transition 
from formal logical idealism to real metaphysics necessary. The absolute 
knowledge (pure cognition) that has emerged from experience must make a 
circle of circles that returns finally to the moment of simple self-identity from 
which its emergent evolution began. (Half of sheet 39 is missing, so we do 
not know exactly how Hegel developed the dialectic of absolute cognition and 
finite experience. But the general review character of the whole discussion 
suggests that the "three determinacies of cognition" are the moments of 
"Proportion": definition, division, and totality.) 
a I Until now the transitzon of the concept into its becoming-other, or 
into its reality, and the taking back of this becoming-other under the 
concept was our refiectzon, a dialectical manipulation that developed the 
antitheses that were present undeveloped in what was posited. The 
latter, however, or the [112] content, was not of the kind that would 
thus move on its own to its becoming-other and back from it; rather, 
it was something dead whose movement was outside it: pure being is 
sufficient unto itself ffilr sick befriedigt]. The znjinity into which pure 
being or nothingness went over was this being and not-being of the 
antitheses, their vanishing and coming forth. But this movement [was] 
only an external one-that is, one in which only the being of deter-
minacy came forth-and then its not-being as the being of some other. 
That from which what came forth proceeded and [into which] what 
vanished lost itself, the inner, the zero of the passage [Durchgang], 
[was] that empty being, or the nothing itself. The absolute concept is 
itself what is without concept, uncomprehended; the equivalence is 
only the nothing. 
In the relations each was posited thus: as connecting with the other-
preservative aspect of sublation-that caused Hegel to accept Schelling's extension of 
the Kantian doctrine of "construction" from mathematics to philosophy in the first 
place. This is quite unaffected by the change of terminology. 
The criticism of geometry from the Phenomenology is to be found at paragraph 42 of 
Miller's translation, p 24. 

118 
Logic 
in its being per se, only being in the equivalence with the other, or as 
self-sublating. There was expressed only the requirement of being per 
se, which could not be realized; what was posited as self-subsistent 
being vanished instead in its realization. Only in the relation of think-
ing did being per se define itself as what would be because it is equal 
to its contrary, and would maintain itself as itself in its contrary-[ that 
is,] as reflection into its very self. As definition, the latter posited a 
determinate, negative unity as this reflection into itself, to which uni-
versality or positive unity was restored in division; and both [unities], 
qua posited in one, are cognition: the positing of the numerical one as 
of something universal and divided, and of the taking back of this 
divided one into the negative unity. Here reflection describes itself. Cog-
nition a) has a definition, the display of the one"4 of self-subsistent 
being in such a way that it has taken up its determinacy into univer-
sality-an immediate oneness that has already come back from the 
movement of separating and of sublating the separation and in which, 
in the immediate unity of the determinacy and the universal, the 
movement and the being-apart is nullified. Definition is not merely 
the definitum, nor merely the definition, but precisely the unity of the 
two: the definitum [is] the one, the singular, immediately the "this"-
the definition, the same [one] released from its immediacy and simple 
unity and divided in itself, in such a way, however, that [ 113] what is 
divided is not per se but rather posited ideally., as sublated; and its 
unity is precisely the one, the immediacy of "this." b)"; But it was 
exhibited as what is dialectical in definition that the definitum was not 
in fact posited as something universal (but rather, as one it excluded 
what was opposed to it and abstracted from it), and that it is to be 
posited as definition, as reflected into itself, as universal. What is 
opposed would not thereby fall outside what it abstracts from but 
would rather be what is equal to itself in its being-other, something 
divided. The presentation of the subject as thus divided with respect 
to itself, as an indifferent being that remains itself in multiplicity, is 
its constructzon. It is the division: not however of a universal, or of a 
determinate concept-that is, of the [kind of universal that] would be 
something merely communal, whose parts [are] on their own account 
while as self-equivalent unity it would fall outside them-but rather, 
it remains the ground, the sphere embracing the parts, while they 
114 In the margin: Cognition has (a) a one, a deftnitzon. 
115. In the margin. (b) is what is universal, and division; construction. 

Proportion 
119 
[are] simply and solely parts-that is, connected with one another. It 
is precisely the exposition of their connection that sublates' '6 this sem-
blance of the being per se of what is divided, and BRINGS FORTH the 
unwersal as connection, as the definition. The exposition of the con-
nection is the negative unity that subjects the parts to itself and thereby 
has exhibited the ONE of the definition as unity-not as one in which 
differentiation is sublated and which abstracts from it, but which is 
rather unity-that is to say, which has division but within itself-that 
is, which is with respect to itself the sublating of the parts. This bring-
ing back of the division of construction to the unity of definition is 
proof. 
This movement of cognition has until now always been the expo-
sition of a concept as reality or totality. The first potency was the 
concept or the definition itself; the second, its construction or its 
exposition as bad reality, its coming-outside-itself or its becoming-
other; and the third, the true reality, or the totality, the moment of 
sublating this becoming-other through its subsumption under the first 
unity. With respect to the first unity it was demonstrated that it has 
in fact a separation in itself; in the face of this separation [it was 
demonstrated] that the connection rather is essential to it. The neg-
ative [114] turning of the separating against the unity, of the unity 
against the separating, becomes a positive result in reality, which in-
terlocks both [of them] in that it is a universal, self-reflexive definition 
in which the first and [second] potency are not nothing but are posited 
as sublated or as ideal 2 • The spinning forward of the concept through 
its moments is in this [way] a movement turning back into itself, and 
its circle is reflection; self-subsistent being is only as this whole of the 
circle or of reflection. 
Through cognition there is first realized the definition,' '7 which 
from the side of the subject is displayed as determinate one; and 
because the one is not qua unity of the definition but is the one of the 
definitum, the determinacy is not something sublated as determinacy through 
the negative unity but subsists as quality of the one, this being an infinite 
aggregate of qualities.' '8 On the other side definztion is the same, but 
bounded, as relation, one particularity reflected into itself. [The terms 
116. In the margm: (c) sublating of constructzon [;]proof. 
1 17. In the margin: Cognition realizes the definition that is a) multiplicity of deter-
minacies, empirical intuition. 
118. In the margm: [3) relation. 

120 
Logic 
of] that aggregate, however, are" 9 indifferent vis-a-vis each other; 
each quality excludes its opposite; and together they make up the 
whole of so-called empirical intuition, that is, of the being per se of 
the subject as a "this." The determinacy reflected into itself is that of 
self-preservation, which, being in itself directed outwards against others, 
turned back into itself, and connected with itself, has sublated in-
equality in itself. Thus the definition of a right-angled triangle is that 
a right-angled triangle has the square of the side opposite to the right 
angle equal to the sum of the squares of the other two sides (its catheti). 
The former determination 12" [is] that of determinate quality; the latter 
is that of reflection; for out of the antithesis of one side to the other 
there is expressed the return or the equality. In its own way the 
antithesis is that of one side against two. 
The definitum is the one[ ness] of the three sides, figure; and the construc-
tion has to demonstrate this one[ness] of the movement of the proof. 
The triangle must be divided so that the indifference of its subsistence 
may cease and it may become differentiated [ 1 15] and thereby come 
to negative unity. The proof sublates the division in such a way that, 
out of that first division of the definitum as of something that is, and 
out of the unity of the parts as a whole, it exhibits the second division 
and its unity. The first one is the indifferent relation of the whole 
and the parts. For the second division to originate from it, the first 
must in fact already be contrary to the whole of "this," must deform 
it as such, must dismember it (as in the cited example, the figure of 
the right-angled triangle in fact is lost), and in general must be en-
gendered through helping lines and figures-figures that criss-cross 
and duplicate the whole piecemeal. It is not this first relation that 
results from the proof, but a differentiated one in which one part of 
the whole is equated to another, or to other parts, so that the parts 
are not equal to the whole but determinate parts are equal to others, 
[so that] therefore an equality is posited in the inequality or opposi-
tion; that is, the whole as unity is a unity returning out of the in-
equality. What are compared here are not parts of the whole but its 
moments; the angles and lines of a triangle are not what constitute 
the figure as a whole, but moments that presuppose the numerical 
one, the principle of the figure, and are its determinacy. The result 
119. Trans.: This verb is singular in the German text. 
120. Trans.: "The former determination" = "right-angled triangle"; "the latter" = 
"its definition." 

Proportion 
121 
of the proof is that the indifferent relation of the whole and the parts 
is at the same time a differentiated relation of the moments. The 
proof fastens both relations together for the first time; it contains the 
ground-that is, it discovers that in which the former is indifferently 
the parts and the latter is a differentiated one. In the proof of the 
Pythagorean theorem it is shown that half the square on one side is 
equal to half a rectangle produced in the construction by dividing the 
square on the hypotenuse, since both are equal to a third triangle.'"' 
All these triangles belong to the construction, the dividing of the figure 
posited with the square of its sides. From them there is eliminated 
what belongs to the triangle as figure, and there remains only an 
equivalence of opposed moments. 
This transition from the indifferent to the differentiated relation, 
and thereby from the positive to the negative [unity] and from parts 
into moments, is what constitutes the nature of cognition and of real 
definition. In the [ 116] concept of proportion or in the definition it 
is first a question of the determinacy reflected into itself as an essential 
characteristic that is embodied in the genus, maintains it on its own 
and makes it into something singular. Through the division the subject 
becomes for the first time something divided into moments; and cog-
nition displays the unity of both relations. 
b I In this way cognition displays what has previously taken place, 
namely, the transformation of the undifferentiated relation into the 
differentiated one, and the equivalence of both. Just as the former is 
itself an equivalence of the whole and the parts, so the latter too is 
an equivalence of what is posited as simple and what is posited as 
separated; and cognition is the equivalence of these two equivalences. 
The antithesis of the second equivalence can be nothing else than that 
of the two relations. The relation of being is the transition of the 
infinite or of relation in general into the equal that is equal to itself, 
into the equal reflected into itself, the universal; the relation of think-
ing is the transition from the universal into the separation of [the 
terms] interlocked by the middle, by the unreflective equal, the re-
lation. In the preceding example the relation of being is the right 
angle, the relation, something equal that is not displayed as equal; 
and what is equal to it in the triangle (with the side angle beside it) 
goes over into the hypotenuse as a non-relation, non-equality, but 
something simple and self-reflexively [zn sich reftectiertes] simple that 
121. Trans.: See Euclid, 11, q. 

122 
Logic 
has posited itself equal to itself, the square on the hypotenuse. Op-
posed to it stands the breaking up of that line into the opposition of 
the sides that have a relation to each other [and] together constitute 
an angle, so that, being [first] self-equivalent as squares in their duality 
[and] then conjoined as a sum out of their separation, they are equal 
to the other simple square. It appears not to be the case that here 
only moments or lines are being compared, rather than figures or 
parts of the plane triangle or even plane figures; for as squares they 
are posited equal. However, a square is precisely not a quantum, not 
a part, not something externally limited. 
In cognition, therefore, the preceding is recapitulated; it is the 
totality of the totality of simple connection, of quantum, and of both 
relations; and in itself [ 117] [it is] this circular movement whose con-
tent (that passes through this movement) is the definition of this circle. 
Cognition equates the whole divided into parts to the one distinguished 
into moments-the former undifferentiated equivalence to the latter 
differentiated equivalence. The whole alone, through its determinacy, 
is capable of division. It itself is determinacy reflected into itself; and 
in its indifference it preserves itself through abstraction from the 
opposites. The other division into moments is the inner determinacy, 
which, opposed to itself, does not abstract but posits both in itself; 
only thereby is it the whole equivalent to itself and corinected with 
itself. The relation, or the second division, is as such a/b; but as unity 
it is the c, = alb, the quotient and indeed a determinacy, the simple 
determinacy of the whole, which has the opposite outside itself. What 
is self-equivalent in the relation is something coming back out of its 
inequality, something sublating the inequality, and just thereby an 
opposite, which has, however, annihilated in itself the form of in-
equality. Thus it has in itself only the form of universality, but in fact 
is determinately abstract. 
Cognition, therefore, posits both relations equal, for within itself it 
splits the determinacy of the indifferent whole; yet this split, like its 
reflection, is in fact always something determinate. Thereby the move-
ment of cognition is indeed the universal. But what moves in this way 
is a particular; for it is a "this," a singular. In other words, it is formal 
and not equal to its content, which is not absolutely universal. 
As the division of the indifferent whole into parts at first indifferent, 
construction is just for that reason completely indifferent in itself; it 
turns into a dividing [Theilung] into moments, or passes over into 
division [Ezntheilung], differentiated relation. Yet as indifferent clivi-

Proportion 
123 
sion it has this principle of differentiation outside itself, and its di-
viding insofar as it is determined and ruled by the second division, is 
indifferent vis-a-vis the whole-that is, is not determined through it. 
In mathematical cognition it indeed turns out at the end that this 
construction is necessary for the proof; but it has proven itself to be 
necessary not through itself but only through the proof. That is, it is 
indeed cognized that the indifferent passes over into the differen-
tiated relation; but this transition is not itself cognized; it is not grasped. 
The wonder of mathematical proofs is this remaining lack of satis-
faction, which indeed passes over from what appears to be contingent 
in the construction to the necessity of the proof, but which does not 
grasp that construction [ 1 18] through itself because it is not a concept, 
not something differentiated, and therefore also not the transition. 
But the fact that cognition-this reflection of the indifferent whole 
out of its bifurcation and otherness into its self-equivalence-is still 
formal. follows from definition being self-preservation-that is, the 
reflection into itself of the determinacy as such, something determi-
nate posited simply, something that is. It passes over into division; 
that is, as something universal it becomes differentiated, negative 
unity. What is dialectical in the definition brings it to this point; and 
cognition itself is at first nothing but this transition of definition into 
division. The transition between them is what is empty, the [mere] 
requirement that definition come to be division, the equivalence of 
both in general, their interlocking; but the equal, their middle, has not 
yet come forth. Since definition passes in this way into division, it does 
presuppose for its [middle] the only authentic one among the abso-
lutely indeterminate partitions; that is, definition would just as well 
have properly to proceed backwards, from division to construction. 
But so far only one path has been pointed out, that of movement, and 
not this, [namely,] that definition and division precipitate out of the 
totality itself. 
Just for that reason totality or cognition is indeed reflection, which 
from definition returns by way of division back to it and posits the 
two as equal-that is, sublates the inequality that issues from the sec-
ond moment. But since cognition is essentially division as well, the 
definition does not preserve itself as what it was; self-preservation 
succumbs to the differentiated unity; and in its reconstruction out of 
division, definition becomes something other than it was. 
The internally reflected determinacy of the definition, or the sin-
gular dividing itself, passes over into internal difference, into a du-

124 
Logzc 
plication of the definition; and the reconstituted unity is the equivalence 
of both definitions, but an equivalence where the very determinacy 
of the first sublates itself. This is what makes determinate division 
possible, a division that collapses once more into what is simple; but 
what is one in the parts is itself that determinacy of definition. The 
definition is the self-partitioning universal, and itself one of the parts. 
In the Pythagorean theorem the determinacy of the right angle a) 
changes from an external equivalence (or, in other words, from [119] 
one that has its equivalent alongside itself) into an internal equivalence 
of [terms], both of which-the hypotenuse and the sides-are posited 
in the figure; the right angle remains what is equal, universal. 13) The 
right angle becomes something else, a part opposed to it. From being 
a relation it becomes a line, quotient, determinate magnitude, the 
hypotenuse opposite to which are the sides. It is thus the equivalence 
of the square of the hypotenuse and the sum of the squares of the 
sides, and is present as a moment, as one aspect [Seite] of this relation. 
The definition is produced thus: its determinacy comes to· be the 
universal, the exponent of the relation, which as aspect of that relation 
at the same time is sublated; but in that aspect the exponent, being 
determinacy against the other aspect, was universally reflected into 
itself, and this is what gets lost. Thus, with respect to definition as 
such, what in cognition preserves itself is not that definition is the 
determinacy reflected into itself; but rather what preserves itself is 
reflection, and the sublating of this determinacy with another's having 
come to be, since the sublated determinacy along with its opposite 
becomes something simple, which again has the opposites outside it. 
In other words, cognition is deduction. The realization of the concept, 
which the first moment expresses and which is the universal of the 
whole sphere, is posited as such a universal-a simple, not reflected, 
not opposed; in its reflection the universal becomes all this and si-
multaneously becomes sublated according to this its determinacy. What 
remains equal with itself and preserves itself is so qua unity, qua con-
nection (though what is connected becomes another, and thus the 
whole). The remaining-equal is merely formal; the realizing by means 
of construction and proof is a transition of definition into division 
and, from these two, which themselves are the parts of the construc-
tion, into the gathering together of both. There is something other 
than the definition,just as previously in the realization of the concept 
something other than the concept itself has always arisen for us. What 
remains equal to itself in its totality is the pure unity, which, however, 

Proportion 
125 
comes to be a negative unity, sublating its own as well as the opposite 
determinacy. The result is that the universal of the sphere is some-
thing deduced, something for which the antitheses, being ideal 2 and 
extinguished therein, are as simple moments (which were the real 
moments for the other that was its concept). It is the universal that 
realizes itself just as much, that [in] remaining equal to itself duplicates 
itself and thus constructs itself. These real moments (of which the 
universal in its determinacy is itself one, ideal2 ,'"" posited as sublated, 
in a negative unity) form its totality, which is reality and something 
other than its concept. It is the antithetic path of the climbing of the 
singular to universality [ 120] and of the universal to singularity im-
mediately united. The deduced sphere is a singular, negative one, as 
unity of the preceding moments. As realizing itself once more, itself 
as something determinate, and as in the contrary of its determinacy 
remaining equal to itself, it is at the same time as singular immediately 
a universal or a particular. In the totality, however, annihilating these 
determinacies one through another, it is universal. Conversely, the 
sphere as unrealized is a universal, which in duplicating itself comes 
to particularity and [which] as negative unity of its duplication [comes] 
to singularity. 
These two paths of climbing up and down cross each other and 
meet in the middle term, which is particularity or bad reality, not in 
the absolute middle. Only in connection with an other is the sphere 
its deduction, a singular, not in the connection in which the other is 
a universal-in other words, not within its own sphere itself. For in 
the latter the other is universal; and as totality it becomes singularity 
again, though an other singularity than what it was before. 
Therefore, as absolute reflection on its own account and [as] equality 
of the simple connection and of both relations, cognition has in itself 
this inequality, which appears distinct from the indicated aspects as 
well. What passes through this circle of reflection, the content, is not 
itself this absolute circle; content and cognition fall asunder. In its 
reflection into itself the content becomes something else instead, while 
the cognition is deduction, itself a circle that in its return is transition 
into another circle. In its repetition in the diverse spheres into which 
it passes, cognition is the same. But the content is a diverse one, and 
becomes unlike itself; its return into itself is rather a spinning forward 
into another; inasmuch as its negative unity alters the moments whose 
122. Trans.· CE has made this an adverb rather than an adjective. 

Logic 
negative unity it is. Qua negative unity enclosing itself within itself, it 
falls outside cognition and is what is passive vis-a-vis the othering of 
cognition; qua content, or negative unity that moves within cognition, 
it differentiates itself within itself, becoming instead unlike itself. Con-
tent.either preserves itself, thus falling outside cognition and having 
cognition outside itself; [or] it is the movement of cognition, thus 
arriving outside itself and becoming an other than it is itself. 
The inequality develops to the point where, opposed to a cognition 
that remains the same [in] all spheres, a cognition as the transition 
[Vbergehen] from singular to universality, or conversely, as diversity of 
content, opposed to what is going over [dem Vbergehenden], there stands 
cognition itself, inasmuch as in its reflection (that is, the finding of 
itself) it is an other. The in-itself, [ 121] what is self-equivalent, is not 
what is posited as reflected into itself, but cognition; though this-as 
the movement of this transition, of what alters itself in reflecting-is 
the universal, the particularity of which comprises the moments of 
this cycle but which presupposes a content, a negative one, whose rest 
is set in motion through [that universal]. But in fact this form of what 
is at rest, of result or product, is itself a moment of cognition, the 
welding together of the moments as self-sublating. And cognition is 
in and of itself a pure self-equivalent cycle. Since cognition is deduc-
tion, what it starts from-the negative one-is itself again its final term. 
For the universality of cognition there is only unity of opposite mo-
ments; and their determinacy falls away along with the fact that what 
is deduced is an other than what it started from. Yet deduction co-
incides wholly with cognition-that is, is itself reflection. Over against 
this self-equivalent [cycle] there nevertheless stands a self-altering con-
tent. With respect to it cognition is essentially deduction; for content 
exists as simple unity, determinacy reflected into itself, which in its 
realization does not turn back into itself but is a moment of another 
simple unity. Because of its determinacy, content as a universal must 
enter on the one side; in its moments cognition is indeed itself some-
thing determinate; yet in itself [it is] a universal, inasmuch as it is the 
unity of its moments, the entire cycle. With respect to content, de-
terminacy is posited as reflected into itself, as something indifferent; 
with respect to cognition it is posited only as something sublated. The 
moment of content with respect to cognition is thereby not negative 
one, indifferent determinacy, but negative unity, infinity, absolute (that 
is, self-sublating) determinacy, which [has determined] itself to be 
what it is. What cognition separates itself from is the indifferent one, 

Proportzon 
127 
undifferentiated determinacy reflected into itself. Inasuch as it fixes 
itself as negative unity, it sublates itself as this deductive process, which 
runs off without rest or respite backwards and forwards into bad 
infinity-a grounding whose very ground, according to its essence, it 
is necessary to ground once more. For as negative unity it incorporates 
the antithesis of what is grounded, while as determinate, it is itself 
once again only a moment, which as negative one must be deduced 
but which can itself exist merely as moment in a proof for which the 
one is to constitute the ground. Being this determinate content, the 
ground must be deduced, [ 12 2] and so on in an infinite regress. As 
the universal of the sphere-that is, as ground-it is not that which 
interlocks; but it was so as a result of deduction. As ground of the 
sphere it is the basis, the universal, of the construction; but in the 
proof it has become just one moment and sublated, since it is negative 
one, and cognition proceeds from it to the totality in which it has 
become an other. But insofar as ground is the universal or the basis 
of the construction, the totality is its realization. In it the ground 
becomes negative one; its particularization is not comprised within 
[the ground], but to the extent that it, as determinate, places itself on 
one side as a moment, only to that extent it sublates itself. Insofar as 
it is considered only as universal, however, the universal remaining 
the whole process of realization, to that extent its reality stands op-
posed to it. It is indifferent, posited as being in and of itself; and the 
movement of cognition proceeding from it to reality is for it something 
alien. For the necessity of thus proceeding would lie only in its de-
terminacy, which, however, because ground is supposed to be being 
per se, is out of the question; proceeding in this way the determinacy 
would sublate the ground. 
Cognition is the universal as totality, since in it the whole content 
of the universal is displayed in a developed way; it is the whole re-
flection, which in its alteration remains simply self-equivalent; it is 
free from the content, which, as something indifferent, abstracts from 
its determinacy and which has separated it from itself outside itself. 
Through cognition, which is directed towards its determinacy, how-
ever, the content comes to be posited in the way it is with respect to 
itself, namely, as an other. The universality of cognition is itself this 
form of indifference, in which the content enters, or the cognition is 
only content, what is posited in this indifferent form. The determinacy 
itself becomes only a content, by way of the form of cognition. Cog-
nition itself, however, expresses itself with respect to the content, so 

Logic 
that its positing itself in this way is a deductive process-in other 
words, so that the content alters itself. The nature of the content is 
thus the same as that of cognition; the content as determinacy reflected 
into itself goes over qua determinacy into another. The content realizes 
its reflectedness, and sublates itself as this determinate indifferent 
[thing], and becomes another indifferent [thing]. Cognition is itself 
just this transition; the content falls asunder; it is a series of indifferent 
[things] that enter as isolated, each on its own account. The unity is 
the differentiated unity of cognition. The indifferent [things] form a 
line; the unity is a circle and is only deduction, itself a series of circles 
as to content or as seen from the side of content. The content is again 
itself this repetition of reflection into itself, for each of its singulars 
is what is reflected into itself. Its [123] determinacy, or what the con-
tent is for the differentiation of cognition, consists in its having other 
content next to itself. This [latter] content is not for it. In other words, 
it is not its differentiated unity; but rather this unity is cognition, its 
inner or outer, which is the same; only it is not what the content is 
posited to be. The self-equivalent circle of cognition is in this way 
itself something indifferent [gleichgiiltzges] to the content, wholly ful-
filled in itself, the absolute reflection into itself, but only as a universal. 
Cognition, as a universal itself from the side of negative unity, 
sublates the content as indifferent [indifferent]. The indifferent content 
is itself derived from it; and cognition goes over into the content. 
From definition, cognition comes to be cognition through division; 
for cognition is itself a definition, and it has not sublated itself as 
definition. It is itself still formal. It is the transition out of definition 
through division into another definition; and as definition it again 
stands opposed to the first definition as an other one. The former 
one would be sublated, of course; but cognition itself is determined 
as a definition stemming from it; and thereby the former is for it just 
as well, or [is] another one. For as this moving or sublating, cognition 
is opposed to the former rest or being; and qua not at rest, qua not 
in being, qua a moment of cognition, definition is something other 
than the cognition whose moment it is. It is on its own account de-
terminacy reflected into itself; but cognition as self-subsistent is the 
sublatedness of the determinacy, and into this rest it indeed passes 
over as a universal and becomes through it a content next to another 
content. For it to be its concept absolutely and not formally, it would 
itself have to be its own content, its moment; and the moment would 

Proportion 
129 
thus be indistinguishable from the whole-in other words, from the 
universal. 
Cognition is therefore the self-equivalent reflection into itself, which, 
though not itself a moment, not yet posited as a singular, has as a 
universal another content than itself, whose movement, however, it 
is. The self-equivalence of cognition preserves itself in virtue of its 
sublating the content, which is other than it, making [it] into an other 
than itself. It thus asserts against this alien [content] that it is not alien 
to it but is rather posited qua alien as sublated. What is thus sublated 
as alien is itself, however, once again a content; for it is to itself posited 
as not sublated, coinciding with cognition, an other, and so something 
determined again. The former, however, still alien to cognition, some-
thing not determined through it, is outside [ 124] cognition, or just 
on that account also its inner. Both together, cognition is still. ... ··~ 
. . . the content, determining it, as the movement, or rather as the 
differentiated unity, as positive in the preceding moment. The for-
mer, distinguished as totality in itself, determines in both of the latter 
the antithesis of cognition as totality over against its moments, or 
determines the determinacy of the content in opposite ways. 
Cognition itself is the universal, or the basis of these three ways of 
considering-in other words, of these three determinacies of cogni-
tion itself, posited indifferently vis-a-vis each other. It is that which 
subsists in itself, the absolute, since it is what is closed within itself, 
absolute reflection, and since as this reflection it is the universality of 
the antithesis posited in this universality. Reflection, as opposed to 
the content, is reflected into itself in such a way that it expresses this 
antithesis in the totality of its moments, and is intuition-that is, their 
self-equivalent indifference. 
Such being in and of itself, or cognition, is the last to halt imme-
diately: for in the circle it turns back into itself and, although the 
content always alters, it remains self-equivalent in it-does not itself 
spin forward any more, but as content (that is, as something deter-
mined by standing over against the determined content) is rather not 
content, and simply falls outside of the movement of cognition; it is 
not [as] moment, but in and of itself. Cognition is what is thereby 
taken from the relation; for the content is on the contrary what is 
123. Trans.: The inner half of the double sheet 39 is missing. 

Logic 
differentiated. Cognition only solicits in order rather to perish in the 
content, and in its cycle to be determined and altered rather than to 
alter and determine. In this way cognition is the realized infinity, 
which is thrown apart in the doubled relation and returned to itself. 
Their moments were abstractions; the moments of cognition are them-
selves infinite, are relations. The whole pathway has been nothing but 
an enrichment of these moments. Cognition, as this in-itself that has 
withdrawn from all connection with another and whose moments 
[ 125] are themselves totalities reflected into themselves, is no longer 
[the] object of logic (which has constructed the form up to its absolute 
concretion) but rather of metaphysics (in which this totality must be 
realized in the same way as the totalities have been set forth up to 
now, they being only moments of the absolute totality). What meaning 
the realization [will]"4 receive here-whether this idea itself [will] go 
over into something else, whether it still has in itself a determinacy-
will become clear in this science itself. [ 126] 
124. Trans.: CE inserts "must" here. We have chosen the milder alternative. 

Metaphysics 
The discussion of cognition at the end of the Logic is like the section on 
infinity at the end of "Simple Connection." Only a formal review of cognition 
can be given in the Logic because cognition is the proper topic of Metaphysics. 
In the Logic it is a climax that poses a problem. The logical self comes to the 
recognition of itself as the free agency that the ethical substance sustains, and 
upon which the fate of substance itself hangs. Now the problem is: how is 
the identity of this absolute cognition with the historic moment of conscious-
ness in which it has emerged to be realized? The first step is for cognition to 
comprehend its own objective structure. Metaphysics shows us the process of 
logical consciousness from the side of the substance itself. It is the absolute 
self-consciousness of the substance. (Thus Metaphysics corresponds to chap-
ters 6 to 8 of the Phenomenology; and cognition is only the formal "certainty 
and truth of reason.")• 
Hence every moment is eternal. The absolute transience of simple connec-
tion is now seen as the absolute permanence of the principles of rational 
consciousness. Logic began with the unity of consciousness as self-equivalent. 
Metaphysics begins with the principle of self-equivalence (and shows that this 
must be a self-mediation). 
Logic ceases at the point where relationship ceases and where its 
members fall asunder as beings on their own account. For cognition 
as reflection into itself comes to be its own first moment; it unfolds 
1. Since the two discussions are so vividl} different, it seems unlikely that any useful 
parallel can be established between the moments or phases of the two texts at this level 
of the argument. Where Logic passes over into Metaph)sics, the phenomenology of 
spirit becomes the explicit Bildung of the Weltgei1·t. 

Metaphyszcs 
as what is passive and self-subsistent beside cogmtwn (as another 
moment, which has its reflection into itself); it is the other of itself; 
and as itself it is connection with another. This differentiated cog-
nition, as it connects with another, posits this other itself as an other 
itself; it is no longer an other for us, but rather for itself; that is, it 
negates itself. For the unity of reflection is what remains constant in 
the moments of cognition; and the otherness of its own self is for 
cognition itself. In other words, otherness is its moment; it itself is 
ideal. on its own account. This is for us: that the object of cognition 
is the whole cognition. This is for cognition, as formal: that in the 
object cognition is something negated, something other. Its otherness 
has only its own negative meaning; the object [is] only determined as 
this other; within it [the other] itself is only negated. The in-itself of 
metaphysics is this form of cognition: what is negative for cognition. 
The course of metaphysics-that is, the coming to itself of cognition 
out of its other or the cognition that becomes cognition-is that this 
undifferentiated other (something differentiated for the cognition) 
determines itself only as its negation, whereby cognition becomes that 
which is solely positive, or the true in-itself. 
As the universal for which there is an other, cognition is at first 
simply connected with this other; it is the undifferentiated space of 
this other, and its movement as reflection into itself is this: this other 
moves within it as simple connection; it comes and disappears. In the 
space of cognition an other is posited and it returns into itself again, 
so that this other sublates itself. As at the same time differentiated 
vis-a-vis what thus comes and disappears, cognition is itself this its 
negative connection. Since the other is the in-itself-that is, it is the 
essential-the differentiated connection of cognition is thus only su-
perficial; over against it stands the in-itself, and its movement is still 
on its own account. As above, there are only two passives, two self-
subsistent beings, hence two movements on their own account, which 
[ 127] just thereby are indifferent to each other. But as movements 
these are immediately in one pure indifference [Indifferenz], in one 
universality, in one space; and this is determined immediately as neg-
ative unity, as infinity, because it is the unity of these movements, 
which are themselves differentiated vis-a-vis one another. It is the 
essence of their differentiation [Differenz], their absolute differentia-
tion, or infinity. For the negative reflection, [that is] the comes-and-

Cognition as System of First Principles 
133 
disappears," or this uniquely linear movement, is connected with its 
passive self-equivalency, or equally with the movement of cognition 
as one that bends this linear moving into a circle. Since that necessity 
is determined through this cognition, the linear othering must reflect 
itself into itself, or its connection must become self-equivalent. And 
in that cognition thus [makes]3 that first movement disappear Uust as 
its passive, unopened connection with itself coincides with its circular 
movement), so everything in it is closed. And the in-itself of the passive 
is still only something negative; cognition is absolutely negative unity 
of movement, sublating the other. It is absolute "1," cognition as neg-
ative one, hence at once another potency and its first moment. 
Since it is the sublating of the differentiated connection of logic, 
cognition snatches away the moments from the idea (from the dia-
lectical advance and sublating), posits them determinately as undif-
ferentiated or as self-subsistent, and denies with respect to them [von 
ihnen] this self-sublating. They are moments of knowledge, and as 
such essentially on their own account, since they were hitherto un-
differentiated in general (that is, indifferent as to whether they were 
undifferentiated or differentiated). For cognition itself is this negation 
of itself, or the being per se of the other-that is, of the other formerly 
posited as differentiated, as ideal., or moment. As what passes into 
metaphysics, cognition is just the sublating of logic as dialectic or 
idealism. 
Directed this way initially, cognition posits the moments of its re-
flection determinately as being-in-itself, not as possibly disappearing 
but rather determinately as remaining. Cognition amounts to the mo-
ment of absolute principles.[ 128] 
1 I Cognition as System of First Principles 
As reflection that has become simple, cognition is self-equivalence that 
persists even in oppostion; a universality that negatively posits itself 
determinately as universality, is universality on its own account. The 
universality of the logic was an unpolemical one; in this one now, the 
ideal. is posited, thereby snatched away again from becoming sub-
2. Trans : Das kommt u11d t•erschwindet. because of the neuter article, cannot modify 
the feminine Reflexion. 
3· Trans.: Ehrenberg and Link reads "and while cognition, that is, that first move-
ment [must] disappear .... " 

134 
M etaphyszcs 
lated, and indeed posited as excluding the becoming-sublated. What 
disappears and comes in cognition is simply and solely something 
relative, something in connection; but this negative unity, the other[ ness], 
is sublated; in itself it is thereby on its own account. The content of 
cognition as thus persisting is nothing but the universal determinacy, 
the moments of cognition itself, which, as not to be sublated, express 
the absolute being and essence of all things. Cognition, as self-equiv-
alent reflecting, reflects the whole logic (this advance into itself), posits 
it equal to itself, sublates the othering of the moments, and posits 
them as a system of absolute being per se, so that from being something 
differentiated, what is opposed becomes only something diverse, whose 
[elements]4 subsist indifferently next to one another. Until now it has 
been a moment of our procedure to take each result or each deter-
minacy in general as something positive at first and then to sublate 
it. That positive taking counted as one side whereby nothing was yet 
decided about the determinacy; in general it was a thought, something 
that belongs to us. Here in cognition this positive is posited on its own 
account, and the determinacy is cut off from its two sides: backwards, 
from that of which it was the result, and forwards, from that of which 
it passed over to an other. The in-itself of cognition has indeed sub-
lated the singular. In universality substantiality has passed away; but 
in cognition (or in its becoming) through thorough division, subject, 
or the negative one, has passed away. The determinacies, to whom the 
subject imparts being per se, are what is known, [are] posited as what 
is essentially taken from the becoming sublated, and therefore [are] 
moments of the subject itself in that it is this not-to-be-sublated uni-
versal. 
The positive side of the previous discussion was not only a being 
posited [in] thought. [ 1 29] Rather, by virtue of its being posited in 
thought it was also the content or the determinacies themselves, uni-
versals; and the logic began with unity itself as the self-equivalent. 
Logic did [not] vindicate itself on this score; that happens here for 
the first time, since the in-itself here posits itself as a self-equivalence, 
[an in-itself] in which all moments are abolished and which emerges 
from this abolition. That unity at the beginning is a result, but that 
it is a result was not at all asserted with respect to it; it was a subjective 
4· Trans.: The verb is singular here, presupposing "something diverse" as subject 
By introducing a plural subject we have had to alter the number of the verb. 

Cognztion as System of First Pnnciples 
135 
result, from which it was to be surmised that much must have preceded 
it in order to begin with it. Here in the absolute return to itself [the 
unity] is as this result. Insofar as it was not posited as a result, [the 
unity] was an arbitrary beginning that had absolutely many [others] 
next to it; it was a contingent first. Here it turns out to be an absolute 
first, or that which, after it realizes itself, has opposed to itself in fact 
the absolutely many, or as connection, has opposed to itself the ab-
solutely many connections-that is, relationship. Having come back 
to itself, it has preserved itself, but as one that has thus come back to 
itself, that has annihilated the possibility of the many, of the other, 
and that is an in-itself, which as cognition (that is, as this movement 
and reflection) has sublated itself. The advance from this unity was 
precisely its not having been cognized, or this: that it was the possibility 
of the other. It was the movement of reflection that sublates itself, 
that leaves only the moments as diverse, being self-subsistent in their 
determinacy and indeed "in themselves" (in the sense that "in itself" 
has in cognition) as what are above [and] beyond sublation. According 
to their form, the moments have been up to now just such universals; 
they are cognized as they proceed from what is absolutely simple. 
That is, their form was that of cognition, of the sublatedness of mul-
tiplicity, even though according to their content they themselves were 
determinate. For example, causes and what follows after are deter-
minate, but not universal in the way of an animal, which is followed 
by gender; rather, they are the universals of knowledge, with respect 
to which all determinacy is abolished. [Their detel,'minacy is] the sort 
that they have in the antithesis, as result; [it is] the necessary deter-
minacy, that is, the one that they only acquire just in this cycle. Their 
previous form as [object of] cognition is now what is essential to them; 
or [they are] self-equivalent, and self-subsistent in such a way that 
cognition, as self-moving reflection with respect to them, is abolished. 
They are the in-itself of cognition; it is cognition itself for which they 
are essential. 
Thus the unity or the self-equivalent goes with the abolition of all 
diversity and is in itself, so that next to it there is an other. Unity is 
present as what is thus determinate, apart from which [130] there is 
another and which, in its connection with another, remains indifferent 
in it and unchanged. Similarly, the many that is opposed to it is thus 
on its own account, [hence] abolished; as opposed on its own account 
it is opposed to itself and becomes fixed as this + or - . There is no 

Metaphysics 
third in which it would sublate itself. Thus, finally, the connection of 
both, the third, is likewise in itself, and what is determinate is present 
only as thus connected with its other, and as being in this connection. 
A / PRINCIPLE OF IDENTITY OR OF CONTRADICTION 
True propositions do not change and vanish like conscious selves. But in 
order to be cognitively significant, they must relate two distinct terms. Thus 
a cognitive identity involves a formal contradiction. The tree is not just tree 
but an oak-and that entails a multitude of differences between it and other 
trees. 
This multitude can all be spelled out as determinate differences: the oak 
is deciduous (not evergreen); its leaves are not like maple leaves, and so on. 
And this mass of truths is the same identical truth as "The tree is an oak." 
The unity of a truth is thus the ground of all the other truths it contains. 
This ground is rational consciousness. Thus in the principle of ground, cog-
nition "comes to itself." But here, too, finite cognition "goes to the ground" 
(perishes), so that it is aware of the contrast between itself and the imperishable 
truth. We must pass to the "metaphysics of objectivity" because of this contrast. 
The self equivalent is such, with indifference vis-a-vis every deter-
minacy. A= A, let A signify what you will. The determinacy is posited 
in this self-equivalence; but in such a way that the self-equivalence is 
not affected by the determinacy and has completely abolished the 
otherness of the determinacy, which is now on its own account. De-
terminacy as quality, or for that matter as universal and as subject, is 
posited on its own account in the form of being, but in such a way 
that its essence-[which is] to be determinate-is; and in such a way 
that it is not to be withdrawn in general from becoming other [An-
derswerden], but only from a determinate otherness [Anderssezn]. For 
that very reason it cannot save itself from being sublated, since it is 
in general open to becoming sublated. But here, on the other hand, 
absolute self-equivalence is posited: a negation of reflection in general, 
or of transition into another. It is not the determinacy A that is in 
itself but the fact that it is self-equivalent; this is what is in itself. And 
the determinacy is withdrawn from otherness only because it is in fact 
abolished as this determinacy, only because it is wholly ideal.; in other 
words, it is posited as something cognized. It is self-equivalent, so that 
A= A expresses a diversity (that is, two A's), and this diversity, this 
other[ness], immediately is not. The two A's ought not just to be equiv-

Cognition as System of First Principles 
137 
alent; it is not a case of A = B: B ought also to be an A. But A = A; 
that is, it is the same A that is on both sides. They do not have an 
inequality in virtue of their place, as in judgment, merely through 
being left or right when written, or earlier or later when spoken. 
These are distinctions that fall away immediately in that one [can]not 
say which is right or left, etc.; ( 131] it is not as [if] one were on the 
right and another on the left; each is the one and the other. 
Here self-equivalence has become a principle, and it is this principle 
that expresses absolute equality, the in-itself,s for in this way it is dis-
played as self-equivalence reflected into itself, but one that has brought 
about reflection into itself, so that its semblance is there as opposition 
to it; but this is also in fact wholly sublated, pure semblance. 
This principle of equivalence, a posited equivalence that is in itself, 
is thus withdrawn from dialectic; the equivalence cannot be sublated, 
since it has completely sublated all sublating, and indeed every con-
nection with another. The determinacy A in which it is expressed is 
indifferent throughout; and this determinacy that is di~tinct in itself-
materialized, as it were-is posited purely in the interest of expression. 
But this necessity of taking in some determinacy or other (indifferent 
though it be towards itself but just for that reason not as sublated) in 
order to express the completion of reflection into itself, or the sem-
blance of opposition within itself-this is just where the not-being-in-
itself of this self-equivalence is immediately expressed. The opposition 
is completely sublated, and precisely for that reason the determinacy 
is posited as not in itself. But it is the determinacy in fact that is posited 
in the form of self-equivalence, as having been in itself. A = A; if we 
abstract from A, the whole principle is sublated; if we posit it, then 
self-equivalence is predicated of it as a determinacy; but this predi-
cating immediately dissolves into nothing. "The tree is tree" is the 
nullity of the cognition of the tree. As determinacy the tree is not 
something reflected into itself but quite the contrary; yet it is posited 
so. What strictly has no being in itself is posited as having it. The 
feeling of this contradiction (that the identity principle sublates itself) 
expresses itself in this way: that nothing at all is said in such a state-
ment. "The tree is ... "-we expect that something will be said about 
it, something that expresses it as maintaining itself in a determinacy, 
as remaining identical in the determinacy of the predicate. But "The 
tree is tree" simply does not even express the in-itself of the tree, in 
5· Trans.: CE transforms the noun An sich into an adverb, an sich 

Meta physics 
that it does not set it forth as something reflected into itself. The 
expression of its opposition, into which it has gone and out of which 
it has recovered itself, would be necessary for that. It [would need to 
be] displayed out of that opposition, and indeed, the opposition being 
posited with respect to it, it [would need to] reflect itself. [132] The 
principle A = A falls apart into two "insofars," two sides that are mutu-
ally indifferent in it, each one being quite alien and contingent vis-a-vis 
the other. The determinacy is contingent for the self-equivalence to 
the extent that to have the latter we must abstract from the former, 
and vice versa. The two are in fact connected with each other, and 
when posited as one, each sublates the other. Hence, although the 
self-equivalent and the determinacy are united, they are not united 
in such a way that the latter should be subsumed under the former 
and rendered ideal 2 ; on the contrary, the determinacy is quite indif-
ferent to the self-equivalent. So in this way there is in fact only a 
connection of the absolutely many, but of the many posited as some-
thing unconnected, as something self-subsisting. There has in fact to 
be connection, however, determination of the one through the other. 
B / FIRST PRINCIPLE OF THE EXCLUSION OF A THIRD 
The many posited on its own account, as the self-equivalent and the 
determinacy, is not opposed to and connected with a third but con-
nected with itself and simply opposed one to the other (and hence 
also connected). The one is not what the other is; otherwise, they have 
no determinate character. The many as something reflected into itself 
(or having being in itself) is posited as excluding what is opposed to 
it, the unity in which it becomes ideal 2 ; it is not something opposed 
as a many but rather as a sublated many that is not opposed. Thus it 
does not exclude this third, its becoming-sublated. 
The many, as cognized, reflected into itself, ceases to have indif-
ference (the being-external-to-it of distinction and of connection with 
another) and has it [the being-external] in itself. It is not another 
generally but another in itself and is thus only determined by its 
opposite. The many as such is self-equivalent and in this way set 
against unity, but precisely thereby not distinguished from it, since 
unity is self-equivalence. Here, however, the many is not many in 
general, self-equivalent, but rather as it is in itself, apart from this 
equivalence-something reflected into itself. The many as it is in itself 
is thus strictly [ 133] not the indifferent determinacy next to which 

Cognition as System of First Principles 
139 
there are others. Thus the many has so far been dealt with only in 
connection with its opposite-which might appear just as contingent 
as beginning with unity. But just as it emerged that the in-itself is 
reflectedness into itself (the state where distinction has been abol-
ished-that is, unity) and that philosophy deals with the in-itself, or 
the absolute, so the in-itself is immediately unity, and what is first in 
philosophy. Similarly, the many enters immediately, through oppo-
sition to unity; but whether they only are in connection with one 
another is a matter of indifference for it qua many. The mutually 
indifferent many posited themselves in connection with unity and qua 
one with it, as self-sublating; and this connection appeared as a con-
sideration alien to the many. But here it is posited that the many in 
itself is, in fact, only as the opposite; it is only in its connection with 
the other. And it is this differentiation in particular to which non-
philosophic thought must first rise out of its intuiting; from the in-
difference of the many it must emerge to this point where the many 
is in itself simply and solely in connection with the opposite. 
These opposites are, then, unity and the many itself. At first the 
many appeared as opposed to unity; and just for that reason unity 
itself is an opposite, included in the many, one of the many. The many 
ceases to be an indifferent many for this reason alone, because its 
many are posited as determined in this way: on one side, the not-many 
or the one; on the other side, the not-one or the many. Herewith the 
many divides into a many that is a many, and a many that is no many. 
That is how the many is with respect to itself. 
This many, as it is in itself, excludes every third. For the third would 
be the unity of the two opposites of the many; but this unity is itself 
one of its members. Thus its exclusion of the third does not mean 
that there might still be something else outside it; rather, there is no 
other outside it. There is in it every other; there is in it6 the other of 
its own self; it has unity, the contrary of itself, as one of its members. 
What it excludes is not something indifferent, for then that would 
not be something excluded. What is excluded is what is negated by 
it, but precisely thereby it is posited with respect to it. What is thus 
excluded, what it negates, is nothing but unity itself; for the other of 
its own self is [ 134] precisely what it excludes in order to be what it 
is. What is excluded from the many is just that which the many is not 
and which the many holds off from itself in order to be. It is therefore 
6. Trans.: Es ist an ihm selb1t in both cases. 

Metaphysics 
the other of the many; but the many is the other of its own self, and 
so it is what is thus excluded from itself. 
Positing itself thus (as it is in itself) both as a many that is a many 
and as a many that is no many-[positing itself] as what it excludes 
from itself in order to be, or, in other words, not as itself at all but 
rather as the contrary of itself-the many is that which sublates itself. 
It is in itself in fact the nothing of itself. It is not the nothing, for it 
is itself again. As the many that is unity, it is nullified; as the many 
that is itself, it is itself self-equivalent. Hence it is neither itself nor 
the contrary of itself, and just as much itself as the contrary of itself. 
These two are not diverse ways of viewing it that are external to it or 
that it is indifferent to; they are not a distinguishing and a sublating 
of the distinction, which might not be posited with respect to it. Rather 
it is this in fact with respect to itself-in itself the absolute contradic-
tion, or infinity posited in one, or as an indivisible, self-equivalent 
unity. Thus it is, in fact, not the many as an either I or-the many 
that just divides into opposed terms-but the third for these terms, 
or the absolute immediate unity of them both, and a simple inward 
self-destroying, the absolute concept, which is, with respect to itself, 
the contrary both of the determinacy and of the sublated determinacy. 
The in-itself is thus neither the first nor the second first principle in 
the way they expressed themselves; rather, they are in themselves the 
third.7 
C I PRINCIPLE OF GROUND 
The determinate is, then, simply the other of itself, or one with its 
contrary; and this unity alone is its in-itself or its ground: as [ 135] much 
that into which it returns as that from which it departs; that is, that 
wherein it sublates itself, and that which it is, as a self-equivalent 
determinacy. The being of the determinacy is its being posited as 
something self-equivalent; and in connection with its reflection this is 
its point of departure. As this self-equivalent determinacy it becomes 
its contrary. In other words, it displays itself as that which it is, as a 
many; it returns into itself; and it is thus the unity of itself, and its 
opposed determinacy. This unity is its ground; the ground is the unity 
itself as self-equivalent determinacy. "The determinacy has a ground" 
7· In the margzn: All singulars would contradict themselves 

Cognition as System of First Principles 
141 
means two things: determinacy is posited within itself as in a unity of 
itself and its contrary; as this determinate one, determinacy has this 
unity for its ground, a ground that divides into them (that is, into 
determinacy and its own contrary)8 or engenders them. Their being 
engendered out of their ground is nothing other than that the ground 
confronts itself, makes itself into one side and stands opposite itself 
as its own contrary. Determinacy as indifferent is called "ground"-
ground of itself, insofar as it appears in the differentiation. And again 
it is the ground as this unity of the determinacy posited differentially!}_ 
[as this unity of] it as that against which it is differentiated, or as the 
opposite of itself; hence it is that in which it sublates itself. 
Herewith the ground shows itself as the reflection of cognition itself, 
as the self-enclosed simple. Cognition has in this way come to itself, 
in that it has reached the ground; it finds itself as the in-itself. [Pre-
viously] it was in relation to [fur] the in-itself;"' [now] it is the in-itself 
of [fur] the in-itself, since the ground is for the in-itself. 
Cognition was the circular movement of the return into itself, and 
thus the in-itself. Qua this in-itself it sublates itself, as that in which 
the posited is changed; it is the self-equivalent in which something 
other than it, as something self-equivalent, is connected only with 
itself. Its content is the determinacy that is in itself, posited according 
to the first principle as a self-equivalent determinacy. For cognition 
it is initially the formal in-itself, or it posits itself as its first moment; 
and indeed according to the determinacy of this first moment [it posits 
itself] in a simple form. The necessity of once again becoming itself 
out of its having become-in which case a start is made with itself in 
the form of the first power••-lies in cognition's coming to a point as 
reflection while it is circumference as movement. In its movement 
positive self-equivalence is, as it were, its [ 136] universal space; but it 
is at the same time negative unity, the one of the point, that in which 
the distinguishing of its moments sublates itself, a unity as its negative 
connection in which cognition is sublated. This unity is its moment 
8. Trans.: Hegel first wrote "a ground that divides into itself and its contrary." In 
making the addition he perhaps forgot to change the gender of "its" modifying "con-
trary." If he had changed it, the text would read "into determinacy and its contrary." 
9 Trans.: Following ms. cE: "as of one posited differentially." 
10. Trans.: Following ms. CE emends: "it was the in-itself for [us]." The editors refer 
to CE 126, ll. 11-19. 
11. Tram · Potenz. Compare Schelling and Cartesian geometry. 

Metaphysics 
and is opposed to it in its motion, which simply is connected with it; 
and this one is the one that appears as content of cognition and what 
comes to be the ground. 
This realization of cognition is its second becoming; in the first it 
becomes the other that it is; in the second it becomes so for itself. The 
content that comes to ground is the becoming of cognition within 
itself-that is, its becoming for itself. However, this ground is indeed 
cognition, insofar as cognition'" is for cognition; but in its reflection 
into itself (or in that it is ground), this i_ts content as negative unity 
(or indeed itself, though as one) is at the same time within this deter-
minacy. The content as self-equivalent determinacy becomes an other 
than itself in that as ground it has come to be totality; but this becoming 
other is now completely determined in that this cycle is its own. Thus 
it retains the determinacy that it has outwardly as something opposed 
to cognition, or as that wherein cognition negates itself. It is in itself, 
and as ground it becomes reflection into itself; but it still remains in 
itself as negated cognition. Cognition has not yet re-cognized this other 
cognition as itself. The ground is a cognition, but as something cog-
nized, as something still affected with antithesis vis-a-vis cognition; 
this differentiation is not yet sublated. That is to say, it zs sublated, 
but cognition has not yet sublated it. 
Still to be determined is how ground or cognition (which for us are 
the same) display themselves for their part, in as much as they [are] 
still not one'3 for themselves but posit themselves in opposition. This 
being encumbered with a differentiation, in that they are the total 
reflection into themselves, lies in the moments of this reflection being 
posited for one another, each still external to the other, or mutually 
indifferent. We come back to the same determination that was initially 
made, with the difference that in ground these moments are, of course, 
equally indifferent, but that ground is the content of cognition; hence 
[it is] the sort of cognition that has indifferent moments [that] is this 
totality of formal cognition, indeed the moment of formal cognition. 
The other moments are this very totality [ 13 7] in the determinacy of 
the moments, and mutually indifferent. The difference in the way 
the ground is posited is that the ground is for cognition and in cog-
nition. Because of this it not only is with respect to cognition; but 
12. Tram.: The ms: dasselbe. CE reads derselbe, "ground." 
13. Trans.: Hegel inserted in the margin "They are substances, souls," then struck 
it out. 

Cognition as System of First Principles 
143 
there is posited the necessity that the ground make its way through 
reflection. It is on its own account, but at the same time a first moment, 
a determinate content of cognition. It is not possible to stay there, but 
its way is laid out before it-the ground must realize itself. In the 
progress up to this point, what is displayed as result or totality of a 
sphere was totality; and it became again its first power by means of a 
consideration that was initially applied to it from the outside, as it 
were: it was undetermined whether this totality might not be the last 
that would not first have to realize [itself] in this way through reflection 
into itself. Here, by contrast, the ground is immediately torn away 
from its being-in-itself and from the opposition against its movement, 
because in cognition it is posited as the point that arises from cognition 
in its movement. As a result the path is not first displayed by the going 
but [is] outlined beforehand; just as the necessity to travel it is posited 
in its having already been embarked upon in fact. 
The ground, thus determined as reflection into itself, as cognition 
in itself, and at the same time connected with cognition, corresponds 
to that moment in the unreflective Logic that was called the relation 
of being and that is now posited as being in and of itself, self-enclosed, 
and held back from disappearing in the dialectic. The path that it 
travels in cognition is indeed its own dialectic; but this side of the path 
is what is not yet posited for cognition. To begin with, in other words, 
nothing is posited but its connection with cognition: cognition is at 
the same time the movement of reflection; but ground is in this con-
nection posited as in itself-that is, although self-moving, yet indif-
ferent towards the movement and unchangable through it. By contrast, 
the relation of being is posited as undifferentiated, or liable just as 
much to be changed as to remain indifferent. Here, by contrast, this 
relationship is posited as being in itself, as such reflected into itself. 
The relation of being passes over into the repose of universality. The 
ground, however, is in itself the universal that has negative ones (or 
substances that [are] in relation) ideally, as contained within it, but 
in such a way that in their ideality they [are] at the same time also on 
their own account. In other words, the ground as their ideality is 
negated with respect to itself, since it is its own first moment-that is, 
ideal", sublated. As ground it is their ideality; they are only as posited 
in it, and in their being-posited in it (not simply insofar as they are 
for it) they are at the same time on their own account as well. The 
ground is their arising and vanishing within it; and it is [ 138] indif-
ferent towards them just as it is towards its own alteration. Their 

144 
Metaphystcs 
arising and vanishing within it is indifferent to their being-in-them-
selves; and their being-in-the-ground is indifferent to their own un-
reflected movement. This determinacy of the ground's indifference 
is posited, in that the ground itself is in cognition connected with 
cognition; as the self-subsistent (or as that wherein the reflecting move-
ment of cognition negates itself) the movement of the moments over 
against one another in the ground and against it as their unity has 
this indifference. The ground is content of cognition, and indeed as 
its first self-equivalent moment; and the determinacy of cognition is 
this determinacy of being indifferent: not as a being-indifferent that 
could also become non-indifferent, [that] could divide itself into itself 
and into its contrary, but rather [one] that excludes its contrary and 
thus in its determinacy would be in itself. 
The ground, the totality insofar as it is reflected out of cognition's 
moments to be its content thus posited as first power (although the 
ground ought to be in itself and is so posited), looks towards the path 
on which it becomes other, and out of this becoming-other becomes 
other again. This path is its realization, wherein it will give itself its 
real totality, a totality whose moments the whole ground itself is. 
B I Metaphysics of Objectivity 
This is the theory of the intelligible reality that the eternity of cognition 
presupposes. On the side of consciousness the ground of cognition is the 
soul, the Cartesian res cogitans. But this is not simply conceivable in abstraction 
from the realm of truth that it knows. Rather, its independence is its own 
abstracting of itself and positing of itself as independent. The intelligibility 
of this activity is still dependent on the context of consciousness within which 
it takes place. So immortality becomes a metaphysical problem. In its actual 
experience the soul is nothing but a window on the world-a monad. 
The world is a community of other selves, and its independence is identical 
with their freedom (of which cognition is the primitive form). Truth is the 
objective structure of their freedom, the structure that all must freely rec-
ognize. Freedom and necessity are one world, not two; and there is no need 
for the establishment of harmony by a higher power. As one world, the 
monads must necessarily be a harmony. Each is "passive" in its self-defining 
activity of perceiving the world of the others; and "active" in its reshaping of 
the world it perceives. Thus the cognition of "the world" is the condition of 
free activity in this higher sense; and active freedom is essentially communal 
in character. Sexual differentiation and recognition is the natural anticipation 
of this active freedom, but its proper exposition belongs to the metaphysics 

Metaphysics of Objectivity 
of subjectivity. The natural identity of the genus (restored in the offspring) 
is the real immortality of the soul. In the real order only the Gattung is 
immortal. The family lifeline is the real monad. 
In the "highest essence" God emerges as the necessary ground of our 
cognition of all this. "In God we live and move and have our being." When 
we think, we must think for the community, or for "the genus." God is not 
to be conceived substantially (as in Spinoza, or in the bodily immortality of 
the natural species). As the highest essence God is a subject above and beyond 
the antithetic unity of soul and body. But now the final problem is to reconcile 
this absolute subjectivity with the finitude of the world of rational monads. 
Notice the influence of Boehme on Hegel's image of finitude as a metaphysical 
darkness, or evil, that is a necessary moment for the self-creation of the divine 
light (CE 153-54)." 
In the way it has been determined as being-in-itself, the ground is 
the same as cognition insofar as cognition has a content, or insofar 
as it determines the content in such a way that the content is in 
cognition and cognition is differentiated vis-a-vis the content. At the 
same time it negates itself in its determination of the content; or it 
lets it be on its own account. Just like cognition, the ground deter-
mined in this way is something self-equivalent that, being indeed 
negative unity according to its essence, sublates the moments. But as 
absolute reflection it sublates itself as well; whether in the determining 
of the moments or in their being-ideal. it posits them at the same time 
as self-subsistent, thus as a synthesis whose moments are on their own 
account absolutely separated: reflection, and reflection as negated-
a synthesis that is indifferent oneness [ 139] of reciprocal action, each 
just as much the active as the other, and the passive as well, the 
determinacy in the form of the determinate concept. 
This ground or cognition is what is called the soul. 
I /THE SOUL 
Since ground has been sufficiently explicated and since the soul is 
precisely the ground as first moment of its realization, to that extent 
the soul has therefore been determined. The undifferentiation of the 
soul, or its unity, has been cognized as absolute unity in virtue of its 
14. Compare the meditation in the Wastebook (Rosenkranz, Hegels Leben, pp. 54 7-
48; trans. M. Hoffbeimer in Clzo 12 [1983] 405-7) and the discussion of evil in the 
Phenomenolog)' (Ge;ammelte Werke, IX, 412-14; tram Miller, paras. 776-77, pp. 468-70.) 

Meta physics 
being reflection into itself. As such it is determinate; and just as ab-
solutely is it the sublatedness of its determinateness. Its determinate-
ness-that is, that it is posited as something sublated-is' 5 the soul 
itself; for it is so only because, as ground in its simplicity of reflection, 
the soul comes to be just the determinacy of this simplicity and its 
own first moment-which for the soul thereby comes to be its content, 
inherently [an sich] outside of it. In that this content is the ground 
coming to be the first moment (the ground being, however, the totality 
of the moments as absolute reflection), so it is what is differentiated 
vis-a-vis that content, connected negatively with it as sublating it. As 
this differentiated unity, opposed to the first unity, which is connected 
with itself, the ground is only in that opposition, and therefore some-
thing determinate. The unity appears as something passive, upon 
which that first moment operates. But this is precisely something 
determinate-and indeed, through its opposite, through the negative 
unity. It is something posited through the unity; they reciprocally 
determine each other. And what is third, or synthetic, is the content 
of cognition, whose factors, however, as falling outside each other, 
are posited on their own account, each negated in the other, existing 
in itself, so that only this synthesis is in the soul. There is only' 6 this 
negative or synthetic connection as content of cognition (in the man-
ner this content is posited, originating as from what are independent 
from each other), and in this incomplete connection there is the soul 
in the moment of differentiation. [ 140] Therefore the soul must reflect 
itself into itself, sublate this connection, and in this return-into-itself 
must posit itself as simple, indifferent. It thus sublates its content just 
as it sublates its connection with the content. However, since it is this 
negation only as ground-though even as ground it has in general 
an opposition, a determinacy in itself, to which it is nevertheless in-
different-its absolute reflection into itself is the return to the indif-
ference of the determinateness vis-a-vis the other, which other, just 
as much as it, is in itself. Reflection is the falling apart of the content, 
or the separation of its two sides. Since the soul as what is thus sep-
arated is also'7 as something determinate-namely, that of indiffer-
ence-it is reflected into itself through the other; and the disappearing 
15 Trans: Following ms. CE reads "is [for] the soul itself." 
16. Trans .. Following ms. CE reads "only [since]," with the main clause starting on 
p. 140: "therefore the soul. . " 
17. Trans .. Following ms. CE reads "has also [come to be] something determinate" 

M etaphyszcs of Objectivzty 
147 
of the content is just as much a free movement of the soul itself, 
independent of the soul. 
As this negative one that excludes itself and in this exclusion is self-
equivalent, the soul is substance, which, however, is not merely the 
differentiation of the accidents that would be only posited within it 
as connected with each other and in their positedness would have 
their possibility outside themselves. Rather, their possibility is posited 
with respect to themselves; in other words, they are posited as ideal., 
sublated. And the substance is rather subject, in which the determinacy 
is not an actual but a particular determinacy-that is, withdrawn from 
its connection with its opposite. This subject, however, is not at all 
something universal and self-equivalent in general, but rather what 
is displayed as such, as differentiating its self-equivalence: both taking 
itself and being itself taken back from it-in other words, reflecting 
itself. It is determinacy only as having an indifferent determinacy vis-
a-vis the other in itself, in such a way, however, that its alternation is 
equally present as an accident, and in this alternation it yet retains 
the character of an indifferent determinacy. The soul is therefore the 
one of substantiality and subjectivity, and neither genuine substance 
nor genuine subject: not the former, because of the indifference of 
the accidents; not the latter, because of the differentiation, the alter-
nation of determinacies. Through their indifference and the inde-
terminateness of the subject through them, these accidents at one and 
the same time are [a] themselves substances, [b] as such in their al-
ternation idealizing themselves on their own account, and [c] synthetic 
in the connection with the subject. The soul is the whole circle, and 
its peripheral movement, which is at one and the same time connected 
with the soul as middle point [ 14 1] and extended indefinitely as a 
straight line-extended indefinitely because, to the extent that the 
soul is the middle point, to that extent the periphery is opposed to it 
and on its own account. 
As what reflects itself into itself, making itself into its first moment 
and becoming its own content, the soul is the ground of this content, 
or of itself as of a moment. The second moment, opposed to the first, 
is just the ground itself, which is differentially connected with itself 
as its first moment; and the reflection into itself is the sublating: of 
the soul as its content, of it as something passive, and of it as something 
differentiated therefrom. This sublating is so constituted, however, 
that the passive in it ceases to be something determined through the 
differentiated soul and comes to be in itself again. Both of them, the 

Metaphysics 
soul as this differentiated soul and the soul as its content, fall asunder 
once more, each as a separate self-subsistent in-itself. For even though 
the soul as ground is just the same as cognition, yet ground and 
cognition are posited as opposed to each other, and the soul has this 
determinacy on its own account. And for this reason its reflection into 
itself is what is thus formal, in the sense that reflection only sublates 
the soul as its content (in other words, the form of the first moment) 
and sublates itself as its unity differentiated from the content. The 
reflection into itself, however, is not this original determinacy that it 
has: as cognition, which would be opposed to the ground, or as ground, 
which would be opposed to the cognition. On the contrary, reflection 
occurs within this determinacy; and the completed reflection of the 
soul (or its coming-to-be-totality) is itself only a falling asunder vis-a-
vis another in-itself, or the negation of itself, and the position sepa-
rated therefrom. Its totality is only the formal taking back into itself 
of the determinacy, so that the indifference that is its form retains a 
content that is determinate. The indifference [is] only something com-
mon to it and an other; and the pure in-itself is divided into diverse 
[in-themselves], which, within the movement of reflection, have their 
unity only in the middle as a synthetic unity, only in the second mo-
ment (that of the differentiated soul), not in the totality. 
This determinacy lies in the essence of the soul; and the require-
ment of sublating it lies immediately in the fact that the essence is a 
determinacy. This requirement is expressed in the attempts to assert 
and to prove the immortality of the soul. The determinacy is to be 
sublated, however, only to the extent that the cognition or ground is 
sublated as posited under the determinacy that one is opposed to the 
other, or to the extent that cognition or ground is sublated as soul. 
The soul as indifferent, having another in-itself indifferently beside 
it [142] (or as in the movement of reflection, which in its determining 
is itself determined), is immediately a plurality of things that are in 
themselves, self-reflected into themselves, connected among them-
selves in a superficial way-a chain of syntheses. Their in-itself is what 
is not coming forth, for their being in their reciprocal indifference 
comes to be immediately a becoming-determinate on their part through 
each other, since one is the content of the other. Each is on its own 
account a negated cognition; butjust for that reason [each is] some-
thing determinate and connected with the other as with its cognition. 
In other words, it is something passive, which, as passivity, is imme-
diately the first moment of reflecting. To the extent that it is on its 

Metaphysics of Objectzvity 
149 
own account, the soul itself is in fact through its determinacy only 
this passive moment; and neither as reflected into itself (that is, as 
thus passive) nor as what is differentiated from such a passive [entity] 
is it the absolute in-itself. In fact there is posited a multiple reflecting 
into itself that, as self-equivalent, is the first moment of another; as 
self-moving, is differentiated from any such other. 
B f THE WORLD 
The soul presupposes the world and itself as in the world. For its 
determinacy is nothing else but this: that originally, in its being-in-
itself, it is the moment of an other just as much as the other is in turn 
its moment too. The world would be nothing else but the reciprocal 
action of the synthetic series collapsing into complete rest. It holds 
itself apart and in motion, however, inasmuch as the [members] that 
connect with one another in this way are not only in this connection 
with others, but in truth also in connection with themselves, since they 
return back from the others into themselves, and in their necessity 
they are free. For their freedom is their being cognition or ground. 
Since something other than themselves is in them a moment, they are 
in this way necessary; but the connection they have with this momen-
tary [other] is its ideality. They sublate their differentiation, and are 
free on their own account: they fall apart, indifferent to the other. 
As was shown with respect to the soul, however, this freedom is a 
formal 2 one; for it only has to do with the [ 143] sublation of the formal 
antithesis in which the soul remains just that original determinateness 
that is the moment of another, in that it is on its own account, and 
that is therefore determined in its very freedom. What in fact holds 
the many apart, however, is this formal freedom-as self-isolating, as 
one of the opposites, not as the universal of reciprocal action, in which 
nothing that stands in reciprocity is posited as self-subsistent-[that 
is, as] tearing away at determinacy. For in this connection or in the 
unity with the other, this freedom is in fact also not in the connection; 
it draws back from it instead. 
This coincidence of freedom and necessity is not a semblance that 
would have to receive its corrective through the sublation of the one 
or the other. Just as little do they proceed side by side, indifferent to 
one another; nor are they diverse aspects of one and the same thing, 
which, just for this reason, would be other than they, and they outside 
it, indifferent to it. Instead, this coincidence is a necessary moment 

Metaphysics 
in the realization of cognition. Freedom cannot [be] sublated, for 
otherwise all movement generally, and every antithesis arising only 
through movement, would immediately be sublated. No more can 
necessity, for the latter is what is sublated by freedom for it to be. 
They are not two systems that remain unaffected as they interweave, 
that would be togeth.er without connection, as it were (in the way we 
think of space and time), such that one could say of neither that it is 
and the other not, yet that in their being united would be absolutely 
without influence upon one another. Each is rather the moment of 
the other. Freedom is that which is passive, connected with itself-
which, just in being so, is moment vis-a-vis another; and this connec-
tion is its necessity, which, once more as reflection into itself, passes 
over immediately into freedom, into connection with itself. Both are 
moments of one and the same whole-not, however, ways of consid-
ering it from which it could abstract. 
Previously, in ground or cognition, this whole was the one that, 
having turned into content, was then connected with it differentially, 
as with something by which it was determined and which it deter-
mined, for its part, just as much. This content disappeared, however; 
for the one went back into itself, and thereby turned into content once 
more. And so what is now posited is that in fact this content, the in-
itself, is itself what is reflected into itself and is self-reflecting; and 
that hence it is related within itself in the same way as only the soul 
was posited as relating to it-like the soul itself entering upon the 
[ 144] line of this kind of self-relating. But the soul is not in a particular 
relation vis-a-vis the other with which it is connected. This other is 
rather just as much an in-itself that reflects into itself; it itself deter-
mines its determinacy through another, sublates the determinacy 
thereby, and posits it ideally,. In other words, this other is just as 
much a representing monad as the soul is. Inasmuch as it reflects into 
itself, preserving itself undifferentiated in its being determined through 
an other, the monad is self-subsistent totality for which the other is 
something negated in it. And the distinction can only be one of degree, 
a matter of the greater or lesser freedom with which the monad 
remains indifferent on many sides. For the distinction with respect 
to the monad itself is this alternation between the form in which the 
monad is a content, something passive, and [the form] in which it is 
differentiated unity. The disappearing of the monad within the dy-
namic [thiitzgen] chain (which at every point spreads out in all direc-
tions) consists in its appearing more in the form of that enveloped, 

Metaphysics of Objectzvzty 
undisclosed, passive content, and as something differentiated in a 
narrower expanse, in a more restricted sphere, and in relation to 
fewer things. Since each is in itself, reflects itself into itself, and expels 
itself from others, this expelling is posited with respect to each as well. 
It is something absolutely determinate; and the graduated transition 
is infinitely divided within itself. As absolutely determined, negative 
one, it is a "this." But this singularity goes aground in its own totality. 
For at the same time the soul, or the monad in general, receives 
another significance in the world-process; in other words, the oppo-
sition of freedom and necessity, which previously displayed itself as 
moment of one and the same thing, must itself divide this concate-
nation of monads in another way. 
For the world-process displayed itself in such a way that the same 
thing was at one time content, something passive vis-a-vis another; 
and at another time active vis-a-vis another that was passive. And this 
same [thing] returns into itself from its differentiation, and is thus 
itself in the form of something that is connected with itself. What 
comes back to itself in this way preserves itself as an in-itself, posited, 
as reflected, for it becomes totality. But in totality it becomes also 
another; as totality of its determinacy it confronts itself as moments, 
in which it is just as much a simple negative one as it is differentiated 
unity. It does not enter into the antithesis as determinacy in general, 
itself already posited as moment; rather, it is moment only for us. It 
enters as subject, as a negative one, as one reflected into itself; and in 
its determinacy it is itself absolute determinacy, [ 145] negative unity, 
which in its being determined through another posits itself as not 
determined [and] the determinacy as sublated in itself-that is, [posits 
itself] as a "this": something simple in its infinitely complex deter-
minacy. This bad infinity is posited immediately as absolute infinity, 
as one, as a point. Negatively connected in this way with the opposite, 
it is what is active. Vis-a-vis another, what is passive and connected 
with itself is equally a "this"; vis-a-vis what is active, however, it is only 
something that connects with itself. Reflecting itself into itself from 
this its determinacy, what is active sublates itself as a "this," and as a 
totality [comes to be] universal. From the definitum it comes to be its 
definition; and the process of its self-preservation is much more the 
demise of its singularity and the realization of the genus. The monad 
that is a reflection into itself is so only as a "this." It is the other 
moment; but this other is in itself too. In other words, it is on its own 
account in the form of the first moment; so far as it is so, however, 

Metaphysics 
it is passive. It reflects itself into itself as simple, or as soul, and pre-
serves itself; this reflection in general is that of the soul. It preserves 
itself, however, also as a second moment, or as a "this"; and it is an 
in-itself, active vis-a-vis another. That first self-preservation is the ideal 
one, where the other disappears in the monad. This second one is 
that of the nullification of the other, not of its relative disappearing. 
But this other self-preservation, as the other moment, is just for that 
reason immediately the contrary of itself as well. It is the liberation 
from itself and the sublating of itself as a "this." 
In the world the soul comes to be monad. To that extent there is 
only an absolute multiplicity of monads that represent the world to 
themselves and, indifferently connected with themselves, remain in 
this differentiation of representation. Monad it is, but only monad; 
in other words, as this connectedness with itself, as a moment, it is so 
only vis-a-vis the differentiated moment. '8 But this differentiated mo-
ment is the development of the soul itself, which negates itself as its 
own ground. As something simple it changes itself into the ground 
that is outside its existence. This its existence (or the fact that it changes 
itself into ground) is its being absolute determinacy, negative unity, 
as reflection connecting itself with itself, or as formal cognition. As 
absolute reflection, its freedom within itself is immediately its exclud-
ing the other from itself, and a connection of [things] that absolutely 
are [absolutseyender]. The former self-preservation of the soul ends 
with the freedom that is immediately this differentiating of freedom, 
[that is,] of negative unity vis-a-vis itself [146] in the form of monad-
vis-a-vis itself as something negated in freedom, which vis-a-vis free-
dom is something passive. Cognition changes itself into an absolute 
cognition as one, and the world is thereby posited. The sublating of 
this differentiation vis-a-vis something absolutely in itself or passive, 
which to us is on its own account, is the sublation of this one itself. 
And thereby [it is] the totality as a universal-totality that, however, 
precisely in that it is simply this connection in itself, itself appears 
again as first moment under the determinacy of equivalence. 
The world as this process of the genus sets freedom up as a higher 
sphere that turns against the world's lower ones. Previously freedom 
was in general what is undifferentiated as reflection into itself; and 
18. Trans.: Lasson reads this text as "Monad it is, but only vis-a-vis the differentiated 
moment; in other words as this connectedness with itself, as a moment, it is only so " 

Metaphysics of Objectivzty 
153 
the first moment, or the monad, was in itself just as much something 
free as the second moment, and as totality, which is itself what is 
simple in the first moment and falls back into the determinacy of this 
first moment. But the former reflection, as the formal in-itself or its 
concept (which freedom previously was), is now the higher freedom 
of totality of which the monad and what is active are themselves 
moments. This totality, the genus, is henceforth the in-itself and ranks 
above its falling back into the form of the first moment, as remaining 
self-equivalent in the first moment. Its falling back is much rather its 
own stretching out into the two moments of what is passive (or the 
monad) and what is active. As the in-itself of the whole, it is the essence 
of these moments, which is doubled in them; and as their genus, it is 
their universal. And the process-that is, the self-preservative process 
of the genus-is like the coming to be of the genus, precisely the self-
preservative process of the singular. 
Opposite the differentiated in-itself stands another, in general as 
something passive. Its preservation is the annihilation of the in-itself, 
but at the same time its own annihilation-that is, its coming to be 
the genus that, to be sure (as the absolute reflection of itself}, displays 
this other that stands opposite the differentiated unity. It displays it 
as the kind of thing that returns out of absolute totality into the 
determinacy of the first moment; that is, [it shows] that this passive 
[thing] is in fact genus only in the form of the first moment. Sublating 
itself in its self-preservation, what is active becomes in this infinity its 
own contrary; and maintaining itself in its contrary, it stands by itself 
as opposed to itself. Instead of having negated itself in its contrary, 
it is, rather, positive. The other in-itself is not its own negation; but 
in the other it cognizes itself. The genus tears itself apart into the 
differentiation of the sexes-from cognition into recognition. The 
singularity that passes away in the process of the genus is ideal., but 
posited as something ideal.; [it is] ideal, in another.[147] On the other 
hand, [once] posited, what is ideal. is on its own account. Singularity 
has come to the point where the first moment itself is a cognizing, 
[that is,] a self-preserving, a connecting of itself with itself, and therein 
a self-sublating, such that its being itself is something other than itself. 
The reflection of singularity into itself is the genus that has come to 
be; but singularity preserves itself throughout this its sublating, and 
finds itself in another. The genus is not only the universal, but also 
the infinite. In the totality the singular has changed itself into the 

Meta physics 
whole process; and in it the whole process comes apart as a duplicated 
process. It is only this process of the totality that, in its totality, comes 
to be the first moment. 
The moments of the genus are the existing singularities. It itself as 
absolute reflection is only as this cycle of its moments, precipitating 
and dissolving into themselves. Since as determinacy of universal in-
difference it stands over against them as moments, it is itself rather 
their one[ness]; yet it is equally the not-determinately universal, or 
the indifferent that is not opposed, and their ideality, or equally their 
being. It is the free, which, elevated above the moments of the cycle, 
is alone what is self-equivalent. The being of these moments is only 
now an existing; all previous being was so merely in a determinacy 
that was not complete reflection into itself. Here for the first time is 
genuine reality posited, f'or the genus is absolute reflection into itself, 
and as such also changes itself into its moments of reflection insofar 
as it is something other whenever this reflection, opposed to these, is 
a 1noment. '9 
Previously it was a matter of indifference whether we considered 
the soul as cognition or as ground (only with the limitation that it be 
as the determinacy of an opposition). In existence, however, this in-
difference is sublated and the two are posited as connected with one 
another. The ground is over against cognition and is the universal as 
reflecting itself into itself; or [it is] absolute reflection posited as uni-
versal in itself and not opposed. Cognition is the same genus but is 
so as a moment of reflecting itself into itself; its reflecting into itself 
is its self-preservation, which is directed against nothing but the genus, 
the universal. The self-preservation is reflection into itself appearing 
as simple; that from which it is differentiated [ 148] was in general 
something self-subsistent that, having been synthesized and deter-
mined, disappeared again. Only its concept was posited; once reflec-
tion is realized, then this other is for it what is strictly passive, nothing 
other than the genus, the whole of the moment itself that confronts 
it as moment and that is something self-subsistent, something con-
nected with itself. Positing singularity self-negated within it, this ne-
gation sublates itself and thus preserves itself; with respect to it, it 
takes its essence up into itself, as it were, for the first time. 
The distinctions of reflection within itself thus come to pass in the 
19. Trans: The French translation of Souche-Dagues has "insofar as it is something 
other than this [or], opposed to these, is a moment." 

Meta physics of Objectivzty 
155 
following way. Cognition and ground are one, but for us. And so 
cognition is soul, undifferentiated, on its own account; its differen-
tiation is an indifferent coming and disappearing of an in-itself vis-
a-vis which [it] is equally in itself. In the world-process this diverse 
in-itself becomes differentiated within itself [gegeneinander] in exist-
ence; the self-preserving singular has passed over into the genus; and 
the world-process is the process of the genus, which, remaining a 
whole in its moments, posits them differentiated over against each 
other [gegeneinander] and exists in them. 
As its concept, cognition is soul; the latter, as this determinacy of 
the concept, is itself a singular that, thus reflecting itself into itself, 
becomes genus [Gattung]. Realizing itself, this in turn is bifurcation 
into genders, existence of natural things and preservation of the spe-
cies [Gattung]; as this, freedom confronts its process. It is the ever 
self-equivalent content of the cycle of cognition, or of the process of 
the genus; and real cognition has stepped forth from formal cognition. 
The monads as existing things express only one and the same uni-
versal. Their multiplicity as much as the determinacy of their move-
ment is what is strictly contingent;•o and what is existing in connection 
with singularity [is] in fact what is only possible. In the genus this 21 
is sublated and its self-preservation is rather its sublating. Singularity 
exists in that it, without coming to be genus, returns into itself, since 
the genus is rather what is in the form of being connected with itself 
(or what is passive, against which singularity turns and which it sub-
lates) and is free. Conversely, the genus is that in which singularity 
sublates itself; genus is the differentiating unity in which the singu-
larities are moments that themselves come to be genus. Both free-
doms-that of singularity and that of genus-are [ 149] opposed to 
each other and so are both necessities-the one in which the genus 
only is a passive, the connection with itself only as moment, and the 
other in which conversely the self-preserving singularity comes to be 
genus just as the latter falls back into being moment. Because of this 
falling back, the genus is not absolute ground, not absolutely undif-
ferentiated in itself; it is thus indeed completely closed within itself 
in that its last is again its first. In this immediate overturning, however, 
it is itself not posited as freedom; but its liberation becomes rather 
only passivity. It is the cycle that changes itself into the cycle; that is, 
20. Trans.: Hegel has no punctuation here. 
21. Trans .. "This" could refer either to "singularity" or to "multiplicity." 

Meta physics 
the cycle moves itself as its moments but is not absolutely free. Indeed, 
it is only in the form of necessity-that is to say, as throwing itself 
over from one side to another through a middle that, to be sure, is 
the genus as universal or rather communal. Yet as such [it] does not 
step forth with the annihilation of its being moment; rather, it is 
posited only in the form of existence; and the genus itself is nothing 
but fulfilled soul, which would be self-equivalent reflection, indiffer-
ent throughout to the alternation and the passing over. Cognition as 
reflection posited in an absolutely simple way, or simplicity, is not yet 
posited. The soul was of course this simple, but its content was the 
indeterminate. Now there is this content or fulfilment; as the mo-
ments of the cycle, the content is the total reflection itself, but it is 
also only the content. In fact, therefore, this content is also only in 
the form of opposed terms. It is only the genus as a passive moment 
that preserves itself as singularity opposed to the genus qua something 
alien, devouring the genus within itself, and thereby springing over 
to the differentiation of the genus. Unlike the first, this genus does 
not stand opposed to the differentiation as something alien but as 
something equivalent to it, something that finds itself in the other as 
the latter finds itself in it. But [it does so] in such a way that they 
express the genus not per se but only as their undifferentiatedness. 
And since they express this, it is itself again that first opposed moment. 
If the self-preservation is only this coming and disappearing of 
something alien in cognition, then in the process of the genus as well 
the preservation of the genus is itself only the coming and disap-
pearing of the singularities positing themselves as themselves outside 
themselves. It is not cognition as absolute reflection into itself, or this 
as simple. 
As the universal, however, the genus must [be] as that which is the 
same in this form [ 150] of existence; in other words, it in its existence 
and it as the self-equivalent must be equal to each other. And in fact 
in this existence of the genus, the genus alone is what is in itself. What 
is existing [is] the self-sublating negative; and the genus is itself this 
negative unity. The simple, self-equivalent reflecting-itself-into-itself 
(which just thereby is something absolutely reflected) and the negative 
unity•• in the mode of divided genus, as necessity, is strictly one; what 
appears other than this unity is purely something ideal" not subsisting 
in itself. 
22. Trans: Grammatical!> the pronoun could refer to "genus." 

Meta physics of Objectivity 
157 
Genus is the ground of existing singularities, as also of their con-
nection; or rather [it is] their connection itself. Yet not only this, but 
the connection is in fact the absolute unity; for what is connected, the 
singularities, are not in themselves, but strictly self-sublating with re-
spect to each other. 
C /THE HIGHEST ESSENCE"3 
As we have shown, there is in the process of the genus, as of the 
existence of the world, totality itself only in its antitheses and in their 
unity, the empty middle of going over. There is in fact never anything 
but the two sides of the transition; they are posited as being in them-
selves, yet indeed characterized by their antithesis-in other words, 
moving themselves to disappear into the opposite. 
The essence of this movement is necessary. For the way it is posited 
as process, there is in it only the appearing of the antithesis between 
the self-preservation of the singularity and that of the genus. The 
passing over, the unity of both, is an "inner" that does not step forth; 
that is, it is what is not posited for this alternation but only what is 
posited by us, or the "outer." For the self-preserving individual, how-
ever, this is, as cognizing or as unity of itself and its opposite, its non-
being or its disappearing. Thereby there is for it too this contradiction. 
And since it finds itself as something other in the genus, then im-
mediately opposed is this: having its essence only as connection with 
another and not in itself, and on the contrary preserving its reflection 
into itself as itself. The unity of both is [ 151] outside the self-preserving 
individual because the individual is only the subject of this contra-
diction. For this unity of the contradiction (which it is) is its being per 
se. It is this unity that, as formal reflection, steps aside, sublates itself 
in the self-equivalent positive of the genus, and has this sublating and 
this self-equivalent outside itself-or as "inner," as its ground, from 
which it is yet distinguished. 
The connection of the self-preservation with the genus has the 
aspect that each singular is strictly contingent for the other in that, 
as self-preserving, each is on its own account and indifferent for the 
other. They are equally contingent for the genus, since the latter is 
in itself; and the determinacy that is in the self-preservation (whereby 
the individual [is] something unique [smgulares], something absolutely 
23. Trans : Alternate translation: "the Supreme Being" 

Meta physics 
determinate in both senses-pure point and point of an infinite ag-
gregate of lines intersecting in it) is not for the genus. Rather for this 
as universal what is unique is indeed only with the determinacy of 
universality,"4 or as particular that has gone back into itself, having 
bent together into the circle of its reflection that aggregate of lines 
extending through it into infinity. 
Yet this indifference of the singulars for each other and for the 
genus sublates itself, for in fact they [are] for each other generally-
one is only with the determinacy of connection with the other and 
equally as singular under the genus, since the points of its lines are 
just such an in-itself. As point it falls on the line, which is on its own 
account a higher reflection into itself-namely, just the genus; the 
alien, which stands opposed to what is self-preserving-and it is itself 
an alien thing of this kind-is in itself nothing other than the genus 
itself for what is self-preserving. The singular is necessary vis-a-vis 
the singular, [and] equally vis-a-vis the genus. For this genus is vis-a-
vis itself as first moment, and in this as formal reflection, as not re-
flected. In other words, it is itself in its moments not only particular, 
but unique. 
However, this necessity is the bad sort in which the connection is 
not as such or in itself, but only with respect to the opposites. Yet it 
is altogether in itself, and the opposites are in the absolute necessity. 
For their bad necessity is in fact the absolute one. That bad indiffer-
ence, like the bad necessity, are nothing in themselves; and the [ 152] 
singular is present only in the absolute indifference and necessity of 
the genus, which is its essence, the essence of the essence, not only 
according to determinacy in general (metaphysical necessity) but ac-
cording to its absolute determinacy as a singular. 
If [a) the process of self-preservation (as that in which the absolutely 
determinate posits itself as self-equivalent, posits the many determi-
nacies as ideal, within it and remains itself, undifferentiated in their 
subl~ting) we call "thought"; [and] if, however, [b) the process of the 
genus in which the singular itself is only within the universal, indeed 
something ideal., negative, [we call] "quantum," whose essence is the 
24. Trans.: Following Lasson we have changed the punctuation and inserted "is." 
This does justice to the word order. The ms reads " . . the determinacy that is in the 
self-preservation (whereby the individual is something unique, something absolute!} 
determinate in both senses-pure point and point of an infinite aggregate of lines 
intersecting in it-not for the genus but rather for this as uni,ersal) is what is unique, 
though only with the determinaq of universalit) ... " 

Meta physics of Objectivity 
159 
self-equivalent, the singular only as negation and the latter as con-
nected with the self-equivalent as delimitation (whereby, however, the 
universal in fact, like space, is not delimited by the determinacies 
posited in it-that is there is no point where space would not be)-if 
we [now] call this universal "being" or "extension" as that in virtue of 
which alone something possible is, then, since both [conditions] are 
one, thinking, and extension or being are strictly one. 
Since the genus, or the universal, is not as some determinate genus 
or other but as the absolute genus, which is reflection into itself, 
moments of which it itself is, it is hence the highest essence of all, 
which is not itself a moment and a stepping over into the determinate 
existence of something else, but rather absolute existence itself; not 
something necessary, but necessity itself; not the empty universality 
that is common, but the ideality of that to which it only would have 
been common, hence the essence of the genus or its substance. 
Whatever superficial connection with the singular is given to what 
is thus in itself, the connection is in itself null and void. If this singular 
is posited as being in itself, then it has a side of indifference vis-a-vis 
the highest essence, and the latter has a reality outside it. Its being as 
the in-itself is yet posited in another way, namely, as an extension that 
would not be one with being, something determined through an alien 
[thing] whose determining, not being inherently ideal. or sublated, 
would be negation. Extension or being in the highest essence is, how-
ever, immediately one with singularity-that is, negation. Since the 
division in it is only as a sublatedness, this singularity is strictly simple; 
and the multiplicity distinguished in the singularity is the genus, the 
simplicity of [ 153] reflection itself. If a being per se is to be ascribed 
to the many, it becomes quite simply equal to itself; and its distinction 
is its being in the other-that is, its sublating; it is only the nothing, 
which is the simplicity of being and indistinguishable from it. Thus 
the determinacies of quantity of the pure universal are only this neg-
ative; and the negative is in itself simple and is the universal itself. 
There can be posited no external determinacy not equal to the uni-
versal; that is, this [universal] can be posited, not with respect to an 
extension diverse from being, which extension would be externally 
determined. What thus determines externally is the nothing--com-
pletely simple, and hence itself being. 
This highest essence has the antithesis of what preserves itself 
(thinking) and of being (extension) simply and solely as an attribute, 
as moment, as something ideal. within itself, not as substance [or as] 

160 
M etaph_vszcs 
what is in itself. On the contrary, it is rather its being in itself, and 
the differences belong only to the ideality, to the nothing in itself. 
The highest essence, thus equal to itself in that which appears to 
be unequal, is the absolute ground of this unequal. For this is in itself 
nothing but just the highest essentiality itself; and [that] whereby it 
is on its own account, separated from it, is pure negation. To be in 
itself it can only strive to sublate this-that is, its being per se-and 
can surrender its sphere of self-preservation in which it is set over 
against something alien-and it does indeed catch sight of itself in 
the process of the genus, but only as something other than itself-a 
sphere of self-preservation that is only the negativity of the highest 
essence. The highest essence is equal to itself thus: that it is what is 
strictly reflected into itself; that there is not this movement or reflect-
ing within it, but rather in its emanation in appearance as multiplicity 
it is absolutely the same. 
It is proven that the highest essence is the one and only, the in-itself. 
It is something infinitely extroverted; it has infinitely created, yet its 
creation, to the extent that in it the singular as individual is separated, 
is in fact only negation. What is thus negated has only to preserve the 
contradiction in itself and preserve itself as negation; yet since it is 
only negation it is to revert, as self-preserving, into non-existence and 
into the highest essence. 
To this there stands opposed, in its self-equivalence, simply negation 
as the evil principle that builds itself up within itself. In its pure clarity 
this [ 154] darkness is not present; for darkness is the nothing for the 
light, and the clarity is to the light strictly as self-equivalent. Yet equally 
the light is not without darkness, as darkness is not [without light]. 
The highest essence has created the world, which for the essence is 
of ether-bright transparency and clarity; yet the world on its own is 
dark. 
It is proven that only the highest essence is in itself; yet this being 
per se of the world stands strictly opposed to this necessity. Its being 
is a non-being; yet this "non-being is" is itself over against that absolute 
being. It dissolves away, vanishes within it. Yet that it so vanishes 
presupposes that it has been, or it retains its being per se. And this 
being per se and the absolute essence remain divided. The proof goes 
back to the latter, but it does not proceed from it. Rather, it begins 
with an inconceivable point of departure-namely, that of existence-
which must freely sublate itself. But if it only must do so, then it has 

Metaphyszcs of Subjectivity 
not been; and it has not been; it is not. This itself is only the result 
of a proof, which was preceded by the movement of the proof and 
the point of departure of the proof but not by its constructzon. The 
emanation of singularity out of the highest essence is an empty thought; 
for that whereby it would be filled would be only an inequality, of 
which the absolute unity of the genus is not capable. 
Yet this highest essence is self-equivalent in that it is itself absolute 
negation, and this in an absolutely simple way. It has to do with 
nothing but displaying just this negation as what is simple. And it only 
[is] this simple as an absolutely simple reflection into itself-as "I" or 
as intelligence. 
c I Metaphysics of Subjectivity 
As we move from objectivity to subjectivity it is worth noting that what Hegel 
says in the Science of Logic about the relation of his new logic to the older 
metaphysics applies fairly comprehensively to his own "old metaphysics." It 
is "the objective logic" that "takes the place of the metaphysics of former 
times ... ,, What he calls here "the metaphysics of subjectivity" has some affin-
ities with the higher reaches of the Subjective Logic of 1816. But most of the 
topics of that logic have no place in the Metaphysics of 1804. They are left 
behind in the finite realm of the logical relationship of thought. The meta-
physics of objectivity arrives at the concept of the highest essence; and it is in 
the context of essence that the metaphysics of subjectivity evolves. (In terms 
of the Phenomenology of Spirzt we have now reached chapter 8.) 
God is not a substance but an essence: the essence of subjectivity. The 
absolute self is the ultimate ground of reality. The final phase of the Meta-
physics is thus a reinterpretation of Kant and Fichte, just as the penultimate 
phase was a reinterpretation of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz. God is the 
self who is a community of selves. But this is just the logical structure of real 
self as our argument has revealed it. The single human organism cannot join 
the end to the beginning. It dies and leaves a new cycle to unroll. Rational 
consciousness, by contrast, is true resurrection. 
The rational self knows its identity with the community of selves. It thinks 
for the genus (that is, for homo sapiens in his world as an eternal community). 
It knows its own natural self as an empirical datum among the rest, but this 
self is only a sublated moment. The consciousness of determinacy is only the 
25. Gesmmnelte Wnke, XI, 32; Hegel's Somce vf Lvgic, trans. Miller, p 63. 

Meta physics 
consciousness of the world as an Anstoss to which the self is passive. Where 
now is the objective immortality of this self? In the objectivity of what it knows 
and in the general validity of that knowledge. 
This rational self has active impulses. It is a will. Here, too, absolute sin-
gularity is infinity. The rational will for the genus is the true infinite of absolute 
spirit. 
As the absolute genus, the absolute essence is what is self-equivalent 
in the moments of existence; and existence is the negative. As negative 
the essence disappears within being; indeed, it is equivalent to being; 
but in order for it to disappear, it is necessary that it be opposed to 
being and that in its opposition only this its sublation should itself be 
what is self-equivalent. 
This negative is nothing else than infinity, but here it is what is 
fulfilled, or absolutely infinite. The two moments of simple connection 
in their [ 155] realization-unity or being (determined as quantum, 
for which negation is something strictly external) and infinity, which 
[is] just this sublation into itself-are here posited as fulfilled. Unity 
was so posited earlier, as having returned out of the totality of the 
antithesis; infinity is :;o posited now as returning therefrom. The [mo-
ments] whose infinity is the I are themselves infinite, reflections into 
themselves; they are not simple circles but such as themselves have 
circles as their moments, and are the circles of these circles. Indeed, 
self-preservation is already something reflected into itself, absolute 
singularity that remains self-equivalent in the unequal, and reverts 
into itself out of its own determinateness. Vis-a-vis singularity the alien 
[moment] is the universal; and singularity, combined with it, is some-
thing synthetic, something particular from which it ascends to the 
universal once again. Singularity interlocking with the universal through 
the synthetic unity of the particular is itself this movement of as-
cending, which, qua universal, is immediately singular once more in 
that as a universal it has opposed singularity to particularity as to what 
is synthetic. It posits them both ideally.: the universal as opposed to 
the substance, and the singular as opposed to the determinate concept. 
It is negative unity or singularity, having thus returned to its starting-
point. The universal that stands opposed to the singular is the singular 
itself, and vice versa: what is alien in this reflection is that [universal 
and singular] have each of them this determination vis-a-vis the other, 
while their unity is only for us. In the world-that is, in the process 
of the genus-the process sublates itself for what is itself self-reflexive; 

Metaphysics of Subjectivit_-y 
as this whole cycle the self-reflexive is opposed to itself-two self-
preserving [processes] that are now therefore no longer something 
in principle alien for one another, since that primary reflection does 
not fall back simply into singularity but in such a way that it fall backs 
as the totality that has come to be. In this guise it has its very singularity 
within it sublated as the one moment and as something merely ideal. 
in itself. Consequently, while the totality is singularity once more, 
singularity is also something sublated; and hence its opposite is not 
something alien but something equivalent to it. This oppositeness is 
only a sublated one for the first singularity, something transparent, 
through which it catches sight of its self and is cognitive. For it does 
not see therein something reflected but something reflecting itself, 
the motion that is its own essence. 
Both of them are the absolute self-equivalence of reflection; and 
the singular, connected with itself as with an other-though for it the 
otherness is also merely [ 156] form-itself passes over into the genus, 
or into what is self-equivalent. The return to the first moment is not 
for that moment. Inasmuch as it is singular, it is only so qua self-
preserving; it cannot hold out through this passage. It perishes therein; 
and this transition is the having-come-into-being of another singular-
of a singular because it is a first moment necessary of itself and is 
opposed to the singular that is pushed into a higher sphere. That the 
singular cannot descend, cannot turn itself into the first moment, is 
because even existence is enclosed in this sphere and the transition 
into another is the cessation of existence. Yet the turning back to the 
first [moment] is only for the absolute universal of the sphere. For 
the singular, however, it is its vanishing, and its having been turned 
back is the arising of another, a vanishing and arising that is equally 
contingent for both of them as such and is only the absolute necessity 
of the universal. 
The universal, as the highest essence, or as the genus, is the state 
of self-equivalence along the path of singularity, which alone is the 
reflection of existence, or absolute existence. For us, accordingly, it 
is what is equivalent in self-preservation, or what is opposed as genus 
to the self-preserving singular. For the singular, the alien [moment] 
is its still not being something reflected of itself, or its being affected 
with an absolute determinacy, since the sublatedness of the deter-
minacy within the totality lies behind it; that is, it exists for an other. 
But this singular, having here arrived at the absolute nothingness of 
determinacy, is no more; the other emerging from its womb, there-

Metaphysics 
fore, stands forth immediately, born completely free and indifferent. 
Since the essence of its indifference, however, is just that it has come 
forth from negation, or is its bezng reflected (for there is no indiffer-
ence otherwise than in being reflected), it is in fact connected with 
what was negated, even though, qua singular, it is indifferent to it 
(that is, it is connected with it as with something absolutely alien, 
having being in itself). For the singular it is not that this alien [moment] 
is an in-itself, simply what is sublated, or the self-oppositing genus. For 
us the indifferent antithesis, which remains in self-preservation, and 
the antithesis of the genus (in the sexes) is the same. The first is the 
second posited as ideal 2 ; the alien quality in self-preservation is the 
sublated equality of the sexes, and vice versa. 
The highest essence is this equivalent that returns as universal into 
the first potency, or into [157] the beginning. However, it does not 
return to the beginning qua singularity but only qua universal, since 
the singularity posited therein is other than that which has come to 
be universal. 
But just the singularity that has become universality is not only what 
is self-equivalent in the moments of existence, but their negative unity. 
It is absolute singularity, absolute determinacy, infinity. The singular's 
having-come-to-be the universal is the sublatedness of singularity. But 
this simplicity is not the nothingness of singularity, so that it would 
have singularity over against it. On the contrary, it is immediately one 
with singularity. For us, the singular of self-preservation has its com-
ing-to-be in the coming-to-be of the concept of cognition. At this point, 
in its first potency, when returning into its beginning, it does so as an 
other, not as the first singular but as a singular that has become 
universal. 
This absolute unity of singularity and universality, the I, consists 
in the fact that singularity, in that it is this I, is now as opposite 
immediately simple, or that the opposite only is for it as something 
sublated. In its opposition, and in connection with this, [it is] some-
thing universal and self-equivalent that has annulled all indifference 
of determinacy and all half-connection. Self-preservation, returning 
out of the simple totality, is not an indifference in which an indifferent 
alien [moment] that has only the form of universality enters. Because 
singularity becomes at the same time what is differentiated, this [alien 
element] opposes to itself, as synthesis of both, the fact that the in-
different is within it; and it sublates this opposition in such a way that 

Metaphysics of Subjectzvity 
both [opposites] become unconnected and indifferent once more. In-
stead, the determinate opposite is for the singularity itself only qua 
universal; thus in its own determinacy [ it is] immediately something 
sublated. For the singular, the genus is precisely what is alien in the 
self-preservation. 
1 f THE THEORETICAL I, OR CONSCIOUSNESS 
The singularity, which is not this mere determinacy but is absolute 
reflection in every dimension and in all its moments instead, is (qua 
infinity) [ 158] simple; that is, its movement in its moments is just this 
transparent universal, sublated in its oppositeness. In the soul the 
determinate is something alien and something to be sublated by ab-
straction from it-that is, through its disappearing. But in the I, qua 
self-subsistent or alien, the determinate is immediately something ideal.; 
it is something indifferent in itself, in connection with the I, since 
formerly it was something differentiated vis-a-vis the soul, something 
alien that posits in the I something other than the I. 
The monad represents the world to itself; and the boundary of its 
presentation, the point where it stops, is its contrary, [or] what is alien 
to it. The universal representing is not bounded by this boundary; 
for of course the boundary is nothing positive at all but is strictly 
negative in itself. This negative status, however, was not for the monad, 
for which on the contrary the boundary is something positive, since 
the essence of the monad is singularity, the negating of an other, or 
exclusion. For the I this other is not a nothing by virtue of abstracting 
from it, since abstracting only lets something else take its place; in-
stead, the other in its otherness is immediately something equal to the 
I-that is, something sublated as other. It is something recapitulated 
in itself, or a many as something self-equivalent, even as the many 
was sublated right at the beginning of philosophy. This it is now not 
for us; rather, the "us" for whom it is so is now the object of our own 
consideration. 
In the monad there was this reciprocity of both [terms]: through 
what was posited in it as alien, the monad was in itself the synthesis 
of that in which an effect occurs; and conversely the monad posited 
once more in the alien [moment) something alien to it and made it 
into a synthesis of this kind, sundered itself as thus synthetic from 
itself as the indifferent, took itself back into itself, and thus sublated 

!66 
Metaphysics 
what is alien•6 in that it disappeared. The I, by contrast, is in its own 
self, and is for itself the universal; the indifference or the being per 
se of the alien [moment] is nothing other than the form of universality. 
But this form belongs to the I; and the alien [moment), so far as it 
thus exists on its own account, is itself determined through the I. 
There is simply and solely the second synthesis (the determinateness 
of the alien [moment] through the I), not the first one (the deter-
minateness of the I through the alien [moment]); and there is in fact 
nothing alien posited in the I. The reflection of the I into itself is no 
longer that formal or negative one in which the genus is for the I not 
genus, not universal, but something else. Instead, the beginning of 
the genus is just the genus reflected into itself, the I as genus; and 
singularity is this [issuing forth] from itself"7 of the genus into the 
first and the other moment of the I. This issuing forth [ 159] is the 
absolute concept, or infinity as simple negation that is the contrary of 
itself; and this contrary, being the contrary in itself (that is, the con-
trary of its own self again, other in itself, or the other of itself), is 
sublated in itself as other. [This is] the infinity of the I, as the contrary 
of infinity, and equally the contrary of this contrary. And the other 
is just for that reason ideal.; it is the contrary of its own self. The 
antithesis only exists as one reflected into itself, as sublated, or as the 
being nullified of everything alien. 
The I, being in this way an inwardly reflected genus, or absolutely 
universal, in its singularity, has the alien [moment] simply and solely 
as a universal vis-a-vis itself. But for this reason this opposite is in fact 
only sublated; it is not something opposed. For there to be an antithesis 
with respect to it, what is designated as universal (the ideal.) must at 
once be something determinate, or something opposed to the I; and 
[it must] have a side from which it is not determined through the I-
that is, [that] is not equal to it. For [it must be] precisely not as I but 
as something that has come to be an I, or as a universal that throughout 
its universality carries being by virtue of its inherent opposition. In 
essence the I is nothing but absolutely universal singularity, in that 
the singularity has returned out of the world, only as something re-
flected. The genus, as singularity, is precisely thereby a determinate 
negation of the determinate, and is itself determined. The I as infinite, 
which turns into the contrary of itself, becomes so as something orig-
26. Trans.: The German pronoun could be referring to "what is synthetic." 
27. Trans: CE reads "self [making]", Lasson reads "self [sublating]." 

Metaphysics of Subjectwit_v 
inally determinate-that is, as an [I] that is a determinate infinity. 
Despite reflection and negation, it is a part of the world, a part posited 
in negated form, but thereby a determinate negative. Thus the I 
confronts nothing alien in its self-preservation-a self-preservation 
that does not preserve itself vis-a-vis what is alien-since it would 
originally have preserved a determinacy that now it would also have 
to sublate. Rather, since it is on its own account and preserves itself, 
the determinacy is prior to the opposition that enters in self-preser-
vation; it is a determinacy that consciousness brings with it, so to speak. 
The process of this self-preservation is simpler than the first; there 
is not in it the doubled, reciprocal determining. The synthesis is [not] 
of the kind in which the alien would at first be the essential, the in-
itself, something that would posit itself in the I as what is passive, and 
[of the kind in which] in this I an otherness would thus not arise 
through the I itself. Rather, the process begins at once with the fact 
that in the antithesis the essentiality is not altered and overturned but 
immediately is the I, as the infinite, what is essential. The antithesis 
itself begins with the inequality of something essential [ t6o] and some-
thing inessential; as the essential, the I has the other only as something 
passive, determining it. The determinacy of the I is not, as it were, 
engendered before its eyes. Rather, the determinacy cannot be con-
ceived by it, is unconscious; and the antithesis in the self-preservation 
is thereby wholly immanent within the I. In other words, the I is only 
its infinity, in which is the antithesis. What is added to this antithesis 
from that original determinacy is not something alien to the I; that 
is, the connection of the det~rminacy with the I is not a synthetic but 
rather an absolute unity, one that gathers itself together in the totality 
of the self-realizing genus but one that, although quite pure unity as 
totality, is thereby something determinate in that it would be derived 
from singularity, or has sublated something singular. The highest 
essence, as this which sublates something singular within itself, is itself 
singular, and thus steps into existence again; because it [is] absolute 
essence, this negative singular must itself sublate itself. As what is 
equal to itself in the two processes of self-preservation and genus, the 
highest essence is only something formally, equal; in its totality, [it] 
has come to be the real equal in such a way that it is differentiated 
vis-a-vis the former inequality (to which it formerly was indifferent) 
and sublates it. But the determinacy is thereby itself only synthesis, 
or what was posited as sublated; and thus the highest essence turns 
back into its beginning as the I, is in this return its own first moment, 

168 
Metaphyszcs 
or something determinate, and is so in that it is absolutely determi-
nate-that is, it has taken up the determinacy into its essence. 
Therefore this determinacy appears for consciousness as an original 
one; for it is not only in the antithesis or in the determinacy to which 
the I is opposed, but it is ground, what is common to both. Hence it 
appears at first as an infinite impact, which is basically in the inner 
absolute essence of the I itself; and its very reflection is for the I not 
a sublating of that determinacy, but the determinacy that is in this 
cycle. In other words, for the I itself, the determinacy is a formal one. 
The self-preservation of the I is only something directed against it, 
or against its consciousness. For that first circle of self-preservation, 
posited in the I as in the soul, still has for it only the one side of what 
is synthetic, that of the determinateness of something alien through 
the I, or the fact that it is in itself something sublated. And its reflection 
into itself is not the sublating of this synthetic [combination] and letting 
it fall apart, but the sublating of the illusion that in what is [ 161] thus 
synthetic, there is in fact an alien component. This reflection is only 
the sublating of the illusion that the I is something synthetic, and 
brings the I forth as something simple, as original determinacy in its 
essence. Thus what is opposed is for the I just the formal reflection; 
or its return is its [coming] to consciousness-[that is,] that what is 
opposed is its own self. The opposite is only an illusion-that is, a 
nothing within itself; or it is formal reflection-that is, the cycle that 
in fact contains nothing alien within itself, and only appears itself as 
something alien. 
For the I it is just the self-preservation of the soul that is the object; 
for it is the reflection in which what is alien is only transitory. As object 
of the I, what is alien is the reflection turned back into itself, the entire 
formal circle outside which is the determinacy-in other words, the 
reflection that does not just come forth in the circle but remains what 
is internal, one with the essence of the I. The self-preservation of the 
I is precisely this removing of what is alien from that circle, so that 
[the circle] remains only the universal [and] only the universality per-
tains to the object of the I as such. In this way the I indicates to itself 
what is thus alien, and does not allow it to disappear from itself; it 
posits itself as something sublated, but posits this alien as one with its 
essence; and it posits its own essence as this determinacy. Thus the 
object is what is self-equivalent in the genus itself; and its in-itself is 
not the negation of the I within it but rather just this self-equivalent, 
or the circle of reflection. The sublating of what is alien is not a 

Metaphysics of Subjectivity 
16g 
pushing out but a taking back into itself; and the antithesis and its 
taking back is something wholly contained in the I. 
The I as determining, or the I for which the alien comes forth only 
as what is determined by it (as something in itself universal, not [as] 
something singular or determining), is in the self-preservation of the 
I the moment of differentiation, the moment of reflection, of self-
equivalence come to itself. It is the taking of the determinacy back 
into the essence of the I, the recognizing (as its own determinacy) and 
the alien (as just something equivalent to itself). But these two, as sides 
of the I, now go asunder in this way: its being united with the self-
equivalence of the alien, and its being united with its determinacy; 
the former, free I and the latter, originally determined I are the two 
moments of the antithesis. They are so for us as the self-equivalent 
genus, and as determinacy of the existence out of which it raises itself. 
But for the I itself they are, only in that the I, as infinite, splits itself 
into the unequal self-preservation [162] and the self-equivalence of 
the I, and has equated the former as pure reflection to itself, just as 
[it has equated it to itself] as determinacy. But in so doing it has 
undertaken a further division of another sort. 
The turning from the first to the second division is the same turning 
of the process that, when first coming to be genus, splits itself this 
way: the transition of the self-preserving singular into the genus, and 
the transition into the absolute genus. [It is] the process of the self-
realizing concept, which thus emerging out of itself is only in bad 
reality, collects itself out of this into the concept, and becomes absolute 
reality. The sublated first division, or the becoming self-conscious, is 
this: the I appears originally determined and just as originally divided; 
it recognizes the determinacy that is in the division as its own, sublates 
it, and indeed posits at first the formal. division or the infinite re-
flection as itself, as freedom; it posits the determinacy also as its own. 
The I can no longer pass over into the formal, sublating, into the 
negative in general; [it] cannot allow the opposite to disappear. For 
it is real.; it is something universal; but it is at the same time 
[through]out"8 only something synthetically, not purely, universal. For 
the I has determined itself only as universal, for us as what is self-
equivalent in existence, [and] not as that which is this equivalence on 
its own account. 
28. Trans.: The ms: am; CE emends to auch ("also"). We follow Lasson in reading 
[durch]aw ("throughout"). 

Metaphysics 
Through the reflection of this potency into itself, the I has come 
to itself in the opposite as a universal, but not yet as a particular. Of 
course the determinacy falls in the particular-it is this very particular; 
but the former reflection, its absolute self-discovered freedom, is only 
through separation. It is not as a whole reflected within itself. It takes 
the formal [moment] of separation to be its own infinity, but it posits 
the determinacy only in a simple unreflected manner as one with it. 
In the opposition the determinacy has not become the other of itself, 
but as original determinacy has remained self-equivalent. 
To the universal self-discovering I, which has severed its infinity 
from its particularity, stands opposed this particular as the I itself; 
the process of self-preservation as formal passes through itself over 
into that of reality. The I is simple, universal reflection, which has 
severed the reflection from itself and has posited it as one with itself; 
simple reflection, reflected into itself. •q The I, as something deter-
minately reflected into itself, [163] immediately confronts this simple 
reflection connecting only with itself. The I itself is what is reflected 
into itself; it is just this reality, but in such a way that the reality is 
essentially determined as singularity. Since the former simple reflec-
tion is at the same time the universal side of this I as something 
singular, it has immediately turned against this its conflict, and is 
differentially active against it. 
II /THE PRACTICAL I 
If the theoretical I has found itself to be formal reflection, though 
reflection that is absolute, reflected into itself, then as practical the I 
must find itself as absolutely fulfilled reflection. 
Formal, absolute reflection, which has found itself and has become 
something simple, equivalent, finds itself facing itself as singularity, 
as determinacy, which is its very essence. The I must sublate this 
determinacy, this antithesis. On the side of determinacy as well it must 
turn into something self-equivalent and simple and take back into 
itself the whole system of conditions-in other words, the ideal origin 
of itself. For this determinacy, here under consideration, is already 
in itself the negatively posited of the species itself, or of absolute 
essence as something existing. 
This determinacy, considered to be nothing, is qua determinacy not 
29. Tram : Following ms. CE inserts [sind] ("are"). 

Metaphysics of Subjectivity 
to be sublated; for its sublating would always be a determining of 
determinacy by the I, and the product would be strictly nothing but 
a synthesis, which in itself would have essentially the nature (deter-
mined ever anew) of something alien. And in the manner of the 
monad, if the determining of the I is directed only against something 
alien, it is nothing if there is not something alien. And its negating is 
equally well only an abstraction, as an other must step into its place. 
The I is not a determinacy in general but rather a determinacy that 
is equivalent to its essence, or the absolute determinacy, [that is] the 
genus's existence posited as sublated. It is the absolute determinacy, 
the whole of the absolute universal's othering of itself. Determinacy 
has elevated itself to absolute determinacy by being the universal 
determinacy, even as singularity. [ 164] The determinate I is so, simply 
qua theoretical. To the extent that it opposes itself as determinate to 
its absolute reflection, it has not ceased to be something theoretical-
that is, to posit determinacy not as its own or original; rather, deter-
minacy is still for the I not yet the I itself. Taking determinacy back 
into itself, [re]cognizing it as original, means nothing other than pos-
iting it as sublated in and of itself. In singularity, determinacy has 
elevated itself altogether to absolute determinacy. The genus, as what 
is negatively posited in antithesis or existence, is itself infinity; to posit 
here, still as negative, this which has been negatively posited means 
nothing but [re]cognizing that negatively posited singularity is no 
determinacy-that is, that the absolute singularity is infinity, which is 
the same simple that the universal is. A singular I belongs wholly to 
the hypothesis of the world-process, in which many singular Is (or 
equally a plurality of Is that are in themselves, reflected into them-
selves, alternately passive and active) make their entrance. In the 
realized genus this existence sublates itself; and at that stage the I 
(which would posit the determinacy as deriving from the genus, as 
being indifferently separated in this way) would fall back under itself. 
In being separate vis-a-vis the universal I, determinacy is simply a 
differentiated one, since the I has, as it were, taken all being-in-itself 
back into itself. The I is the circle of its own circle and of the other's-
that is, of the in-itself of the opposite; and for this in-itself there 
remains nothing left over. This determinacy that falls back into the 
I is infinity itself, or precisely the inherently sublated relation of what 
exists in the genus. Hence this infinity is immediately just the unity 
of both reflections: that which the I finds, and that which the I itself 
is-in other words, that which just finds itself, and just is only in that 

Metaphysics 
it finds itself. That the I is, only as a finding of itself-not separately, 
somehow prior to its having found itself, but rather that the I [is] this 
finding of itself-this is its absolute infinity. And the antithesis of the 
practical I lies solely in its being for itself what had not yet found 
itself. The determinacy embedded in the I is nothing other than the 
infinite itself, posited as something equivalent to itself, connecting 
only with itself. In its singularity, I is simply a universal; its original 
determinacy is its absolute singularity, or its infinity-a determinacy 
sublated with respect to it, [ 165] which merely as determinate I is the 
semblance that the practical I sublates. Just as the theoretical I is the 
cognition that what is opposed to it is a universal, so the practical I 
[is the cognition] that in the deed:Jo this opposite is the universal proper, 
and the determinacy is absolute determinacy. The I, qua theoretical, 
is spirit in general; qua realized, practical 1-for which determinacy 
is itself absolute determinacy or infinity-it is absolute spirit. 
III /ABSOLUTE SPIRIT 
The doctrine of absolute spirit is what gives a novel-though hardly unex-
pected-turn to the interpretation of Kant and Fichte. Just as Hegel used the 
dogmatic rationalism of the older tradition to found the speculative realism 
of his philosophy of nature, so he uses the postulational moralism of Kant 
and Fichte as the scaffold for his objective idealism. Logic ended with a formal 
review. Metaphysics ends with the real application of that review. The subject 
that thinks and wills rationally is neither a postulated Ego nor a bad infinite 
progress towards an ideal community. It is the community that is the real self 
of the rational consciousness here and now, the self of the ethical substance, 
the" 'I' that is 'We', and 'We' that is 'I' ": 1 ' "the longing for immortality is a 
reversion of the spirit into a baser sphere." 
Absolute spirit comes to be for itself (or really) only at the climax of the 
Philosophy of Spirit (and of the system itself) in art, religion, and philosophy. 
At this stage it has come to be for us as thinkers, or for itself as pure thought. 
This formal reality is the concept of the ether. The ether is the energy that is 
absolutely conserved, the continuum at the basis of all experience. Hegel 
conceives pure thinking as the self-comprehension of the ether because in 
this way he can close the circle of experience. Spirit and nature are the 
subjective and objective aspects of the ether, which is their logical ground-
30. Trans.: In der That could be translated "in fact." 
31. See Phenomenology, trans. Miller, para. 177, p 110. 

Metaphysics of Subjectivity 
1 73 
concept or absolute identity. Here he calls the ether "absolute matter," but 
in the Philosophy of Nature we learn that it is also "the Idea of God." Absolute 
spirit is here said to be "the Idea of the highest essence"; and it closes not 
just the Metaphysics but the Logic and Metaphysics into a speculative circle 
because it is "once more its own first moment, simple connection in general" 
(CE 176, lines 24-26). Thus Hegel was implicitly bound to absorb his critical 
logic into one unified speculative science in the end. 
Here the progression that has been going on comes to a halt: the 
progression by which the concept in its reality turns into an other, 
and thereby, as totality itself, or as something reflected within itself, 
passes over into another sphere. Totality is [now] absolute totality; 
for all determinacy has been sublated, or is absolute universality proper. 
Qua being-in-itself (in that it is what is enclosed within itself) cognition 
is realized in absolute spirit. The idea of cognition is the following: 
the side of the definition (which expresses singularity, existence, and 
in which there is the many as something indifferent, each [one of the 
many] abstracting from its contrary) is one with the other side, which 
is universality and has within it in the form of a simple determinacy 
that developed singularity. Cognition is formal because its reflection 
into itself is complete only to the extent that singularity in general is 
also the contrary of itself, [that is,] universality. But this singularity is 
a determinate singularity that excludes a determinate other from it-
self. As pure singularity it is point, simple, yet for that reason opposed 
to its multiplicity of determinacies, which are, in that they exclude 
their opposite qualities. This singularity is the unity of these qualities. 
Yet although it is the singularity of negative one, it is so only in con-
nection with the excluded other, not in connection with the deter-
minacies connected with singularity. It is not the negative unity of the 
determinacies, but it is rather only a whole, an indifferent universality 
that does not affect the determinacies negatively, since it [166] could 
be this only through its opposites, which are however excluded. Sin-
gularity is therefore negative only in a quantitative manner; in other 
words, it is externally restricted. And the positive negating of its re-
striction is not singularity itself, but something else; at the same time 
this negating is equally a new positing in singularity of restrictions 
that are in it and for zt equally indifferent. This singularity-posited 
in its determinacies as a simple one, in such a way that they are all 
gathered up into it as the universal's particularity-is nonetheless only 
a determinate, not an absolute, particularity. The universal indeed 

174 
Meta physics 
contains within itself, as self-dividing, the whole totality of particu-
larities, though these are at the same time indifferent to each other. 
Proof is this dividing up of the universal, its constructing; the universal 
divides, not as definition does, into pure determinacies to which the 
universality (qua point) is opposed, but rather into parts that them-
selves have in them the nature of the whole [das Ganzen]. In the proof, 
this their being per se is completed [ergiinzt] through their connection 
with one another, so that the universal displays itself as much qua 
their universal, as qua their negative, unity, and is as much a singular 
as a universal, being now singular, however, in the genuine sense of 
negative one in connection with the opposed determinacies contained 
in it. This concept of cognition is the formal returning into itself. The 
universal is divided within itself-the determination is not an external 
one-the universal is not a quantum; rather, quanta are contained in 
it. But this indifference of determinacies vis-a-vis one another-as 
having the nature of the whole within themselves, as determined and 
on their own account-at the same time sublates itself. The movement 
of proof shows that they are in fact differentiated with respect to one 
another, are only in the connection, and are thus ideal,; and [it shows] 
that the first division is not an arbitrary, external one, but determined 
exclusively through negative unity; in other words, it has in itself 
nothing but the connection with one another of what appear indif-
ferent. The result is that the singularization of the whole is in fact 
absolute singularity, and the determinacy that appears in it is absolute 
determinacy, since the determinacies all fall into that whole, which is 
thus their unity, the one in which they are equally sublated. Qua first 
moment, the whole appears passive, connected only with itself, equiv-
alent to itself, and its separation appears to be something to which it 
is indifferent, as absolutely contingent, and which, as something alien, 
it simply does not affect. The meaning of the division is here some-
thing wholly concealed, unexpressed. The hidden connection that the 
parts have to one another as they emerge sublates [ 167] their indif-
ference to one another; and they show themselves to be simply and 
solely a relation, or to be moments that as unity are related to plurality 
in such a way that the two are simply equivalent. What before was an 
indifferent relation becomes a genuine relation; and what before was 
outside the universal, something alien to it, now becomes a relation 
to itself. What were the parts relate [now] to the parts as a whole; and 
because they are parts of one whole, parts that relate to the parts as 
a whole, they are sublated in their determinacy, this being their con-

Metaphyszcs of Subjectivity 
1 75 
trary (in that the part is the whole quite ideally. and the others sun-
dered from the whole are themselves equivalent to it); and the whole 
is absolute singularity. Their negation is singularity itself, and is with 
respect to itself without [any] excluding connection with something 
alien; and the being per se of what appear as parts, [namely,] existence, 
so far as their being is itself only the differentiating connection, co-
incides completely with their ideality. That existence of the whole, as 
a whole opposed to its division, is a relation to itself. It is the unity of 
this antithesis as moments---of the universal and of the particular, 
which are equivalent to each other: the universal expresses the whole 
as a moment of the whole; the particular expresses that same whole 
as a division, which is equally a moment of the whole. The result: this 
division has returned completely into itself; for it is merely3 • not a 
plurality of self-subsisting beings but a plurality of moments. These 
being differentiated, they are only their connection; and this con-
nection is the whole. The turning point of this reflection lies in the 
fact that what is divided, simply and solely qua differentiated division, 
shows itself to be differentiated connection and passes over into re-
lation-that is, into the being of the parts qua moments. That first 
division is itself therefore only through this second relation; in other 
words, the relation is nothing contingent but rather what appears in 
the proof as necessity. The necessary content is the determination of 
the construction, with the result that it only constructs itself so far as 
it is differentiated unity, the way the unity appears first of all in the 
proof. 
This cognition is rounded out in itself; the singular is enclosed with 
the universal. However, even the whole, which thus moves within 
itself, is still a determinate content vis-a-vis cognition. It is only this 
movement of cognition that is absolute in itself; but the moments of 
its movement are not in the same way this cognition itself. Cognition 
is thus formal; and singularity in cognition is at once an absolute 
singularity and something turned outward; it has a side from which 
it is a quantitative determinacy. The indifferent dividing becomes one 
that is not [ 168] indifferent; but what is self-equivalent in the division 
is not that which determines the division. In other words, it has not 
yet begun from the insight that the indifferent dividing in fact is 
nothing but a dividing into an indifferent dividing and into a differ-
entiated dividing. These two moments of the process of cognition are 
32. Trans.: We follow ms. CE: "it is not merely a plurality." 

Metaphysics 
themselves not yet posited as unity, as what is first, or as the absolute 
content. Only if this takes place is the initial dividing directly through 
the whole itself. In other words, cognition itself is not just what is so 
divided as content that cognition, qua self-dividing, would be imme-
diately the necessity of the content's being able to be broken up into 
no other commensurable names than these. Only in the proof does 
the necessity of the construction show itself. The construction must 
in itself be the division of the proof; thus results cognition as a whole, 
posited as the in-itself. 
This idea of the in-itself is realized in metaphysics, since cognition 
becomes its own content: or the circle of reflection, as this movement, 
as the in-itself, is now what goes through its circle. Formal cognition, 
as the circle that is distinct from what constitutes the cycle, is on its 
own account shut up in itself [and] indifferent towards the determi-
nacy of its content. It is a monad or even an idea that is not affected 
by its determinacy but is determinate in that there are many of them. 
And there are many of them because, connecting only with themselves 
as [being] in themselves, they are passive. They possess determinacy 
as something external; determinacy did not stand over against them 
as something absolute. For since negative unity and the universal as 
moments (so to speak) are only at the one time in the idea, the coming 
apart is a dividing, since it is not the unity of both moments-in other 
words, the whole circle that still stands opposed to itself. Otherwise 
there would be nothing remaining on the other side; there would in 
fact be no crossing over. 
Cognition is the idea of the in-itself, or the idea in general. This 
monad is the determinacy of what is undifferentiated; for this reason 
it is so directed towards itself that it negates what is external-it abstracts 
from it. Outwardly its determinacy has only this negative side. It is 
thus the relation of substantiality, complete in itself; and its realization 
is in keeping with it, except that in the former entirely ideal. relations 
what stands in connection is essentially only how they are when con-
nected, whereas here what in the realization emerges into an external 
connection is not [16g] essentially how it emerges when connected, 
but essentially the self-enclosed circle of cognition. Just as the relation 
of being is realized in the universal, so the monad is realized in the 
highest essence, in an absolute self-equivalency in which cognition, as 
opposed, doubled cognition, has remained for its part an absolute 
simple unity. The highest essence, as what is absolutely universal (that 
is, [whose] sublated [moments] within it are the wholes of the in-itself, 

Metaphysics of Subjectivity 
177 
of reflection), is their bezng self-equivalent, their sublatedness. It is the 
one moment of absolute essence to be absolute unity and simplicity. 
Since the being per se of the monads or ideas is an indifferent mul-
tiplicity, it can do nothing but sublate itself in their movement vis-a-
vis one another. For to the extent that the monads are exclusive, their 
determinacy takes on the character that they are essentially on their 
own account, and that for them their essence is being per se-that is, 
that they only have the consciousness of the relation. In themselves 
and with respect to us they come later. However, at first the relation 
is what is posited ideally, in the monad; that is, the monad is the 
positive and negative unity of the relation: the monad is in it and is 
at the same time indifferent to it. This, then, is what sublates itself in 
the world-process, in the process of the genus: that for the monad 
the being per se of the monad, as of something determined-this 
determinacy that accompanies formal cognition-disappears. For the 
monad there is in this disappearing through its realization only the 
negativity of what is essential to it, its being per se (the self-equivalent 
universality). For us [there is] this universal as idea, as negative unity 
of a relation of existing ideas-the real, abiding genus. [It is] an infinity 
for which the determinacy of the monad is not one turned outwards, 
as it is for the monad in its self-preservation or in its idea, but one 
turned [against the] monad, against cognition itself. And in the in-
difference of both, the determinacy of both perishes. The self-pres-
ervation of the monad is its negating of another; this other is cognition, 
even as it is; and in this other cognition, its negating becomes some-
thing sublated as well. The self-preservation of the monad [sub]lates 
itself for the monad to the extent that its negating of another sublates 
itself. "Negating of another sublates itself' means that the other be-
comes for the monad the monad itself. The negative is not the ne-
gating of another, but the negating of the monad as something essentially 
singular. The negative is for the monad a beyond of absolute uni-
versality. [170] 
The moment of the process of self-preservation is the sublating of 
the externality of determinacy and the [monad's] coming to be genus. 
The other moment is the sublating of the merely negative of sublated 
externality and is the being of determinacy (as of something equivalent 
to the monad) and a being for the monad. [It is] at the same time, 
however, a sublating for the monad of the essentiality of determinacy 
in general-that is, the coming to be of absolute being per se. At first 
determinacy becomes something not other than the monad; deter-

Metaphysics 
minacy itself becomes cognition; and so33 for the monad it comes about 
that determinacy [is] equivalent to the monad, and by that very fact 
the essentiality of the monad too [is] sublated for it. At first the de-
terminacy becomes equivalent to the monad for us, then for itself. 
Thus the monad, as a negative one that is excluding only as deter-
minacy, qua something external, is sublated for the determinacy itself; 
and for the monad there is only the essential being as something 
external, as an absolute beyond. For us, in fact, this external [thing] 
is something internal to the monad. In other words, the monad co-
incides with its determinacy as something original to it. For the monad, 
its beyond is the highest essence, and the monad is sublated as sin-
gularity. But in fact the highest essence is the genus, in which, how-
ever, the singularity is just a sublated one, one that is not annihilated 
but has gone through the null-point of infinity. Yet for the monad 
[the singularity is] one that is annihilated. Its self-preservation is only 
a longing that sets out to save singularity by way of that null [and] by 
the stripping off of determinacy, to preserve singularity as immortal, 
as absolute singularity. 
Since the monad views what is opposed [to it] as itself, singularity 
is in fact sublated as external or quantitative determinacy, and is 
absolute or pure singularity, something simple, self-equivalent. But it 
[is] not yet so with respect to the monad; for the monad, singularity 
only annihilates itself. Since, however, singularity is not in fact an-
nihilated, this annihilating is only an "ought." Singularity, as absolute 
[and] simple, is the I. For the I the determinacy is posited not as an 
external one, having being in itself, but only as one that is to annihilate 
itself. Moreover, on its own account the I is only the idea. Qua idea 
the monad has confronted itself in this determinacy; or it is for the 
determinacy:J4 as something that is ideal2 in itself [but] is not yet so 
for the I. The monad has indeed penetrated to the idea of the in-
itself, just as qua monad it has penetrated to relation. [ 171] 
Thus the I has completely excluded the in-itself of determinacy; 
the monad is simply and solely in connection with the I; that is, it is 
its original determinacy. The monad is a universal, something sublated 
in itself as determinacy; but once again only something that is to have 
been annihilated, no longer the synthesis of an in-itself and of a 
determinateness by means of the I but of something determined solely 
33· Trans.: We follow Lasson, reading al.1dann; ms. alsdenn. 
34· Trans.: Following ms. n:: "it is on its own account." 

Metaphysics of Subjectzvity 
179 
by means of the I. However, the I is itself this determined [thing); it 
is both the synthesis of universality and determinacy as well as what 
is opposed to the I. The other is equivalent to the I; but both are in 
themselves the non-equivalent. Singularity has disappeared in the 
universal only in the sense that it would be no longer an external one. 
Yet it is still the same chain or line-but only as a diverse one, sublated 
by the monad. The monad is itself determinate monad. However, the 
monad that severs itself from itself in this way becomes free. Insofar 
as determinacy is cognized as the absolute determinacy of the idea 
itself, it is nothing other than infinity, and the practical monad cog-
nizes itself essentially to be infinite. As a result the in-itself is this: that 
the monad qua singular confronts itself qua universal, and posits its 
singularity as absolute. The theoretical I discovers itself to be the 
highest essence, as that into which its realization had [already] gone 
over for us-that is, as that which the I had posited as its absolute 
beyond. It discovers itself to be the absolutely self-equivalent, which 
has emerged out of the disappearing of all determinacy. It discovers 
its opposite within itself to be for that reason itself, to be the in-itself; 
that is, as the closed circle of reflection it discovers the closed circle 
of reflection. It finds itself; it is spirit, or rational. The longing for 
immortality and the beyond of the highest essence is a reversion of 
the spirit into a baser sphere, since the spirit with respect to itself is 
immortal and the highest essence. 
This spirit, however, is itself formal spirit-highest essence, but not 
absolute essence or absolute spirit. For there is for spirit only the one 
side of the its-self opposed to it; and the very discovery of itself is 
only by way of separation. The highest essence does not find itself as 
something existing; on the contrary, it finds existence as something 
negating, or finds itself in its freedom confined within inconceivable 
limitations. Now it finds what is unequal, determinacy, to be the be-
yond, just as before it found self-equivalency to be so. 
This determinacy, however, is for us nothing else but infinity, or 
the determinacy that is directed in genus no longer against something 
external but against itself. Qua original, the determinacy is for the I-
that is, as a determinacy that would lie beyond the freedom of the I, 
that would be one with the I as with something simple, self-identical 
and self-connecting. Since it is self-connected, however, this [ 172] 
determinacy, as the determinacy of the process of genus, is itself 
nothing but that absolutely simple of reflection, which the I has dis-
covered itself to be. 

180 
Metaphysics 
The I as simple reflection that has found itself is opposed to, and 
turned against, determinacy as its determinacy in order to sublate it. 
It is turned against itself, not in the determinacy of being against an 
individual or something singular, but as an original, universal deter-
minacy, determinacy in itself, or in fact it is turned against the uni-
versal itself. The self-preservation of the I is the preservation of itself 
qua reflection that has discovered itself, or of itself qua negated sin-
gularity, and [that] is genus for itself. What is opposed to formal spirit 
is the same singularity that is in genus: infinity. And the practical I 
that is self-preserving is no longer connected with itself qua singular 
[singuliires], but with itself qua genus. It preserves itself as what has 
found itself-the universal. What it negates in order to preserve itself 
is its-self qua singular. The singularity of the practical I has disap-
peared within universality. To turn itself against determinacy is only 
a deception arising from its wanting to be practical; for what it is 
turned against is its-self and, as it has discovered itself to be, its-self 
is simple infinity. What it turns itself against is simpleness itself-that 
is, the nothing, the self-connected, the passive. 
The I that has found itself, or spirit, is the unity of both reflections, 
which connects with itself: the first reflection is what preserves itself 
but has become universal; the other is that of genus, or the universal 
reflection that has within itself absolute singularity. This spirit is com-
plete in itself; and this is what makes it still practical for us-and for 
itself. [Spirit is practical] for itself because, as the unity of both these 
reflections having come to itself, it has its self-alienation outside itself 
and wants to preserve itself against it. [Spirit is practical] for us because 
it has, to be sure, cognized itself as self-equivalent. However, neither 
the non-equivalent as itself, nor yet infinity as such has cognized what 
infinity is. Spirit is infinite for us, but not yet for itself. For itself spirit 
is only self-equivalent. It intuits itself, but not infinity; it does not 
intuit itself as the other. 
Formal spirit is on its own account formal in that it opposes to itself 
as something simple the infinity of reflection, infinity in itself, or its 
pure concept. For its reality is not the relation or the process of the 
genus, for the formal spirit posits as equal to itself what is real in this, 
or the self-equivalent. But spirit [ 1 73] opposes to itself infinity outside 
itself; for infinity is this: that spirit has sublated itself as existing, as 
a fixed point. It is what is thus sublated that is spirit's object, but 
strictly as something sublated; that spirit has found itself consists in 
the fact that it has sublated itself. There is for it something purely 

Metaphysics of Subjectivity 
negative, against which it is practical; this is its nothingness. It is 
directed not against its existence but against the nothingness of ex-
istence. Its existence is to have discovered itself as spirit, and what it 
fights against as spirit is nothingness. Because it is spirit, its self-
preservation is its absolute connecting with itself as something dis-
covered, or an its-self that spirit [re]cognizes itself to be. Its negating 
is directed against its not having found itself, its being not-spirit, its 
being something alien to itself. But that which is to itself something 
alien is the contrary of itself, is what sublates itself in itself. It is 
nothingness; in other words, it is the absolute contrary of itself; and 
as this contrary of itself it is the contrary again, absolute unrest. It is 
the absolute concept, infinity. Spirit, thus preserving itself as some-
thing that has found itself, is directed against nothingness, or infinity; 
its self-equivalence [is directed] against this absolute non-equivalence. 
But nothingness, infinity, or absolute non-equivalence is just the ab-
solutely simple, what is absolutely returned into itself, simply and 
solely self-connecting and it is the same as spirit is. Spirit discovers 
the other as such, as absolutely other, as self-sublating, as itself. In 
other words, it does not only intuit itself as itself, but [it] also [intuits] 
the other-as-such as itself. It is equal to itself and equal to the other; 
the other is that which sublates itself and is equal to itself. This unity 
is the absolute spirit. It cannot be asked how the infinite would come 
to be finite or emerge from it, and what meaningless expressions of 
this sort amount to. For the self-equivalent [re]cognizes the infinite 
as an equal (and it itself as something self-equivalent, as infinite, or 
as something coming out of the other to itself), as being only in that 
it, the other, comes to itself; and this other is just as much its-self as 
its-self is the other. Since spirit thus [ re ]cognizes infinity, it thereby 
comprehends itself, for its comprehending consists in this: that it 
posits itself as connected with another. It comprehends itself, for it 
posits itself connected with the other-that is, it itself as the other of 
itself, as infinite, and thus equivalent to itself. 
Thus the absolute cycle of absolute spirit. What has discovered itself 
to be self-equivalent intuits itself as the kind of thing that is non-
equivalent to itself, is the other to itself; [174] it is infinite. And this 
infinity is its-self for the other is the contrary of itself; it is the self-
equivalent. This is spirit, which thus intuits itself in the non-equivalent. 
In absolute spirit construction and proof are absolutely one. The 
dividing within construction is just what displays itself as one in the 
proof; in the proof, however, it is the self-equivalent unity and the 

Metaphyszcs 
infinity that posits itself as one, and these two are moreover the only 
parts of the construction. The construction itself is as such necessary; 
for it is one with the proof. In other words, spirit in itself is this: that 
it discovers itself as spirit; and that in which it discovers itself, or 
rather that which it finds itself to be, is infinity. Spirit is only as this 
self-discovering; and this latter is the necessity of its division into itself 
and into the other of itself, which is the self-subsistent absolute other-
that is, the other with respect to spirit, or the infinite. 
Absolute spirit is simple infinity, or infinity connecting with itself. 
As infinite, this simple essence is immediately the other, or the con-
trary of itself; as simple, as connected with itself, it is determinate; it 
is the passive; and the self-equivalent confronts this its other. "The 
self-equivalent is something other" means that it posits itself as some-
thing connected with an other; and qua that first it is this other as 
self-equivalent. But this other, or passive, is infinite, the contrary of 
itself; it is what is in the other. Similarly, the active is the contrary 
itself; it is what is in the self-equivalent. Hence the otherness, the 
connection of self-equivalent spirit as preserving itself and negating 
the other-namely, what connects with itself-is immediately the other 
of itself, or what has come back to itself. 35 Its negating the other is 
immediately the being of the other; for the negating of the other is 
a connecting with itself, and the other is precisely this connecting with 
itself. 
Absolute spirit is the self-equivalent that connects only with itself; 
for spirit as such, just this connection with itself, is the passive, since 
the spiritual is this: that it finds itself in the other of itself. But the 
self-equivalent is not what finds itself as the other of itself. That is 
why self-equivalent spirit is precisely this very other that spirit finds 
as itself. The connection of spirit with itself, as this other, is however 
immediately [175] the contrary of itself as well, or that which spirit 
finds as itself. This connection of spirit with itself, which with respect 
to itself is at the same time the other of itself, is the znfinite. It is 
nothing other than what was called the first part of logic, or the logic 
of understanding. Unity or self-equivalence becomes for itself the 
absolutely other; unity comes to be the many, and the whole as the 
self~equivalent, indifferent unity of unity and multiplicity comes to 
be infinity. This infinity [is] the unity of something that, as infinity 
35· Trans.: The ms: zuriikgekommen. CE emends by adding -seyn; we have simply 
added an -e. 

Metaphystcs of Subjectivity 
strictly in its being per se (and it is posited on its own account as the 
other of the unity, at the same time only in connection with its op-
posite), is itself as such a unity or as relation, is just something other 
and herewith doubled, because the relation is equally marked with 
the character of otherness in general. The division of the infinite, as 
well as the being of its parts, is just for this reason nothing indifferent 
either, but is what sublates itself in itself; and only thereby does it 
[come] to pass that what is posited is in itself the absolutely other than 
that as which it [is] posited. This its otherness is its passing over into 
a being otherwise; and the posited infinity connecting with itself is at 
the same time with respect to itself the movement within itself of 
becoming an other; and the uninhibited connecting with itself is in 
the contrary, infinite within itself. 
The infinite, as the system of simple connection that becomes the 
contrary of the connection, or infinity, and divides itself into the two 
opposed infinites or relations, has within this its constructing passed 
over to the self-equivalent, to the circle of the return into itself. The 
whole inner movement of this system emerges as what is in itself; 
what is moved, however, is the ideal., or is posited only as sublated. 
Cognition is the in-itself of infinity, the absolutely equivalent in ab-
solute non-equivalence, the unity of simple connection and infinity, 
which fell apart in infinity and are indeed its two absolute arms or 
moments. As a result, the second as the non-equivalent is infinity once 
more,just as the simple connection is only the first moment. Cognition 
as the in-itself is spirit connecting with the other or with infinity. 
Viewed from the side of infinity, spirit [is present] in the way that it, 
as self-connected, is an other to itself; or from its side, in the way that 
it comes to itself out of its otherness, out of infinity. Again only the 
infinity and cognition constitute the antithesis-that is, the antithesis 
with respect to itself or [ 176] [the one that] is posited. Infinity, or 
otherness, is on its own account only at this point; cognition itself and 
its content fall apart even for cognition, whereas previously infinity 
divided itself only for us, while for itself it fell apart indifferently. 
The infinite is essentially connected in its moments-for the infinite 
it was not thus connected; essentiality was internal to it, or unposited. 
Only cognition is both: it is the essential connection of moments, 
posited infinity; and for it the infinite, as the holding apart of the 
moments, is an indifferent content. Up to now this indifference was 
for us; that is, we were the indifferent unity, the contiguity or succes-
sion, as well as their movement. In its becoming, the infinite became 

M etaphyszcs 
our object; its becoming-other was for us also something other than 
the movement of cognition.36 Thus the movement of cognition, the 
positing as different, as moment, is here posited as connected with 
an indifferent content. This antithesis, existing for the first time in 
cognition, is the moment of infinity, as connection with itself (which 
becomes an other for itself, in the differentiation),:l7 or in connection 
with spirit (which in itself comes to itself out of the infinite, as out of 
other[ness], but which as coming to itself out of the other has this 
other as its antithesis). Metaphysics is the moment of spirit that has 
found itself, is in itself, and finds itself in its other. What is opposite 
to cognition becomes itself cognition; the content of spirit becomes 
itself spirit; and thus has spirit in its other[ ness] found itself for itself. 
The infinite, which for us was in itself in its essence, is so for spirit 
itself; and spirit, which has thus found itself as itself in its other[ ness], 
is therein only connected with itself, not with an other. In other words, 
spirit is again its first moment, the simple connection in general, or 
connection in its reality, infinity. 
This [infinite] is the idea of the absolute essence; it is only as absolute 
spirit. It is this: that out of its connection with itself it becomes another 
for itself. The connection with itself is the infinite for spirit-that is, 
for this very connection; for us-that is, for cognition, or for spirit 
coming to itself-the infinite is the other[ness]; and spirit, which in 
this way is spirit and finds itself in the infinite, is connected only with 
itself, or it is equivalent to itself. It is again its first moment and has 
returned completely into itself. 
But this return too is still an othering of itself; this whole [ 177] idea 
of spirit is only idea, or the idea is first moment to itself. For spirit as 
this movement of return into itself has found itself in the in-itself, in 
the content of cognition, and is only spirit as this unity in its other[ ness]; 
thus it is only absolute spirit. But it is itself not absolute spirit, or has 
not [re]cognized itself as absolute spirit. It is this for us, not for itself; 
metaphysics is its coming to be, and is spirit as idea. Spirit zs absolute 
spirit, positing the other as itself, infinity returning into itself. But 
this return is again simple connection or infinity itself; at its highest 
peak it thus falls back again into its first, into its beginning, which 
again is only this beginning-is the infinity that splits itself into simple 
36. Trans : Possible alternate reading: "its becoming other, as the movement of 
cognition, was .... " 
37· Trans.: Following ms. CE inserts [iibergeht]: "which goes over into differentiation." 

Metaphysics of Subjectivity 
connection and infinity as something opposed, not infinity as it has 
now come to be, as an infinity [re]cognized by spirit as itself, but again 
only as other[ ness]. But this other[ ness] [re]cognized by spirit is hereby 
of this sort: the other[ness] is itself spirit's self-discovery forged to-
gether out of its infinity, a unity that can be dissolved. This return 
that is exhibited as spirit is all by itself the other[ness], the finding 
itself, as well as itself in the other[ ness]. The cycle that is spirit is the 
self that runs through this cycle; and it does so in the shape of spirit 
that in its moments never forgets itself and would not be in them as 
absolute spirit on its own account. Spirit, as it has been exhibited, is 
therefore only idea, because it is only a simple cycle, because it is not 
in all moments of the cycle (not in infinity only as other[ ness] nor in 
the reflection of cognition as connecting with itsel£)38 [but because it 
is] only spirit that is itself coming to be spirit. [It is so] when spirit 
that has found itself is again on its own account, not when this spirit, 
having found itself, is another to itself, not when it comes to itself 
and has found itself as one that spirit has confronting itself even qua 
spirit (which returns to itself from this fall of infinity as victor over a 
spirit, and is just as eternally returned). This totality of the return is 
for the first time in itself, and no longer goes over into the other. 
Spirit is the absolute; and the absolute as its idea is realized absolutely, 
only in that the moments of spirit itself are this spirit; but then there 
is no more going beyond it. 
The idea of spirit, or spirit that intuits itself in other[ness] as itself, 
is immediately again spirit connecting with itself as absolute spirit. In 
other words, it is absolute spirit as infinity and, for its self-cognizing 
(or the becoming itself out of its other[ness]), the other of itself. It is 
nature; [ 178] the simple absolute spirit connecting with itself is ether, 
absolute matter. Spirit, having found itself in its other, is self-enclosed 
and living nature. As spirit that is at the same time connecting with 
itself, nature is other[ness], spirit as infinite, and the coming to be of 
absolute spirit. Nature is the first moment of self-realizing spirit. 
A Note on the System of 1804 
The Metaphysics-and with it our translation--ends on the first or second 
page of the fifty-fifth sheet. Hegel's manuscript continues without a break under 
38. Trans.: The French translation of Souche-Dagues reads. "(not in infinity only 
as other[ ness] or as connecting with itself) in the reflection of cognition it is only 
spirit. ... " 

186 
Meta physics 
the new heading Naturphilosophie. This is broken off only at sheet 102 
(which is less than half full and comes to a halt near the top of a page when 
the argument has just reached the concept of "organism"-das Organische). 
In the Philosophy of Nature Hegel traces the evolution of the "ether" (which 
he calls "the Idea of God" but says is not "the living God") from its primary 
positing as light and darkness, through the dynamic space-time equilibrium 
of the solar system, to the physical equilibrium of the earth-process, which 
sets the stage for organic life. He takes motion to be as primitive as rest, and 
like Heraclitus he interprets all physical stability as a tension of opposites or 
as a more complex cycle of tensions. 
The perpetual-motion machine in the heavens Hegel regards as the open 
display of the true nature of body. But he no longer uses the language of 
"intuition" and "concept" that he employed in the System of Ethical Life in 
1802. Instead, when he reaches the earth-process-which is the frame of all 
natural consciousness-he calls it "absolute cognition." He makes it quite 
clear that this cognition does not exist "for the earth." It is mankind as a 
rational genus that is the conscious subject of this absolute cognition. 
From his "metaphysics of objectivity" we can see how the theory of the 
living organism was projected in Hegel's mind as the movement from absolute 
cognition to self-cognition. But he abandoned his phenomenology of the 
absolute spirit at this stage, so we have to turn to the manuscripts of 1803-
4 to fill the material gap. In fact the Philosophy of Nature is in rather a 
disorderly state in these earlier drafts because Hegel has not yet managed to 
articulate it properly as the realization of cognition. But enough survives from 
the fragmentary Philosophy of Spirit'" to show how the natural human con-
sciousness becomes the quest for absolute knowledge, from which logic starts. 
Unfortunately, we have no developed account of the theory of absolute 
spirit in Hegel's own words. We have to depend on the reports of Rosenkranz'" 
(in which the manuscripts of different years are often mingled together). But 
the general conception of the absolute triad of art, religion, and philosophy 
is clear; and the concept of systematic philosophy as a circle that closes upon 
its own beginning is a constant in Hegel's theoretical program from 1802 to 
the very end of his life." 
39· See Harris and Knox, trans and eds., Sntem of Ethical Life and First Philosophy 
of Spirit. 
40 The rele\'ant reports are translated in the appendixes to ibid. 
41 
For a fuller discussion of the S)Stem that this Logic and l\letaph}sics is designed 
to introduce, see Harris, X1glzt Thoughts, chaps. 5 to 7; for the theor} of absolute spirit 
see also chap. 4· 

das Andere 
das Anders 
Andersseyn 
A nderswerden 
an ihr (ihm) selbst 
an sich 
dans An sich 
An sich seyn 
an und fur sich 
aufheben 
aussern 
Bedeutung 
begreifen 
das Besondere 
bestehen 
Bestimmtheit 
Bestzmmtseyn 
Bestimmung 
bewirken 
beziehen 
Beziehung 
darstellen 
different 
Differenz 
Glossary 
the other 
the other[ ness] 
otherness 
becoming other, othering 
with respect to it, in it 
in itself, inherently 
the in-itself 
being-in-itself 
in and of itself 
sublate 
utter, express 
significance, meaning 
comprehend, conceive 
the particular 
subsist 
determinacy 
determinateness 
determination 
effect (verb) 
connect 
connection 
set forth, display 
differentiated 
differentiation 

188 
Ein, Eine 
Einheit 
Eins 
Einsseyn 
Einswerden 
Eznzelne 
entgegensetzen 
entzweien 
sick erhalten 
erkennen 
Erkennen 
fur sick 
fur sick seyend 
fur sick seyn 
Gedankending 
Gegensatz 
Gegentheil 
gleich 
Glied 
Idee 
indifferent 
I ndifferenz 
in sick reflektiert 
Menge 
Sac he 
schlecht 
theilen 
trennen 
Ubergang 
ubergehen 
Ubergehen 
Unterschied 
Glossary 
as noun: one; as adjective with 
capital: one 
unity 
one, one[ ness] 
oneness 
becoming one, unification 
singular 
oppose 
split 
preserve itself 
[re]cognize, cognize 
cognition 
on its own account 
self-subsistent 
being per se 
ens ratioms 
antithesis 
contrary 
equal, equivalent 
term, member 
idea 
indifferent, undifferentiated 
indifference, neutrality 
reflected into itself, self-reflexive 
aggregate 
Thing 
bad 
divide 
separate 
transition 
pass over, go over 
passing over, transition 
distinction, difference 

verbinden 
Verbindung 
V erhiiltnis 
verhalten 
verschieden 
Verschiedenheit 
V ertheilung 
V orstellung 
Wahrhaft 
Wirken 
wirkend 
zusammenschliessen 
Glossary 
bind up, bond 
bonding, combination 
relation, ratio, relationship 
relate 
diverse 
diversity 
dividing up 
presentation 
true 
acting 
effective 
interlock 
t8g 

Works Cited 
Cerf, W., and Harris, H. S., trans. and eds. G. W. F. Hegel, Faith and Knowledge. 
Albany: SUNY Press, 1977. 
Chiereghin, F., eta!., trans. and eds. Logzca e metafisica di jena. Trento: Qua-
derni di verifiche, 1982. 
DiGiovanni, G., and Harris, H. S., trans. Between Kant and Hegel: Texts m the 
Development of Post-Kantian Idealism. Albany: SUNY Press, 1985. 
Fichte, J. G. Grundlage der gesammten Wissenschaftslehre. Leipzig: Gabler, 1794. 
-
Siimtliche Werke. Ed. R. Lauth and H. Gliwitzky. Stuttgart-Bad Canstatt: 
Fromann, 1964-. 
Harris, H. S. Hegel's Development 1: Toward the Sunlight (177o-18o1). Oxford: 
Clarendon, 1972. 
-
Hegel's Development n: Night Thoughts Uena 1Bo1-18o6). Oxford: Clarendon, 
1983. 
Harris, H. S., and Cerf, W., trans. and eds. G. W. F. Hegel, The Difference 
between Fzchte's and Schelling's System of Philosophy. Albany: SUNY Press, 1977. 
Harris, H. S., and Knox, T. M., trans. and eds. G. W. F. Hegel, System of Ethical 
Life and First Philosophy of Spzrit. Albany: SUNY Press, 1979· 
Hartkopf, W. Kontinuitat und Diskontinuitat in Hegels Jenaer Anfangen. Konig-
stein: Forum Academicum, 1979. 
Heath, P., trans. F. W.]. Schelling, System of Transcendental Idealism. Char-
lottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1978. 
Heath, P., and Lachs, J., trans.]. G. Fichte, Science of Knowledge. New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1970. 
Hegel, G. W. F. Brzefe von und an Hegel. Ed. J. Hoffmeister and R. Flechsig. 
4 vols. Hamburg: Meiner, 1961. 
-
Dokumente zu Hegels Entwicklung. Ed. J. Hoffmeister. Stuttgart: Fromann, 
1936. 

Works Cited 
-
Gesammelte Werke. Ed. Rheinisch-Westfalischen Akademie der Wissenschaf-
ten. Hamburg: Meiner, 1968- (CE). 
-
Hegels erstes System. Ed. H. Ehrenberg and H. Link. Heidelberg, 1915. 
-
Hegel's Science of Logic. Trans. A. V. Miller. London: Allen and Unwin, 
1969; New York: Humanities, 1969. 
- Jenenser Logik, Metaphysik und Natwphilosophie. Ed. G. Lasson. Leipzig, 1923. 
-
Lectures on the HistOI}' of Philosophy. Trans. E. S. Haldane and F. H. Simpson. 
3 vols. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1892. 
-
Log1c. Trans. W. Wallace from Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. 2nd 
edn. Oxford: Clarendon, 1892. 
-
Phenomenology of Spirit. Trans. A. V. Miller. Oxford: Clarendon, 1977. 
-
Werke. Ed. E. Moldenhauer and K. M. Michel. 20 vols. Frankfurt: Suhr-
kamp, 197o-71 (Theone Werkausgabe). 
Hegel-Studien. Ed. F. Nicolin and 0. Poggeler. Bonn: Bouvier, 1961-. 
Heinrichs, J. Die Logik der "Phiinomenologie des Geistes." Bonn: Bouvier, 1974. 
Kant, I. Critik der reinen Vernunft. Riga, q88. 
-
Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. N. Kemp Smith. London: Macmillan, 1933. 
Kimmerle, H. "Dokumente w Hegels Jenaer Dozententatigkeit." Hegel-
Studien 4 (1967): 21-100. 
- "Zur Chronologie von Hegels Jenaer Schriften." Hegel-Studien 4 (1967): 
125-76. 
Knox, T. M., trans., and Acton, H. B., eds. G. W. F. Hegel, Natural Law. Phila-
delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1975. 
Nicolin, G., ed. Hegel in Berichten semer Zeitgenossen. Hamburg: Meiner, 1970. 
Rosen, Michael. Hegel's Dialectic and Its Criticism. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1982. 
Rosenkranz, K. Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegels Leben. Berlin, 1844. 
Schelling, F. W .J. Siimmtliche Werke. Ed. K. F. A. Schelling. 14 vols. Stuttgart 
and Augsburg: Cotta, 1856-61. 
Souche-Dagues, D., trans. G. W. F. Hegel, Logique et Mltaphysique (lena 18o4-
18os). Paris: Gallimard, 1980. 
Stirling, J. H. The Secret of Hegel. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd, 1865. 
Trede, J. H. "Hegels friihe Logik (1801-1803/4). Versuch einer systema-
tischen Rekonstruktion." Hegel-Studien 7 (1972): 123-68. 

Index 
Italic numbers refer to H. S. Harris's commentary. 
absolute, the/absolute being, 37, 67, 103, 
IIo-II, 114, 129, 134, 160, 185; as 
in-itself, 18, 139, 149, 152. See also 
contradiction; determinacy; concept; 
cognition; antithesis; essence; infinity; 
opposition 
actuality, 43· 48, 58, 67, 73· 76 
allness, g, 13, 87, 106 
antithesis: qualitative, 18; absolute, 35-
36; pure, 57; developed by reflection, 
117, 129; between essential and 
inessential, 167; between infinity and 
cognition, 183; and passim 
Boehme, J., 145 
categories (of understanding), xvi-xvii, 
53-54 
causality, 45-46, 47. 49· 65-66, 67, 71, 
75,81,go 
Chiereghin, F., et al., viii, xi, 4, 59. IJU, 
116 
circle/circular movement, xix, 1 16--1 7, 
122,147, 186; of concept, 100, IIo, 
IIg; of reflection, 125, 158, 168, 176, 
179; of cognition, 125, 128, 129, 133, 
141, 176; of circles, 162, 171 
cognition, xviii, 4-5, 27, Hl3, 118-85 
passim; absolute, 152; as deduction, 
124-28; of the absolute, 37; infinite, 
63, 72, 130; idea of, 173; nature of, 
121; object of logic and metaph} sics, 
130, 133; as reflection, 123, 125, 129, 
131, 133, 141, 142, 154. 156; formal, 
123, 128, 132, J41. 142, 152, 155· 
173, 174, 175, 176, 177. See also circle/ 
circular movement; in-itself; ground; 
soul 
concept, 8, 10, 11, 31-32, 40, 49· .:;o, 76, 
77-78, 85. 96. 99, 110, 114, 124-25, 
153, 155, 16g; real, 10, 119; determi-
nate, 8o--83, 84, 145; absolute, 117, 
qo, 166, 181. See also circle/circular 
movement; and passim 
connection, 39. 53-54. 61, 64-65, 85, 
110, 174; simple, 3-38,jo--j1, 132, 
162, 183; and passim 
consciousness, xii, x\·ii, X\'iii, xxii, 
J4-lj, 1g--20, jO, 41, 45, 116, 165, 
168 
construction, 116, 118-27 passim, 161, 
175· 176, 181-82 
contradiction, !JO, 32-33. 44· 61, 79. 81, 
106, 136, 137, 157; absolute, 29, 33· 
37· 14° 
deduction, 124-28 passim 
definitwn, 107, IID--28 passim, 151, 173-
74 
degree, 15, 26 
determinaq, 10, 17-19, 23, 32, 35· .p-
43• 52, 5g--6o, 72, 7g-8o, 81, 103, 
I07, 122, 134· qo--41, 167-68, 17(}--
71, 173· 179; absolute, 25, 6g, I.'J I. 
163; and passim 
dialectic/dialectical, xvi, xx, 44, 48, 6o, 

194 
Index 
79· 8!, 1!2, 115, 117, 118, 123, 133· 
137· 143 
division, II 3-24 passim, 128, 134, 174-
76, !82 
essence, 18, 27, 31, 36, 44, 56, 59· 68, 
87, 104, 106, Ill, 114-15, 134, 148, 
154; absolute, 18, 162, 167, qo; 
highest: 157-61, 163, 164, 167, 176-
79; essence of, 158; and passim 
ether, 16o, 172-73, 185, 186 
Euclid, 2 1, 116, 121 
evil, 160 
explanation, 52, 61-64 
Fichte, J. G., xii, xvii, 3-5 
finite, xviii, 35 
force, 4, 5· 15, 27, 28, 46, 47, 49-50, 
54-65 
formal/formal, 57, 6o, 73, 93, 113, 124, 
167, 169, 170. See also reflection; 
cognition; opposition; sublate, 
freedom 
freedom, 34, 46, 81, 84, 144, 147, 149-
56, 164, 16g, 170, 179; and necessity, 
149-51, 155; formal/formal, 149 
God, 67, 145, 161, 173, 186 
Goethe, J. W., xiii 
ground, 118, 121, 127, 14o--45. 147, 
ISO, 154. 155· 157· !60, 168 
Harris, H. S., Night Thoughts, xi, xv, xvii, 
xix, xxii, 4, 186 
Hartkopf, W., xvii 
Hegel, G. W. F.: The Difference between 
Fichte's and Schelling's System of 
Philosophy, xv, xvi-xvii, 78, gg, wg-
w; Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical 
Sciences, xiv, xvi; Faith and Knowledge, 
78; Phenomenology of Spirit, xviii, xx, 
xxi, xxii, 46, 116-17, 131, 145, 172; 
Science of Logzc, 161; System of Ethical 
Life and First Philosophy of Spirit, xi, xv, 
41, 186 
Heinrichs, J., xxii 
Hume, D., 53 
"I," 161, 162, 164, 165-72, 178, qg, 
!80 
idea, xv, xvii, 5, 55, 72, 133, 176, 177, 
178. 184, 185 
ideal/real, 49, 57, IIo--1!, 112, 114-15, 
121, 152, 155· 177 
ideal,/real, 5· 12, 27, 28, 35· 49· 57, 73, 
77. 78, 79. 8s. go-g 1, gs, g6, 104, 
tog, IIO, 112, 113, 114-15, 116, 118, 
Itg, 125, 132, 133, 136, 138, 143, 
145, 147, 15o. 153• 156, 158, 162, 
163, 164, 165, 169, 174, 175, 177, 178 
Idealism, xv, 5, g, 133 
ideality, 3. 4· 33· 37· 44· 47· 49. 56. 58. 
71, 73. 76, 78, 8o, 86, 100, 102, 113, 
ti4-15, 143, 149, 154, 15g-6o; 
ideality, (ideellseyn), 8o 
induction, 108 
infinity/infinite, xviii, xx, 14, 17, 22, 23, 
2g, 2g-31, 39-40, 44-45· 46, 47· 52, 
56-57, 6o, 65-73.78, u6, 117, 127, 
130, 132, 140, 153· 162, t66, 171-72, 
179-85 passim; true or genuine, 33-
38; paralysed, 72-73, 79; bad, 32-35, 
6g, 73, 77. 100, 103, 151; absolute, 
151, 172; is logic of understanding, 
182. See also contradiction; absolute 
in-itself, the, 132, 133, 134, 135. 137. 
139· 140, 141, 143· 148, 149· 150, 
151, 153· 158. !60, 164, 167. t68, 
171, 173, 176, 178, 179. 184; thing-in-
itself, xvi, 53 
judgment, 83-97 passim, 137; universal, 
86-87; particular, 87-88; singular, 88; 
hypothetical, 88-gt, 95. g6, 97, 102, 
103, 107; negative, g1-g2; infinite, 
92-93. 95; disjunctive, 93-95, g6, 97· 
104, 108 
Kant, I, xii, xvi, xviii, 3, 19, 38, 53 
Lagrange, J., 20 
Leibniz, G., xii, 45, 67, 78 
limit, 4, 5. 6-8, 16-17, 29, 32, 70 
logic, xv-xvi, xix-xx, 4. g8, 116, 13o--3 I, 
133, 134, 161, 182; of understanding, 
5, 182; neutral, xii, xvi, 30; unreflective, 
143 
magnitude, 15, 16, 19-20, 26-27, 29 
mathematics, 14, 2o--21, 23, 123 
matter, 6, 15, 27, 59, 66, 185 
metaphysics, 130, 132, 133, 158, 161, 
176, 184. See also logic 
monad, 144, 15o--53· 165, 171, 176-79 

Index 
195 
nature, xviii, 50, 63, 72-73, 155, 185 
necessity, 44. 53, 58, 66, 75· 96-97, 99· 
103-5. 158, 159, 163. See also freedom 
negation/negating/negated, 4. j, g, 48, 
7'· 75· 132, '39· 146, 153· 158-68 
passim, '7'• 173, '77• 182; double, 36 
negative unity, g, 13, 43, 44. 8o--116 
passim, !18, 119, 120, 123, 125, 126, 
12j, 132, '33· '34· '4'· 145. 146, 
152, 156, !64, 173· '74 
Newton, I., 23 
numerical one, Io--12, 16, 17, 32, 43, 
48, 77· 88, 8g, 100, 103, 104, 10.') 
opposites: unity of, 18, 21, 55· 72, 77, 
106, 107, 112; oneness of, 79; and 
passim 
opposition, s-6, 23, 37· so. 57· 61, 68, 
75. 102, 137-38; absolute, 1 1, 70; 
formal, 7.'): and passim 
otherness/other of itself/becoming other, 
10, 12, 19, 35- 37. 49• 56, 68, 72. s4-
86, 89,100,106, Ill, 114,132,136, 
139. '44· 16s-66, I81-85; and passim 
particular, 78-116 passim, 122, 125, 158, 
ljO 
philosophy, '39· 165 
Plato, xii, 4. 79, wg, 116-17 
possibility, 42, s8, 66 
proof, !19, 120, 121, 124, J6o--6I, 174, 
Jj6, !8!-82 
Pythagoras, 1 21, 124 
quality, 7-8, 10, 22, 24-25, 33, 42, 72, 
1 15· 173 
quantity, 8-g, 18, 24-2.'), 28, 33. 43, 69, 
72, '59· 173 
quantum, !6-17, 23, 67, 158, 162, '74 
reality, 7. 73. 83, 103, Ioj, 109, IIo--12, 
125, 127, 1.')4. 159. 170, 180, 184, 
bad, 33· 84,95-96, llg, 125, 169; 
true, 95-96, 119; absolute, 112, 169. 
See also ideal/real, ideal/real, 
recognition, 142, 153, 169, 184-85 
reflection/reflected, xx, xxii, 81, 116; 
absolute, 37. 125, 128, 129, 145· 146, 
152, 156, qo, 171; "our," 8, 29, 79· 
82, IOI, 111, Ilj: describes itself, 
118; negative, 132-33. 166; formal, 
148, 1:)7• 158, 166, 168, 17o: and 
passim. See also cognition; circle/ 
circular movement 
relation/relationship/ratio, 2o--25, 38-
109 passim, IIj-18, 130, 131, 135. 
143· 174· 177, 178 
Rosen, M., xii 
Rosenkranz, K., xx-xxi, 78, gg, 145 
Schelling, F. W. ]., xiii, xvi, xvii, 141 
semblance, 51, 62, 93. 119, '37· 149· 
172 
singular/singularity, 58, 82, 88-Sg. 102, 
Ill, 112, 116, 121, 123, 125, 129, 
151, 153· 155· 159· !62, !64, 170, 173 
soul, 142, 144-45, 145-49. 15o--56 
passim, 165, 168 
Spinoza, B., xii, 45• 78 
spirit, xviii, 63, 72; formal, 17g-8o; 
absolute, 172, 173, 179-85 passim 
subject, III, 120, 134. 136, 147, 157; 
and predicate, 84-109 pauim 
subjective, 53-54 
sublate/sublated/sublation, 6, 12, 13, 27, 
32, 44, 51,6o,65. 66, 70, 77· 83. 85. 
86, 104-5· 112-13, 128, 134· 138, 
142, 177• 18o; formal, 81; trul), 5: 
simp!}, 18; and passim 
substance(s), xii, 37, 41-45. 46, 49-.')0, 
55-57. 59· 65, 68, 73. 77· 84. Joo--
101, 105, 114, !16, 147· 159 
syllogism, 5. 79. 97-gB, 9g--109; 
hypothetical, 103, 108; disjunctive, 
105; simple, 105 
Thing, Ig, 23, 24-25, 28, 56 
thinking/thought, xii, xx, 78, 100, 109, 
112,118,121, 134· 158. 159· !61 
totality, g, 10, 39· 86, 94-96, 103, 119, 
!22, 123, 124, i2j, 129, 130, 142, 
143· '44· 145· 148, 150, 151, 1.')2. 
153· 154· '57· !63, !67, 173· J85 
transition, 74, 76, JOI, 117, 121. 123, 
125, 126, 128, 136, 1.')7. 163, !69 
Trede, J. H., viii, xix 
universal/universalit), 78-116 pns1im, 
118, Jig, 121,122, 124, 12j, 129, 
133· 143· 154· 158, 159· !62, 164 
Wolff, C., 20 
world, 149-57, 160, 162, 166 

