
G. W. F. Hegel 
System of Ethical Life (1802 I 3) 
and First Philosophy of Spirit 
(Part III of the System of 
Speculative Philosophy 1803/ 4) 
Edited and translated by 
H. S. Harris and T. M. Knox 
State University of New York Press Albany 1979 

The translation of Hegel's text of "The First Philosophy of Spirit" has been made 
with the consent of the Rheinisch-West-faelische Akademie der Wissenschaften in 
Duesseldorf from the Collected Writings of G.W.F. Hegel, Volume 6 "Jenauer 
Systementwerfe I", published by Klaus Duesing and Heinz Kimmerle, 1975. The 
translation from "System der Sittlichkeit" is based on the work of George Lasson, 
second edition, 1923, reprinted in 1967, entitled "Philosophische Bibliotek", Volume 
144a. Both publications: Felix Meiner Verlag, Hamburg. 
Published by 
State University of New York Press 
Albany, New York 12246 
© 1979 State University of New York. 
All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770-1831. 
System of ethical life (1802/3) and first Philosophy 
of spirit (part III of the System of speculative 
philosophy 1803 /4) 
Translation of System der Sittlichkeit and of 
Philosophie des Geistes, Teil 3 of Encyklopiidie der 
philosophischen Wissenschaften. 
Bibliography: p. 
Includes index. 
1. Ethics. 2. 
Mind and body. 
I. Hegel, Georg 
Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770-1831. Encyklopiidie der philo-
sophischen Wissenschaften. Te1l 3. 
Philosophie des 
Geistes. 
English. 1979. II. 
Harris, Henry Silton, 
1926-
III. 
Knox, Thomas Malcolm, Sir, 1900-
IV. 
Title. 
B2944.S9513 
170 
79-14477 
ISBN 0-87395-386-X 
ISBN 0-88706-828-6 (pbk ) 
10 9 
8 
7 
6 
5 4 
3 

Contents 
General Preface 
ix 
PART ONE: Hegel's System of Ethical Life: An Interpretation 
by H. S. Harris 
1 
1. The character of the manuscript. 
3 
2. The systematic context of the 
System of Ethical Life. 
7 
3. Ethical Life on the basis of relation. 
20 
A. Feeling 
21 
B. Thought 
36 
4. The Negative as Freedom. 
44 
5. Ethical Life. 
54 
A. Virtue 
65 
B. Government 
70 
6. Religion. 
81 
7. Conclusion. 
85 
Notes. 
87 
PART Two: The System of Ethical Life 
translated by T. M. Knox and H. S. Harris 
97 
Note on the Translation 
99 
[Introduction] 
99 
1. Absolute Ethical Life on the Basis of Relation 
102 
A. [First Level: Feeling as Subsumption 
of Concept under Intuition] 
103 
B. Second Level: of Infinity and Ideality 
in Form or in Relation 
116 
a) [The Subsumption of the Concept 
under Intuition] 
117 

Contents 
b) The Subsumption of Intuition 
under the Concept 
119 
c) [The Level of the Indifference 
of (a) and (b)] 
123 
2. The Negative or Freedom or Transgression 
129 
3. Ethical Life 
142 
First section: The Constitution of the State 
145 
I. Ethical Life as System, at rest 
146 
II. Government 
156 
A. The Absolute Government 
157 
B. Universal Government 
163 
a) [The first system of Government: 
System of need] 
167 
b) The second system of Government: 
System of justice 
173 
c) [The] third system of Government: 
[System of discipline] 
176 
C. Free Government 
176 
Appendix to System of Ethical Life 
178 
PART THREE: Hegel's First Philosophy of Spirit 
(being Part III of the "System of Speculative Philosophy" 
of 1803/ 4) translated with an Introduction 
by H. S. Harris 
187 
Introduction to the First Philosophy of Spirit 
by H. S. Harris 
189 
[A. The Formal Concept of Consciousness) 
206 
First Level: [Speech] 
218 
Second Level: The Tool 
228 
Third Level: Possession and the Family 
231 
[B. Transition to Real Existence: The Negative] 
235 
[C. Real Existence: The People] 
242 

Appendix 1: The fragment "ist nur die Form" 
251 
Appendix 2: The report of Rosenkranz about Hegel's 
Philosophy of Spirit in the early Jena 
period 
254 
A Note on The Translation 
267 
Bibliography 
270 
Index 
275 
Contents 

General Preface 
This volume contains the two earliest surviving versions of Hegel's 
social theory. Neither of them is complete, and although it is quite like-
ly that Hegel himself left them both uncompleted, it is certain that 
some parts of the second manuscript have been lost. The appendixes 
contain, in each case, the secondary reports (and other surviving frag-
ments) which throw most light upon what is missing from the manu-
scripts themselves. I have tried to show the relation of all of the trans-
lated materials as clearly as I can in my introductions-and I have not 
scrupled to make these quite lengthy. The reader will find in them the 
fullest statement of the context and background and the clearest line 
of interpretation for the manuscripts that I have been able to devise. 
Difficult as they undoubtedly are, these highly condensed accounts 
of Hegel's social theory are both full of interest in themselves and 
pregnant with portents of his later thought and its influence. If, as I 
believe, they reciprocally illumine one another, they will together help 
us to understand better the great works of Hegel's maturity-both the 
Phenomenology of Spirit and the Philosophy of Right. We meet here 
Hegel's first versions of the "life and death struggle" (which leads to 
the establishment of "lordship and bondage" in the Phenomenology) 
and of the theory of "Civil Society" and its class structure (which is 
basic to his mature Philosophy of Right). We are also presented with 
statements of basic economy theory which are in some ways prophetic 
of the Paris Manuscripts of Marx. But these are only the most obvious 
and striking anticipations of later developments. There are many things 
less evident to the first glance which may in the end be of even greater 
importance for the interpretation of Hegel's work and its influence. It 
has long been recognized that the concept of "spirit" is probably the 
central notion of Hegel's thought as a whole, but the concept remains 
extremely difficult to grasp clearly. In these two manuscripts the evo-
lution of this vital focus of Hegel's philosophy can be directly observed 
as it comes to birth in his own mind. 
This volume has been in gestation for a long time. The first version of 

General Preface 
my interpretation of the System of Ethical Life was written in 1971/2 
when I was granted a sabbatical leave and a Leave Fellowship. It is my 
pleasant duty, therefore, to acknowledge gratefully my debt both to 
York University (who granted the leave) and to the Canada Council 
(who granted the Fellowship). But there is another kind of debt that is 
more important. Sir Malcolm Knox had made the first draft of the 
translation before I ever became interested in the text, and only some-
one who had compared my first attempt at an interpretation with the 
essay published here can justly estimate how much it owes to the ex-
perience of working over the text with him. 
Finally I must record my gratitude to the others who have labored 
to bring the gestation to a successful physical outcome. Several drafts 
were typed by Mrs. Ida Sabag, and one by my daughter Carol. My 
wife bore a heavy share of the burdens of proof-reading and making 
the Analytical Index; and the staff of SUNY Press have been uni-
formly helpful throughout. 
Martinmas 1978 
H. S. Harris 

Hegel's System of 
Ethical Life 
An Interpretation 
by H. S. Harris 

Hegel's System of 
Ethical Life 
An Interpretation 
by H. S. Harris 
1. THE CHARACTER OF THE MANUSCRIPT. 
The untitled manuscript among Hegel's Jena papers, to which editors 
have given the name System der Sittlichkeit (System of Ethical Life) 
was written in the winter of 1802 or the spring of 1803. It is the earliest 
of Hegel's systematic manuscripts that has survived. The writing of it 
followed directly after the composition of the essay on Natural Law for 
the last number of the short-lived Critical Journal of Philosophy, and 
it was either contemporaneous with or directly prior to the final draft-
ing of the essay on the German Constitution.1 The manuscript is a fair 
copy, and from the way Rosenkranz dealt with it in his Life of Hegel 
we can safely infer that he had at least one earlier draft before him. 
That earlier draft was written for a course of lectures.2 Our manuscript 
does not read at all like a set of lecture notes until we come to the final 
pages, where it degenerates into a series of "headings," from which a 
connected discussion was still to be written up. Possibly Hegel used 
these headings as a basis for oral development, but in view of the reli-
able report that he was "bound to his text" during his first years as a 
lecturer we must be doubtful of this. Our manuscript is very dense and 
stark throughout; it gives the impression that everything extraneous 
has been carefully stripped away. The lecture-manuscript which Ros-
enkranz had before him, on the other hand, seems to have been some-
what more unbuttoned and flowing.3 
The best available answer to the question why Hegel should have 
written up his own lecture notes in this rather forbidding, and at first 
sight not maximally useful, way depends partly on a proper compre-
hension of his "scientific" or systematic conception of philosophy and 
partly on an understanding of his external circumstances as a univer-

4 
H. S. Harris 
sity lecturer. We shall here begin with the external circumstances, but 
the reader will rapidly perceive that the systematic and the external 
exigencies are not strictly separate. They interacted to produce the sort 
of manuscript that we actually have, and the same sort of interaction 
continued throughout Hegel's academic career first at Jena and later at 
Heidelberg and Berlin. 
On the external side, then, what we principally need to remember is 
that it was the usual thing for lecturers to appoint a textbook to be 
studied in connection with their lectures. Hegel himself followed this 
practice, for example, when he announced a course on mathematics in 
1805 and 1806.4 But in philosophy the only existing texts that he could 
conceivably make a constructive use of were the various writings of 
Schelling} and it was scarcely to be expected that students would pay 
Hegel to explicate Schelling's texts when they could go and listen to 
Schelling himself. A lecturer in Hegel's position, who did not have a 
salaried appointment and was therefore not allowed to give "free" lec-
tures even if he had wanted to,6 had virtually no recourse but to write 
his own textbook. And since Hegel was never in reality the mere dis-
ciple of Schelling that others-including Schelling-frequently took 
him for, he had the strongest of internal motives to do this in any case. 
His first course at Jena was on "Logic and Metaphysics." Apparently 
it did not last long, but broke up quite early. In announcing the course 
again for the next semester (Summer 1802), Hegel promised the early 
appearance of a textbook. But the textbook did not materialize. New 
promises were made and old ones reiterated, but it was only in the last 
course of lectures that Hegel was to give at Jena (Summer 1806) that 
his students were finally provided with a printed text from his hand-
the sheets of the still unfinished Phenomenology as they came from the 
press.7 
So what did Hegel (and his students) do in the meanwhile about a 
textbook for the lectures? A lecturer who did not wish to use someone 
else's book was obliged, until his own book was ready, to lecture ex 
dictatis. This is what Hegel both promised to do, and did, in his courses 
on "Natural Law" in 1802 and 1803.8 Thus his own textbook, when it 
finally materialized, would take the place of a sequence of dictated 
propositions or paragraphs. In the normal course of events, therefore, 
the book itself grew out of such a sequence. The character of Hegel's 
mature Encyclopedia-and at least some part of the peculiar difficulty 
that it presents for the modern student-is much easier to understand 
when we realize that the text was not meant to stand entirely alone. It 
was designed to be read in the context of the oral explanations pro-
vided by the lecturer.9 

5 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
The System of Ethical Life is best regarded, I think, as a draft for 
this sort of textbook. It is an attempt to distil the "scientific" essence 
out of a series of lectures, so that the auditors of future series would 
have a foundation to start from. It is not meant to be read by itself, but 
to serve as a skeleton for the lecturer and a guideline for his students. 
It never actually reached the students' hands, but the fact that there 
are a few marginal notes, generally of an amplificatory and illustrative 
kind, strongly suggests that Hegel himself may have used it for "dicta-
tion" at least once after it was written. 
What course was it written for? In his initial application for per-
mission to lecture at Jena in 1801, Hegel advised the Faculty that he 
wished to lecture on "theoretical and practical philosophy."1° For his 
first semester he lectured only on "Logic and Metaphysics," but subse-
quently he offered two courses regularly for several terms: "Logic and 
Metaphysics," and "Natural Law." The initial announcement of this 
latter topic (for Summer 1802} gave the title more fully as jus naturae 
civitatis et gentium, or in the vernacular Natur und Volkerrecht. This, 
surely, was the lecture course from which our text was written up. 
But already in the announcement for this term Hegel was promising 
a textbook for "Logic and Metaphysics" that would appear in due time, 
whereas at no time did he promise a textbook specifically for his course 
on Natural Law. The reason for this silence is not too far to seek. He-
gel's "systematic" conception of the subject made it impossible for him 
to contemplate more than one textbook in philosophy.U The one book 
might be published in parts; but the part dealing with "practical" phil-
osophy could hardly be prepared until the "theoretical" part was com-
pleted at least in outline. We can assume that when Hegel gave notice 
of the impending publication of his "Logic and Metaphysics" he was 
already hard at work on an outline for that course. In the summer of 
1802, however, he was immensely burdened by his labors for the Criti-
cal Journal. So it is not suprising that he sent nothing to press in his 
own name. By the fall he felt able to promise that the textbook in 
"Logic and Metaphysics" would appear within a few weeks (nundinis 
instantibus proditurum). This is fairly good evidence that the manu-
script was ready. But it did not come out. Instead Hegel went to work 
to make a textbook for his course in "practical" philosophy, and what 
he produced was our present manuscript, which has no heading and no 
introduction to speak of. The most reasonable hypothesis, I think, is 
that by the time he began the System of Ethical Life Hegel had decided 
not to publish a separate compendium on "Logic and Metaphysics," 
but to issue an outline of both his "theoretical" and his "practical" 
philosophy in the same volume. This is confirmed by the next lecture 

6 
H. S. Harris 
announcement (for Summer 1803), which promises a philosophiae 
universae delineatio (or in the vernacular an Encyklopiidie der Philoso-
phie) "from a compendium to be published this summer." Our manu-
script is a draft for part of this encyclopaedic outline. 
The latest manuscript discoveries have revealed that the schema of 
Hegel's "System of Philosophy" during his earliest years at Jena was 
based on a fourfold division, rather than the triadic plan (Logic, Nature, 
Spirit) that formed the skeleton of all of his system-construction from 
the end of 1803 onwardsP The manuscripts have not yet been pub-
lished, but the division attracted the notice of Rosenk:.·anz as a curios-
ity. He gives it thus: 
1. Logic or the science of the Idea as such; 
2. Philosophy of Nature or the realization of the Idea, which in 
the first place creates its body in Nature; 
3. Ethical Nature as the real spirit; 
4. Religion as the resumption of the whole into one, the return 
to the primitive simplicity of the Idea.13 
The System der Sittlichkeit, as we have it, fits very exactly into the 
third of these four subdivisions. The way that Hegel refers to the dif-
ference between the level of Sittlichkeit and that of Religion at several 
points in our manuscript reflects the fact that he regarded religious ex-
perience, not as part of ordinary social life, but as the highest synthesis 
of theoretical and practical cognition, and hence as the culmination of 
the whole system. This conception of religious experience was one that 
he formulated at Frankfurt. He had already injected it into his account 
of "Schelling's system" in the Difference essay.14 
One might object that on this hypothesis it is strange that Hegel 
made no mention of his new "compendium" in his announcement of 
the "Natural Law" course for Summer 1803. Again the probable reason 
is to be found in the gap that had still to be filled. Hegel's problem now 
was that he could not send any of his practical philosophy to the print-
er until his theoretical philosophy was completed by the addition of a 
systematic philosophy of nature. If he had had any idea of how difficult 
it was going to be to H.ll this gap, he would never have promised the 
early appearance of his compendium at all. 15 But no matter how opti-
mistic he felt in the spring of 1803, he could certainly see that the 
printing of the practical philosophy would never begin in time to be of 
any use to his "Natural Law" students that summer. 
By the winter he had managed to complete the first draft of his 

7 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
"Philosophy of Nature" and had come round again to what he now 
called the "Philosophy of Spirit."16 At this stage he must have decided 
to recast everything that he had already done, for there is no further 
mention of a textbook in his announcements until Summer 1805, when 
the systematic compendium is again promised, this time for use in the 
"Natural Law" course as wellP 
In effect our manuscript fell by the wayside-along with the four-
fold division of philosophy to which it belongs-when Hegel's "ency-
clopaedic" conception of philosophy assumed its mature form. But 
there was an important external reason for this too. The departure of 
Schelling from Jena in the spring of 1803 opened up for Hegel a wider 
field of academic activity. He was now able, indeed morally obliged, to 
assume responsibility for the entire range of systematic philosophy, as 
the two of them understood it, whereas philosophy of nature had until 
then been peculiarly Schelling's province. In view of Hegel's lifelong 
concern with organic ideas of growth and continuity, it is not surpris-
ing that a treatise which had been written out of order, so to speak, 
would not fit properly into its place when everything was finally done, 
for the first time, in the proper order. We shall have to consider later 
the unresolved tensions in the manuscript itself, which were virtually 
bound to lead to significant development in Hegel's views. But it was 
the form rather than the content that had become unsatisfactory when 
the essay was first set aside.18 
2. THE S Y S T E M AT I C C 0 NT E X T 0 F T HE 
SYSTEM OF ETHICAL LIFE. 
The external data have thus led us to the suggestion that the System of 
Ethical Life represents the third part of a four-part plan in the context 
of which Hegel had been working since 1801. The fact that it is also 
the earliest of his "systematic" manuscripts that has survived makes 
the task of interpreting this wider systematic context into which it fits 
an extremely difficult one. Here we must rely heavily upon the internal 
indications offered by the text itself. We have only just enough indirect 
evidence and secondary reports to provide the barest outline of the 
way in which Hegel's "system" evolved. 
In his essay on the Difference between Fichte and Schelling Hegel 
came forward as the champion of the "philosophy of Identity," which 
was already associated with the name of his younger friend Schelling. 

8 
H. S. Harris 
The original conception of the "Identity Philosophy" was explicitly 
Spinozist in its inspiration. The two "attributes" of extension and 
thought were replaced by "philosophy of Nature" and "transcendental 
philosophy" respectively. The fundamental thesis was, to use Spinoza's 
expression, that "the order and connection of ideas is the same as the 
order and connection of things."19 But the focal problem of the ideal-
ism of Kant and Fichte, the problem of reconciling theoretical deter-
minism with practical freedom, was superimposed upon this Spinozist 
foundation. And the solving of that problem required that a certain 
supremacy of "practical" philosophy over "theoretical" philosophy, a 
certain superiority of the "transcendental" philosophy of subjective 
activity over the "natural" philosophy of objective observation must be 
admitted. Thus although there was supposed to be a perfect Spinozist 
parallel between the two philosophical constructions of the one Abso-
lute Identity, there was also, in the single system of "speculation" in 
which they were both comprehended, a necessary sequential relation 
between them. Philosophy of nature was theoretical, while transcen-
dental philosophy was practical. But if the sequential relation was seen 
to be necessary in the speculative comprehension of the "absolute in-
difference," it must also be present in both of the opposed "construc-
tions of the Absolute." Theoretical (natural) philosophy and practical 
(transcendental) philosophy must each have both a "theoretical" and a 
"practical" part. This presented no problem on the side of transcenden-
tal philosophy-from which the antithesis of "theoretical" and "prac-
tical" was derived in the first place. But it meant that the theory of 
nature had to be subdivided into a strictly theoretical part (the philos-
ophy of inorganic nature) and a practically theoretical part (the phil-
osophy of organism). These two parts were thought of as anticipatory 
parallels of the self-constructive (and hence essentially practical) activ-
ities of "theoretical" and "practical" Reason.20 
From the fragmentary manuscripts of those first lecture courses we 
now know that in Hegel's hands the cyclic unity of the "system" be-
came, from the very first, a more complex matter than the summary in 
the Difference essay indicates. Even in that summary it is fairly clear 
that the theory of the" absolute Indifference Point" or the "resumption 
of the whole into one" is to be thought of as a separate (third) phase 
of the system.21 From the introduction to the first course on "Logic and 
Metaphysics," we can now see that there was a corresponding "intro-
ductory" phase of speculative philosophy: "Logic, or the science of the 
Idea as such." 
This introductory phase was necessarily two-sided. First there was 

9 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
the critique of finite Reason, which was the task of critical logic. Then 
there was the construction of absolute Reason (the "Idea as such") 
which was the task of speculative logic (or "metaphysics"). It was this 
latter task which eventually became the whole subject matter of Logic 
in Hegel's mature theory. But he always maintained the negative, criti-
cal, conception of the traditional "philosophical logic" (i.e., epistemol-
ogy) with which he began. Faced by the demand of Reinhold and Bar-
dili that thought should be conceived "objectively," he agreed that the 
demand was justified, even though its proponents did not understand 
it.22 The "reduction of philosophy to logic" which Bardili proclaimed 
was Hegel's serious object from the first in a sense quite different from 
that given to it by Bardili. 
The necessary complement of his criticism of the essentially "finite," 
subjective, basis of the whole tradition of empiricist and critical episte-
mology from Locke to Fichte was a positive conception of "Logic and 
Metaphysics" which completely transcended the bounds of "transcen-
dental philosophy," as described in the systematic outline of the Dif-
ference essay. Instead of being parallel with the philosophy of Nature, 
the theory of the Absolute Idea has to be thought as the beginning of 
systematic theory which corresponds (though without any structural 
parallel) to the end of speculation in the absolute experience of Relig-
ion. Ever since about 1797 Hegel had been thinking of Religion as the 
experience of the Absolute. In the Difference essay "Art" and "Specu-
lation" are presented as the twin approaches to the "point of indiffer-
ence" from its opposite sides. Both are there characterized as forms of 
"divine service." Religion is thus the mode of experience in which the 
Absolute Identity is comprehended absolutely.23 In seeking to estab-
lish a conception of thought which would be truly absolute, because it 
was completely beyond the antithesis of subject and object, Hegel was 
opening the way to his mature doctrine that "speculation" or philoso-
phy, not religion, is the absolute mode of experience. But he could not 
see this yet. What he saw first was that just as "Logic" must be dis-
tinguished from the "theoretical part of transcendental philosophy" 
and given absolute status as "the science of the Idea as such," so "Re-
ligion" must be distinguished from the "practical part of transcendental 
philosophy" (the theory of "ethical life"). 
We have already noted that our manuscript reflects this distinction 
between Sittlichkeit and Religion in several places, where Hegel re-
marks without further explanation that the situation in religion is "dif-
ferent" from the ethical one that he is analysing. In the notes on the 
forms of constitution with which the manuscript ends, it is clear that 

10 
H. S. Harris 
we are approaching the boundary line where this "difference" will need 
to be discussed. Fortunately Rosenkranz was able to recognize the con-
nection between our manuscript and the lecture manuscript. In spite of 
his indubitable confusion about the supposed "conclusion" of the Sys-
tem of Ethical Life, the connection that he makes appears to be quite 
secure;24 and from his account we can see that Hegel's discussion of 
"Religion proper" was conducted-like the discussion that we still find 
in the Phenomenology-upon a higher plane altogether. 
Assuming, then, that our manuscript is designed to fit into the four-
part plan of Hegel's first year at J ena, rather than the triadic schema 
(Logic, Philosophy of Nature, Philosophy of Spirit) which underlies the 
fragmentary "System of Speculative Philosophy" of 1803/4 and all the 
subsequent manuscripts that have come down to us, let us now consid-
er the structure of the System of Ethical Life itself. The absence of any-
thing resembling an introduction provides further support for the view 
that it was designed to be part of a larger, continuous whole. It is well 
known that Hegel disliked philosophical prefaces and introductions 
generally, but in an independent treatise we should expect to find, at 
the very least, a page or two on the futility of writing (and reading) 
prefaces, if he were in fact here making a beginning without one. 
What we are given instead is more like the opening of a new chapter 
than the start of an autonomous treatise. Hegel begins baldly: "In or-
der to cognize the Idea of absolute Sittlichkeit, the intuition must be 
posited in complete adequacy to the concept, because the Idea is itself 
nothing other than the identity of the two."25 The only "introduction" 
that he supplies is a two-page elaboration of this thesis in which every 
new term and every explanatory assertion only makes things more ob-
scure, because none of the familiar words is used in a familiar fashion. 
The logical and epistemological terms "intuition," "concept," "univer-
sal," "particular," "singular," "subsumption," "relation" have all been 
removed from the "subjective" or "finite" matrix of ordinary discourse 
and are used in the new "absolute" way. What they mean in this new 
context has to be discovered and explicated by detailed examination of 
the way in which this initial programmatic statement is executed in the 
body of the discussion. 
The main body of the discussion, however, bristles with the same 
sort of difficulty on almost every page. So we must have some idea of 
the overall structure and method if we are to have any hope of com-
prehending it in detail. Let us begin then with some general observa-
tions about the structure and the method of exposition which can be 
verified by straightforward observation of an external and formal kind. 

11 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
We must hope that even an examination of this superficial, noncom-
prehending, type will enable us to interpret the initial programmatic 
statement with enough confidence to attempt a detailed study of the 
main text. 
The structural analysis provided by Hegel himself through his head-
ings and subheadings (ignoring for the moment, the further subdivi-
sions, where one might have difficulty deciding what is coordinate and 
what is subordinate) reveals that the treatise is in three sections. These 
are: 
1. Absolute Sittlichkeit on the Basis of Relation 
2. The Negative, or Freedom, or Transgression 
3. Sittlichkeif6 
Of these three sections, the second is not provided with any subhead-
ings by Hegel. The fact that it has three coordinate titles suggests the 
possibility of an internal progression, but this is only a hypothesis to 
be tested. All that is outwardly evident is that this middle section is 
meant to provide a necessary transition of some kind from the first sec-
tion to the third. 
The first and third sections, on the other hand, are clearly subdi-
vided by Hegel. In the first section he failed to provide a heading for 
the first main subdivision, though he marked it clearly enough. In the 
third he has provided what may be a superfluous (purely repetitive) 
heading at the beginning of the first section. We cannot be sure wheth-
er the heading "First Section: The Constitution" is superfluous or not, 
since the fact that there is no coordinate "Second Section" may simply 
be a consequence of Hegel's failure to complete the manuscript. But for 
the functional analysis of what we have it is superfluous precisely be-
cause there is nothing we can coordinate with it, so we are justified in 
ignoring it in this external survey. Setting it aside, we have Part I sub-
divided into "Finitude: Reality"27 and "Infinity: Ideality" and Part III 
into "Ethical Life as a system at rest" and "Ethical Life in motion: 
Government." 
In terms of content the first section of Part I is about the primitive 
natural needs of a human organism and about the most elementary 
forms of labor and economic relations; in the second "Infinite" section 
we find in reverse order the establishment of the necessary institutional 
context, first the organization of labor and property, then the neces-
sary stages of family life. Part III, on the other hand, is mainly con-
cerned with the character, functions, structure, and interaction of three 

12 
H. S. Harris 
social classes-the nobility, the bourgeoisie, and the peasantry-with-
in an established political community. 
The whole discussion is organized as a sequence of "levels" (Poten-
zen)-though this becomes less insistently obvious in Part III-and 
the sequence is organized as a pattern of reciprocal"subsumptions" in 
accordance with the programmatic statement at the beginning. "The 
subsumption of concept under intuition" is followed by the converse 
"subsumption of intuition under concept," and then, typically, both 
"subsumptions" are equalized in their "middle" or "totality."28 
"Intuition," "concept," and "relation" are terms which come origin-
ally from the "subjective" philosophy of Kant. In the Identity Philoso-
phy they gain an "absolute" significance, but with respect to all of 
them, there is something to be gained from attending to Kant's use. 
Let us begin with "relation," for which the relevant Kantian context is 
easy to locate. The categories of "relation" in Kant's table are: 
1) Inherence and Subsistence (or Substance and Accident) 
2) Causality and Dependence (or Ursache and Wirkung)29 
3) Community (or Reciprocity between the agent and the 
patient). 
We shall find that the recollection of all the categories and synonyms 
that Kant mentions under this heading helps us to understand how 
Hegel employs "relation" as an ethical category. In the Difference es-
say Hegel speaks of the substance-accident relation as "the true rela-
tion of speculation."30 The speculative focus of the System of Ethical 
Life is the Volk as a self-conscious, self-moving, substance. Hence it is 
the substance-relation that dominates Part III. But this "ethical sub-
stance" is materially constituted by mortal living organisms which are 
only transient moments in the more comprehensive substantial whole 
of Nature. Their mortal lives and motions are cycles of action and re-
action which can only be stabilized as a perfect reciprocal balance of 
cause and effect. "Natural" ethics, the "ethics of relation" in Part I, is 
thus inevitably an analysis of "causality and dependence." 
So much for the Kantian context of Hegel's concept of "relation." It 
must be admitted that there is very little in the "transcendental aes-
thetic" or the "transcendental analytic" that has an equally obvious 
relevance to Hegel's use of "intuition" and "concept." Certainly there 
is an analogy of some sort between the Hegelian "totality" of intuition 
and concept and the Kantian doctrine of a necessary "synthesis" be-

13 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
tween them. But the preponderant role played by the strange principle 
of "subsumption" in arriving at the "totality" plainly forbids us to 
look to the first Critique for any real help here. 
It is not the first Critique that provides the clue in this instance but 
the third. In the "Critique of Teleological Judgement" we find the fol-
lowing: 
It is, in fact, a distinctive characteristic of our understanding, 
that in its cog,nition-as, for instance, of the cause of a product-
it moves from the analytic universal to the particular, or, in 
other words, from conceptions to given empirical intuitions. In 
this process, therefore, it determines nothing in respect of the 
multiplicity of the particular. On the contrary, understanding 
must wait for the subsumption of the empirical intuition-sup-
posing that the object is a natural product-under the conception, 
to furnish this determination for the faculty of judgement. But 
now we are also able to form a notion of an understanding which, 
not being discursive like ours, but intuitive, moves from the 
synthetic universal, or intuition of a whole as a whole, to the 
particular-that is to say, from the whole to the parts. To render 
possible a definite form of the whole a contingency in the syn-
thesis of the parts is not implied by such an understanding or its 
representation of the whole. But that is what our understanding 
requires. It must advance from the parts as the universally con-
ceived principles to different possible forms to be subsumed 
thereunder as consequences. Its structure is such that we can only 
regard a real whole in nature as the effect of the concurrent dy-
namical forces of the parts. How then may we avoid having to 
represent the possibility of the whole as dependent upon the parts 
in a manner conformable to our discursive understanding? May 
we follow what the standard of the intuitive or archetypal under-
standing prescribes, and represent the possibility of the parts 
as both in their form and synthesis dependent upon the whole? 
The very peculiarity of our understanding in question prevents 
this being done in such a way that the whole contains the source 
of the possibility of the nexus of the parts. This would be self-
contradictory in knowledge of the discursive type. But the repre-
sentation of a whole may contain the source of the possibility 
of the form of that whole and of the nexus of the parts which 
that form involves. This is our only road. But, now, the whole 

14 
H. S. Harris 
would in that case be an effect or product the representation of 
which is looked on as the cause of its possibility. But the product 
of a cause whose determining ground is merely the representa-
tion of its effect is termed an end. Hence it follows that it is 
simply a consequence flowing from the particular character of 
our understanding that we should figure to our minds products of 
nature as possible according to a different type of causality from 
that of the physical laws of matter, that is, as only possible 
according to ends and final causes. In the same way we explain 
the fact that this principle does not touch the question of how 
such things themselves, even considered as phenomena, are pos-
sible on this mode of production, but only concerns the estimate 
of them possible to our understanding. On this view we see at 
the same time why it is that in natural science we are far from 
being satisfied with an explanation of natural products by means 
of a causality according to ends. For in such an explanation all 
we ask for is an estimate of physical generation adapted to our 
critical faculty, or reflective judgement, instead of one adapted to 
the things themselves on behalf of the determinant judgement. 
Here it is also quite unnecessary to prove that an intellectus 
archetypus like this is possible. It is sufficient to show that we 
are led to this Idea of an intellectus archetypus by contrasting 
with it our discursive understanding that has need of images 
(intellectus ectypus) and noting the contingent character of a 
faculty of this form, and that this Idea involves nothing 
self-contradictory. 31 
The basic claim of the Identity philosophy is that our understanding 
both of ourselves and of the world is ultimately intuitive and that we 
must use the concept of an organism (or "natural end") constitutively, 
and not just regulatively (as Kant allows), if we are to have any knowl-
edge at all. Thus we must "follow what the standard of the intuitive 
or archetypal understanding prescribes, and represent the possibility 
of the parts as both in their form and synthesis dependent upon the 
whole." Thus "intuition" in the present work refers to "synthetic uni-
versal, or intuition of a whole as a whole," and "concept" refers to the 
"motion" of the understanding "from the whole to the parts." How 
far Hegel's attempt to meet Kant's challenge is successful is the ulti-
mate question, both about this present piece of systematic exposition 
and about his later philosophy as a whole. But at least this passage 
from Section 77 of the Critique of Judgement-with all the surround-

15 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
ing context from Section 76 to Section 84-shows us both what Hegel 
was attempting to do, and why the first formulation of his endeavor 
was in terms of "intuition" and "concept." 
Just as "intuition," "concept," and "relation" remind us of Kant, 
so Potenz directs us to Schelling. From the very moment when he be-
gan to break out of his initial allegiance to Fichte,32 Schelling employed 
the term Potenz as one of his basic conceptual tools. In one of his early 
polemics about the Identity Philosophy, a dialogue between "the au-
thor" and "a friend" "On the Absolute Identity-system," Schelling im-
plies that the first to use the term (at least in print) was his friend 
Eschenmayer in a work called Propositions from Nature-Metaphysics, 
published in 1797. 
Unfortunately for us it is a very flexible conception easily adaptable 
to different contexts and scarcely definable apart from some definite 
context.33 Its origin was the mathematical theory of "powers," and in 
combination with the signs plus and minus and the elementary logical 
formulas for identity and difference" A= A" and "A=B," it provided 
Schelling with an algebraic notation for his theory. Thus in the Exposi-
tion of My System (1801), which remained the fixed foundation stone 
of the Identity Philosophy, we find the following: "The formula N= 
(A=B) thought as a relative totality, signifies the Absolute Identity, 
not in so far as it exists, but in so far as it is ground or cause of its 
existence through the organism, and so also it signifies the organism 
itself (as product). The formula N=(A2-A=B) signifies the Absolute 
Identity existing under the form A2 and A=B."34 The A3 formula ex-
presses a higher Potenz than the A2 formula, which is, in turn, a higher 
formula than A=B, which is the elementary basis of all Potenzen. 
These three levels are to be found in finite consciousness and in all 
finite realities, for they express the structure of the Absolute itself. 
Hence they express also both the way the Absolute is in things and the 
way that things are in it. "The unique reality in everything, in the sin-
gular thing and in the whole alike, is for me theN, that in which the 
universal and the particular, the infinite and the finite are absolutely 
one, or in a word the eternal."35 
According to the Exposition of My System, "The Absolute Identity 
only exists under the form of all Potenzen."36 The theory of Potenzen 
enables Schelling to articulate the relation between the different as-
pects of finite reality and activity and the Absolute Identity. If pressed 
about the fact that he offered a series of variant accounts of the Paten-
zen, he would probably have responded that a certain relativity in the 
account of experience on its finite side was inevitable. His best non-

16 
H. S. Harris 
technical explanation of the meaning of Potenz was in the lecture 
course on the Philosophy of Art (Winter 1802/3): 
There is only One philosophy and One science of philosophy; 
what are called distinct philosophical sciences are just expositions 
of the One and undivided whole of philosophy in distinct 
Potenzen or under distinct ideal determinations .... this expres-
sion ... is connected with the general doctrine of philosophy 
about the essential and inward identity of all things and of every-
thing which we distinguish at all. There is truly and in itself 
only One essential being, One absolute real, and this being an 
absolute is indivisible, so that it cannot pass over into distinct 
beings through division or separation; since the one being is 
indivisible, diversity of things is only possible at all, in so far as 
it is posited as the undivided whole under distinct determinations. 
These determinations I call Potenzen. They change nothing 
whatsoever in the essential being, which remains always and 
necessarily the same, which is why they are called ideal deter-
minations. For example, what we cognize in history or in art is 
essentially the same as what also exists in nature: in each of them 
the whole absoluteness is innate, but this absoluteness stands at 
distinct levels [Potenzen] in nature, history, and art. If one could 
take the Potenz away, so as to see the pure essence naked, so to 
speak, One being would truly be in all of them. 
But philosophy in its complete appearance emerges only in 
the totality of all Potenzen. For it ought to be a true image [Bild] 
of the Universe-and this equals the Absolute set forth in the 
totality of all ideal determinations. God and the Universe are one, 
or they are only different aspects of One and the same being. 
God is the universe regarded from the side of identity; he is All 
since he is the only real being, and hence there is nothing outside 
of him, while the Universe is God grasped from the side of to-
tality. But in the absolute Idea which is the principle of philoso-
phy, both identity and totality emerge only in the totality of 
all Potenzen. In the Absolute as such, and therefore also in the 
principle of philosophy, there is no Potenz precisely because it 
comprehends all Potenzen, and conversely just in virtue of the 
fact that there is no Potenz in it, all Potenzen are contained in it. 
I call this principle the absolute point of identity of philosophy 
precisely for this reason, that it is not equal to any particular 
Potenz, and yet it comprehends all of them. 

17 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
Now this indifference point, just because it is the point of 
indifference, and it is strictly unique, indiscernible, and indivis-
ible, necessarily exists again in every particular unity (another 
name for a Potenz); and this is not possible unless in each of 
these particular unities all unities, hence all Potenzen, return once 
again. Thus there is in philosophy overall nothing but the Abso-
lute, or we meet with nothing in philosophy but the Absolute-
always just strictly the One, and just this unique One in 
particular forms. 37 
The proper formula for this indifferent unity of all Potenzen would 
be "A=A." Hegel's System of Ethical Life, which seeks to exhibit the 
existence of the Absolute as the ethical organism, would be summed 
up by Schelling in an A3 formula. But since, to the best of my knowl-
edge, no one has ever found the algebra of the Absolute enlightening, 
that topic is scarcely worth pursuing. 
The dynamic connotations of the term are more interesting.38 Schell-
ing used it to formulate his philosophy of nature as a series of energy 
levels, and it is clear that Hegel is using it in the same way for social 
philosophy. For us, therefore, the most interesting aspect of Potenz 
theory in Schelling is his architectonic use of the concept as a way of 
articulating the Spinozist parallel between nature and thought, the real 
and the ideal, the object and the subject. In the Exposition Schelling 
says, "Every definite Potenz signifies a definite quantitative difference 
of subjectivity and objectivity ... relative to the whole or the Absolute 
Totality."33 Thus there are two "series" of Potenzen, the real series 
(where the object is positive) and the ideal one (where the subject is 
positive). In his Further Expositions from the System of Philosophy of 
1802 Schelling adds that the fundamental triad in both series consists 
of a first Potenz of "reflection" (the "reception of the infinite into the 
finite") and a second Potenz of "subsumption" (the "reception of the 
finite into the infinite"). These two phases achieve their "totality" (the 
A3 formula) in the Potenz of "Reason." 
This basic triadic pattern is preserved in many variant versions in 
Schelling's subsequent essays.40 But it is only in this first account that 
the concept of "subsumption" plays an important role. This was also 
the latest version that Schelling had published at the time when Hegel 
was working on the Sytem of Ethical Life. For this reason the coinci-
dence of terminology deserves a fairly close examination. The total 
scheme which can be extracted from Schelling's account is a follows:41 

18 
H. S. Harris 
First Potenz 
(Reflection-recep-
tion of the infinite 
in the finite) 
Second Potenz 
(subsumption-re-
ception of the finite 
into the infinite) 
Third Potenz 
(Reason-absolute 
equality of finite 
and infinite) 
REAL WORLD 
(Nature-the realm of finitude) 
World-structure (in the whole) 
Body, material forms (in singulars) 
Spatialization 
IDEAL WORLD 
(God-the realm of 
Infinity) 
Knowledge, Science, 
Concepts 
Temporal sequence 
Light (universal principle) Dynami- Action 
cally determined bodies (in series 
of three Potenzen: 
Magnetism-one-dimensional 
Electricity-two-dimensional 
Chemical process-three-dimen-
sional) 
Divine light and Gravity 
Universal Mechanism and Neces-
sity 
Organism-identity of form and 
matter 
God 
Freedom 
Work of Art 
Objective Reason 
(Truth) 
Imagination 
(Beauty) 
Absolute 
Indifference 
Point 
In view of the importance of "subsumption" in the organization and 
procedure of the System of Ethical Life it may well be significant that 
Schelling regards the whole sphere of human action as the Potenz of 
"subsumption." We cannot be sure how much of Hegel's theory and 
method was directly inspired or suggested by Schelling because there 
is no extended discussion of this second Potenz of the "ideal series" in 
Schelling's published work during this period. There are some reasons 
for thinking, however, that Hegel developed his own procedure, work-
ing within the context of the general scheme given above, but adapt-
ing it to a purpose of his own, which was subtly different from Schell-
ing's monochromatic concern with seeing all things in God and God in 
all things. Schelling's "subsumption" is the "reception of the finite 
into the infinite." It is a process of intellectual subordination of the 
many to the One; and we can follow it either in the realm of thought 
or in that of extension. But on both sides it is a one-way process. He-
gel's "subsumption," on the other hand, is essentially a reciprocal pro-

19 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
cedure going first one way, then the other, and continually weaving 
back and forth from the real side to the ideal side. This interaction of 
the "real" and the "ideal" is perfectly concordant with Schelling's con-
ception of the second Potenz. For this is the Potenz of motion in space 
and time; in Schelling's real series it is the Potenz where the inward 
essence (an "ideal" principle) utters or realizes itself. So, by parity of 
reasoning (whether Schelling's or Hegel's), we should expect that in 
the "ideal" series it is where the outer reality "inwardizes" and so 
"idealizes" itself. The important thing for us is not to decide whether 
it was really Schelling who originally thought of this, but to see that 
the use of "subsumption" in this reciprocal way is more closely anal-
ogous to what Schelling calls "reception" or "formation" (Einbildung) 
than to what he calls "subsumption" proper; and secondly we need to 
recognize that because of the equilibrium established by this reciproc-
ity the finite Potenz gains in Hegel a firmer standing, a greater measure 
of independent subsistence, than it ever seems to enjoy in Schelling's 
discussions. 
In place of Schelling's antithesis of "Nature" and "God," we find in 
Hegel's treatise the antithesis of "nature" and "spirit," or "nature" 
and "ethical life." "Nature" embraces man as a living organism con-
textually embedded in the organic life of the earth. It is important to 
remember that Schelling and Hegel regarded the world, and in particu-
lar our Earth, as an animate organism. The essential contrast between 
Natur and Sittlichkeit is a contrast between two levels of life. We 
begin in the side of natural life, and we move up and over toward the 
side of ethical life. Thus in all the stages of "ethical life as relation"-
which means the life of the rational organism in the context of natural 
necessity, there is a lower "natural" pole from which we begin, and an 
opposite "rational" or artificial pole, through which we move to the 
higher, truly ethical "middle," which is their "totality." But when we 
arrive at the higher level of independent ethical life, this whole pat-
tern is reversed. For Sittlichkeit is itself only a "side"; it is the higher 
"ideal" side of the Absolute, but it needs to be integrated with its low-
er analog in nature. So here it is the higher ethical pole, the pole of "to-
tality," from which we begin; and we move through an opposite pole 
of reflective separation or difference to the natural middle which is 
the point of identity between them. Thus at the level of "nature" we 
go from desire, through labor, to the tool; whereas at the level of Sitt-
lichkeit proper we go (several times, at different levels) from the nobil-
ity, through the bourgeoisie, to the peasantry. This alternation of pat-
tern reflects Schelling's basic doctrine about the Potenzen. Schelling 

20 
H. S. Harris 
liked to express the "quantitative difference" between a Potenz and the 
Absolute in terms of a "constructed line": 
+ 
+ 
(IdealPole) A=B 
(0) 
A=B (RealPole) 
------------~A--~A~-----------
In the System of Ethical Life Hegel proceeds from right to left in the 
first part and from left to right in the third. His second section, "Free-
dom," is where the absolute midpoint emerges. It comes forth in its 
negative aspect (the zero-point) as the annihilation of everything finite 
(i.e., everything expressible by the formula A= B). Thus "0" is a bet-
ter designation for it on Hegel's "constructed line" than the "A= A" 
that Schelling prefers. But Hegel's procedure shows us what Schelling's 
axiom "The constructed line is the form of the being of the Absolute 
Identity, both in single instances and in the whole"42 meant to him. 
3. ETHICAL LIFE ON THE BASIS OF RELATION. 
We are now as well prepared as we can easily manage for the study of 
the text in detail. According to Hegel, ethical awareness begins as the 
self-awareness (the "intuition") of a single individual in the controlling 
environment of nature as a whole. Before he/ she43 can emerge as a free 
agent, he/ she. must come to terms with the necessities of nature (both 
inward and outward). The whole concept of man as a free rational 
agent is first presented to each of us in the shape of the natural world 
in which we exist. This is the stage on which we are to perform as free 
agents, and in order even to know what it means to be a rational agent, 
we must first discover what is necessary to our own maintenance as ac-
tive natural organisms, and we must be able to secure it; secondly we 
must know what is possible for us as natural organisms and what the 
natural consequences of different possible patterns of behavior are. We 
find all this out either by trying, and suffering the consequences our-
selves, or by seeing others try and suffer them. Nature rewards or dis-
ciplines our efforts, and in this way we come to know what we natural-
ly are and what we need. This is the "subsumption" of our own singu-
lar existence or self-awareness under the "concept" which is objectified 
or realized in the organic totality of nature as a whole. At first I wrote 

21 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
"instantiated or realized," but I had to cross out "instantiated" because 
it carries the misleading implications that the concept might be exem-
plified otherwise or elsewhere and that it is definable in abstraction 
from its actual existence in and as the order of things. The Identity 
Philosophy follows Spinoza in denying both of these positions. All of 
our ordinary "finite" concepts, whether they are mere "possibilities," 
or are actually exemplified in one or many real "instances," arise from 
the matrix of our cognitive and practical relations to the one system of 
"nature" which is the objective and necessary existence of Reason it-
self. 
Even the capacity to survive to biological maturity as parts of the 
order of nature is something that we only possess as members of a 
natural community, the family. Hence this community is the "totality" 
of ethical life on the basis of relation.44 But the mastery over nature 
that is requisite to our existence as free rational agents we can only 
achieve through membership in a wider community, the Volk. Thus 
the "subsumption" of our singular "intuition" under the concept of 
rational humanity requires for its proper fulfillment the contrary sub-
sumption of the concept of humanity under the ethical intuition of the 
Volk. The process of reciprocal subsumption at this highest ethical lev-
el is what Hegel calls, for the nonce, "the concept's absolute move-
ment."45 It is something that happens in real life, as well as in specula-
tive thought. To understand what the "intuition" of the Volk is, and 
what the "subsumption" of the concept of human nature under it can 
be, is the hardest major problem of interpretation in the System of Eth-
ical Life. But that is not yet our concern. For the moment that ideal of 
ethical life can either be said to be buried deep within us or to be float-
ing above and beyond us. There is a sense of striving which belongs to 
this feeling of something deep within that must be brought out, or 
something far above or beyond that must be reached. This sense of im-
perfect union with one's own real essence, of not being what one actu-
ally can be, is the way in which "relation" appears to the "dependent" 
consciousness throughout the treatise. 
a) Feeling 
Basically then, at this first stage, "intuition" refers to the particular 
side, the self-conscious single individual with his wants, his capacities, 
and his satisfactions; while "concept" refers to the system of Nature 
as the universal array of possibilities and necessities. But as soon as the 

22 
H. S. Harris 
striving sets things in motion it is, more obviously than anything else, 
the functional designations "universal" and "particular" which move. 
For they are logically tied to the process of "subsumption." What sub-
sumes is always, at that moment, the universal; and what is subsumed 
is the particular. In the second paragraph of his introductory note He-
gel tells us that "what is truly the universal is intuition, while what is 
truly particular is the absolute concept." This situation, which is the 
exact reverse of the initial conditions that he sets up in the very next 
paragraph, is our goal. But the very first step is a subsumption of con-
cept under intuition. The intuition has "stepped over" to the side of the 
particular-that is to say, we are speaking of a singular individual-
but it here subordinates the content of nature (as concept) to itself as 
the inward essence. In the contrary subsumption of intuition under 
concept, on the other hand, the essence, the real universal or the iden-
tity to be achieved "floats above" the order of nature (as concept) and 
the particular individual (as intuition). This "floating essence" is not 
identical with the concept, just as the "inward essence" is not properly 
identical with the intuition-although there the connection is closer. 
Properly speaking, however, the essence is in both cases the relation 
between concept and particular. Since it is a relation, a relative unity, 
it is not absolutely identical with the absolute unity. But it can only 
qualify as a unity of inner and outer-of intuition and concept-at all, 
to the extent that the inward essence does come out and coincide with 
or get realized to some degree in external nature. This coincidence is a 
"satisfaction" (of the subsuming moment), a "totality" of intuition 
and concept, of the real and the ideal sides. Thus something comes into 
existence which has a significance beyond the urge of the moment that 
was its immediate occasion. But all the same the satisfaction is not fi-
nal; it leads on to a new drive, but one which is logically of a higher 
type. This will continue to be the case until the inward essence ("abso-
lute life" or "absolute intuition") finally coincides perfectly with the 
outward essence (the system of nature as a whole or the "absolute con-
cept"). 
All the pages that I have so far devoted to the explication of these 
few introductory paragraphs are probably worth less to the puzzled 
reader than a few concrete examples. But one cannot give general ex-
amples. Every concrete case necessarily belongs to a definite level or 
Potenz, and should therefore be given in its place. The first stage of 
"Natural ethics" is what Hegel calls "feeling." This is the simplest, 
most primitive form of intuition.46 It has to be opened out somehow 
until it embraces the whole natural environment of the organism's life 

23 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
in a subordinating or subsumptive way. Hegel tells us as well as he can 
what the subsumption of the concept under "feeling" means when he 
calls this the practical Potenz. We subsume nature under our own feel-
ing by acting upon it. Thus work or labor will be the crucial moment of 
this stage. But work is the negation of feeling as the spontaneous 
awareness of our own living energy. Thus within the overall subsump-
tion of concept under intuition labor is the moment of opposition, the 
moment when intuition is subsumed under concept. 
A good example with which to begin this very first stage-we shall 
see why later-is a baby. The concept of feeling has three moments: 
a) desire or need (subsumption of concept under intuition) 
b) satisfaction (subsumption of intuition under concept) 
c) the totality of need and satisfaction: the tool 
A healthy baby, awake but not hungry, active only at the theoretical 
level of simple awareness, e.g., learning to focus its eyes and fascinated 
by the play of light and color, is the simplest model of what Hegel calls 
"the complete undifferentiatedness of ethical life ... or nature proper." 
As he gets hungry or thirsty or wet or cold, the cycle of practical life 
begins. But the baby exemplifies as strictly as possible the subsumption 
of concept under intuition, for when he is in need, it is someone else 
who must labor to satisfy his needs. The baby sets before us the cycle 
of need and satisfaction, but the only work that he contributes to keep 
the cycle going is to signal his need by crying. If we regard this signal 
as essentiat if we feed or change the baby "on demand/' then he is a 
paradigm of "natural ethics as intuition." On the other hand, if we ig-
nore his "normal" cries and feed him, etc., "on schedule" (as we typi-
cally do with our domesticated stock), then the baby-like the beasts 
-continues to belong only to the realm of nature so far as his own 
practical initiatives are concerned; he is not yet an agent at all. 
The basic contrast in feeling is between need and satisfaction. This 
contrast is what makes feeling practical. Before it becomes practical, 
feeling is unconscious. But a practical need, a felt need, is still not yet 
a desire. Desire, as Hegel analyzes it, is the starting point of labor, its 
ideal pole. For desire involves an imaginative awareness of what is 
needed. At the very beginning, a baby presumably does not have de-
sires in this sense; it has only needs. We can say with certainty that it 
has "desires" in Hegel's sense, when its crying is checked or stilled at 
the sight of what it needs-or when the crying is redoubled. But it nev-
er labors in the full sense, for labor is properly concerned with the real 

24 
H. S. Harris 
production of what is ideally envisaged as desirable. Even in the case 
of adult hunger and thirst, the primitive models that Hegel himself em-
ploys at this level, the labor may be nothing more than hunting for and 
finding the desired object somewhere in the natural order and then 
reaching out and taking it. This dependence of the organism on nature 
for the satisfaction of its needs is what Hegel calls "the subsumption of 
feeling under the concept, or the more real concept of practical feeling 
unfolded in its three dimensions." His apparent inconsistency in deal-
ing with this here-since we are supposed still to be at the level where 
concept is subsumed under intuition-arises from a change of perspec-
tive which he finds useful at this point. He is here looking at the prob-
lem from the more general level of "natural ethics" as a whole (which 
is precisely the subsumption of intuition under concept, or the discov-
ery by a finite organism of its place in nature). He indicates his move 
to the more general point of view by speaking of "the more real con-
cept of practical feeling." The theory of feeling as subsuming the con-
cept is the formal (i.e., phenomenal) concept of it. In "the real concept 
of feeling" it is precisely this formal concept (the needy subject) who, 
in spite of the particularity of his feeling can be recognized as "the uni-
versal, the subsuming power." 
This "more real concept" contains very little that was not already in 
the "formal concept." But it gives Hegel the opportunity to describe 
the "unconscious" state of enjoyment {satiated desire) which is the be-
ginning and the end of practical feeling. This constitutes only a back-
ground for the formal concept, which is an analysis of how feeling 
appears to the intuiting subject.47 In the "real" concept the content of 
the formal concept is described as it appears for a scientific observer. 
The need which absorbs the subject's whole consciousness "formally" 
is "really" only a minute detail in the total economy of life. But as He-
gel says, this is not our present concern. The absolutely particular need, 
with which we are concerned, particularizes the environment for the 
organism. Thus there is nothing in the order of nature which is in itself 
food or drink. Nothing would appear as "food" or "drink" in a scien-
tific account such as Schelling's "dynamic series" of finite things (to 
take the obvious philosophical instance); nothing appears in the "dy-
namic series" as a mere particular of any kind. Everything there is 
"universal," being both "i9entical" (with itself in the Absolute), and 
"quantitative" (i.e., diffen!nt from the Absolute as a Potenz of it). But 
for a hungry and thirsty organism what appears is this loaf of bread, 
this glass of milk, etc. In the "theoretical" course of nature the loaf 
would mold and eventually disappear as "this" thing altogether, the 

25 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
milk would sour, and so on. It is the practical need of the subject that 
identifies these things here and now as food and drink; and they only 
are food and drink when they are consumed, i.e., when they pass away 
into the organic process of the subject, rather than into some lower 
cycle of nature. When that happens, the subject settles back into his 
self-enjoyment, and action ceases. As a result of action, however, the 
agent has learned something. He has discovered that his comfortable 
self-absorption is dependent on the syst€m of nature. He has a con-
sciousness of the "objectivity of the object." 
This consciousness of objectivity is what must now be developed. 
From the process in which need is satisfied, we must turn to the means 
by which it is satisfied. The essence is not now "within" the subject; it 
"floats over" him as the relation of subject and object. In this relation 
the living energy which he intuites as feeling is subordinated to the 
real order of nature in order to change that order. We have arrived 
finally at the analysis of labor proper. 
A satiated baby may, very probably, go to sleep. This is "the indif-
ference and emptiness of the individual or his bare possibility of being 
ethical or rational." But, as we have suggested, even a baby learns to 
cry for food, etc., in a fairly deliberate way, stopping (or increasing its 
efforts) when it perceives that its cries are about to be answered. For 
adults who are actually, not just potentially, rational, conceptual com-
prehension of the full cycle of feeling makes its objectification possible. 
Because we understand that hunger and thirst will keep on recurring, 
we can begin to prepare for them before they occur. Thus we begin 
laboring to produce something that we can have in our possession 
against the time when need returns; and when we give our whole at-
tention to the problem of labor we finally begin to produce possessions 
designed to make labor easier or more effective. These possessions pro-
duced by labor for the sake of labor are tools. The tool is thus the to-
tality of labor and possession. Notice that labor has here become quite 
independent of a felt need or desire, and possession has similarly be-
come independent of enjoyment. Primitively, possession and enjoy-
ment are negatively dependent on one another-as the proverb says, 
you cannot eat your cake and have it too. But you can use your tool 
and have it too, for that is essential to the concept of a tool. 
Hegel's analysis of labor is a logically structured survey of the types 
of labor that are possible in relation to different levels of the scale of 
nature and of the different ways in which nature can come into our 
possession for purposes of enjoyment or tool-use. We are still acting 
on nature to satisfy our needs (in this general perspective the concept 

26 
H. S. Harris 
is being subsumed under intuition), but in so far as our attention is 
focussed on possession and use, our activity is not directed to our own 
enjoyment but towards objective ends. A possession can be given to or 
taken by someone else; a tool can be used by anyone who has learned 
how. Thus in the narrower, more immediate, perspective "intuition" is 
subsumed under "concept" in a sense that is quite easy to grasp. 
Labor occurs when we change what is there in space for our intui-
tion into something else that we envisage in our minds. Thus the sub-
ject is the subsuming agent, indifferently aware both of the thing that 
exists and the thing that he wants. The object is "subsumed." But the 
subsumption is quite different from the baby's subsumption of his bot-
tle or the hungry man's subsumption of his dinner. There it was the 
inner intuition, here it is the inner concept that dominates. Everything 
is now objectified and the process of transformation (the laboring ac-
tivity of the subject) becomes continuous and does not terminate in en-
joyment as soon as some envisaged transformation is achieved. Adam 
digs, and the ground is turned; now he can sow; after that he can wa-
ter, hoe, etc. Enjoyment is deferred. 
In order for this lengthy deferment to be possible, Adam must take 
possession of his field; he must also have last year's crop in store to 
live on while he works; and finally he must have his spade. These are 
three forms of possession which were not present in the primitive cycle 
of needing, finding, and consuming. In the Garden of Eden Adam had 
momentarily to take possession of whatever he needed for consump-
tion, but he did not have possession of the Garden or its fruits. 
It should be noted that we are not yet thinking of any kind of legal 
"possession," but of the attitudes one must have in an agricultural re-
lation to nature. Obviously the need to have secure possession of the 
necessities of life leads to the establishment of a legal system of prop-
erty relations, but that comes later. For the moment Hegel is only con-
cerned to clarify his own version of the labor theory of property. "Pos-
session" is the synthesis of two moments, the conceptual moment of 
taking possession and the real moment of labor. The first moment is 
the moment of rest, for Adam thinks of the field as his even before he 
turns the first sod, and he must continue to think of it so through all 
the transformations produced by his labor; and of course he thinks of 
the crop as his when he finally possesses it properly in his barn. 
But in this possession of the product, the gathered crop, we have 
something different from the possession of the field. The activity of 
labor by which the ideal concept of possession was realized has now 

27 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
stopped, but the "difference" that it has made in the world is visibly 
ptled in the barn. The object now "subsumes" the activity of labor; or 
in other words the objective, external, intuition subsumes the concept 
(whereas at the level of need it is the subjective, internal, intuition 
that subsumes the concept). This object, the gathered crop, belongs to 
Adam as a singular individual, it is his private possession, a singular 
characteristic of his. So when labor is "subsumed" in the object pro-
duced, the singularity of the subject gets its "rational place" as "im-
plicit concept." Labor is the active concept, the Begriff fur sich; the 
product is the resting concept, the Begriff an sich; but both of them 
have this conceptual status as aspects of the practical subject. 
So far we have considered labor only as a mechanical activity, as the 
expenditure of physical energy, without regard to the different ways in 
which the energy is expended. I mentioned Adam's digging, sowing, 
hoeing, etc., but the reader was supposed to attend to the continuing 
flow of activity, not to the variation. There is a steady stream of activ-
ity, and the laboring subject is the efficient cause of all of it. The field 
which Adam digs, etc., exists always in some particular state, it is "one 
with the particular," but it abides indifferently through all the states 
that Adam imposes on it; these states are "purely external forms," not 
its "being as a subject." Adam's field does not have "being as a sub-
ject," though the Earth of which it is part was conceived by Hegel as a 
living organism and hence as having something analogous to the "be-
ing of a subject." 
The differences, to which we now turn, arise from the product, but 
the product is not the efficient cause of them. Hence Hegel says that 
"causality is absent." 
For what is true of the ploughing of the field is not true of the grow-
ing of the crop. The seed that Adam sows is not "indifferently one" 
with any condition. It has a life cycle that belongs to it. Since Adam 
wants the best crop he can get, "the object is in the relation as real." 
His agricultural labor is not just a mechanical activity; it is concordant 
with the life cycle of his crop. Labor as "real and living" (not just me-
chanically causal) is thus differentiated according to the patterns of the 
life cycles which it subserves. Adam's digging, etc., in so far as it is all 
concerned with moving the soil around, creating the conditions for the 
desired plant life and destroying or inhibiting other life, is regarded by 
Hegel as purely mechanical. The life cycle of the plant itself is deter-
mined by the earth and its elementary processes. Moreover such effec-
tive practices as grafting, slip-setting, and so forth, are evidence, in 

28 
H. S. Harris 
Hegel's view, that plants are not true individual organisms. Thus on 
both sides, with respect to the labor and with respect to the living 
thing labored on, the intuition is subsumed under the concept. 
Animals, on the other hand, are individuated living things; they of-
fer us the simplest paradigm of the concept subsumed under intuition. 
The individual animal is not conscious of itself as a "living thing," so 
there is no reciprocal subsumption of intuition under concept except in 
the mind of its human keeper and breeder. Hence the different possi-
bilities of animal life can only be realized in spatial dispersion. But the 
human labor of "domestication" can transform the animal in ways 
which are quite impossible in the cultivation of plants. Plants can enter 
only into the primitive cycle of need and consumption, but animals can 
be trained as fellow laborers. Plants provide us with the food that 
maintains what Hegel calls our "inorganic" nature. He uses "organic" 
and "inorganic" in the contextually relative way that Aristotle uses 
"form" and "matter." In the present context "inorganic nature" means 
our animal nature as distinct from our rational nature, or our natural 
as distinct from our ethical or conscious life. 
Hegel remarks further that with respect to "enjoyment" (positive as 
opposed to negative intuition) the "subsumptive" relations are the con-
verse of those involved in labor. Now labor is basically subsumption 
of intuition (subjective image of what may be, and objective impression 
of what is) under concept (the thought-guided activity that transforms 
desired image into real impression and real impression into remem-
bered image). In the labor to produce a plant crop it is the concept of 
the plant, the development of its living form to perfect fruition, that 
guides and controls the working activity. But in growing flowers for 
enjoyment it is the sensation of the viewer that is the grower's end. 
This is a "subsumption of the concept under intuition" because "the 
enjoyment of the single sense is the dispersal of the same" -i.e., per-
haps the expression of our feeling for our theoretical awareness? 
The "enjoyment" of our relation with animals cannot be fully con-
sidered at this stage because it "would not be a subsumption of the 
concept under intuition." Hegel is probably thinking here of "domesti-
cation" in the full and etymologically literal sense, the treatment of 
animals as friends or pets. This is an active relationship and we must 
presumably regard it as a primitively ethical one, which falls beyond 
the horizon of the moment, since it is an anticipatory form of the proc-
ess of Bildung. At this stage we can only consider the enjoyment of the 
sense of freedom and increased power that comes from harnessing ani-
mals to do our work with us. 

29 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
The highest object of labor is the human being himself. Plants can 
be quantitatively maximized as a harvest to maintain the animal ex-
istence of both man and his livestock. Animals can be trained individ-
ually to assist man in his labor. But the human individual is laboriously 
trained to make his own nature into the tool of reason which is his 
concept. Here the labor of molding the life process is a direct assistance 
of the life process itself, to enable it to reach its own goal. The teacher 
begins in the position of the worker who imposes his own "concept" 
on the pupil. But this is the very concept of which the pupil is himself 
the intuition, so the process of his formation is a process of his own 
self-formation and we can no longer say what is subsuming what. Each 
side "makes its particularity immediately into universality." As we 
shall see, this is the characteristic of rational communication in lan-
guage. Rational communication is not a matter of causal interaction be-
cause the parties are self-conscious subjects or self-determining agents. 
This r~lationship between two rational agents at the culmination of 
a self-suspending process of labor has its own natural course of evolu-
tion. The intuition and concept that are united in it are not, after all, 
those of plant and animal: they are the intuition and concept of man. 
So here Hegel's analysis touches for the first time on the family as the 
natural means by which man is made. The process of human reproduc-
tion begins with something that is outwardly analogous with the in-
stinctive coupling of animals and moves to a terminus that is inwardly 
analogous with the simple multiplication within conceptual identity of 
plants. Between these limits lies all the physical and mental effort that 
sustains the human family. 
For six or seven years before he wrote this treatise Hegel had been 
pondering about the feeling of union that arises from sexual coupling. 
As a natural phenomenon he now regards it as the objective realization 
of the moments of the absolute concept. The male is the universal, the 
female the particular. In the coupling of an animal pair the unity of the 
species exists as a feeling, but there is no mutual recognition at the con-
ceptuallevel. The recognition of equality at the conceptual level, the 
recognition that each partner, regardless of the sex difference is a 
rational human individual, is the distinctively human relation that is 
achieved between man and wife. Properly human love is not, therefore, 
as Hegel had held in 1797 I B, an incomprehensible miracle.48 It is only 
natural desire that is incomprehensible, because it is below the level of 
reflective consciousness altogether. 
The subject-object relation, where the subject is dominant as intelli-
gence (not as a singular agent satisfying his desires) is realized in the 

30 
H. S. Harris 
relation between parents and children. But here the determinacy of the 
opposites is superficial because temporary. In the course of nature, and 
through the work of nature, the child grows up. Through "practice"-
the human activity of parents and children alike-both parties finally 
become aware of their own humanity in each other. 
It is only at this stage that the real cultural formation of man begins. 
Bildung, as Hegel understands it is the reciprocal communication of ra-
tional agents. Helping one another in the general enterprise of knowing 
ourselves and our place in nature is the highest work of mankind. It is 
through this cultural exchange that men become really independent in-
dividuals. The bonds of feeling, need, desire, and of loving emotion 
become mere outward forms. What matters for each man as an indi-
vidual is to discover the truth for himself. 
We have now reached the "totality" of this first Potenz of practical 
feeling. The two moments through which we have passed were relative 
identities, which is to say that the identity between the subjective side 
and the objective side exists in them as a necessary causal relation be-
tween the two terms and reveals itself as a see-saw motion in which 
first one side and then the other dominates. The "totality" will show 
the see-saw at its moment of perfect equilibrium. Thus the first stage 
(concept under intuition) showed us the alternation of need and satis-
faction (as the way in which the objective process of nature appears in 
subjective experience) but did not show us the fulcrum on which the 
alternation depends. All that we could see there was the top edge of the 
fulcrum, the bare necessity of action to satisfy need when the stimulus 
of need is felt. That fulcrum, when we examined it on its own account 
in the second stage (intuition under concept), was found to be a com-
plex process of subjective activity in and upon the organic reality of 
nature. Out of the simple alternation of need and satisfaction (the cycle 
of the human body, or of the human organism as a stimulus-response 
system) there emerged the great arc of the forms of human labor, 
involving the whole odyssey of the human spirit in miniature, from 
Adam's bondage to the soil at one end to the perfect equality in free-
dom of a society of cultural "enlighteners" on the other. Thus, in study-
ing the fulcrum of the first see-saw we discovered a far greater see-
saw. We shall see how the one real see-saw comes to rest as the two 
views of it coincide. 
This coincidence and resultant equilibrium comes about through the 
examination of the fulcrum of the second see-saw. In his analysis of 
the process of need Hegel did say a little about the "middle" between 
need and satisfaction, which is the objective moment of labor. But in 

31 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
his analysis of labor and its products he has not said a word about the 
"totality" of labor and possession beyond naming it as "the tool." In 
the first Potenz all that was really analyzed was the state of need. Hav-
ing seen that the satisfaction of need requires labor, we went on to ana-
lyse that. It is only now that we have shown how human labor reaches 
its climax in man's self-creative activity, that the third moment of "en-
joyment" can come to have a positive content. Thus far the term "sat-
isfaction," meaning just the removal or abolition of need, was more 
appropriate. Labor was the process by which need is abolished. But we 
have now seen labor finally abolish itself by becoming enjoyable. Thus 
enjoyment has become a conscious subjective condition, whereas to be-
gin with it was merely an unconscious objective state of organic equi-
librium. We shall now watch man's subjective self-enjoyment of his 
rational nature reach back over the whole range of the laborious activi-
ties by which he satisfies his needs, until everything that he does can be 
recognized as the self-enjoyment of Reason. At the same time we shall 
see how the process of Bildung, the process where enjoyment finally 
reveals itself as something that has positive content for the subject, is 
the most absolute of all human needs, the absolute precondition of our 
capacity to satisfy even the primitive organic drives of hunger and 
thirst. Thus need and enjoyment will be shown to be "identical," and 
instead of a relative identity we shall have before us a true Potenz of 
the Absolute. 
In the first two stages, "the Absolute Identity is something subjec-
tive outside them." The hungry man knows why he must eat now, and 
why he will be hungry again in a few hours. That is the way life is. 
Similarly when Adam goes out into his field in spring, he knows that 
he must work now if he is going to live through next winter. The Ab-
solute Identity is "life," which involves hunger and necessitates labor, 
but it is not identical with being hungry, still less with digging. Hegel 
would be willing to say that "life" is identical with what a baby feels, 
but the baby does not really know that he is hungry, and he cannot dig. 
He is only the formal possibility of rationality. As he grows up, the 
child does come to know what he feels, but at first he has no concept of 
his own desires at all. He is a bundle of needs. I remarked earlier that 
We should eventually see why the baby was a good example of Hegel's 
first stage. It is because the new born child is the substratum, the un-
conscious unity of the whole cycle of need and satisfaction. He is the 
reality of feeling as bare intuition. We adults say, "Here is the baby," 
but he does not yet know what we are sayingi and when his mother 
Protests a few years later against the imposition of some task on her 

32 
H. S. Harris 
little boy because "he is not old enough to work yet," her common 
sense is again at odds with the speculative truth; for in fact the child 
began to work at being human when he learned to talk. 
Hegel presents the baby as the "identity" of the sex-distinction 
which was the first moment of the totality of work. As far as the con-
nection is concerned explanation is superfluous here, for it is obvious 
enough that the baby is the product of sexual congress. What was not 
at first clear was why sexual congress should be regarded as an aspect 
of labor at all; and what is still anything but obvious is why the baby 
should be regarded as the first moment of the concept of a "work tool." 
The key to both problems is the recognition that the real topic of the 
philosophy of Identity is the self-formation of Reason. The child is the 
"instrument" of Reason and his begetting as a natural organism is the 
first step in the self-making of man. The proper task of "practical" 
philosophy is to put all human practical activities into their proper per-
spective as part of that self-making. All animals reproduce themselves 
as part of the self-maintaining cycle of nature. But nature is only the 
raw material from which Reason fashions the "instruments" of its own 
existence. So when the rational animal reproduces himself "in the 
course of nature," this reproduction has for him an instrumental func-
tion; it is not the achievement of a final goal as it is for the organisms 
that are simply part of nature. 
The child is what makes the bond of sexual desire "comprehensible." 
In him the feeling of the parents becomes an external intuition for 
them. Of course there is a formal concept ("baby") that expresses that 
intuition. But that formal concept is only "the indifference and empti-
ness of the individual, or his bare possibility of being ethical or ration-
al" (420). The actual concept that the parents have of their child is the 
concept both of what they believe he is and of what they hope he will 
become, the concept that guides all of their conduct towards him. For 
themselves they might live from day to day; but for him they must 
make a home and secure their livelihood. He is a possession that makes 
other possessions necessary. 
Thus the transition from this natural stage in the making of man is 
to its direct opposite-to all the artificial making that man does in order 
to create a stable home for himself. The child, presumptively, has all 
the normal potential of a human being-"in this identity ... no cir-
cumstance is missing"-and until he/she reaches physical maturity, 
there will be no sexual "one-sidedness." But what are the "circum-
stances" that are none of them missing? In an obvious sense everything 
is missing, the baby is, as yet, nothing human at all-except a real po-

33 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
tentiality. That real potentiality cashes out as a full complement of hu-
man needs. This is where "no circumstance is missing." Everything he 
needs has to be supplied for him. 
Actually this is not quite correct. Nature has provided for the baby's 
food to begin with; and the production of food always remains essen-
tially a natural process. It is scarcely correct to regard the endless cycle 
of Adam's mechanical labor in his field as a kind of tool-making, be-
cause he is always at the mercy of the changing seasons. But in all his 
labor man is using nature as an instrument for his purposes, though 
this is a fact that only becomes explicit in his home. There all the needs 
of life have to be spelled out in an actual concept of human existence, 
realized in things. The range of this concept extends from the baby's 
cradle to the family Bible-but we have a long way to go before we 
can put the Bible in its correct perspective. 
Adam's spade is the elementary paradigm of the tool, for his digging 
shows us this moment of the alienation of the concept in things at its 
simplest. The spade is a piece of dead matter that has been formed by 
Adam himself for the mechanical purpose of digging to which he di-
rects his own energies. It forms a mediating term between Adam's in-
telligently directed activity and the mechanism of the natural order. 
But in order to use it Adam, with all his rational powers, must become 
a mere quantum of energy. The digging in which Adam uses his spade 
is a mere negation of both object and subject, without any realization 
of rationality at all. On the subjective side it produces nothing but 
weariness and a blunting of all his human capacities; and on the ob-
jective side it produces the satisfaction of the natural needs of himself 
as a singular individual and of certain other singular individuals. But 
when he was making the spade itself Adam was realizing his rational 
capacities, he existed as a universal subject. Once Adam has made it, 
others can use it when he is tired; and anyone who grasps what it is 
for can make another one like it. Thus the making of tools sets the 
boundary between nature and culture. Labor here becomes rational 
self-expression (craftsmanship) instead of being a mechanical expense 
of energy (toiling). 
But all tool-making and tool-using has its mechanical aspect, because 
it involves the realization of a concept in the natural order. As the child 
grows up, he begins to realize his own concept. Thus he makes himself 
the "tool of reason." The extreme at which the living agent is reduced 
to a stream of energy that moves the dead things in which his real na-
ture is expressed, is now brought together with the opposite extreme 
of pure reason enjoying itself. The spirit must guide the hand in the 

34 
H. 5. Harris 
craftsman's self-expression, whereas both spirit and muscle alike were 
merely spent in the laborer's struggle with nature; and at the higher 
limit spirit must express itself spiritually. This is what it does in 
speech. As a momentary sound speech is, on its material side, a van-
ishing quantity. The barest minimum of living energy is consumed in 
producing it, and it makes a minimal impact on the objective world of 
natural processes. And "because of the immediacy of the nature of 
this being, its subjectivity is immediately objectivity" (429): the word 
spoken is nothing but an immediate coming-to-be-and-passing-away 
unless we catch its meaning; and the meaning is a concept which is 
the form of objectivity on its ideal side. This objectivity is at the same 
time absolute subjectivity, for it is the actual existence of the subject. 
In the formal concept of speech, the concept of words as a set of "pos-
sible meanings," the very concept that has its real existence in a dic-
tionary, "objectivity" itself is a word with a fixed meaning such that 
"objectivity" and "subjectivity" can never coincide absolutely. But in 
the actual concept of speech, i.e., in actual speech, this coincidence is 
just what is necessarily brought to pass.49 
The "totality of speech" is the final development of the concept of 
Bildung at this level. It begins with "gesture, mien, and their totality 
the glance of the eye." This is an "unconscious" language of the kind 
that we have to interpret in dealing with the needs of babies. In so far 
as it is not deliberate-! believe the intended contrast between "ges-
ture" and "mien" is that the latter is not deliberate-there is no "con-
cept" here. It is the direct expression of feeling in and for intuition. 
Crying ought to belong here just as much as laughing does, but Hegel 
does not say so because he wants to treat the types of vocal sound as 
the totality of the totality. 
It is clear that Hegel intends to include all forms of writing under the 
next heading, corporeal sign, which embraces all the ways in which we 
use the external world to make signs to each other. A child conveys a 
great deal by his "mien," but as a rule he does not intend to do so. But 
we cannot make external signs without knowing exactly, and in the 
most objective way possible, what "message" we want to send. All the 
meanings conveyed in an external sign system have been established 
by conscious convention; and of course no such sign is capable of in-
terpreting itself. It is not a sign for itself and does not mean anything 
to itself, yet it has its own being in itself. When we come finally to 
audible speech, none of these assertions holds good. We might plaus-
ibly object at this point that writing is a much higher cultural achieve-
ment than speaking. Hegel does not mean to deny this, for he com-

35 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
ments on the high level of rationality involved in writing. But writing 
is a dead communication, not a living one. For this reason, as Plato was 
the first to point out, written communication is not a self-correcting 
process, and one cannot be fully "dialectical" in writing. Hegel, like 
Plato himself, certainly struggled against this limitation. But it would 
be easier to understand him if we could talk to him. As it is, we have to 
"tack on" the meaning that he sought to express in his "objective 
speech" as best we can.50 
What is new in the discussion of speech as the totality of gesture 
and sign, as compared with Hegel's introductory discussion of it, is the 
concept of "recognition." Spoken language is addressed to someone 
else, who is thereby recognized as a rational agent who can receive and 
interpret it. Written language is "dumb" recognition because it is only 
for someone who can read it-i.e., make it speak by lending it his own 
voice-that it exists as language. The objective existence of speech is 
"according to the mode of the concept," i.e., it is that of a living and 
self-conscious intelligence which has its being in the "inner" world, or 
on the "ideal" side. Hegel did not know how much effective animal 
communication there is through cries and other behavior at the level of 
what he calls "mien"; but he would have had no trouble in accommo-
dating all of it within his analysis. Indeed it would fit in better than the 
romantic fancies about the death cries of lower animals with which he 
did have to deal. In any case he does have a very sharp awareness of 
how different the song of a poet is from the song of a bird. He says 
that the lyrical capacity for direct linguistic expression of one's own 
inward feeling is the "highest flower of the first Potenz." This first 
Potenz is the Potenz of feeling, the level of absolutely singular exis-
tence. Except for the "song" of the lyric poet, the universals of culture 
exist at this level only in the objective form of tools. In the poet's 
speech singular consciousness is finally exhibited as a proper monadic 
reflection of the Absolute Identity. 
In conclusion Hegel adds a short note about "the negative of this 
Potenz." First, there is the negative of intuition. Necessity (Not) is the 
point where need (Bediirfnis) overwhelms all other consciousness. An 
example of the negative extreme which Hegel gave in his own earlier 
writings was the hunger that drove David to eat the shewbread.51 Nat-
ural death is the negative of all feeling, being the negative moment 
present in life itself. As we shall see presently, the havoc of natural 
forces and even of man himself, so far as he appears simply as a force 
of nature, are the negatives of rational activity, and achievement, the 
negative of the concept, rather than of intuition. But all of these active 

36 
H. S. Harris 
forces form the lower levels of the negative as such, and Hegel will 
deal with them more fully later on. 
b) Thought 
The second stage of natural ethics is an abstract conceptual one. In the 
first stage we were concerned with the articulation of feeling as the 
living process of the singular individual. But in the "conceptually" 
dominated submoments of that analysis we saw how the wider context 
of nature made certain structures necessary. Now we shall look at 
those structures from the point of view of the thinking consciousness 
that language makes possible. Thus the second stage as a whole will be 
a subsumption of intuition under concept; and it will be largely con-
cerned with the conceptualization of the laboring process and of "pos-
session/' which, as we have already seen, is the conceptual framework 
without which the organization of labor as a way of life would not be 
possible. The singular organism that needs, works, and enjoys life from 
cradle to grave now appears as an abstract concept, the person. 
Whereas the first stage was finite and real, this stage is infinite and 
ideal. The first stage was that of feeling, this one is the stage of 
thought. But both stages are "formal/' for both are concerned with the 
conditions that must be satisfied if the singular human organism is to 
reach maturity. The first stage was concerned with the relation between 
the sentient organism and nature; this one is more concerned with so-
cial relations outside the family. (The family is a natural structure and 
belongs to the first stage.) But in both stages we are dealing with man 
as a possibility. First we dealt with his "real" nature as an abstract pos-
sibility. This stage culminated in the concept of actual speech, because 
that is the "point of union" between the real and the ideal sides. Now 
we shall deal with the "ideal" side as an abstract possibility likewise. 
Because we are now dealing with abstract thoughts, not feelings, we 
lose contact with living men altogether. In the conceptually dominated 
substages of our previous discussion we found ourselves dealing with 
dead things, but they were the singular things that constituted the life 
environment of a single individual and his family. They were Adam's 
things, even when we arrived at his tools and his speech. But his tools 
and his speech have universal import, and the speech is a point of tran-
sition because it demands a response of the same sort. Hence it posits 
(or logically presupposes) the recognition of the "other" who is ad-
dressed as Adam's conceptual equal. Now we shall deal with the con-

37 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
cepts that are implicit in that recognition of others as equals and with 
the new relationships which become possible in a community of inde-
pendent equals. Adam becomes "Mr. X," and his wife and children 
temporarily disappear from the scene altogether. When they return in 
the moment of "totality," they will be accompanied by a new character, 
the bond-servant, who is not entitled to the prefix "Mr." 
The "intuition" under which the concept is subsumed in the first 
stage of this conceptually dominated Potenz is the "negative" intuition 
of labor. This appeared previously in the opposite role of intuition sub-
sumed under concept when it was differentiated objectively in terms of 
the aspect of nature that the labor was directed upon. But then it was 
just the one man Adam, who partitioned his energies between digging, 
planting, stockkeeping, and raising his children. And even at the high-
er level of tool-making and tool-using we had before us only one man, 
who devoted all of his intelligence and energy to one special craft. The 
subsuming intuition now is the one task of life-maintenance that is 
partitioned between indifferent intelligences. This unique and absolute 
task of life-maintenance, in its unity of subjective and objective sides1 
is what "intuition" always refers to in some way throughout the whole 
range of its uses in the first part. But whereas earlier the focus point 
was the singular feeling of subjective need, the emphasis is now on the 
objective task. Through the parcelling out of the different aspects of 
the work of living, and even the stages of a single craft, to different 
agents, all agents approach more closely to the "mechanical" ideal of 
simply providing the energy to keep a causal cycle going. Life is di-
vided up into single working activities or equal tasks. Carried to its 
limit, the process makes everyone the minder of a special tool which 
provides its own energy and needs only to be turned on and off at the 
right moments. Thus we move from the tool, which presupposes the 
skill of the specific craftsman who made it and/ or uses it-the smith 
who made the shield of Achilles or the bard who exalts him to the 
level of the gods-to the machine, which presupposes an impersonal 
intelligence that does not do any more than turn switches and press 
buttons. 52 
This impersonal labor produces a surplus commodity; in order to 
have any bearing on the needs of the producer the surplus commodity 
has to be exchangeable. Hence the formal alienation of possession from 
one agent to another has to be possible. Instead of being a man who 
possesses things that are useful to him, the agent must be a person who 
owns property. 
With these legal abstractions we arrive at the point where the recoil 

38 
H. 5. Harris 
of the concept can begin. The "ideal" tie of possession will now be-
come a "real" one in virtue of its public recognition and legal status. 
The "infinity" of this Potenz is subjectively the concept of legal per-
sonality and objectively the concept of "acknowledged property." As 
an identity transcending the subject/ object antithesis it is simply legal 
right. The bare concept of a surplus product is the concept of the pres-
ent Potenz "at rest"; it is implicitly alienated, its destiny is clearly in-
dicated, when it is marked as "surplus." The process of exchange is 
the concept "in motion." Exchange presupposes that each of the two 
parties involved needs what the other possesses, and each recognizes 
the other's "right" as owner. As rightful owners they are like the op-
positely charged bodies involved in a discharge of static electricity, 
whereas work, as the connecting of desire to enjoyment, is analogous 
to the attraction between the poles of a bar magnet.53 Each side can be 
separated from its own energy (as embodied in the product of labor). 
The "magnetic" relation between me and my labor can be severed, 
whereas if we try to sever the poles of a magnet we only get two mag-
nets. Thus "true ideality" begins here, for practical intelligence (the 
energy of man as such) can be severed from need and labor altogether. 
Someone else can work to supply my needs while I devote my mind to 
other pursuits. But this must come about "rightfully," or else the equi-
librium of nature will be disturbed, and a see-saw of quite a new kind 
between families will be set up. 
Therefore the exchange must be an exchange of things which are in 
themselves equal, even though each side finds what the other has more 
desirable. The equality of the two sides of the "concept in motion" is 
the price. The price is the empirically found value. The value of some-
thing is what the owner ideally possesses when the thing he owns is 
not useful to him per se. He realizes this ideal value in actual utility by 
getting something that he actually does need and can use through the 
exchange. We should note that although Hegel speaks of the "price" 
already at this stage, he has not yet introduced "money" as a real mid-
dle. This he will do only in the "totality" of this Potenz. At the moment 
we have the ideal value of the thing possessed, on the one side, ex-
changed directly for the real utility of the thing desired, on the other. 
This is the moment of simple opposition, and as long as the exchange 
is a simple barter-relation, there is no need for a "real middle." But 
when the exchange is complicated and is completed over a time inter-
val, some guarantee of fulfilment at the stipulated time becomes neces-
sary. Thus we arrive at contract, the "totality" of abstract right and 
exchange, where the legal right itself becomes what is evidently real 

39 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
and effective. The exchange may not actually take place until after the 
harvest, or service at harvest time may be promised in return for goods 
delivered now, and so forth. But the contract is already signed, sealed, 
and delivered. It is a "rational middle" which does away with all the 
differences of time and place. On the ideal side the exchange is already 
completed. 
Hegel treats "contract" as the formal emergence of the spirit. Men 
often trust one another to perform promises without invoking legal 
sanctions. This is an important element in social relations, and Hegel 
certainly does not underestimate it, as we shall see in due course. But 
this relation of "trust" belongs to the inwardness of the spirit. In a le-
gal contract the spirit exists "formally," i.e., abstractly, in the shape of 
something absolutely outward and nonspiritual. The formal existence 
of the "spirit" is the "letter." 
The "totality" of these two stages of property and exchange is two-
sided. On the external side the "totality" of property and exchange 
is money, which is the medium of exchange in the form of property, 
the resting concept of exchange itself, and trade, which is the actual 
process of exchange, or the concept in motion. 
So far there is no great difficulty. Money is a concept that is always 
necessarily singularized, but one can see how it is the "realization" of 
a universal, for it circulates from hand to hand indifferently in com-
merce, keeping always the same significance and depending always for 
its currency on the generally recognized convention about its value. It 
is, indeed, precisely the realized form of the abstract concept of value. 
But according to Hegel this is just "the relative identity or the rela-
tion." The implication here is that in order to be an absolute identity 
the external process of money circulating in the course of trade has to 
be brought into equilibrium as a stable pattern of human existence. 
The object (money and trade) must be equalized with the subject. The 
object is a concept that is necessarily singularized in intuition when it 
is real. The subject, correspondingly, is an intuited singular that is nec-
essarily universalized as a concept when it is realized. This is the indi-
vidual as person. The individual exists as a person only for another 
person who recognizes him and whom he recognizes. The process of 
this recognition has the usual three stages. 
First, there is the subsumption of concept under intuition: as per-
ceived by others, the individual as person is the owner of all his pos-
sessions and of rights generally. He is a living being who has rights 
and owns things. This is his formal character, and it is no concern of 
anyone else what capacities for living this person has, or what external 

40 
H. 5. Harris 
equipment he actually owns. He has the generalized right to be recog-
nized as a person as long as he is alive. What then is this "life" that 
entitles him to recognition? Hegel says that "like recognition and em-
pirical intuition in general" it is "a formal ideality" (441). In its actual-
ity an individual's life is his freedom: "the supreme indifference of the 
singular," i.e., the capacity of being indifferently A or not A. This is 
not one of his "personal" possessions, for he cannot alienate it-at 
least he cannot hand it over to another in the way that he can give up 
his possessions generally. But his life is "also something formal," since 
it is the "empty unity of the singular characteristics." Here, as before, 
the best model of an "empty unity" is a baby. The baby is already a 
person with the generalized right to recognition even though he is not 
yet a rational free agent. For at the very least, at the absolute limit of 
abstraction, he is a living being and his life is human life. To be a "per-
son" is to be acknowledged as a living human being in this absolutely 
abstract sense. Thus the concept of "personality" is the formal concept 
of rationality; and Reason is, of course, "the Absolute Concept itself." 
When we recognize another being as human, even if he is only a 
baby, we are already thinking of him as the realization of the Absolute 
Concept, or as a free rational agent. But this recognition involves also 
necessarily a consciousness of its own freedom, for it is a recognition 
freely given, and it can equally well be withheld or denied. It is not 
a simple fact that this human being is free when he might not have 
been free, as it is a simple fact that his skin is black when it might 
have been white or white when it might have been black. Every intelli-
gible concept involves some possible alternative or contrast; but the 
actual concept of intelligence, the concept of freedom, is "the indiffer-
ence of all specific characteristics" including "recognition," which is 
freedom itself as a specific characteristic. 
Thus when the concept of personality subsumes intuition, or when 
our baby grows up and goes out into the world as an actual concept, a 
free intelligence, he finds other living individuals there from whom he 
demands recognition. They make the same demand. But it is a simple 
matter of economic fact that some are rich and others are poor, and for 
this reason some can employ others as servants and some are forced by 
their circumstances to become servants. One is "caught" (begriffen) in 
a "difference" and another is not. (We should remember that the prim-
itive "difference" is that between need and satisfaction.) Some persons 
have more "living might" (Macht des Lebens) than others, and so they 
can satisfy their needs. The less fortunate must give service in return 

41 
Hegel's System of Ethicai Life 
for the satisfaction of their wants out of the surplus of the more pros-
perous. 
The mention of Macht and the use of the terms Herrschaft and 
Knechtschaft must give rise to the suspicion that Hegel is here discuss-
ing the master-slave relation. But he calls "this relation of bondage" a 
relation "of person to person" when he goes on to the next stage where 
the difference is equalized. He has not clearly identified the Knecht as 
a person before this, though he is very explicit that the Herr is a per-
son. Still, the bond that he is discussing is not one of physical domi-
nance of lord over slave, for he explicitly says that what constitutes it 
is Not. Now Not stands for the point where the ordinary need (Bedurf-
nis) of life becomes compelling; the fear of death may enter into it, but 
it is not yet a fear of death through the violence of the mastering per-
sonality. Hegel insists that the relation is natural and that it is directly 
involved in the very concept of a plurality of men living together. 
It is plain I think, that Hegel means thl.s formal Potenz to embrace 
all the forms of servitude, from the slavery of a vanquished foe to the 
servile dominance of J eeves or the admirable Crichton. The only thing 
that he explicitly contrasts it with is the "obedience" involved in a rela-
tion of individuals "in connection with what is most ethical." In that 
ethical relation obedience is also necessarily involved, but there the 
"power or might" is an absolute universal, whereas here we are con-
cerned with the authority of another's particular need (which the ser-
vant labors to satisfy). In the ethical relation "individuality is only 
something external and the form," whereas in servitude "it is the es-
sence of the relation ... since bondage is obedience to the single and 
the particular." Thus when an army officer gives a military order we 
have ethical obedience, for the safety and prosperity of the Volk is das 
Sittlichste; but when the same man gives instructions to his batman we 
have Knechtschaft. 
Primitive servitude-slavery or serfdom-is certainly embraced 
within this Potenz. It is the natural pole to which ethical obedience is 
opposed. The very fact that Hegel develops the formal concept of rec-
ognition into its own negation as his way of making the transition is a 
warning of this; and he speaks of the Knecht at first as "the one who 
is not free" and who must therefore intuit his inner freedom as its op-
posite, i.e., the external freedom of the Herr. But the full development 
of our present Potenz is the relation of paid service, where the formal 
equality of personality or legal right is recognized on both sides and 
objectified in the money paid. In the primitive condition of servitude 

42 
H. S. Harris 
the opposite moments of "being a person" and "being a possession" 
are realized on the side of subjectivity. But since the relation is natural, 
and is immediately established where men are living together, it must 
still exist when the moments of "recognizing" and "being recognized" 
are not dissociated but are in their proper reciprocal equilibrium. This 
is also where the objective concept of value (money) is in perfect equi-
librium with the subjective concept of personal right. 
But even in the society of free persons, there still remains the rela-
tion, the "difference" between "master" and "servant." Only within 
the family is this difference finally equalized. In the family the differ-
ence and the dependency remains-indeed it is accentuated, for there 
is no one else so incapable of independent survival as a baby-but it is 
not what is important. Of course the formal identity of the baby as a 
living being with the free rational agent that he will become, or the real 
identity of the child with the parents themselves as Hegel likes to put 
it (because the actual Bildung of the new individual is their work), does 
not show on the surface. But that just reflects the abstractness of this 
Potenz. On the one hand the baby is recognized as human and pos-
sesses human rights; on the other hand he is loved by his parents as 
the expression and meaning of their union. The family, which has thus 
far been treated strictly as a set of natural ties, is now given its prop-
erly ethical dimension as a system of "recognition."54 
As the totality of natural feeling with ethical right the family is first 
the institution by which natural needs are kept at bay. Adam's inces-
sant struggle to take possession of his field, his actual possession of his 
house and its furniture, is all for the sake of his family; and when he 
demands and gets recognition from his neighbors as landowner and 
householder, this too is for the sake of his family. He does not assert 
his claims against the members of his family or they against him. His 
sons do not make contracts to work for him in the field or his wife and 
daughters in the house. He is tP,e recognized holder of the family prop-
erty, but his "holding" is just that: the property is a patrimony to be 
handed on to the next generation. Thus in the order of natural ethics 
he has no right to bequeath the family property to an alien heir. But 
within the family he is the authority. In the public world he is the 
householder, having equal legal rights with other householders; in the 
private world of the household, as a plurality of men living together, 
it is the "difference of living might" that makes itself evident, so that 
the master's word is law. But the obedience involved here is ethical 
obedience. The family members are not father's servants; he gives or-
ders, and they obey, in the interest of the family as a whole. 

43 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
Secondly, the natural difference of the sexes passes into an ethical 
identity in the family. "These twain are one flesh" permanently and by 
general recognition, not just in the momentary intuition of "the beast 
with two backs." If either of the parties now follows the promptings of 
sex in a new direction, they will be guilty of adultery, which is a viola-
tion of fundamental natural right. It is proper to speak of natural right 
here, for husband and wife form an "empirical universal/' they are to-
gether a particular instance of the natural species homo sapiens.55 
A marriage is made by a man and a woman in order to have a fam-
ily. In that sense it is a naturally determined relationship, not an acci-
dent of personal choice. But the couple do choose one another, and 
from this side their union has the outward appearance of a contract. 
In its inward meaning, however, marriage transcends the limits of con-
tractual relations altogether. It is impossible to "own" one's own life 
as a whole, yet the parties to a marriage give themselves up to their 
union completely. Of course as a matter of legal form it is quite pos-
sible for a family member to be treated as property; wives, like slaves, 
can be bought and sold. But this involves a contract between the own-
ers, not between master and slave or husband and wife. So this con-
tract does not, and cannot, constitute an ethical relation between them. 
The marriage contract, like the authority of the householder, is only an 
outward form. If the husband and wife begin arguing about the due 
exercise of their "conjugal rights," they will make their marriage an 
ethical monstrosity. For a marriage is a union, and it must not be 
treated as a relation. 
Finally, the family is an absolute unity of form and actuality. The 
marriage comes to its fruition in the child. The parents must care for 
all of his needs, so that the marriage as the moment of difference is 
"subsumed" under the first moment of external need. This is a natural 
necessity, and as such we dealt with it in the first Potenz, but now we 
have returned to it as the crowning ethical duty imposed by nature. 
In subordinating their own fully developed rationality to the natural 
needs of the living thing which is as yet human only in outward ap-
pearance, the parents come to terms with their own mortality as nat-
ural organisms. Death as the negative aspect of life is the mode in 
which the concept as the universal inward essence manifests itself 
against the inescapable particularity of external nature. Reason itself 
is preserved, and the foundation of Reason's own independent level of 
existence-the realm of Sittlichkeit proper-is laid through this sur-
render of the parents' own lives, not to one another as rational adults 
(as in their marriage), but to this life whose complete fruition they may 

44 
H. S. Harris 
perhaps not live to see. By this reversal of values in which the strong 
serves the need of the weak, and the actual labors on behalf of the 
merely formal, the absolute identity of form and essence, intuition and 
concept, of the inward and the outward, is known and shown to be 
what matters, even though the identity must "remain inward" as a 
feeling, or "float above" family relations as a thought. It is because the 
whole function of the family is the raising of the children that "the 
family is the supreme totality of which nature is capable" (445). 
4. THE NEGATIVE AS FREEDOM. 
At the end of the Potenz of feeling, Hegel mentioned "the negative" 
for the first time. We have now seen how the natural negations of feel-
ing-Not and Tad, necessity and death-function to make natural re-
lations into ethical ones for rational beings. It is through Not that men 
are naturally brought into institutional relations of service and obedi-
ence with each other; and it is through the conscious recognition of the 
inevitability of need and death that men are led to transform the nat-
ural bonds of desire and instinct into ethical institutions. Thus death, 
as the negative of natural life, is the link between the natural and the 
ethical level of the rational individual's existence. 
But now that the family has emerged as the totality of natural rela-
tion and rational identity, or as the stable equilibrium of nature and 
ethical life, the further development of ethical life into full indepen-
dence is only possible through the negation of what the family itself 
represents. Thus need and death must come forward as ethical nega-
tives, as selfishness and murder, so that ethical life can be established 
in its own right as the power by which they are controlled. 
Hegel said at the beginning that "nature itself is nothing but the 
subsumption of intuition under the concept" (416). Now he says that 
this whole stage of "Nature" that we have gone through is "the Abso-
lute subsumed under the concept." It appears, therefore, that the life 
of mankind in the "state of nature" is the existence of the Concept as 
Nature-and what is subsumed under it is man as a rational agent. The 
totality of life itself (Sittlichkeit or ethical life) has not come forth to 
be individuated or "subsumed under intuition." We have advanced 
from the single organism or person to the particular family or house-
hold, but "singularity" remains the principle. The family is created by 
single agents, and we shall now watch it being destroyed by single 

45 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
agents. The right will come forward as something fully real only in the 
ethical resolution of this self-destructive dialectic. 
Hegel's first concern is to explain the difference between the negative 
activity of ethical life itself and the destructive act of the murderer. So 
far we have viewed ethical life as a positive process, setting up a stable 
equilibrium between need and satisfaction, male and female, parent 
and child, value and utility, strong and weak, actual and formal. But 
ethical life is not only positive, reintegrative; it is negative and disci-
plinary. It is not just felt needs that have to be superseded; there are 
also natural impulses that have to be formally abrogated. Contracts 
must be kept, marriage must not be violated, lessons must be learned, 
skills practiced, the rights of others respected, and so on. Here the nat-
ural impulse itself, when it conflicts with one of these obligations, be-
comes negative; and instead of being satisfied it must be negated. This 
negation is a matter not of realizing a goal, but of changing the goal 
to be realized. In dealing with these forbidden desires and impulses, 
things which he has renounced, the individual acts freely. So far his 
goals have been given by nature, and reason has been the slave of the 
passions. But now "the form as negative is the essence. The real will 
be posited as something ideal; it is determined by pure freedom" (447). 
At this point Hegel draws an analogy between the practical and the 
theoretical levels of the "ideal series." The negative activity of freedom 
is like the negative activity of thought in relation to sensation. The 
sensation is necessarily a real particular, while the thought of what was 
sensed is an ideal universal. But the thought still refers to the sensation 
in its particularity. "Red" as a sensation is an objective intuition; as a 
thought it is a subjective one. It has been raised to infinity, for it is 
now contemplated as possible at any time and in any place, but "its 
finitude remains definitely persistent." In objective intuition it was dis-
criminated against the spatial background of other colors, now it is 
thought of as one color among the others. But at both levels we need 
the determinate intuition of "red." 
Absolute ethical life involves the same sort of idealization of what 
is naturally given. The negative act of the murderer does what ethical 
life does, but it does something else as well. Ethical life obliges the in-
dividual to come out of his natural context, to forget all his natural im-
pulses (as the murderer removes his victim from this context and as 
the color is abstracted from its physical background). But, whereas the 
murderer does away with the objective existence of his victim alto-
gether, so that he becomes just a corpse which returns into the cycle of 
natural change at a lower level, ethical life leaves the subject's essence 

46 
H. S. Harris 
as a living being alone (just as thinking about it does not change the 
color of anything). Ethical life nullifies the individual's subjectivity 
only as an ideal determinacy (not as a real determinacy too, which is 
what happens in a murder). 
The ethical agent is free, and ethical life makes him conscious of his 
freedom in all of the pressures of his natural existence. The murderer, 
too, is asserting this freedom (though he may be doing so under ex-
treme pressures). But the freedom of ethical life is not a "fixed nega-
tive" opposed to the "positive" (which is life itself in its natural deter-
minacy). The "fixed negative" is what we have when the freedom that 
ethical life reveals is turned (by the murderer) against life itself. Hegel 
does not explain very clearly how and why freedom gets fixed in its 
negative moment. He merely says that this is "a determinacy posited 
by the same moment of negation according to the preceding level of 
necessity" (448). This "preceding level of necessity" (Notwendigkeit) 
must be the level of natural feeling, and its negative moment is need 
(Bediirfnis), which rises to the extreme of Not. I cannot see any sign 
of a "trial-of-strength" doctrine in Hegel's account of "lordship and 
bondage" in the following "infinite Potenz" or Potenz of freedom, but 
it is fairly obvious that violence, rather than recognition, must come 
about when both of the opposed parties, or even just one of them, is 
subject to Not. If we look forward to the way that Hegel develops the 
present Potenz, this interpretation of what he means appears to be 
confirmed.56 
The general pattern of that first "practical" Potenz was a cycle from 
need to satisfaction and back again. But violence, when it reaches the 
pitch of murder, or even when it simply deprives the loser of the means 
of subsistence, produces death, which means that ''the practical sphere 
falls under the control of the inorganic and objective levels." In this 
willingness to destroy life altogether what shows itself as essential is 
freedom itself. But because it goes to the pitch of destruction, there is 
bound to be a reaction. Life is only injured by violence, not elevated to 
a higher level as it is by the negative aspect of ethical action. But also 
it is only injured, not destroyed. The "person" who is killed or de-
prived of his right by violence had only a "formal" existence in any 
case. He was really a member of some family in which life continues. 
If he had died in the normal course of nature, the family would simply 
have buried him and given him the honors due to a member with his 
status (whatever it may be). This is no longer a matter of ethics but of 
religion. 57 But if he dies by violence, the family must also take steps to 
reassert and reestablish his ethical right in this world. There must be 

47 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
an equal and opposite reaction for what was done to him. No matter 
how he dies, his body is restored to the earth in a ceremony that ex-
presses recognition of the great cycle of the life of nature to which all 
mortal life belongs. But when he dies by violence, it is not just his body, 
but the whole sphere of practical action, that falls back under the law 
of causal reciprocity. This is what the "fixation" of the negative really 
means: the lex talionis, "an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth." 
The natural justice of vengeance is itself the fixing of the negative, for 
it is in the vendetta-cycle of injury and revenge that "the negative" is 
made into the essence. In the positive cycle of need and satisfaction life 
itself is the essence, and the free personality of the agent is only some-
thing "external and superficial." Since each family regards what is done 
to it as injury and what it does as vengeance, it is quite correct to say 
that "the one is the opposite subsumption of the other." If the original 
injury was an act of Not, then free rational consciousness, the concept, 
does here "constitute itself into intuition" as "negative vitality" having 
its own absolute right. For vengeance belongs to the Lord, and no man 
can take the law into his own hands. When we grasp the essential end-
lessness of the vendetta process, we are forced to admit this. Wherever 
the agent of vengeance is human, the hand of the Lord does not clearly 
appear; but the making of the law into a singular "intuition" is very 
much apparent. 
There is an internal dialectic in the mind of the agent which arises in 
the same way. The killer knows that the spilling of blood is injury to 
life. This is the pang of conscience; but it is only an ideal or inward 
vengeance, it does not appear outwardly at all. Hegel's analysis of how 
this inward torment "presses on to a totality" seems to me to have been 
suggested by Macbeth more than by any ancient tragedy.58 But the 
source is not important. What is important is the doctrine of the life-
and-death struggle that begins to emerge here. Conscience makes the 
guilty one look for the avenger. Yet in the presence of the avenger 
conscience is overcome and drowned by the spur of Not. When life 
itself is threatened in oneself, the absolute right of self-preservation 
comes to the fore. In a life-and-death struggle the parties are equal in 
the sense that both are defending life itself. This wipes out all their 
other differences, including the difference of good and bad conscience, 
because conscience is only a "determinacy" of life. At the same time 
every "guilty" victory through the death of the opponent in such a 
struggle increases the inner torment of guilt. Hegel does not appeal to 
this internal dialectic of conscience in his account of the actual devel-
opment of criminal justice, but the implication that the guilty man al-

48 
H. S. Harris 
ways knows that he is guilty, and must in some sense assent to and 
approve of his own punishment so far as it "matches" his crime, is 
important to the understanding of Hegel's doctrine as a whole. 
The first moment of this process of "negative vitality" is life itself 
as a natural force which resists the civilizing power of Reason. In the 
first moment of practical life we saw how intuition subsumes the con-
cept, how Reason emerges as a slave of the passions. But now we have 
a very different subsumption of everything that Reason has produced 
under a single blind passion for simple destruction. This is the opposite 
of the whole subsumption of nature under "intuition and life." But it is 
not itself a "subsumption of intuition under the concept." Logically it 
has to be a "subsumption of concept under intuition" and the descrip-
tion of the following moment as "this havoc subsumed under the con-
cept" confirms this. The present moment of natural annihilation (or 
"havoc") is logically a moment of intuition, but Hegel is in a difficulty 
with it (as he was with "feeling") because it is the moment of "pure" 
or unconscious intuition. The agency in this Potenz is not a force of 
nature like fire or flood, but a human horde. What we have here is the 
Volk as a felt community of blood, united in a free activity that is blind 
or antirational. It is free precisely by being purposeless, or having no 
purpose beyond sheer destruction. In the total economy of nature and 
spirit it has a purpose or function, but like the plants and animals it is 
a natural force that fulfils its function without any awareness of it. 
This function is to wipe the slate for a new beginning, as when the 
barbarian invasions overwhelmed the Roman Empire. But those north-
ern barbarians were in "the determinacy of the understanding": they 
had at least a minimal culture of their own, and they wanted to take 
over the imperium themselves {and did so). The permanent presence of 
pure barbarism in the natural order is rather the Mongolian hordes. 
Hegel always thought of the East as the region where human nature 
existed in a state of natural equilibrium, so it is not surprising that 
he should take this view of the eastern barbarians. They are simply 
"brooms of God" who sweep away a decaying culture without replac-
ing it. The horde is an absolutely united Volk, but one that is "form-
less," i.e., without consciousness of itself because it has no "constitu-
tion." Thus it really is a natural force, like fire or flood, and cannot be 
conquered (at least not in a pitched battle, for that is where havoc be-
comes universal). But it breaks down by itself because it only has an 
active form by contrast, it is natural devastation as opposed to the ac-
tive force of Reason and culture. In its triumph it becomes "pure form-
lessness" properly, and through the abolition of the contrast it goes 

49 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
from the formlessness of "pure unity" to that of pure multiplicity, like 
a bubble bursting into tiny droplets of water. This happens because 
the spirit of Verwustung infects even the forces that are seeking to 
contain and overcome it. Thus we have what Hegel calls Wut: "the 
absolute and unmediated urge, the absolute concept in its complete in-
determinacy, the restlessness of the infinity of the absolute concept." 
This happens because Wut intensifies its opposite, das Reine, into the 
opposite of itself, i.e., it turns the self-conscious reason of the civilized 
defenders into Wut. Now the bubble can only burst and all the drop-
lets of which it is composed must fall to the ground in death. Wut is 
the unchaining of absolute freedom in its pure negative form. It shows 
itself to be "the real being of absolute subjectivity," because in seeking 
to annihilate all objective form, it leaves nothing but objectivity. By 
going thus from the battle-madness of the barbarian to the berserk 
fury that comes over a defender of hearth and altar, Hegel has shown 
that this first natural Potenz is indeed the formal concept of the whole 
stage. 
By definition, havoc can only destroy. It is "negative intuition" in 
this primitive sense, that it simply replaces one perceptible intuition, 
one state of the world, by another. Conceptual changes such as "trans-
fer of possession" do not concern it. It is at the opposite pole from 
theft, because it is vital to the thief that what he steals should keep its 
character and not be destroyed or spoiled. Theft makes apparent the 
universality that belongs to something as a tool; it also makes the 
purely ideal character of "possession" apparent. Thus theft is the sub-
sumption of havoc under the concept, in as much as it is only some-
thing conceptual that is destroyed. Havoc destroys men and things 
indifferently; theft destroys neither; it merely destroys the relation 
between them. Only someone who properly understands and recog-
nizes rights can steal. The barbarian who makes havoc cannot steal, 
any more than an animal can; indeed the barbarian has to be regarded 
and dealt with like an animal on the rampage. But the thief recognizes 
the very rights that he denies, for he expects the recognition of his 
own supposed right to possess, enjoy, or alienate what he has stolen. 
The natural avenger of theft is the person injured. If he does not care 
about the injury to his right as such, he may be content with the sim-
ple restoration of the thing stolen or with an equivalent payment for its 
value. But we have not yet reached the level of social development 
where a settlement of this sort is really conceivable. Before a human 
community can securely achieve that stage, it must pass through the 
phase where it is a point of honor to defend one's right and where an 

50 
H. S. Harris 
injury cannot be overlooked without dishonor. We are dealing now 
with the biblical"strong man who keepeth his goods"; and if he cannot 
keep them then he is shown to be no strong man. How is such a one to 
deal with a thief if he catches him? He must subjugate him, compel him 
to submit to discipline. But as long as his strength is respected and his 
right admitted, he cannot go so far as to enslave the thief either in 
terms of justice, since the thief has not threatened his life, or in terms 
of prudence, since the thief has shown himself untrustworthy. The lex 
talionis must be observed; but I believe Hegel is being deliberately cau-
tious when he refrains from giving any examples. The Bible may speak 
of "an eye for an eye," but the equivalence of crime and punishment is 
generally symbolic rather than direct-as when the thief loses his hand. 
There is no simple natural scale for the application of the natural prin-
ciple of justice. 
The "totality" of the two moments of "havoc" (against civilized ex-
istence) and "deprivation" (of personal right) is "battle." For in a fair 
fight both aspects (subjective and objective) are equalized for both 
parties. The issue (which may be either death, the fate of havoc, or 
bondage, the fate of one who seeks to deprive another of his right) is 
uncertain as between the parties (whereas it is quite definitely the thief 
and the barbarian who are to be subjected to it in the contributory mo-
ments). But how can there be an adequate occasion for such a battle 
between equals? The very fact that they are equally conscious of their 
own personal integrity makes anything at all which touches that integ-
rity in any way a possible ground for battle. Any injury, however 
slight, can be a matter of "honor." Thus honor can be injured through 
the denial of a mere possession, as the wrath of Achilles over the fact 
that Briseis was taken from him graphically illustrates. Ordinary theft 
is not an affair of honor because a thief usually has no honor to de-
fend; generally speaking he will admit his fault and accept the penalty, 
rather than make a life-and-death struggle of it. Once the struggle has 
been accepted, however, all lesser questions of right and injury fall 
away. The threat to life confers right, and the willingness to put life at 
risk constitutes the justice of one's cause. The issue must be bondage 
or death for the vanquished party, though if their strength proves 
equal, both may die (as in the conflict between Eteocles and Polynices). 
There is a noticeable ambiguity in this "totality" on the question of 
whether "battle" is really a conflict of two singular individuals, or 
whether we have now arrived at a relation which essentially and nec-
essarily involves groups. The "formal" concept of "havoc" from which 
we began would seem to call for some sort of communal response, and 

51 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
we should therefore expect to find this communal aspect reflected in 
the "totality" of the whole stage. This expectation certainly appears to 
be confirmed in some places. Thus the distinction that Hegel draws be-
tween murder and political assassination as an act of war makes no 
sense outside of a communal context; and when his discussion con-
cludes finally with War we have just the sort of integration of the for-
mal concept that we might have expected. 
Hegel seems, none the less, to be of two minds about the question; 
and the only interpretation of his argument that can be made fully con-
sistent with all that has gone before and with what immediately fol-
lows is one in which the main emphasis is placed on single combat, and 
where no community larger than the family or clan is invoked. The re-
mark about assassination must be treated as an incidental aside that 
refers either to a more developed social situation altogether or, more 
probably, to the faction-fights of "families" like the Montagues and the 
Capulets ;59 and both the initial discussion of "havoc" and the closing 
discussion of "war" must be carefully reexamined to discover exactly 
what perspective Hegel means us to view them in. 
This general line of interpretation is made absolutely mandatory by 
the fact that Hegel explicitly says at the beginning of the next section 
(on Sittlichkeit proper) that "in the foregoing levels there is the totality 
of particularity in both of its aspects, particularity as such and univer-
sality as abstract unity. The former is the family .... But in none of the 
foregoing levels does absolute nature exist in a spiritual shape; and for 
this reason it is also not present as ethical life; not even the family far 
less the subordinate levels, least of all the negative, is ethical" (460; my 
italics). In the development of Sittlichkeit we shall come upon "war" 
again in a quite unambiguous perspective, and its supremely ethical 
character will be emphasized along with its negativity. This is a clear 
indication that we ought to look very carefully at this preliminary dis-
cussion of it in a context which is so explicitly declared to be not prop-
erly ethical. 
Hegel himself recognized the ambiguity of his discussion of the "to-
tality" of this Potenz of ''the negative." For in his marginal note-
which, no matter when it was written, must surely have been subse-
quent to the drafting of the text60-he summarized the stages of his 
argument thus: "3 Potenzen: (a) Murder, (b) Revenge, (c) Zweikampf; 
the middle is Kampf, the swaying. Zweikampf, personal injury on the 
singular point." It is clear that he wanted to focus attention therefore 
on "single combat" (Zweikampf); and although he needed the more 
general concept of "battle" (Kampf), which occupies the limelight in 

52 
H. S. Harris 
his actual text, he was especially concerned with the definition of the 
species Zweikampf in relation to this genus. "War" (Krieg) does not 
appear in this summary at all, even though his discussion actually cul-
minates with it. 
The first moment of the totality, then, is murder. Murder is any in-
tentional homicide that does not occur in a fair fight. It is the extreme 
case of oppression, which is the violent subjugation of someone who 
lacks the strength or a fair opportunity to defend himself. But Hegel 
is not concerned here with any and every murder. He is not concerned, 
on one side, with assassination as a political act, where the murder of 
some notable individual is intended as a declaration of war; nor is he 
concerned, on the other hand, with murder committed for economic 
motives, e.g., in pursuance of a robbery. For in this latter case there is 
"nothing personal," that is to say, the victim has not previously given 
offense to the murderer in some way which he chooses to take "per-
sonally." The giving of personal offense or "injury to personality" is 
an essential component in the whole concept of crime that Hegel has 
developed up to this point. Even robbery is here dealt with as a per-
sonal offense. The barbarian hordes could not give personal offense 
because they knew nothing of personality. But now in the "raw" mo-
ment of the totality their natural"havoc" is synthesized with the mo-
ment of "recognition" against which the "havoc" of theft is directed. 
The offended self simply wipes out the offending one, without any 
recognition of his right as a person and without any shadow of natural 
justice or parity between the offense given and the penalty exacted. 
This is precisely the "injury to life" which gives rise to "avenging 
justice." So the second moment of the totality is the vendetta, which 
can be recognized abstractly by the understanding as an equilibrium of 
causal reciprocity, where negation is made real and permanent by being 
endlessly repeated. Here the family emerges as the offended personal-
ity and vindicates its own violated right. But there is no overt "honor" 
in the process, although "honor" was the original ground of the whole 
feud. The "negative is fixed," for death is appointed as the penalty for 
the offender on the other side; and it is what the concept requires, for 
it is in perfect parity with the offense. We have already analyzed this 
stage (and its subjective correlate in the guilty conscience) sufficiently 
above. 
It is easy to see now why the developed totality of this relation is 
single combat over the point of "honor" which would otherwise set off 
the ruinous cycle of the vendetta. The middle term is death itself, so far 
as that absolutely conceptual reality can be presented in living intui-

53 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
tion. For the fair fight is an equal risk and an equal consciousness of 
death. Thus the indifference of justice appears and the judgment of 
God, not of a biased human judge, is made evident in the result of the 
combat. 
Trial by combat is thus a perfect method of avoiding or eliminating 
the sort of murder that was set forth as the "raw" totality, for it gives 
everyone whose "honor" is touched in some particular a method of re-
dress which does not create offense against life itself. But it is also a 
method of resolution for a family feud or vendetta. That is why Hegel 
insists that the combatants participate here as family members. If per-
sonal combat were not here being regarded as the "totality" of murder 
and vendetta, "family matters" would simply be one special area in the 
completely indefinite range of possible "points of honor." But just as 
Hegel was not concerned about any and every murder, so he is not con-
cerned about any and every personal combat or duel. He is only con-
cerned with murder for "personal" reasons and with combat as the 
champion of one's clan. The "fixed ne!?:ative" of the feud must be ra-
tionalized, made indifferent, brought back within the living equilibrium 
of the ethical. The family can afford to lose a member, but it cannot 
stand to go on doing so continually. 
In this combat there is a "judgment of God," but it is not a judgment 
of guilt or innocence. A family may deny the guilt imputed to it; each 
side may impute guilt to the other, while claiming innocence them-
selves; the defending champion may with evident truth, unchallenged 
by anyone, deny that the offense given was any of his doing; or he may 
be guilty without question and accept the challenge in open acknowl-
edgement of that fact. None of this matters in the least, since the battle 
is fought for honor's sake, and "honor," as Hegel says bluntly, "is the 
urge to subsume" (i.e., to gain the mastery). This brings us back to that 
subsuming "mania" of the barbarians; and it is precisely here that He-
gel makes his final transition to the general concept of war. In war it 
does not matter which side is "in the right" and which is "in the 
wrong"; this difference is "external and formal," like the difference 
between the Wut of the barbarian and its opposite das Reine. The 
"berserker," the man who can forget himself completely, along with 
all the distinctions and justifications with which his consciousness is 
filled, he it is, who, like the natural force of "havoc," cannot be con-
quered. 
Finally, then, what war are we talking about? It is a war in which 
defeat means slavery for the survivors. Therefore it is not a war at the 
level of Sittlichkeit proper, for in the ethical community, as we shall 

54 
H. S. Harris 
see, there are no slaves or at least they have no proper place.61 This is 
war regarded as an affair of the clan and fought for family and dynastic 
reasons, for the sake of honor and for the vindication of personal right. 
The Trojan war is a case in point, having been occasioned by the ab-
duction of Helen and almost lost through the injury to Achilles' vanity. 
But the key instance is the culmination of the Theban saga in the strug-
gle between Eteocles and Polynices. By the "judgment of God" both 
brothers fell in that battle. This was philosophically appropriate, for 
their right was equal and their conflict was not properly ethical. Their 
problem was only "who is to dominate?" The singular individual is still 
the only reality in this sort of war. The universals of "right" and "jus-
tice" are only abstractions that "float above" any stable equilibrium of 
family and personal relations. The family relationship may, indeed, be 
more fictional than real, but it is still the supposed "tie of blood" that 
counts, not yet the tie of citizenship. 
This war may end in a peace which is the recognition of equality in 
strength, rather than in victory for one side and subjugation for the 
other. But this peace is not the foundation of a new relation; it is rather 
the reestablishment of an old one. The "equality" here is simply a mu-
tual recognition of difference. Each side recognizes the other as foreign 
but as too strong to be subsumed or absorbed. This recognition of dif-
ference is, I suppose, the only permanent or rational relationship that 
can exist between civilization and barbarism, if barbarism is regarded 
as a necessary part of the total balance of nature. But in practical, ethi-
cal terms, this simple recognition of difference is just the acceptance of 
failure. It is the opposite pole from the achievement of Theseus in per-
suading a group of warring clans not to regard each other as foreign, 
but to accept one another as fellow-citizens. The highest moment we 
have yet reached is the moment when the clans are locked in combat 
and the battle hangs in the balance, with each side still hoping to win 
and no decision in sight: "In the antitheses, the rationality of this to-
tality is the equality of indifference [i.e., equality of strength, equal 
hope of victory, and equal peril of defeat]; the middle term between 
them [i.e., the battle] is their unity in their complete confusion and un-
certainty" (460). 
5. ETHICAL LIFE. 
The third section of Hegel's manuscript is simply called Sittlichkeit. 

55 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
This is "absolute ethical life"; the first level was natural ethical life or 
the ethics of natural relations. Natural ethics is the ethics of family life, 
including the essential economic relations with other families; absolute 
ethics is the ethics of political existence. Within these two "levels" the 
sublevels are organized so that there is natural continuity and rational 
transition from each stage to the next. But there is no similar continu-
ity or rational transition from the family to the polis. Between them we 
find only "the negative," which is connected with both certainly but 
not at all in the way in which it, "the negative," is internally connected. 
Hegel does make the connections explicit in both directions, but these 
connections are in surprising places. "The negative" as a whole is con-
nected as negative with "absolute ethical life," not with the family; and 
this connection is made at the beginning of Hegel's discussion of "the 
negative." His introductory pages on the negative are concerned pre-
cisely with the contrast between the fixed negative, or the negative as 
such, and the negative as an integrated aspect of absolute ethical life 
itself. This is where "absolute ethical life" makes its first appearance 
in his discussion. The "formal" Potenz of the negative, the one that 
contains the "empty" essence which is both its inward nature and the 
outward form which will "float above" it throughout its development 
in the world of conscious experience, or of appearance, is the "havoc" 
of nomadic barbarian hordes to which only fully developed political so-
cieties organized for war can hope to offer effective opposition. Small 
agricultural communities with a complement of skilled craftsmen and 
a marketplace, the only social complexes suggested by the "relations" 
analyzed under "natural ethics," have no military organization at all. 
On the other hand, the whole objective development of this formal 
Potenz of "havoc" is conceived in terms which run directly parallel 
with a plausible account of the development of cdminal justice and 
military organization in agricultural villages of this type. The justice is 
"personal" throughout; and although the family takes it up on behalf 
of the injured personality when he is wiped out altogether, it is only 
with the return of the person as champion of the family cause in single 
combat that a stable equilibrium is achieved. The champions thus pro-
duced can now be led to war by tribal chieftains, and so by extrapola-
tion we can see how a military class capable of defending civilization 
against barbarism could be generated. But this connection is not made 
at the end of the discussion. Instead we are presented with a war be-
tween neighboring tribal communities, similar in strength (and hence 
in rational organization presumably); and this war ends either in sub-
jugation or in stalemate. Again either of these issues could have pro-

56 
H. S. Harris 
vided Hegel with a transition to properly political existence, thus mak-
ing "the negative" into a positive connection between the family and 
the city. At other times and in other places he used both routes. The 
hero of his earliest independent reflections on society was Theseus, 
who did not subjugate the warring tribes of Attica, but reconciled them 
and made them into one polis ;62 and the contrast between this "nat-
ural" friendliness and the unnatural exclusiveness of the children of 
Abraham was a favorite topic in Hegel's early essays.63 In the First 
Philosophy of Spirit the "struggle for recognition" provides the transi-
tion from the state of Nature to political existence (Theseus fashion); 
and in the Phenomenology Hegel treats the master-slave relation and 
cultural subjection as the cradle of political existence. Here he offers us 
neither, but rather ignores the whole problem. In the "ethics of rela-
tion" he develops "civil society/' the society of burghers, as the ration-
al context of the family; under "the negative" he develops patriarchal 
or tribal society as its natural context. But he does not directly connect 
either of them with political society proper. 
The family, whether in the context of marketplace equality or of 
tribal aristocracy, is one Potenz of the Absolute Idea, and political so-
ciety is another one, the next higher one. They are connected by having 
the same "negative" in crime and warfare. This is their indifference 
point as "identity/' the center point on the line of speculative develop-
ment that Hegel is "constructing" for us. At one end (in family-rela-
tions as a "system of need") Nature, or the objective moment, pre-
dominates; at the other end (in the "absolute estate" of the priests 
and elders who have passed out of the bonds of family life altogether) 
Spirit, or the subjective moment, predominates. The "indifference 
point" is the consciousness of the "Absolute Concept" as the unity of 
the opposites: life (the natural pole) and freedom (the ethical pole). 
This indifference point comes before us in its bare "identity" in the 
"middle term" of battle-and that is why Hegel explicitly denominates 
the Wut in which "havoc" becomes indistinguishable from its civilized 
opposite as "the absolute concept" (451). 
In Hegel's exposition we first approach this "indifference point" from 
the side of Nature; but we do not depart from it again on the side of 
Spirit. This is because the "constructed line" is also a process of devel-
opment, an ascent. Spirit is in perfect balance with Nature; there is a 
parallel that creates a perfect equilibrium in the scale-for which the 
"absolute concept" is the fulcrum. But Spirit is also higher than Na-
ture; and this is shown by exhibiting Spirit itself as the "totality" of 
the "indifference point" between them. We know, for instance, that we 

57 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
shall meet War again at the level of Sittlichkeit and that Hegel will then 
treat it as absolutely ethical rather than "least of all" ethical-i.e., he 
will treat it as the negative o£ nature and private happiness, rather than 
of Spirit and freedom. But we shall also meet all the other moments of 
the negative, along with all the positive moments of "ethics as rela-
tion." The discussion upon which we are now embarking will reach 
back and assimilate into itself every aspect of family existence, togeth-
er with its perishing in crime and war, until finally we do have the 
civilized pattern of social life before us for which barbarian invasion 
represents a kind of natural death. This "construction of identity into 
totality" is the same "indifference point" which we approached from 
below as a point on a line, or as bare "unity" in the earlier discussion, 
but we shall come to it now from above, as a "totality" or as the fixed 
end of that line which moves as a radius to generate a circle.64 
The change in the direction of approach can be apprehended and 
confirmed immediately. I have already pointed out that whereas every 
sub-Potenz in the ethics of "relation" moves upwards towards a high-
er "middle" or spiritual point of equilibrium, the sub-Potenzen of Sitt-
lichkeit move downwards towards a "middle" at the level of nature. 
The dialectic of "the negative," we may notice, goes both ways. For the 
resolution of the "formal" Potenz of "havoc" appears to be a return to 
the unconscious self-assertion of pure freedom against pure life, while 
the material development through robbery, murder, and vendetta to 
single combat is plainly an ascent from human arbitrariness to "the 
judgment of God." 
But if the starting point for the development of Sittlichkeit is not the 
battle-consciousness that we reached at the culmination of "the nega-
tive," what is it? "Ethical life must be the absolute identity of intelli-
gence, with complete annihilation of particularity and relative identity 
... an incomplete self-objectification and intuition of the individual in 
the alien individual, hence the supersession of natural determinacy and 
shaping, complete indifference of self-enjoyment" (46D-61). Where 
have we encountered something like this already? We met with the 
self-intuition of one single consciousness in another in the love-relation 
between the sexes. But Hegel does not mean that, for he specifically 
denies that it is properly ethical. It is a "relative identity" -i.e., it be-
longs to the ethics of relation-because, like all other family relations, 
it is "afflicted with a difference." The marr is the universal, the worn-
as is the particular.65 We might add that when the child is born we 
have a complete self-objectification of both parents, whereas what we 
are presently looking for is an incomplete one. But also the begetting 

58 
H. 5. Harris 
of a child is not an intelligent objectification at all-as Hegel remarks: 
"it is more rational to make a tool than to make a child" (431). 
What then is the objectification of intelligence itself? Language. It is 
only in expressing their own absolute individuality to one another' in 
language that our singular human organisms have thus far risen to 
anything that deserves the name "complete indifference of self-enjoy-
ment." Bildung, as the mutual education of free rational agents (not as 
the teacher-pupil relation, which is "afflicted with a difference"), is 
what we are looking for. But in language the "objectification" is tran-
sient. Where is it more permanently realized? In property exchange 
and contract. Here we have "intuition of self in the other" -though 
not "self-enjoyment"-in the basic phenomenon of "mutual recogni-
tion." 
Recognition-subjective in Bildung, objective in commerce-is the 
element of political existence. Just as "the negative" connects with the 
family through theft and murder, so ethics proper connects with it 
through the bonds which theft and murder negate. Recognition is "the 
absolute concept" on its positive side, the concept as life rather than as 
death, or as intelligence rather than nature. The soldiers who followed 
the Homeric heroes to battle, and the citizens who are represented by 
the (male) chorus of a Greek tragedy recognize one another, but tliey 
also recognize their natural subordination to their heroic leaders or to 
the members of the royal family whose tragedy they witness. Yet in so 
far as the soldiers face death, and the chorus expresses opinions in their 
own right, as men or as citizens, even their obedience is ethical and not 
servile.66 The development of civic recognition from slavery, through 
obedience, to civil equality does not concern Hegel here, as it does in 
the Phenomenology.67 But by presenting the dialectic of "right" in a 
bourgeois-civic context, and the dialectic of "wrong" in a familial-
tribal one, he has given us all the clues we need to close the circle be-
tween the family and the city. 
The citizen on business in the marketplace is not yet "truly infinite," 
for it is not then true that "all his specific determinacy is annulled." But 
this is true of him when he acts as a "witness" (whether to a contract 
or to a tragedy). Here he acts in his citizen capacity. In order to under-
stand the hard saying that the "intuition of the Idea of ethical life is 
the Volk" (462) we must attend carefully to the working of Hegel's 
doctrine of free recognition. When a citizen recognizes another as his 
fellow-citizen, what is it that he "intuites"? Not simply another adult 
male human who lives in his market-community area. He recognizes 
someone who is committed i:o maintain in any and every way that he 

59 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
can the law and custom of that community. In certain boundary situa-
tions he is committed to do this even at the cost of his own life, and if 
he fails to meet his commitment when such a situation arises, he may 
be found guilty and banished or even put to death through the normal 
processes of one of the institutions he is committed to maintain. In his 
capacity as citizen he is not just "Mr. X" who has certain family re-
sponsibilities, certain known assets and liabilities, and certain proved 
capacities and failings; he is the incarnation of that law and custom. 
They have made him the free agent that he is, and as a free agent he 
makes them what they are. Neither could exist without the other, even 
though "the Laws" existed long before this citizen was begotten in the 
order of organic nature, and they will remain after his body has re-
turned to the cycle of inorganic nature. What makes a man a citizen is 
this commitment, and it is identically the same commitment for every 
citizen. Thus in intellectual intuition, in the direct perception of what 
exists as and for intelligence because it generates itself as and for in-
telligence, every citizen is quite simply the law and customs of his city 
incarnated. When we look at him as a family father coming to the 
market with his own basket of produce and his own list of things 
needed, this universal aspect remains "inward," and the law "floats 
above" him as a formal matter of external record; but when we look 
at him as a citizen, as the product and the producer of Bildung, it is 
just this inward essence that we intuit. Of course we cannot just see 
him concretely in this way, for this "intuition" is a "self-objectifica-
tion" so far as its intuitive character is concerned; we perceive our-
selves thus in every other individual. And this self-objectification is 
only partial, not complete as it was when the parents perceived their 
own flesh and blood-i.e., the reality of the family which is their own 
substance-in the child; for each citizen has his private life and his pri-
vate concerns (in that family). But it is a very different matter from the 
self-positing of Fichte's Absolute Ego, which is what Hegel is referring 
to when he speaks of "an artificial independent consciousness, and an 
intellectual intuition in which empirical intuition is superseded" (461). 
The "objectivity" that exists in the practical intuition of Fichte's Ego is 
the Sollen of absolute moral duty. It is a Sollen precisely because all 
ordinary consciousness and all empirical intuition has to be superseded. 
This is quite different from Hegel's intellectual intuition of partial self-
objectification, because here it is precisely the necessity of the univer-
sally shared structures of our ordinary experience that is intuited. The 
"object" here is not the Categorical Imperative, but the constitution of 
Athens as known to an Athenian in the history of the City's deeds and 

60 
H. S. Harris 
fortunes and expressing for him what he means when he says "I am 
an Athenian;" or the British or the American constitution incarnated 
in the same way. Each citizen is aware that he is a private person quite 
distinct from all the others. But this subjective personal existence is 
just the apparent aspect of his real objective essence. The clearest ex-
ample that Hegel gives anywhere is to be found in Faith and Knowl-
edge, in his comment on the story of Sperchias and Bulis. These two 
Spartans, being ambassadors at the Persian court, spoke to the satrap 
Hydarnes in one way and to the Great King, Xerxes, in quite another: 
They showed their contempt for the satrap plainly, when they 
spoke to him of his and their experience and inclination. They 
confronted his subjectivity with their being in the form of a sub-
jectivity. To the majesty of the monarch, on the contrary, they 
showed their respect in that they made themselves wholly explicit 
before him: they named what was most objective, and just as 
holy for him as it was for them, namely country, people, 
and laws.68 
This then is the intuition of the Volk as a practical reality. At the 
higher, purely spiritual level, this unity of the City is intuited not as 
"country, people, and laws," not as human life at all, but as the City's 
God: Athena is Athens. So far I have spoken of the intuition of the 
Volk as if it were strictly a matter of "equal recognition." But Hegel 
explicitly denies that the "intuition of oneself as oneself in every other 
individual" is a matter of "equality of citizenship." "Recognition," we 
should remember, is implicit in all speech. Anyone who shares in the 
life of the City as a full speaking partner, using its language to express 
his own deepest feelings and recognizing those inner depths in the holy 
things and sacred traditions of his City, can intuite the Volk equally in 
himself and all others who reverence the same things and traditions. 
Thus a child can perceive what he hopes to become, and boys and girls, 
as well as womenfolk, can have their essential part to play in the City's 
pattern of worship. Even native-born slaves can intuit the Volk. Here 
the Identity Philosophy simply provides a theoretical framework for 
the "Greek ideal" of Hegel's earlier years: 
the Athenian citizen whose poverty deprived him of the chance 
to vote in the public assembly, or who even had to sell himself as 
a slave, still knew as well as Pericles and Alcibiades who Aga-
memnon and Oedipus were when Sophocles or Euripides brought 

61 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
them on the stage as noble types of beautiful and sublime man-
hood or when Phidias and Apelles exhibited them as pure models 
of physical beauty. 69 
Thus, civic equality is not a necessary characteristic of the intuition 
of the Volk, for the Volk is an "absolute" or a "living" indifference. 
As such it is equally all the differences that we have seen to be neces-
sary in the "ethics of relation." It is the moment of realized equilibrium 
for all of them, the stable fulcrum upon which they all sway, and the 
motionless totality of cycles which their swaying establishes. So it is 
both the substance, the absolute one intuited indifferently in all, and 
the accidents, the absolute many or the "display of all differences" in-
tuited differently in each member when he is seen as contributing 
something distinctive that is necessary to the life of the whole. When 
I view these contributions as essential to my own personal existence, 
I see them as a set of "relations" in which I stand or of dependencies 
and needs to which I am subject. In ordinary experience this is typical-
ly how I do perceive the society of which I am a member. The one 
"body" of which we are all "members" is not usually apparent to us, 
except when we find ourselves opposed to it. One essential function of 
religion is to make us aware of it, not as an external system of rela-
tions, or a crushing external power, but as our own inward essence. 
At the level of action this intuition of the Volk is the State-Consti-
tution or the Idea of ethical life. The "Idea" is the identity of intuition 
and concept. 70 Intuition and concept are now no longer the opposed 
terms of a relation which have to be brought into equivalence through 
the stabilizing of the relation itself. They are aspects of an already 
stable Idea which has to be made to reveal itself in its living motion as 
the substance that appears in a relation. Thus the Idea of Sittlichkeit 
reaches back and incorporates the necessary "relations" of natural 
ethics. This embracing of practical life within its Idea is the process of 
"government." 
At this point in Hegel's account we encounter the structural ambigu-
ity alluded to earlier. 71 For he now proceeds to give us a division of the 
"totality" of Sittlichkeit, in which there are only two "moments"-the 
"Idea at rest" and the "Idea in motion." These two moments are, as we 
shall see, opposed to one another as inner and outer, just as the first 
two moments of each Potenz of natural or relative ethics were. But the 
opposition is now merely a formal one. The same content is now going 
to be looked at from inside and outside. What is now before us is "the 

62 
H. S. Harris 
Idea of absolute ethical life," which was the announced goal and ter-
minus of our inquiry. A higher reconciliation of the opposed "mo-
ments" in a new "totality" is no longer necessary. The two moments 
of "inner" and "outer" are self-reconciled inwardly and outwardly as 
the discussion of them will demonstrate. The same whole is evolving 
from stage to stage. 
The difficulty that arises here is partly an ambiguity of terminology 
-which is easily removed-and partly one of structure-which Hegel 
never completely overcame, but which led almost at once to his aban-
doning the four-part plan of the system of philosophy that he had pro-
jected in 1801. 
Terminological ambiguity arises because Hegel first gives the "rest-
ing" and "moving" moments different names ("Constitution" and 
"Government"), and then in his actual headings he makes it clear that 
the name first given to the "resting" concept is in fact the name of the 
Idea as such. "Constitution" becomes his main heading with "Resting 
Concept" and "Government" as its inward and outward sides. The 
natural name for the "resting concept" is not "Constitution" at all, but 
"Virtue," since what Hegel offers us under this subheading is his the-
ory of the political virtues. Hegel's whole approach is plainly inspired 
by Plato, who set forth his theory of what "justice and injustice are in 
the soul" in a work entitled Constitution (i.e., the Republic). 
The deeper structural difficulty arises from the fact that the heading 
Constitution, which has the "resting" and "moving" concept (or "vir-
tue" and "government"-i.e., political activity) as its moments, is itself 
called the "First Section" (scilicet of the exposition of the Idea of Sitt-
lichkeit). The initial analysis of the moments of the Idea-which cre-
ated a false impression concerning the relation of the terms "Constitu-
tion" and "Government"-is again shown to be misleading. For that 
analysis of the moments of the "totality of the Idea" only covers the 
contents of the "First Section." It gives no hint that any "second sec-
tion" will be needed, and it might plausibly be taken to imply the con-
trary. 
Again it is plainly Hegel's own heading that must be considered de-
cisive. "Constitution" is the first name of the Idea, the name of the in-
tuition, the existing reality, of which Sittlichkeit is itself the concept. 
If we ask what the substance is, which is the "absolute Identity" of this 
intuition and concept, the answer is the Volk. We already know that 
the primitive particulur intuition that is to be developed into the uni-
versality of the Idea is the intuition of the Volk. In order to discover 
what more there is to the exposition of the Idea than can be contained 

63 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
under the heading "Constitution," we have only to ask what else there 
is in the life of the Volk apart from its political existence. 
In Hegelian terms the answer is now obvious. What unites the 
classes, the sexes, and the age-groups, which are divided and set in 
motion by the Constitution, is their artistic and religious experience. 
The Volk intuits itself as a Volk in the tutelary deity of the polis. Thus 
the complete exposition of the "Idea of the absolute ethical order" re-
quires as its culminating phase a discussion of the religious experience 
of the community. 
This put Hegel into a difficulty. He could not simply treat religion as 
an aspect of Sittlichkeit, because in his view the evolution of religious 
experience belonged to the human race as a whole-not to the ethical 
life of any one Volk or even to the race itself at a particular moment. 
For this reason he wished to keep his discussion of Art, Religion, and 
Philosophy separate from his account of Nature as the "body" and 
human history as the "real spirit" which the Idea generates for itself. 
In the fourfold division of the Identity Philosophy the eternal Alpha 
and Omega (Logic and the self-conscious Absolute Identity) are care-
fully segregated from the spatiotemporally determinate realm of the 
finite. One might very well want to fill in the "eternal" background of 
temporal Sittlichkeit in a course of lectures. But in a systematic presen-
tation everything must be dealt with at its proper level. 
This difficulty is not (or need not be taken to be) the reason for He-
gel's failure to complete his manuscript. He could have made the tran-
sition to the higher Potenz of "Religion"-with Art and Speculation 
as its intuitive and conceptual moments-when he came to it, just as 
the fourfold structure required. It is evident from the manuscript itself 
that he was not trying to write an independent treatise on Sittlichkeit. 
Nevertheless the heading "First Section" does reveal a tension between 
what his systematic standpoint required and what he himself wanted 
to achieve as a historic agent. Philosophy itself, according to Hegel's 
own historical diagnosis, answers a "need." The "need of philosophy" 
is something that arises in a particular culture, at a particular stage of 
its development. Specifically it answers the need of a culture that has 
lost the integrity of Sittlichkeit; and its historical function is to restore 
that integrity or at least to show the way to its restoration when the 
time is ripe. The question is: how should philosophy itself regard its 
own genesis? What view should the philosopher take of the historic 
occasion that brings him to birth? The answer given by the Identity 
Philosophy itself is plain-and Hegel repeats it faithfully in the Differ-
ence essay and elsewhere.72 Philosophy is participation in an eternal 

64 
H. S. Harris 
vision. It is always one and the same, and if one achieves it, the occa-
sion or path by which one does so becomes irrelevant, indifferent. 
Speculation is the end in and for itself. 
Hegel repeats this faithfully, and he never abandons it. But by de-
fining philosophy from the start in terms of a cultural "need," he tem-
pered the opposition between the eternal and the finite and so re-
mained faithful to the practical "ideal of his youth." His philosopher, 
like Plato's is a "just" man who cannot simply turn his back upon the 
Cave once he has got out of it. He must honestly meet the "need" of 
his time. 
The System of Ethical Life is both part of the system of philosophy 
as such and an attempt to meet the need of the time.73 As part of the 
system it cannot properly deal with Religion; as a response to the need 
of the time it must do so. This was Hegel's dilemma. 
The "need of the time" could not be made paramount without de-
stroying speculative philosophy altogether. Philosophy is not simply 
the theory of Sittlichkeit, because religious experience is not simply a 
reflex of the ideological structure of the time. To deal with Religion 
merely as a moment of Sittlichkeit would have reduced it to this and 
would have reduced philosophy itself to the "sociology of knowledge" 
(and of values). Hegel was unalterably opposed to this, though the 
possibility of adapting his concepts and method to this end accounts 
for a great part of his following at the present time. 
All the same, having come to philosophy himself only when driven 
to it by his diagnosis of the "need of the time," he could not accept 
the dichotomy between philosophy and that need, between the tem-
poral and the eternal, imposed by the Identity Philosophy. So what 
went by the board was the fourfold structure itself. The continuity of 
the temporal and the eternal was established by transforming the the-
ory of the "Absolute Identity" into the final phase of the Philosophy 
of Spirit itself. Art, Religion, and Philosophy kept their absolute status, 
but the theory of Absolute Spirit became part of the general theory of 
Spirit. In this way the twin functions of Religion, as the actual founda-
tion of the State in this and every other time and as the eternal self-
revelation of the Absolute Identity, could be reconciled without injus-
tice to either. The change may seem to be a relatively slight one, but it 
is not. Hegel always insisted from 1801 onwards that philosophy and 
religion were different modes of awareness of the same ultimate reality. 
Thus the change in the structure of his philosophical system through 
which the temporal and the eternal functions of Religion are reconciled 
is a change in the conception of philosophy itself. It involves the up-

65 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
grading of the practical, social function of philosophy (as the critical 
consciousness of the State, so to speak), which the Philosophy of Iden-
tity might very well lead us to despise. 
a) Virtue 
The introductory paragraph of "Ethical Life as System, at rest" sums 
up the general doctrine of the Volk as intuition and contrasts it with 
the doctrine of Kant and Fichte, in which there is a reflective separa-
tion of the particular self and his circumstances from the universal law 
of duty. But there is a mysterious sentence in this very telegraphic set 
of statements which seems to refer to the religious level of experience 
and to belong to a Judaeo-Christian religious context for which noth-
ing earlier has prepared us: "The grief would not endure, for it would 
not be intuited in its objectivity and would not be detached." All the 
other conditional statements with which this one is surrounded are 
aimed at the "reflective philosophy of subjectivity" criticized in Faith 
and Knowledge.74 So we must assume that this one refers to that phi-
losophy too and that the situation is somehow better if "the grief" does 
endure and is intuited in its objectivity or in detachment from the sub-
ject. We do indeed find "the infinite grief" identified as a "moment of 
the supreme Idea" on the last page of Faith and Knowledge: 
Formerly [says Hegel,] the infinite grief only existed historically 
in Bildung and as the feeling upon which the religion of recent 
times rests, the feeling that "God himself is dead" .... By mark-
ing this feeling as a moment of the supreme Idea, the pure con-
cept must give philosophical existence to what used to be either 
the moral precept that we must sacrifice our empirical essence, 
or the concept of formal abstraction .... Thereby it must re-
establish for philosophy the Idea of absolute freedom and along 
with it the absolute Passion, the speculative Good Friday in 
place of the historic Good Friday.75 
The "speculative Good Friday" endures always, whereas the historic 
Good Friday happened only once. 
That "the absolute Passion" must go with "absolute freedom" in the 
intuition of "ethical life" is a surprise. This is a higher level of "the 
negative" than any we have encountered previously. This "objectifica-
tion" of religious grief so that it "endures" is part of Hegel's projected 
reform of Christianity, not of his essentially Hellenic political philoso-

66 
H. S. Harris 
phy. We shall come to it in due course, although we cannot hope to 
make much of it because of the loss of the manuscript.76 
When it is "subsumed under the concept," this absolute intuition 
(both positive or ethical, and negative or religious) becomes the system 
of the virtues. The "concept" of ethical life is the whole range of pos-
sible human excellence. The "absolute One" of infinite joy and infinite 
grief differentiates into the "absolute many" of moral obligations. The 
accidental, capricious character of "reflective" duty which Hegel com-
plained of in Kant and Fichte, the need for "insight," is avoided here; 
or perhaps we should rather say it is presented in its proper objective 
form, since every agent is conscious of himself as a limb of the social 
Briareus. His "station" determines his duties for him, but not as if the 
"station" itself was a structure of requirements imposed on him. 
The two aspects of virtue, absolute unity and absolute multiplicity/7 
are differentiated by the great social contrast of war and peace. "Abso-
lute ethical life"-the unity of virtue-is courage. It is not a state of 
feeling, or an attitude, but a way of life: "absolute life in the father-
land and for the Volk." Hegel characterizes it in heroic terms, empha-
sizing the positive moment of joy and freedom. He explicitly says that 
"all difference and all grief is aufgehoben in it. It is the divine ... un-
veiled." We should notice that this comes only a page after his insis-
tence that "the absolute grief" must endure. In both contexts he is 
talking about the "intuition" of absolute ethical life. But the earlier 
passage is about the intuition of it "in its objectivity," i.e., from a 
contemplative or religious viewpoint. Here we are concerned with it as 
an activity of the subject. Absolute ethical life is the identity of infinite 
joy and infinite grief, but where it exists as perfect courage, all"singu-
larity" is sacrificed joyfully. It is not the soldier who grieves for mor-
tality as a moment in the divine life. 
We should also notice that although Hegel's language about death 
in battle is full of Greek overtones, he thinks of modern warfare (typi-
fied by the use of firearms) as being more truly ethical, just as the 
religion of "the absolute grief" is higher than Greek religion. A mod-
ern soldier must face not just a living enemy whom he can hope to kill 
in single combat, but the abstract force of death against which all are 
helpless. He will die "if the bullet has his name on it," to use an ex-
pression which is, I think, post-Hegelian. 
It is precisely as self-sacrifice, self-surrender, that courage is "ab-
solute" virtue, the "indifference" of all virtues, the inward essence that 
makes all the different virtues virtuous. But it is only in the soldier's 
courage in battle that virtue comes forward in its absolute indiffer-

67 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
ence. All ordinary, differentiated, virtue is Bildung, self-sacrifice for 
the sake of self-formation, putting off the old man in order to put on 
the new one. Thus the danger of battle is the absolute test of one's 
intuition of the Volk in oneself; and there is, after all, a direct transi-
tion from "the Negative" (as freedom) to Sittlichkeit. 
Now a virtue that can only completely and finally reveal itself in 
death is only formal. The man who dies "nobly"78 for his country 
reveals his ethical status, his freedom, his absolute identity with the 
Volk. But there is no life left in which the freedom can realize itself. 
The soldier gives up his life in order that the life of the Volk may go 
on. 
The life that does go on is the ordinary peacetime existence of virtue 
as Bildung. But all the virtues of this ordinary life are ambivalent. We 
cannot tell whether the "justice" of the bourgeois is merely rational 
selfishness, the honesty that is the best policy, until we see whether 
at the appropriate moment of social crisis it turns into its opposite, into 
prodigality and willful destruction of property. The "dishonest" man 
of ordinary life is an "outer" hypocrite (one who deceives others about 
his real motives). But the "honest" man is, very often, an "inner" hyp-
ocrite (one who deceives himself, because he does not have the intui-
tion of the Volk, he only thinks that he has it, and therefore he does 
not exemplify it objectively any more than the dishonest man does). 
So we have two opposite "formalities." A purely inward virtue, 
which proves itself by dying, and an outward virtue, which shows it-
self in all its concrete fullness, but cannot prove its own inwardness. 
War and peace are the "see-saw" that unites these two extremes. The 
life of peace justifies the sacrifice of life in the indifferent virtue of war, 
and the test of war validates the differentiated virtue of peacetime. In 
peace the rule of right is "to each his own." Hegel's brief discussion 
clearly shows the influence of Aristotle's discussion of justice and 
equity in Book V of the Nicomachean Ethics. But neither Plat~ nor Ar-
istotle has much to do with his conception of "trust" as the natural 
foundation of all virtue. Trust is the peasant virtue, resembling bour-
geois "honesty" in being subordinated to the needs of life and noble 
"courage" in its absolute commitment, but unlike either of them in that 
it is only vaguely felt, not rationally intuited. This is the "solid" virtue 
of the Athenian peasant in the story, who wanted to vote for the ostra-
cism of Aristides because he did not like hearing him continually re-
ferred to as "the just," but was so little familiar with the Assembly and 
its leaders that he asked Aristides himself to write the verdict on his 
potsherd. 79 

68 
H. 5. Harris 
Thus we have three forms of virtue and three social classes in which 
they are to be exemplified. In a tribal society all the forms will be 
mingled, and this society will therefore have no "wisdom," no intel-
lectual awareness of what virtue is. Plato's definition of "justice" as 
"minding one's own business and not meddling" is thus the basic form 
of social"wisdom" in Hegel'Sc analysis;80 without it ethical life could 
not develop into self-conscious freedom at all. But because ethical life 
is free, and is not simply the interdependence and relatedness of nat-
ural ethics, each class with its own distinctive virtue must exhibit in 
some way the total structure of the political whole that has all the vir-
tues. The single individual can only express the aspects of ethical life 
momentarily; but in the different classes each level of virtuous activity 
is presented as an objectively real way of life in a stable ethical and 
natural context. Thus a "class" is not just a collection of individuals 
with certain common characteristics. It is a complex of institutions or 
of objectified patterns of thought and action. "Slaves," for example, 
are not a class, because they have no structural relations to one an-
other as slaves or to the wider society as a structured group. They 
belong to the family and are related to the wider society only through 
their "master." 
Hegel's account of the classes must therefore include an account of 
how they meet the needs and perform the functions which are not their 
specific social function. The military nobility has to have property and 
be maintained by the work of the others, for by its very nature it can-
not manufacture things or labor for itself. Its only proper "work" is 
the waging of war (and training for it); apart from this it must be at 
leisure, "for its immediate activity in the people is not work, but some-
thing organic in itself and absolute" (472). 
This "absolute, organic, activity in the Volk" is not too easy to grasp. 
We might expect that it includes the "governing" functions that the 
military nobility has. "Government" is properly an "organic" function, 
as we shall see; but it can hardly be the "immediate" activity which is 
"not work," for Hegel subsequently amends his earlier remark about 
the "work" of the class to include "government." "Immediate activity 
in the people" refers rather to the way in which the nobility exempli-
fies the "real ethical shape" for the other classes. This is the spiritual 
significance that it has for them. If we were to confine our attention to 
the material benefit that it produces for the rest of society, the "nation-
al security" that the nobility sustains by its "work/' in exchange for 
which it receives its own natural maintenance, then we would be treat-
ing the classes as if they were terms in a natural"relation." It is only 

69 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
in the nobility that the rest of society can intuit completely what "life 
in the Volk" is. And without this intuition, honesty and trust would 
decay into hypocrisy and natural hostility. There is thus, finally, a con-
nection, at least, between the "absolute organic activity" of the nobility 
and the task of "government" which Hegel belatedly adds to fighting 
and military training as their "work"; for this absolute activity is the 
root of the political authority that belongs to the nobility. As we shall 
soon see, this authority is of particular importance in the relations of 
the nobility with the peasantry, who have to share the work of bravery 
with it. 
Because of its "absolute activity in the Volk" the nobility is the class 
that has wisdom as well as courage. The bourgeoisie are "without wis-
dom" for one reason and the peasants for another. The peasants do 
not have it because their virtue is still natural, rather than ethical; it is 
not differentiated into its aspects, and so they do not have intellectual 
awareness of it. The bourgeoisie, on the other hand, have no wisdom 
because their virtue is too intellectual. The burgher is aware of himself 
as a free citizen with his own rights, but "citizenship" is for him an 
abstraction. What matters is his own private life, his personal affairs. 
He is "independent," but he is not wise enough to grasp what inde-
pendence really means. In his world Reason takes the sh;me of t'h<> ";..,_ 
visible hand"; it is an external, impersonal force which dominates the 
market in which the achievements and contributions of the bourgeoisie 
are all weighed and measured. The noble is wise because the '·seHse of 
honor" which was the guarantee of all right in natural ethics is still 
the foundation of noble existence, though it is now no longer "person-
al" but "national" honor. But in the bourgeois way of life honor is re-
placed by the impersonal might of civil justice. Everything (including 
the bond of service) becomes a matter of legal contract. Family sur-
vival and prosperity are the aspect of natural ethics that remains as the 
essential subjective concern of this class. The bourgeoisie is incapable 
either of "a virtue" or of "bravery." "A virtue" here means some spe-
cific form of self-sacrifice, whereas "bravery" is the absolute or indif-
ferent form. Thus it is only by partial negation of its principle (family 
prosperity) that this class achieves any proven virtue at all. But even 
then the sacrifice is either quite impersonal (as in the taxes which the 
burghers pay for the upkeep of the military, which are regulated by 
the principle of abstract justice), or else the sacrifice is accidental in 
character (as in private charity). The peasantry is capable of real virtue 
because in its way of life virtue is still a natural totality. The peasants 
do not abstract things out of their natural context in order to make 

70 
H. 5. Harris 
artificial things; they rather collaborate in, and with, natural processes. 
Their existence is still patriarchal, and they still look to their noble 
lords to lead them in the war in which their virtue is demonstrated. 
b) Government 
Having thus completed his survey of the forms of virtue, Hegel now 
begins on the forms of government. "Government" is the "motion" of 
the Constitution. We have already distinguished between the "organic" 
and the '"inorganic" aspects of the social whole, the nobility being 
organic and the bourgeoisie inorganic-the peasantry being both or 
neither depending on how one wants to interpret the question. The 
"absolute movement" of the concept, the subsumption of "absolute in-
tuition" under the concept, is precisely the "organizing" of the inor-
ganic. But each class is itself an "organic" whole. So this "absolute 
movement" is something that also happens within each class, and it 
is what organizes each of them into a true class. Thus there has to be 
an organic/inorganic distinction within the "absolute" (or "organic") 
class and within the "relative" (or "inorganic") class. The organic 
moment is the internal government of the class itself, and this self-
government of each class is the real "separation of powers" in the po-
litical organism. Hegel says that "this system ... is the true Constitu-
tion." This is not quite the conventional view-which would tend rath-
er to see the operation of the central government as the real expression 
of the Constitution-but it is certainly closer to it than his Platonic 
identification of the Constitution with the "resting concept" (i.e., with 
"virtue in the soul"). 
Government is the essential function of "wisdom." So the "absolute 
government," the governing function as it is distinctly articulated 
within the "absolute class," is the analog, in Hegel's account, of the 
Rulers, in Plato's Republic, as distinct from the Auxiliaries. But He-
gel's Guardians are "guardians of the law," like the governing class in 
Plato's Laws; and this "absolute government" is not recruited exclu-
sively from the military nobility.81 One can enter its ranks through the 
avenue of the priesthood, and the one absolute prerequisite for that is 
a certain seniority in age. Like warriors, the old live in the presence of 
death, and they can achieve the practical indifference which is both the 
highest form of political consciousness and the practical side of reli-
gious contemplation. 
Of course it is only in the naive ethics of natural relations that the 

71 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
''elders" are ipso facto wise. But aging is an instrumental aspect of 
wisdom, and aging consciousness is the proper tool of wisdom. One 
who lives nobly does become naturally wise as he grows old; and one 
who sets himself consciously to pursue wisdom by becoming a priest 
must still wait upon old age for the proper maturing of his wisdom. 
Everyone who does participate in this absolute government is ipso 
facto a member of the absolute or noble class. Hegel clearly holds that 
in the absence of the class structure which is established by nature, 
and by the ethical interdependence of warring and peaceful existence, 
any absolute government would be a tyranny. Fichte's Ephorate would 
be as bad as any Roman despotism.82 The proper business of "absolute 
government" is to keep the "estates of the realm" in a healthy equi-
librium. This cannot be conceived either as a negative, regulatory ac-
tivity in which dangerous initiatives are vetoed, or as a positive over-
sight of everything that happens to, or is done by, anybody.83 Just 
how it should operate, Hegel does not say; and what he says about 
how it is established needs pondering over if we are to understand it 
rightly: "it is God's appearance ... the direct priesthood of the All 
highest ... everything human and all other sanction ceases here" (483). 
This is essentially the position that Hegel always maintained, that 
"religion is the foundation of the State."84 Anything that is fundamen-
tally religious in character must have for consciousness the quality of 
being given, being beyond all argument and beyond the need of con-
firmation. In view of all the conscious and deliberate constitution-mak-
ing which had gone on since 1775, and more particularly since 1789, 
both in political meetings and in professors' studies, it was important 
to emphasize that an act of deliberate choice cannot make something 
holy; choice is bound to have rather the opposite effect, by making ex-
plicit the fact that what has been decided does not have to be the way 
it is, that the decision could have been different, and is always open to 
revision. For the Volk its own existence is not a decision; it is rather 
the given context within which all decisions of the Volk are made. 
"Absolute government" is the activity by which this absolute founda-
tion maintains and deft!nds itself. All that Hegel says about its activity 
is that "it is legislative, establishing order where a relation is devel-
oped which intended to organize itself independently, or where some 
hitherto insignificant feature ... begins to get strong." The "relations" 
here are relations between the classes or estates. The German Empire 
was a mass of "estates" which had developed various degrees of in-
dependence. Some had advanced to the recognized status of sovereign 
nations which made war on one another and on the Reich itself. In this 

72 
H. 5. Harris 
situation Hegel could say, "Germany is a State no longer,"85 because 
the Reich no longer had an "absolute government." The empire was 
"holy" in name, but in fact it was no more than a legal fiction accord-
ing to Hegel's analysis, since a legal fiction was all that solemn pro-
nouncements of the Imperial Courts or votes of the Diet could preserve. 
We should notice that the fact that popular election cannot make 
something sacred does not mean that the principle of popular election 
cannot be what is sacred. For the Athenians their "democracy," mean-
ing popular assembly and direct popular vote, was sacred; it was part 
of the wisdom of Athena herself. And we can see both from Hegel's 
essay on the German Constitution and from the surviving fragments 
of, and reports about, his pamphlet on the Wurtemberg Estates As-
sembly of 1797 that he did not believe that any constitution should 
continue to be held sacred which did not incorporate the principle of 
popular election for legislative functions.86 
"Absolute government is the resting substance of the universal 
movement, but universal government is the movement's cause" (484). 
We have seen that the "resting substance" is the abiding structure of 
institutions and values which the political community holds sacred. We 
are now moving on to examine how that structure functions, and what 
makes it go. The traditional analysis of the structure involves the dis-
tinction of three branches of government, the legislative, the executive, 
and the judiciary. Hegel does not find this division very satisfactory, 
since government is always finally a matter of executive action, of caus-
ing things to happen. What is at first sight more surprising is that he 
does not find the division of government business into "internal" and 
"external" affairs satisfactory either. We might have expected him to 
make much of this distinction, since the cyclic opposition of war and 
peace is so important in his theory. The distinction of internal and ex-
ternal affairs is, in fact, more important in his theory than the distinc-
tion of legislative, executive, and judiciary, but it is not fundamental. 
Instead, the division that Hegel offers us has the internal/ external anti-
thesis built into it as its basic subdivision. His division is between: 
a) economic policy and commerce 
b) judicial and military policy 
c) education and colonization. 
The last two aspects are regarded by Hegel as logically connected. But 
we cannot say how he would have worked the connection out in de-

73 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
tail, since the manuscript declines into a mere list of topical headings 
by the time we reach section c. 
The business of "universal government" is to relate the abiding 
Constitution of the Volk to the actual historical situation. With respect 
to its foundation in nature this situation is a constant. Men always need 
food, clothes, shelter, etc. But the vicissitudes both of nature and of 
human intercourse affect even this level of human existence in society, 
so that it necessarily becomes an object of governmental concern. The 
surprising thing is that Hegel places it first. The analogy of his proce-
dure thus far at the level of Sittlichkeit leads us to expect that this 
would be the natural"totality" to which his argument would descend. 
Instead we find an ascending scale, culminating in the self-reproduc-
tion of the City by colonization. Colonization is a totality like that pro-
vided by the rearing and education of the child at the level of natural 
ethics. Since a new colony needs first of all a Constitution, its estab-
lishment would bring the wisdom of the "absolute government" into 
play. Thus the "motion" of the concept apparently involved a renewal 
of the upward spiral movement that was characteristic of Hegel's ear-
lier discussion. We cannot be sure about this because Hegel has left us 
too little to go on, but I take this reversal to be a reflection of the fact 
that in the "true constitution" our inquiry has reached its goal. 
Apart from this natural substratum the business of "universal gov-
ernment" is the "subsumption of particular under universal." This log-
ical function explains its title. But to identify the referents here is not 
easy. At the level of natural relations, "the Potenz of inwardly con-
cealed identity and outwardly revealed difference," the universal gov-
ernment was the law of universal mortality, the reign of death. But 
now we have the people governing itself. "Universal," "particular," 
"concept," "intuition" become very difficult to apply and to interpret 
because all distinctions are largely formal, i.e., they are only distinc-
tions of reason. 
On the internal side the governing process has traditionally been 
analyzed into three branches, legislative, executive, and judicial. Hegel 
identifies these branches with the moments of the concept; the legisla-
tive being the resting universal and the other two arms being its ideal 
and its real motion against the particular. But since government is a 
real process, all governmental action is really executive action. This is 
not difficult to follow, but just how it fits into Hegel's discussion of the 
external and internal relations of the people is not so easy to see. Ap-
parently Hegel simply wants us to set it aside because it is not the real 
problem. The real problem is to "know the executive as government." 

74 
H. S. Harris 
The "executive as government" is concerned on the one hand with 
external relations. This is the subsumption of intuition under concept, 
for one or both of the parties concerned must submit to higher control. 
War, as we have already seen, produces only a momentary recognition, 
and the conclusion of peace need not lead to any permanent relation at 
all. Only conquest or colonization produce stable results: conquest ex-
tends the range of internal relations, while the planting of a colony 
produces a new kind of relation altogether: "the reconstruction of 
identity." 
Internal relations are the "subsumption of concept under intuition"; 
because now it is the particular character which the people has gained 
in its history that is paramount. But the whole distinction of "internal" 
and "external," "intuition" and "concept," is a formal one. The "move-
ment" of the people always has both an internal and an external side. 
Its phases are the three given earlier, but the second moment (of jus-
tice and war) is one where the "particular remains what it is," so the 
universal is "merely formal," i.e., it exists when the opposed particu-
lars, whether they be warring nations (in "foreign affairs") or litigat-
ing estates (in "home affairs"), "recognize" one another. In the "total-
ity" of education and culture on the internal side, or of conquest and 
colonization in external relations, the particular is completely absorbed 
into the universal. 
Hegel's remarks about economic policy show the influence of his 
early "mercantilist" studies. We cannot be certain that he has even 
read Smith's Wealth of Nations yet, though it is quite probable.87 We 
have already seen that the division of labor and the establishment of a 
market are necessary elements in the natural ethics of family relations. 
The problem now is how markets are to be regulated and how the 
needs of the noble class, which does not produce marketable goods, 
are to be provided for. 
The market is itself a "power" than can overwhelm the greatest ef-
forts of individuals. Price levels fluctuate according to the total state 
of supply and demand, and these fluctuations cannot be foreseen by 
the normal employment of human intellectual capacity. The mechani-
cal operation of the law of supply and demand can therefore threaten 
the very existence of ethical life if it is not controlled by human agency. 
Through the exercise of social control"blind fate" comes under "gov-
ernment" (489). The government can tell when an economic crisis 
threatens by watching the fluctuation of prices. A crisis exists when-
ever what we would call the "standard of living" of a sizeable fraction 

75 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
of the population is seriously threatened; and the "standard of living" 
is a function both of the prevailing natural conditions and of general 
social expectations. "Stability" rather than "growth" is the goal that 
Hegel sets up for public policy. Economic crisis destroys "trust," which 
is the natural"solidity" out of which the higher social virtues of "hon-
esty," "courage," and "wisdom" develop. Hegel is willing, like Adam 
Smith, to rely on the mechanical self-regulation of the market as long 
as the fluctuations of prices and incomes are not too great, but a seri-
ous economic crisis has revolutionary political implications. Need itself 
cannot be controlled and regulated, for the advance of civilization 
breeds ever more sophisticated desires. For this reason, too, trade and 
commerce are essentially world-wide, and economic policy must be 
made in the context of the world market. The natural difference of 
strength among men translates in ethical life into a difference in eco-
nomic resources. The ethical class structure is therefore subjected to 
the destructive tension between rich and poor, the haves and the have-
nots. Hegel calls this economic dialectic "the unmitigated extreme of 
barbarism"; the reduction of everything to a price, and subordination 
of every aspect of life to the quest for a profit is, in his eyes, "the bes-
tiality of contempt for all higher things." The urge toward private ma-
terial prosperity breaks the ethical bonds of society. Just as economic 
poverty destroys the "trust" of the peasants, so economic prosperity 
turns the "honesty" of the bourgeois into hypocrisy. Economic policy 
must therefore be directed towards moderating these extremes. The 
only method that Hegel suggests is "by making big gains more diffi-
cult." We shall see in a moment how the taxation system is adapted 
for this purpose. 
Hegel speaks rather glibly of "sacrificing one part of the burgher 
class to mechanical and factory work and abandoning it to barbarism" 
(492). But he was actually much more disturbed by the emergence of 
an urban proletariat than his words here indicate. This problem of the 
impoverishment of life through the natural tendency of intelligence to 
make labor even more "mechanical" was one that had troubled him in 
his earliest studies of economic life;88 and the persistence of his concern 
is evident in the economic analyses contained in the first Philosophy 
of Spirit. These analyses anticipate Marx in a quite startling way.89 In 
the present context the whole emphasis of the Identity theory would 
naturally lead Hegel to minimize this sort of disturbing development, 
which did not fit into his theory of the natural classes of society. He 
was, perhaps, less quick to recognize that the Greek ideal could not 

76 
H. S. Harris 
simply be extrapolated mechanically for the economic sphere than he 
was to admit this at the opposite pole, in religion. But the industrial 
revolution had hardly touched Germany as yet. 
Hegel relies partly upon the spontaneous activity of the bourgeois 
class to secure economic stability. The rich should be obliged by the 
customs and mores of their own class to support public initiatives of a 
cultural kind, just as the Athenians imposed special"liturgies" on their 
richest citizens. In this way private charity, which was the only avenue 
for subjective virtue in this class, could come to have more than an ac-
cidental significance. 
We come, finally, to the economic life of the governing class itself. 
The governing class now includes the "formally universal" class, i.e., 
public servants of all kinds, drawn from all classes, and possessing 
only the normal virtues of the class from which they come. The ex-
penses of this class can be met partly through rents received as owners 
of landed estates; but a system of taxation is also necessary, so the 
principle of fair taxation must be laid down. 
Hegel holds that the only objectively fair system of taxation is a levy 
on the cost of raw materials for all productive purposes. The peasant 
will make his contribution in the form of rents, we should notice. This 
is the closest possible analogy to a levy on his raw materials. A good 
farmer will get better crops out of a farm than a bad one, and a good 
craftsman will likewise get better goods out of a given quantity of raw 
materials. Thus "skilfulness is taxed" but "not according to its re-
ceipts, which are something particular and the individual's own." Pre-
sumably traders and retailers would pay a levy on what they buy for 
resale. This system provides the government with its means of "re-
stricting gain," for by raising the levy it can force prices up and drive 
consumption down in any sector of the economy. 
So much for the "system of need." Here "need" was the fulcrum 
through which the universal "value" and the particular "needs and 
possessions" of the classes and their members .were related in the see-
saw of supply and demand. The opposition of universal and particular 
was only formal, because it is precisely the possessions that have value, 
and the value is determined by the general need for them. 
The second system of "universal government" is the "system of jus-
tice." This system includes "war" as a punitive instrument in external 
relations. But Hegel's discussion is now becoming increasingly con-
densed, and in the course of this section it ceases altogether, declining 
into a simple list of the topics that have to be discussed. 
The "system of justice" is virtue in its moment of externality. An 

77 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
external concept, justice, here subsumes the property and lives of the 
citizens (and by implication the property and independence of the City 
and its foes are similarly subsumed in war, which is the divine judg-
ment). Everything in this moment depends on "recognition" for its 
reality, for what is "intuited" here is not things and people, but prop-
erty rights and persons (including "national rights" and "sovereign 
nations" in the international court of war). The real essence of eco-
nomic relations is "need" which is felt. The real essence of judicial re-
lations is "right" which is thought of. 
Hence the system of justice is also the moment of abstract equality. 
Everyone is equal before the law. Class members litigate against one 
another and against members of another class. They can also litigate 
against the class itself as an organized whole or against one of its or-
gans. All come into court as legal persons, with rights established by 
the constitution. If all rights could be systematized in a code, the dif-
ferent classes could each be left to run their own affairs; or, to be more 
precise, the nobility and the burghers would each run their own affairs, 
and the peasantry would come to the local manor courts established 
for them by the nobles. For what matters is the decision of the singular 
case and the best judges for this would be those who best understand 
the circumstances. But this Fichtean ideal is impossible to achieve. The 
government of the people should be self-government; hence the judi-
cial process in civil cases should be a composition of dispute according 
to equity, which "satisfies the parties and is reached with their con-
sent." What Hegel means by "consent" and "satisfaction" here is ap-
parently just the fact that the parties both want what is right, and 
although the judgment may go against them, they accept it without 
compulsion. It is only some Bestimmtheit that is at issue, though it 
may be a performance (e.g., of a contract), or a piece of work, or some 
personal matter, not just physical property. (It seems that what Hegel 
calls "war" must, by parity of reasoning, include the peaceful diplom-
acy through which nations settle many disputes without resort to 
arms.) 
Criminal justice, on the other hand, must not just establish right; it 
must punish the attempt to establish a private right of one's own. 
When we look at crime in this way, it is easy to understand how "war" 
can be assimilated to justice. In a civil suit "damages" are awarded; in 
criminal justice punishment is imposed. The "essence" of the first is 
the establishment of what is right; the "essence" of the second is to 
establish that a crime has been committed, and by whom. War brings 
the opposed peoples into court, as in a civil suit; ordeal by battle finds 

78 
H. S. Harris 
one of them guilty like a criminal; and the peace settlement awards 
"damages" as in civil suit once more. Hegel's notes contain just enough 
to enable us to descry the pattern of the "totality" that he was intend-
ing to construct. 
The third system of government is the completed equilibrium where 
the universal moment does not just momentarily "subsume" the par-
ticular, but absorbs it. And the "universal" here is not an abstract ratio 
of pure quantities, as it was in the operation of supply and demand 
that determines value. Now it is realized subjectively as well as objec-
tively; it satisfies a need that is felt. 
In his introductory survey Hegel gave "education, culture, conquest, 
and colonization" as the moments of this "system" (488). The notes 
for his detailed discussion omit "conquest." But since he made no 
notes for the "external" part of the discussion at all, I do not believe 
this is significant. "Colonization" only gets into the discussion as the 
culmination of the City's self-reproduction. We must assume that in 
the fully developed argument, colonization would have taken its place 
as the final synthesis of both internal and external policy. 
The "internal" process, which we can follow, passes through "edu-
cation," by which the array of individual talents are developed and in 
which particular discoveries are made, to Bildung, the realm where sci-
ence is established as a communal activity and achievement. We caught 
sight of this realm at the extreme limit of the development of natural 
ethics (just as we also caught sight of the world market at that point, 
and of the concept of legal right). But here Bildung emerges as the uni-
versal force (Zucht) that disciplines us, making us self-conscious mem-
bers of the Volk, enabling us to intuit the Volk in ourselves and others, 
and causing us to "live in the Volk." This process of "training" is the 
work of the school and of the police, but the primary agent is the peo-
ple itself: "the great discipline consists of the universal Sitten, the or-
der of society, Bildung for war and the testing of the reliability of the 
single individual in war" (498). This stage of "subsumption of intui-
tion under concept" has two sides: Erziehung, which is formation from 
within, the maturing of inward nature; and Zucht, which is formation 
from outside, the action of the universal that "floats above." 
The totality of "education" and "training and discipline" is "child-
rearing" regarded in its social aspect. Here Hegel proposed to deal with 
population control, the training of the next generation of citizens, and 
finally with colonization as the chief means of controlling population 
by disposing of the surplus. Conquest would come in here as the means 

79 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
by which colonization is made possible when the right of the Volk is 
challenged. 
The next paragraph begins abruptly: "Possible forms of a free gov-
ernment. I Democracy. II Aristocracy. III Monarchy" (498); and the 
last page of the text is devoted to this topic. Lasson has rightly divined 
that this is the final section of the discussion of "Government" and 
that the "totality" of "absolute government" and "universal govern-
ment" is "free government." I believe that if this section had been 
fully written up, it would also have been the totality of "Resting con-
cept" and "Government," and so the conclusion of "Section I: The 
Constitution." The classification of constitutions forms a natural and 
appropriate conclusion for this section. 
The classification itself derives from Aristotle, and the distinction 
between "free" and "unfree" constitutions is likewise his. For when 
the ruler governs in the interest of all, rather than in his own interest 
(which is Aristotle's distinction between a "true" and a "corrupt" con-
stitution), then in Hegel's terminology the "essence" of ruler and ruled 
"is the same." This is what "free" government, or "self-government," 
means in his usage. But in Aristotle's view a corrupt monarchy is the 
worst of constitutions, whereas Hegel regards a corrupt aristocracy as 
the worst. Here we have "the form of the absolute constitution, and 
not its essence." This implies that the "absolute constitution" that we 
have so far been describing is a "free aristocracy." But since both the 
hereditary character of the nobility and their possession of entailed 
landed estates are specifically condemned as departures from the ideal, 
this conclusion puts us in a difficulty. 
The first part of the way out of this difficulty is provided by Hegel 
when he makes clear that his "absolute constitution," like Aristotle's 
"best" one, is a "mixed" one. Political activity should not be restricted 
to the noble class. The democratic principle of equality destroys the 
natural class distinctions, but the absolute constitution "is democracy 
too, within the classes." Thus Hegel's remark about a hereditary, 
landed aristocracy being the worst constitution does not imply that the 
best constitution is a Platonic aristocracy without private property or 
personal heirs. What Hegel condemns is any constitution in which par-
ticipation in politics and the holding of public office is a matter of he-
reditary right and depends on the inheritance of an entailed estate.90 
The nobility of his own "first class" must have their inherited estates; 
the relations of the nobility and the peasantry could not be what Hegel 
means them to be on any other basis. But his ''priests and elders" are 

80 
H. S. Harris 
recruited on Platonic principles, and the "formally universal" class 
would consist mainly of burghers. This much is clear from the manu-
script as we have it. The proposals that Hegel makes for the recon-
stitution of the Reich at the end of his "German Constitution" essay 
further suggest that his distinction of "absolute" and "universal" gov-
ernment would have been articulated into a bicameral legislature, or a 
senate and an elected assembly, if he had ever completed his System 
of Ethical Life. 91 
Hegel's final notes are about the relation between the constitution 
and the religion of the Volk. Here the emphasis on genetic develop-
ment is once more evident; it becomes clear also that a "free" constitu-
tion really does mean popular self-government. A monarchy will only 
be a "free" constitution when the king governs with the people and 
allows them more and more to govern themselves. And as their politi-
cal freedom develops, the religious experience of the people will in-
volve increasing resistance to and rejection of the "monarchic" re-
ligion.92 
The comment that there is "little imagination or religion" in an aris-
tocracy "on account of its patriarchal character" needs to be glossed 
by inserting a qualifying adjective: "little <public> imagination or 
religion." What "patriarchal" religion is like we can infer fairly reli-
ably from the description of "vendetta justice" earlier. Each tribe has 
its own cult and its own rites. The political achievement of Theseus 
was consummated by his religious achievement. He managed to gather 
the tribal gods into a pantheon which was the object of public worship 
by all the tribes. This religious achievement broke through the bul-
warks of aristocratic privilege and set Athens on the path towards de-
mocracy. 
It is the Athenian democracy in its great days that exemplifies the 
democratic "religion of nature." But it was unstable; and when it 
passed away, the Epicureans demythologized nature. The religion of 
nature develops from the primitive level which Hegel believes we find 
in Homer "where Jupiter and Juno are air, and Neptune is water" to 
the point where the religion is purely ethical, and the artistic represen-
tation of it is completely human. Then the "infinite grief" of the sepa-
ration of God from man can begin. The Epicurean secularization of 
nature was thus the prelude to the "death of God" in man himself, 
which was portrayed for intuition and as feeling in the Crucifixion. 

6. R E L I G I 0 N • 
81 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
According to Rosenkranz, Hegel had material in his lecture manuscript 
which he could have used to develop his discussion of constitutions 
along evolutionary lines.93 He certainly had plenty of material there 
with which he could have filled out these brief memoranda on Relig-
ion. But I have already shown why Hegel could not deal with Religion 
properly at the level of Sittlichkeit. His notes on the parallel between 
constitutional and religious evolution give some hint of what "section 
II" of the discussion of Sittlichkeit could have contained. Hegel had 
been meditating on the problem of the relation of state and church for 
years. This was the proper place for him to state whatever formal con-
clusions he had arrived at.94 But only a formal discussion would have 
been possible. According to the fourfold plan within which Hegel was 
operating, the content of religious experience-the history of God's 
self-revelation-belongs to a higher Potenz of the Absolute Identity 
altogether. It belongs in fact to the final pha:.e of speculation: "there-
sumption of the whole [i.e., of the philosophy of nature and of the 
ethical spirit] into one, the return to the primitive simplicity of the 
[Logical] Idea."95 
It is certain, however, that Hegel laid out this "history of God" in 
the lectures from which our manuscript was written up. And since his 
concept of ethical life cannot be properly understood in abstraction 
from it, we must do our best to recover it from the accounts that we 
possess. Rosenkranz tells us that Hegel "claimed that in religion the 
reality of the objective world itself, and subjectivity and particularity 
along with it, are posited as aufgehoben."96 His introductory discus-
sion included an analysis of the Protestant "religion of subjectivity," 
which reached its apogee in Schleiermacher's Addresses. He attacked 
Schleiermacher's refusal to "let spirit appear in spiritual shape."97 
Against Schleiermacher's theory of the pastor as a subjective virtuoso 
he set his own doctrine of true religious democracy, "the spirit is not 
ashamed of any of its individuals." Any true Athenian, being capable 
of the intuition of the Volk, is capable of intuiting Athena. But when 
he does so, "the ideal shape of the spirit is real, while its real side is 
ideal." The inward essence is expressed in the outward form of the 
goddess, and all the outward reality of life in agora and Assembly is 
collapsed into his inner thoughts. The ancient Athenian was not an' 
idolator. Athena is the very spirit that lives and moves in Athenians 
when they are conscious of themselves as Athenians. In the speculative 
knowledge of the philosopher the absolute spirit receives its objective 

82 
H. S. Harris 
(i.e., conceptual) shape, but this is only one pole of religion. The other 
is the intuitive contemplation made possible by the religious artist. 
And still this difference between "subjective" and "objective'' or "in-
tuition" and "concept" is "purely formal," as we have by now learned 
to say.98 
Pure speculative knowledge is indeed the absolute apex of religious 
experience. It is when philosophy and religion are completely recon-
ciled that religion reaches its own perfection. Being the actual process 
of "resuming the whole into one," religion itself goes through a natural 
cycle of development. Thus a religious tradition expresses the people's 
consciousness of the Idea in its indissoluble unity with their own 
history and life. This unity has two aspects: the speculative, or uni-
versal, side and the historical, or particular, one. And the relation 
between universal and particular, the way that the absolute Idea is 
"bounded" in religion, is not quite the same as the way in which the 
Idea is "bounded" in art. We cannot be certain what the difference is 
here, but in his essay on the Difference between Fichte' s and Schel-
ling's Systems Hegel makes Art the intuition of the "indifference 
point" from the side of natural philosophy and Speculation the intui-
tion of it from the side of transcendental philosophy. Only a very 
slight shift in his use of "theoretical" and "practical" would be in-
volved if we suppose that he now regards Art as the theoretical mo-
ment and Religion as the practical moment in the absolute knowledge 
of the speculative Idea. He emphasizes here that religion is the practi-
cal complement of both art and "science" (i.e., philosophy). In his ma-
ture philosophy the triad of the Absolute Idea (Art, Religion, Philoso-
phy) forms a definite sequence with Philosophy at the top. The most 
consistent interpretation of his various statements about the "absolute 
Identity" of the Identity Philosophy seems to be that he did not wish 
to make any sequence or grant any preeminence among them. 
In any case Religion is certainly the highest activity of practical life. 
And the basic activity of all religion as cult is sacrifice.99 By offering 
sacrifice we show that our inward devotion is not hypocritical. We are 
reconciled with the Infinite through this deliberate adoption of an iron-
ical attitude toward our own finite life and affairs. 
Hegel called reconciliation "the basic Idea of religion." We have al-
ready seen how in the Potenz of "the negative," he referred to the con-
trast between causal reciprocity, as exhibited in penal justice ("an eye 
for an eye"), and the "reconciliation" in religion. 100 As far as can be 
seen, the explanations which he gave here were consistent with the 
doctrine of "reconciliation with fate" as he had developed it in his 

83 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
Frankfurt essays.101 Reconciliation restores at the spiritual level the 
original harmony of life that existed before injury established the pat-
tern of hostile interaction. It changes nothing at the level of fact. The 
transgressor must accept whatever consequences are naturally or ethi-
cally "fated." But the discovery of ethical freedom is necessarily the 
discovery of the possibility of making a fresh start and so of being 
reconciled with fate. 
After this general introduction Hegel gave his systematic exposition 
of the Potenz of Religion in the usual triadic pattern. Religion evolves 
through three moments: 
a) the simple identity of intuition and concept, or the natural 
reconciliation of spirit (the universal) with its real being in 
individuality. (Greek religion is the paradigm here). 
b) the moment of difference between the universal spirit and its 
real being; the condition where they come into "relation" with 
one another and a relative identity is established. (Here the 
paradigm is harder to identify. The whole Judaeo-Christian 
tradition can easily be subsumed here.) 
c) the moment of absolute reconstruction. (This is in the future, 
but the whole development of Christianity will be "resumed" 
in it along with Greek religion.) 
Haym tells us that this division as given by Rosenkranz, together 
with his exposition of it, was taken almost verbatim from Hegel's man-
uscript.102 The first stage is easy enough to follow. This is the "nature-
religion" of the Greeks, for which the whole system of nature is living 
and holy. The different aspects of this living spirit are "the Gods." 
Thus in Homeric religion, as Hegel conceived it, the four elements 
themselves are the Gods. But the principle of reconciliation requires 
that the divine spirit should be intuited in human form. Thus classical 
Greek religion, nature-religion in its mature form, becomes "the reli-
gion of art" which Hegel presents to us in the Phenomenology. We 
may notice that Hegel distinguishes the three moments of "artistic 
beauty/' "truth of the Ideas/' and "actuality" (this last being plainly 
the "religious" moment) and insists on their "indivisibility." 
The next stage is the moment of "absolute difference" or "infinite 
grief." The remark about Epicurean philosophy at the end of the Sys-
tem of Ethical Life itself shows us where this stage begins. When Alex-
ander triumphed, the "natural reconciliation" of man and God, or of 
politics and religion, was ruptured. Nature became in the Epicurean 

84 
H. S. Harris 
philosophy a merely mechanical concourse of physical atoms, and in 
the triumph of the Roman Empire and of Roman law the ethical world 
became a concourse of spiritual atoms. This is what Hegel refers to as 
the "boredom of the world," which is something very different from 
"infinite grief." The Romans took over the "pantheon" of natural reli-
gion, but the Gods were no longer spiritual "intuitions" of free peo-
ples; they were no longer really alive. The "boredom of the world" 
reached its climax in the deification of the emperor. In the Roman pan-
theon "the ideal wnstituted itself in the form of universality" -but ex-
ternally; and in the emperor "the real principle sets itself up firmly as 
singularity." The actual religious consciousness of this situation was 
first expressed as "infinite grief" by the Jews. Here we have a Volk 
whose God has fled from nature and is Lord over it. This God will al-
low no pantheon, and there can be no graven images. In his presence 
men have only the consciousness of sin and of their own nullity. 
Orthodox Christianity in all of its historical forms is the recon-
struction of a sequence of "relative identities'' out of this "infinite 
grief." The living man Jesus was himself the absolute identity in a 
simple intuition. But as the dead Saviour he became the mediating 
term through which Christians were related to God; and in being thus 
"redeemed," they were saved out of nature, which remained lost. Thus 
the Christian "contempt for the world" was bound at first to extend to 
the world of ethical life as well as that of nature. But when Christian-
ity became the religion of the empire, this was no longer the case; as a 
result the Judaic principle of "infinite grief" was threatened. Hence 
the focal ceremony of the cult became a reminder of the religious 
significance of the Crucifixion. The Christian Eucharist celebrates the 
sacrifice of God himself who died on earth, and at the same time it 
establishes the identity of the worshipper with God. The whole hu-
man world was consecrated afresh in universal Catholicism. The pope 
crowned the emperor, and every nation had its own apostles and saints. 
The new religion developed its conscious or speculative side in the 
doctrine of the Trinity, thus rising from the level of nature-for which 
the ideal expression is Art-to that of spirit. Catholicism developed the 
natural aspect, and Protestantism the spiritual one. But where the Cath-
olic emphasis overcame the principle of "contempt for nature," the 
Protestant emphasis accentuated it. They need now to be reconciled. 
This is the problem that confronts the world in Hegel's own time. 
It seems that Hegel was convinced that the advent of the truly abso-
lute religious consciousness was imminent. The speculative "totality" 
of religion, being thus reached, will "resume" the infinite grief into the 

85 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
infinite joy of a genuine reconciliation with nature. All the moments of 
the above development will be taken up as moments, but they will be 
mere moments in the religion of absolute identity or spiritual free-
dom.103 This will be a philosophical religion, but it will demonstrate its 
speculative character by overcoming the excessive subjectivity of the 
Christian flight from the world and restoring nature and art to a posi-
tion of honor. The "infinite grief" of universal mortality and transience 
will be accepted as an eternal moment in the new synthesis. The grief 
must "endure," for without it the speculative side of religion cannot 
develop. But it will no longer be dominant, as it still is in Protestant 
"yearning." The direct quotation with which Rosenkranz ends his ac-
countl04 should be compared with the concluding sentence of Faith and 
Knowledge: 
The pure concept ... must reestablish for philosophy the Idea 
of absolute freedom, and along with it the absolute Passion, the 
speculative Good Friday in place of the old historical one. Good 
Friday must be reestablished in the whole truth and harshness 
of its Godforsakenness. Since the serenely happy, but less well 
grounded, and more individual style of the dogmatic philosophies 
and of the natural religions must vanish, the highest totality can 
and must achieve its resurrection from this harsh consciousness of 
loss in all its earnestness and out of its deepest ground, encom-
passing everything, and at the same time possessing the most 
serenely happy freedom of shape that it can.105 
7. CONCLUSION. 
The examination of Hegel's views about the next higher Potenz, Reli-
gion-the highest Potenz of all in fact-has helped us to understand 
the System of Ethical Life better. For it enables us to put the influence 
of Hegel's "Greek ideal" into proper perspective. The ideal model of 
Sittlichkeit is quite evidently the polis. But several tensions are visible 
in Hegel's discussion. First there is a tension between the speculative 
and the historical influence of Greek culture itself-a tension between 
the philosophical model provided by Plato's Republic and the historical 
experience of Athens as Hegel found it in Thucydides and in various 
lesser writers. In this respect I think we can say that the empirical in-
fluence predominates. There is another deeper tension between ancient 

86 
H. S. Harris 
and modern influences, where the Hellenic models seem to predomi-
nate, but the truth is more complex. Here the knowledge of Hegel's 
religious views and hopes, fragmentary and unsatisfactory as it is be-
cause of the state of the evidence, helps us to see that Hegel's concern 
was really quite contemporary. His projected reform of religion goes 
hand in hand with a projected reconstruction in politics: indeed neither 
is possible without the other. Hegel believes that his own society is 
now in a position to "reconstruct" the Greek ideal, but on the scale of 
a modern nation and on quite a new level of self-conscious awareness. 
The reconstruction, when it comes about-and 1789 was a portent of 
its imminent arrival-will be a higher thing altogether than the original 
creation of the polis. 
This is where we discover the most important tension of all. For the 
projected reintegration of "ethical life" has not yet even begun. Specu-
lation can recollect and integrate all the elements that are spread out in 
time behind us. But the logic of the absolute Identity theory requires 
that the philosopher should comprehend what actually is, not create a 
bridge between a lost world in the past and a dream world of the fu-
ture. Fichte, and the other philosophers of subjective reflection, thought 
it was quite all right for philosophers to build Utopias. The burden of 
Hegel's criticism in the Difference between Fichte's and Schelling's 
System and again in Faith and Knowledge was that this was one of 
their worst mistakes. Yet by seeking to anticipate history, as he does 
in the System of Ethical Life, he comes perilously close to doing the 
same thing himself. The utopian element in his construction is not 
great, but it is there. This fact was dramatized for Hegel himself by 
his strictly contemporaneous discovery that "Germany is a state no 
longer." 
We must be careful not to exaggerate the difference between Hegel's 
enterprise in the System of Ethical Life and that of his mature Philoso-
phy of Right. Philosophical comprehension always continued to be in 
Hegel's view an activity of critical reconstruction, not just a matter of 
descriptive analysis. And the Greek ideal always retained in his mind 
much of the authority that it has here as a criterion for use in political 
criticism. The general outlines of his mature political theory can be 
clearly descried already in the System of Ethical Life. But the ideal of 
a living organic society portrayed in this early essay is one which Hegel 
consciously set up against the "machine-State" of Fichte and of Prus-
sia; and while the Holy Roman Empire was certainly a corpse, Frederi-
cian Prussia was very much alive. The practical ideal of "reconciliation 
with fate" was one that Hegel never abandoned. This basic principle of 

87 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
the Identity Philosophy remained always with him as the speculative 
axiom that what is actual is rational. By this standard he was bound to 
adjudge the System of Ethical Life to be a philosophical mistake in so 
far as it was merely the expression of a hope. But hope is an essential 
element in all practical existence; for this reason it will not, and cannot, 
ever be entirely banished from a political philosophy that seeks to be 
"systematic" in Hegel's sense. It is always present in Hegel's political 
thought, and it is always severely disciplined by a conscious effort- to 
comprehend historical actuality. But in the System of Ethical Life and 
the essay on the German Constitution hope is allowed to dominate, 
whereas in the Philosophy of Right it is subordinated. Since Hegel's 
own time, prophecy has occupied a prominent place in political philoso-
phy, especially in the work of the thinkers who owe most to him. The 
mature Hegel condemned all efforts at philosophical prophecy, but he 
did not do so without knowing whereof he spoke. The chief benefit that 
we can derive from the study of his earlier social thought, and espec-
ially from the System of Ethical Life, is the opportunity to make our 
own assessment of the wavering assessment of the "principle of hope" 
that Hegel himself made. 
NOTES 
1. See H. Kimmerle, "Zur Chrono-
logie von Hegels Jenaer Schriften," in 
Hegel-Studien IV, 153-54. Kimmerle 
would like to make the System der 
Sittlichkeit later than the final version 
of the German Constitution essay, 
in spite of the objective evidence 
of the handwriting, about which he is 
the expert witness. But since the Ger-
man Constitution essay had its origin 
in a project on which Hegel had em-
barked before he came to Jena; and 
since it was clearly destined for a 
more general audience, I do not think 
we should place any weight on his 
arguments concerning the relative 
complexity and maturity of Hegel's 
social theory in the two essays. The 
general literate public to whom the 
Constitution essay was addressed 
would have been quite unable to fol-
low the argument of the System of 
Ethical Life. 
2. Rosenkranz believed that our 
manuscript was part of the "system" 
of which Hegel spoke in his letter to 
Schelling on 2 November 1800. Hence 
he was forced to regard the lecture 
version(s) as later. It is quite possible 
that he did also have a later draft be-
fore him, since the lecture lists show 
that Hegel announced a course on 
"Natural Law" in Summer 1803, Win-
ter 1803/4, and Summer 1805; and 
some things that Rosenkranz says sug-
gest that he was dealing with more 
than one lecture draft. But since the 
connection of the main lecture manu-
script with our System of Ethical Life 
was evident both to Rosenkranz and 
to Haym, it is virtually certain that the 
fair copy that we have was written 
up from an earlier version used in lec-
tures. In that case the primary lecture-

88 
H. S. Harris 
draft was for Hegel's first announced 
course on the topic (Summer 1802). 
See Rosenkranz, pp. 132-33, translated 
in the Appendix, pp. 178-79. 
3. The part of Rosenkranz's discus-
sion that derives from the first lecture-
manuscript is translated on pp. 179-86. 
4. He announced the course twice, 
but he probably gave it only once (see 
Hegel-Studien IV, 76). 
5. It was possible, of course, to lec-
ture critically about someone else's 
work. Hegel did once specifically pro-
pose to do this, when he announced a 
course on Fichte's theory of natural 
law. That course had to be cancelled 
(for reasons gi,•en in the following 
note). But much of what Hegel had in 
mind to say probably went into the 
essay on Natural Law in the Critical 
Journal. \'Vhen we consider that 
Hegel's initial conception of "Logic" 
(as opposed to ·'Metaphysics") V'Jas 
"critical," we may fairly surmise that 
Faith and Knowledge also contains 
much material from his earliest lecture 
courses. One did not, in this period. 
have to tell students in advance that 
they must read the Critiques or 
Fichte's latest publications. 
6. Hegel always needed whatever 
student fees he could earn-though 
it is recorded that he sometimes re-
mitted or excused payments when the 
student himself was short of money. 
But in order to get students he had to 
become known (another external rea-
son for publishing a textbook). To 
this end it was in Hegel's interest to 
give free lectures on topics of general 
interest if he could afford to do so. 
In his first year at J ena he lived al-
most entirely on his small inheritance 
from his father (plus whatever savings 
he had accumulated from his years as 
a private tutor with "all found"). He 
did not even apply for permission to 
teach until he had lived in Jena more 
than six months (and had published 
his essay on the Difference between 
Fichte and Schelling). Then in his first 
teaching semester he participated with 
Schelling in a "disputatorium" given 
gratis for beginners in philosophy; and 
for his second he announced the 
course on Fichte's theory of Natural 
Law gratis. But at this point the 
faculty intervened. Someone pointed 
out that according to their rules only 
the regular professors were allowed to 
give gratis courses. 
7. Rosenkranz, Hegels Leben, p. 214. 
His authority for this was Gabler, 
who took the course. (Compare Hegel-
Studien IV. 71.) 
8. In his last "Natural Law" an-
nouncement (for Summer 1805) he 
promised to lecture from the coming 
textbook of his own "system of phi-
losophy." 
9. The editorial policies of the com-
mittee that edited Hegel's works after 
his death must be understood in this 
same context. We may-indeed we 
must-regret their often cavalier treat-
ment of the surviving manuscripts. 
But we have to recognize that they 
were only doing their best to make a 
properly autonomous treatise out of a 
slightly peculiar pedagogical device. 
10. The application (in Latin) can be 
found in Hegel-Studien IV, 28. 
11. He did, of course, in his matu-
rity, produce a textbook for his regular 
course on the philosophy of law. But 
the special problems which this 
created for his editors (who had to 
leave the corresponding part of the 
Encyclopedia without its lecture-com-
mentary) illustrates the point I am 
trying to make. The project for the 
Encyclopedia was born from Hegel's 
continuing effort to provide the one 
necessary textbook for his J en a lec-
tures. 
12. The first system to be organized 
on the triadic model of Hegel's ma-
turity was the "system of speculative 

philosophy" of 1803/4. The surviving 
fragments of the manuscript for this 
course are printed in N.K.A. VI. (The 
fragments of the third part-Hegel's 
first "Philosophy of Spirit"-are trans-
lated in the present volume.) 
13. Rosenkranz, Life of Hegel, p. 179. 
The newly discovered manuscripts-
which are plainly texts selected by 
Rosenkranz for citation in his biog-
raphy-will be published in N.K.A. V. 
14. For the earliest form of Hegel's 
theory, see the "Fragment of a System" 
translated in Hegel, Early Theological 
Writings (ed. Knox and Kroner), pp. 
309-19 (and my discussion in Toward 
the Sunlight, pp. 379-99). For his re-
formulation of Schelling's theory of 
the Absolute Identity in terms of this 
conception, see Difference, pp. 171-72. 
When I wrote my discussions of this 
passage (Difference, pp. 20, 51-52, 58-
60), I did not know that the fourfold 
structure mentioned by Rosenkranz 
belonged to a manuscript of 1801. But 
the latest discoveries appear to me to 
be fully concordant with my hypothet-
ical reconstruction of the system that 
Hegel ascribes to Schelling in the 
Difference essay. 
15. All of his efforts during the sum-
mer were bent upon the problems of 
the philosophy of nature-see Kim-
merle's chronology of the manuscripts, 
Hegel-Studien IV, 142-43. 
16. As the reader will see, the first 
"Philosophy of Spirit" preserves much 
of the content and sequence of the 
System of Ethical Life, but the method 
of exposition and progression is quite 
new. (See further my Introduction to 
the "First Philosophy of Spirit".) 
17. The publisher was always willing 
to send the printed sheets to his own 
bookshop as soon as they came from 
the press (or even to send them away 
to another place as Goebhardt sent 
the sheets of the Phenomenology from 
Bamberg). One could subscribe for a 
89 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
work of this sort almost as if it were a 
journal, because binding was always 
a quite distinct matter, at the pur-
chaser's discretion. The first edition of 
Fichte's Science of Knowledge, and 
several of his other works were pub-
lished in this way. Thus if Hegel 
thought that he could get at least the 
first sheets out in time, he could an-
nounce his textbook for the course in 
which those sheets would be used. 
18. I assume that this was some time 
in the summer of 1803 (as far as pub-
lication was concerned). But Hegel 
may have used the manuscript for lec-
tures after that. He announced his 
"Natural Law" course for Summer 
1803 and again for Winter 1803/4. The 
marginal notes in the manuscript sug-
gest that he probably based his course 
upon our manuscript at least once, and 
perhaps twice. The evidence is by no 
means conclusive. We know from the 
manuscripts of Winter 1803/4 that 
Hegel had abandoned his quadripartite 
theory in favor of a triadic one by 
then. This would explain why he 
stopped working on his fair copy, but 
it would not necessarily make the 
manuscript unusable for his lectures 
on Natural Law. On the other hand 
we must never forget that the an-
nouncement of a course is not conclu-
sive proof that it was in fact given; 
if it were not for our manuscript, and 
the inferences we can reliably draw 
from the reports of Rosenkranz and 
Haym, we could not decisively prove 
that Hegel gave any particular course 
on Natural Law (despite five announce-
ments), since there are no surviving 
enrollment lists (such as we have for 
some of Hegel's other courses) or 
known references to a "Natural Law" 
course in the letters, testimonials, or 
memoirs of former students who 
took it. 
19. Spinoza, Ethics, Part II, Prop. 7; 
compare Difference, etc., p. 166. 

90 
H. S. Harris 
20. This sketch is based on the al-
most equally sketchy outline provided 
by Hegel in Difference, etc., pp. 167-69. 
21. Compare my reconstruction in 
Difference, pp. 51-52, 58-60 (which 
was proposed without any knowledge 
of the lecture manuscripts). 
22. Compare Difference, pp. 97, 
176-92. 
23. Compare ibid., pp. 170-72. 
24. The relevant passages from the 
report of Rosenkranz are given in full 
on pp. 178-86. 
25. Compare pp. 99-100 of System 
of Ethical Life below. 
26. See the Contents (where every-
thing not given by Hegel himself has 
been placed in square brackets). 
27. Lasson supplies the heading 
"First level of Nature, subsumption of 
concept under intuition," but this has 
nothing except the safety of absolute 
triviality to recommend it. If we want 
to follow Hegel's own indications in 
the text, we should probably call the 
section "First Level: Feeling or the 
practical." Hegel does not give us 
antithetic headings: Finite/Infinite, 
Real/Ideal; but these antitheses are 
the only "gap-fillers" that come spon-
taneously to mind in a cursory exter-
nal inspection. I hope to show that 
they are, at least, not misleading. 
28. The antithesis of "intuition" and 
"concept" was also used by Schelling 
in his formulations of the Absolute 
Identity. One minor pointer to his 
usage that will be familiar to many 
readers is his bewildered comment 
when he began to read the Phenome-
nology: "I confess that up to now I do 
not comprehend the sense in which 
you oppose the concept to the intui-
tion. But you cannot mean anything 
else by the former except what you 
and I have called "Idea," whose nature 
is just this, to have one side from 
which it is concept and another from 
which it is intuition" (Letter 107, 2 
Nov. 1807, in Hegel, Briefe, ed. Hoff-
meister, I, 194). It must be left to the 
attentive reader to decide whether the 
System of Ethical Life is not already 
closer to the Phenomenology in this 
respect than it is to Schelling's under-
standing of a shared terminology. 
29. These are, of course, the German 
terms that are quite normally used 
for "cause" and "effect." But transla-
tion would obscure the difference 
between this pair and the more schol-
astic Kausalitiit und Dependenz. 
30. Difference, p. 116; Compare also 
p. 161. 
31. Critique of Judgement, Section 
77, (Akad. V, 407-08); Meredith, Teleo-
logical Judgement, pp. 63-64. 
32. The earliest occurrence I have 
found is in On The World-Soul (1798): 
"But the Absolute is not just a willing 
of itself, but a willing in an infinite 
way, hence in all forms, grades, and 
Potenzen of reality" (Werke II, 362). 
But I cannot be certain that this is not 
a revision introduced in the second 
edition of 1806-just as the occurrence 
in the Ideas for a Philosophy of Nature 
(1797) belongs to the "Addition" of 
1803-see Werke II, 66. In that case 
Schelling's first use of the term is 
presumably the one which he cited 
himself (when he awarded the priority 
to Eschenmayer) from his "Introduc-
tion to Nature-Philosophy" (June 1799) 
-see Hegel, N.K.A. IV, 161-62. 
33. One must agree with Tilliette 
(Schelling, vol. I) who reiterates, every 
time he returns to the topic of Paten-
zen in Schelling, that "the study of the 
Potenzen is indubitably not the best 
guideline for cataloguing the evolution 
of Schelling" (331); "it is the use that 
clarifies the term, not the other way 
round" (377); "the theory of the 
powers, through the whole length of 
the philosophy of Identity, never ac-

quires precise contours" (422). 
34. Schelling, Werke IV, 205. 
35. "Ueber das Absolute Identitiits-
System," in Hegel, N.K.A. IV, 162n. 
36. Schelling, Werke IV, 135 (Sec-
tion 43). 
37. Schelling, Werke V, 365-67. 
38. The Leibnizian inspiration of the 
Identity theory was dearly evident to 
its earliest critics. Compare, for ex-
ample, Schelling's indignant footnote 
in the dialogue for the Critical Journal 
(Hegel, W erke IV, 160n). I believe, 
though I cannot definitely prove, that 
the earliest form of the Potenz theory 
was mainly inspired by the equiva-
lence which Leibniz established be-
tween "power" and "existence." In any 
case the theory is fundamentally dif-
ferent from the Aristotelian doctrine 
of "potentiality." A Potenz is an actu-
ality rather than an Aristotelian poten-
tiality. In Aristotelian terms it is best 
identified as a self-actualizing form. 
39. Werke IV, 134. The note that 
Schelling added here, which was sup-
posed to elucidate the concept of 
Potenz, actually elucidates the formula 
A=A. 
40. A conspectus of his efforts to ar-
range the "real series" and the "ideal 
series" is provided by Tilliette, (Schell-
ing I, 417-21). Note how often the 
"ideal series" is absent. 
41. Schelling, Werke IV, 412-23; I 
have also used the summaries of the 
"real series" in the second edition of 
the Ideen (1803)-Werke II 68-69 and 
174-77-which clarifies a few vague-
nesses. For instance the organism is 
the objective or real aspect of Reason, 
the object of the "absolute act of 
cognition." Thus the "real series" con-
nects at its terminus with the begin-
ning of the "ideal series" (and I take 
the connection of Truth and Beauty to 
be the joining of the two ends of the 
ideal series). In the second edition of 
91 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
the Ideen, however, Schelling no 
longer speaks of "subsumption" but 
of "subordination under the real 
unity." 
42. For the "constructed line" in 
Schelling, see, for instance, the Expo-
sition of My System {1801), Section 46 
(Werke IV, 137). I have added the 
zero for the reason indicated in the 
text. Schelling's "axiom" will be found 
in Section 47 (Werke IV, 139). 
43. Hegel thinks in terms of "he"; 
and his conception of human nature 
gives him grounds for regarding "man" 
rather than woman as the ethical 
agent in the fullest sense. So I shall 
generally write "he." But the connec-
tion between sex and rationality ap-
pears to me to be empirically rather 
than rationally grounded in Hegel's 
theory; and since we presently regard 
his empirical grounds as socially mis-
determined, rather than as naturally 
determined, they have little relevance 
for us. Compare note 65 below. 
44. The fact that "community" is 
Kant's preferred synonym for "reci-
procity" as the "totality" of "relation" 
should always be kept in mind. 
45. In its completely general form 
(not just as restricted to the concept of 
Sittlichkeit) "the concept's absolute 
movement" combines the procedure of 
Kant's hypothetical intuitive under-
standing with that of the analytical 
understanding to produce this circular 
motion. But it is also a "real" process, 
not just an "ideal" one. 
46. The insertion of "feeling" into 
the basically Kantian conceptual 
scheme of the Identity theory derives 
from Fichte. "Feeling" is "deduced" as 
the basic category of practical experi-
ence in Part III of the Science of 
Knowledge. But the discussion there 
is very difficult and abstruse. 
47. When Hegel speaks of a "for-
mal" concept, he means the sort of 

92 
H. S. Harris 
theoretical understanding of something 
that can be formulated in a definition. 
A formal concept is the concept of 
something as "possible," and the con-
trast is with an actual concept, or with 
the concept of something actual. The 
contrast formal/ actual may overlap 
with the contrast ideal/real; but it 
does so only at the limits of the range 
of the terms "ideal" and "real." An 
"ideal" can be a very potent actuality; 
and in the context of Hegel's practical 
philosophy "ideal" factors are typically 
"actual" concepts. (The tripled alpha 
in the text should be just 'a'. Lasson 
misunderstood Hegel's own in-
decision about his divisions here.) 
The correspondence of the three 
moments in the "formal" and the 
"real" concepts are shown by the 
doubling of the Greek letters: a) be-
comes ""), {j) becomes {j{j) and 'Y) 
becomes 'Y'Y). 
48. See the fragment on "Love," in 
Hegel, Early Theological Writings, (ed. 
Knox and Kroner), pp. 302-08; also 
the other fragmEnts cited in my To-
ward the Sunlight, pp. 316-17n. 
49. It seems to me that the text is 
faulty here (429-30) and that Hegel 
may have meant to write: "die Realitat 
des Objects ist auf andre Weise sub-
jektiv als es [das Objekt] objektiv ist." 
But I do not feel confident about this 
or any other simple correction that 
occurs to me. I feel slightly more con-
fident that I have grasped the principal 
difference between "the formal con-
cept of speech" and Hegel's exposition 
of actual speech. 
so. The whole discussion of cor-
poreal signs and speech should be 
compared with the theory of imagina-
tion and memory (the corresponding 
moments on the inward side of con-
sciousness) in the first "Philosophy of 
Spirit," pp. 219-22 below. 
51. See "The Spirit of Christianity," 
in Hegel, Early Theological Writings, 
(ed. Knox and Kroner), p. 208. (This 
example can only be used properly 
within the full context of Sittlichkeit, 
which has not yet been developed. But 
I think it shows clearly what Not 
means-compare my Toward the Sun-
light, pp. 283n, 300. 
52. The status of the craftsman (and 
even of the farmer as soon as there 
are craftsmen) may seem to be some-
what ambiguous. For all craftsmen 
produce a surplus and meet some part 
of their needs through exchange. But 
tool-making is a special skill, and 
Hegel ascribes that to the "finite" 
Potenz. Probably he regarded personal 
commissions executed by and for spe-
cific individuals (like the forging of 
Achilles' shield) as belonging, together 
with barter and reciprocal exchange 
of services, to the "finite" level. But 
the Potenzen are only "ideal determi-
nations" of a fluid reality. We must 
not expect to be able to cleave the 
things of nature with a hatchet. The 
attempt to do that is just what typifies 
the present Potenz. 
53. Hegel's analogy here was a bow 
towards the ideal of a perfect parallel 
between Schelling's "real" and "ideal" 
series. For as the reader will see from 
the table on p. 18 above, the "dynamic 
series" of bodies was regarded as the 
natural parallel of the levels of human 
action. In order to understand the 
analogy we have to remember that for 
Schelling and Hegel the paradigm 
case of an electrical phenomenon was 
what we call "static electricity" -the 
attraction of a positively charged ob-
ject of one type for a negatively 
charged object of another. Thus the 
inseparable poles of a bar magnet were 
"dissociated" in electricity. 
54. "The child is the parents them-
selves" Hegel wrote in the first draft 
of the fragment on "Love" in 1797. 
In his revision he cancelled this ro-
mantic excess, but he let stand the 

claim that "in the child their union has 
become unseparated" (see Hegel, Early 
Theological Writings, ed. Knox and 
Kroner, p. 308). The translation of the 
bonds of blood into a system of rec-
ognized obligations is the clearest 
illustration of "ethics as nature or in 
relation." The identity is the inward 
feeling of love (a natural bond) or else 
it "floats above" the child and his 
family as his "natural rights" (and 
they are all ethical by virtue of their 
relation to this ''identity" of "human 
nature"). 
55. Hegel adds parenthetically: "In 
Religion wird es ein anderes." This 
may refer to the dictum of Jesus about 
there being no marriages in Heaven. 
But Hegel does not elaborate so we 
cannot tell just what he means. Per-
haps it is somehow the case that par-
ticulars can be united without being an 
empirical universal at this level. 
56. Hegel's theory of natural bar-
barism is an added complication. But, 
at least he supplies the necessary 
connecting links for that in his brief 
paragraph on "the negative" of the 
first Potenz as a whole (432). That is 
the clue which I have followed here. 
57. Hegel simply contrasts the ethi-
cal Wiederherstellung of life with that 
which occurs in religion, saying that 
"the restoration through religion does 
not affect actuality." Since we do not 
have his account of religion, we cannot 
be quite certain what the Wieder-
herstellung through religion is, but I 
think that my implicit appeal to 
Hegel's treatment of the Antigone in 
the Phenomenology is not a very 
risky conjecture. 
58. For the influence of Macbeth in 
Hegel's earlier reflections, see "The 
Spirit of Christianity" in Hegel, Early 
Theological Writings, (ed. Knox, 
Kroner), pp. 205, 229. 
59. Hegel had studied the history of 
Italy and would not need to depend 
93 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
on Shakespearean examples. So I do 
not mean to suggest that he has any 
Shakespearean model in mind here. 
60. Kimmerle makes no remark 
about the marginalia in the manuscript 
-which are too slight to provide a 
sufficient body of text for dating by 
the handwriting. But Hegel typically 
used his broad margins for subsequent 
revisions and notes; also this manu-
script has the general appearance of a 
fair copy, so one would not expect 
him to use the margin for preliminary 
planning-and if he did so one would 
expect him to cross his notes out 
afterwards. 
61. Clearly there can be slaves in a 
political community, but they are not 
an "estate" (Stand) within it ([471] see 
below p. 152). Also there can be serfs 
or helots. They do form a necessary 
estate, but it is one that has been 
forced out of its proper shape (see 
p. 156). 
62. See especially the "Tiibingen 
fragment" (in my Toward the Sunlight, 
p. 488); the "Positivity" essay (in 
Hegel, Early Theological Writings, ed. 
Knox, Kroner, p. 146); and the "Ger-
man Constitution" essay (in Hegel, 
Political Writings, ed. Knox, Pelczyn-
ski, pp. 219, 241). 
63. See, for instance, Hegel, Early 
Theological Writings, ed. Knox, Kron-
er, pp. 185-88. 
64. For the "indifference point" as 
"identity" and as "totality," compare 
Hegel, Difference, pp. 169-70. The 
System of Ethical Life is a particular 
illustration-the best and the most de-
tailed that we are likely to find-of 
the difficult doctrine that is there put 
forward. 
65. Compare p. 29 above. It is not 
very clear what Hegel takes the natural 
basis of this distinction to be. But 
presumably, like the immediate posit-
ing of the lordship/bondage relation, 
it is a matter of natural strength and 

94 
H. S. Harris 
aggressiveness; certainly the "spiritual" 
aspect of it is a supposedly innate 
rational authority of man over woman 
(and specifically of husband over 
wife). 
66. For the distinction of ethical 
from servile obedience, see p. 41 
above. 
67. It did concern him in the lecture 
draft upon which our manuscript is 
based. But our manuscript declines 
into mere headings, just at the point 
where the lecture draft apparently pro-
vided Hegel's first sketch for the 
discussion of "noble service" in the 
Phenomenology. Compare p. 179 below 
and Miller's translation of the Phe-
nomenology, sections 493-520. 
68. Faith and Knowledge, p. 145. 
(The story comes, via Jacobi's Letters 
on Spinoza, from Herodotus VII, 
134-36). 
69. "Is Judaea, then, the Teutons· 
Fatherland?" (1796). in Hegel. Early 
Theological Writings, pp. 147-48. The 
attempt to collapse the culture of fifth-
century Athens into a single example 
has here produced a rather odd image. 
But the intent is clear (Apelles is 
historically out of place, but he is the 
stock representative of Greek paint-
ing). 
70. Compare the remark of Schelling 
quoted in note 28 above. 
71. See p. 11 above. 
72. See especially Difference, pp. 89-
94, 114; compare the Introduction for 
the Critical Journal, N.K.A. IV, 117-28. 
73. This is evident enough when we 
study the closing section of Faith and 
Knowledge (pp. 189-91) and Natural 
Law (pp. 129-33). The latter passage, 
in particular, makes plain the relevance 
of the System of Ethical Life to the 
"need of the time." 
74. For the absence of necessity in 
practical life, the possibility of other 
duties, and the accidental character of 
ethical insight, see especially Faith and 
Knowledge, pp. 183-87. 
75. Ibid., pp. 190-91. The Protestant-
ism in which "the grief does not en-
dure" achieves its highest level of 
development in the Addresses on Re-
ligion of Schleiermacher (ibid., pp. 
15Q-52). 
76. See pp. 81-85. 
77. An "absolute" multiplicity is 
one which is "complete and self-suffi-
cient," to use Artistotelian terminol-
ogy. Thus virtue as an "absolute 
multiplicity" includes all the virtues 
that are necessary to the full articula-
tion and completely adequate expres-
sion of human nature. Virtue as 
"absolute unity," on the other hand, 
is the living soul of all the articulated 
virtues, the spirit of self-sacrifice and 
self-abandonment apart from which 
they would not be virtuous. 
78. When Hegel speaks of ethical 
life as "beauty" or "beautiful," we 
must remember that the normal Greek 
word for "beauty" and "the beautiful" 
is also the word for "nobility" and 
"the noble." 
79. See Plutarch, Aristides (Every-
man I, 497). I do not wish to imply 
that the story was certainly in Hegel's 
mind, but I think it illustrates what 
he has to say about the mistrustfulness 
of trust. 
80. Republic IV, 433. But Hegel's 
peasantry, unlike Plato's, remains in 
the natural condition of "solid" virtue. 
For this reason it has no "wisdom" 
and becomes politically dependent on 
the nobility. 
81. The historic analogue at Athens 
was the Areopagus. Hegel's reflections 
about this were much influenced by 
his study of the Oresteia of Aeschylus 
(see his essay on Natural Law, Knox 
and Acton, pp. 104-05). 
82. I think it is legitimate to regard 
the remark about "the nothing" which 

hovers over the indifferentiated 
"clump" (482) as an anticipation of 
Hegel's discussion of "Absolute Free-
dom and Terror" in the Phenomenol-
ogy (Miller's translation, sections 
582-95). 
83. This was the extreme which 
Hegel thought Fichte's theory would 
approach in practice (compare Differ-
ence, pp. 146-47). 
84. Lectures on the Philosophy of 
World History, trans. J. Sibree, pp. 49-
52; or Nisbet, pp. 101-111. 
85. "The German Constitution" in 
Hegel's Political Writings, Knox and 
Pelczynski, pp. 143, 15o-51; compare 
my Toward the Sunlight, pp. 438, 
45o-52, 456-57). 
86. See Hegel, Political Writings, ed. 
Knox and Pelczynski, pp. 73, 234-35, 
239-41, 243-45; and my Toward the 
Sunlight, pp. 474-75. 
87. It was translated by Garve and 
published in German between 1796 
and 1799. Hegel first refers to it 
explicitly in his first "Philosophy of 
Spirit" of 1804. The edition from 
which he quotes there was apparently 
the Basel edition of 1791 (in English). 
He owned this edition, but we do not 
know when he acquired it; obviously, 
however, he would be more likely to 
purchase it while he was in Switzer-
land, and before the German transla-
tion was available. 
88. See Rosenkranz, Hegels Leben, 
pp. 86; and my Toward the Sunlight, 
p. 435. 
89. See pp. 246-49; and compare 
further Avineri, Hegel's Theory of the 
Modern State, pp. 104-05, 107-09. 
(Avineri rightly emphasizes how dif-
ferent Hegel's attitude to the problem 
was from that which Marx adopted 
later. But by the time of Marx it was 
a matter of the "real motion" of the 
concept.) 
90. The example with which Hegel 
95 
Hegel's System of Ethical Life 
was himself most familiar, having 
lived in it for more than three years, 
was the aristocratic republic of the 
Canton of Bern. 
91. See Hegel, Political Writings, ed. 
Knox and Pelczynski, pp. 239-41. On 
the other hand, the absence of any 
legislative structures in the "Constitu-
tion" section of the second "Philoso-
phy of Spirit" (1805/06) might be 
taken as an indication that Hegel be-
lieved, at this time, that no such 
articulation could be philosophically 
justified-but see further note 93. 
92. The final remark here, "and then 
by reconciliation with the world and 
itself it passes through the lack of 
imagination in irreligion and in under-
standing," seems to look forward to 
Hegel's lengthy critique of the ancien 
regime and the Enlightenment in the 
Phenomenology. 
93. "He worked out the concept of 
the distinction of constitutions further, 
and identified the free estate in Mon-
archy as the Nobility which stands over 
against Majesty, in a tacit battle that 
has the form of obedience" (Rosen-
kranz, Hegels Leben, p. 133). This 
"battle in the form of obedience" is 
put before us at length in the Phenom-
enology. For the "form of obedience," 
see also p. 41. If the analysis of this 
"class struggle" was carried through to 
the point of social revolution (as in 
the Phenomenology), then it could 
have culminated in the justification of 
a formally established "assembly of 
Estates." 
94. For a summing up of what we 
know about Hegel's earlier reflections 
on the problem of church and state, 
see my Toward the Sunlight, pp. 
409-16. 
95. Rosenkranz, Hegels Leben, p. 
179; cf. p. 6 above. 
96. Rosenkranz, H egels Leben, p. 
133. The whole report is printed in an 

96 
H. 5. Harris 
appendix on pp. 178-86. 
97. The general line of his criticism 
can be gathered from Faith and Knowl-
edge, which he wrote in the summer 
of 1802; see the translation by Cerf 
and Harris, pp. 15Q-52. 
98. I am here depending on the indi-
cations supplied in Difference, pp. 
171-72, for the interpretation of what 
Rosenkranz says about the relation 
between "religion" and das Wissen. 
cannot be far wrong if Religion is 
indeed "the return to the primitive 
simplicity of the Idea." 
99. For the origins of this contention 
in Hegel's religious thought, see the 
"Tiibingen fragment" (in my Toward 
the Sunlight, pp. 503-04). 
100. See pp. 46-47. 
101. For a detailed exposition of the 
doctrine as he held it in 1797/98, see 
"The Spirit of Christianity" (ed. Knox 
and Kroner, pp. 224-53; see also my 
Toward the Sunlight, pp. 346-55). 
102. Hegel und seine Zeit, p. 509, 
note 13. He supplies one sentence that 
was omitted by Rosenkranz (see p. 
185), and he indicates that there are 
other omissions, but he apparently felt 
that they were not of any great 
importance. 
103. Hegel's attention is mainly con-
centrated on the Protestant moment of 
"infinite grief." But we should not 
overlook his attempt to develop the 
doctrine of the Trinity aesthetically. 
The three Persons, with the Mother of 
God, form a sort of "universal" living 
pantheon. Also he treats the "com-
munion of saints" in a patriotic way. 
So we can see in a general way how 
the political "totality" would be inte-
grated. 
104. See Appendix, p. 185-86. 
105. Faith and Knowledge, p. 191. 

G. W. F. Hegel 
System of Ethical Life 
(18o2 I 3) 
Translated by T. M. Knox 
and H. S. Harris 

Hegel 
System of Ethical Life 
A NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION 
Of all Hegel's posthumously published manuscripts, the System der 
Sittlichkeit is perhaps the most enigmatic. Even German scholars who 
have studied all of the posthumous publications closely do not seem 
to dissent from this verdict. For example Haering, who made the most 
comprehensive study of Hegel's early writings, says: "It is true that 
the difficulties of understanding it are quite extraordinary" (Hegel, 
sein Wollen und sein Werk, ii, 338). For this reason we have not al-
ways found it entirely possible to render into clear and intelligible 
English what is scarcely intelligible in German. It has, nevertheless, 
seemed to us that the effort was worth making because this essay is 
the earliest of Hegel's systematic manuscripts that survives intact, and 
it represents his mature social thought in embryonic form. Its impor-
tance, long recognized by German scholars, has now been made clear 
to Anglo-Saxon students by Shlomo Avineri (Hegel's Theory of the 
Modern State, Cambridge, 1972). 
The translation is based on the edition of Georg Lasson (originally 
published by F. Meiner Verlag in 1913). We have used the second 
edition, of 1923, and have indicated the pagination of this edition in 
square brackets in the margin of our text. The original draft for the 
translation was made by T. M. Knox and it is in essence his work. But 
we have both gone over it thoroughly, and we now share responsibil-
ity for whatever errors and imperfections may still be found in it. 
T. M. Knox 
September 1977 
H. 5. Harris 
[Introduction] 
Knowledge of the Idea of the absolute ethical order1 depends entirely 
on the establishment of perfect adequacy between intuition and con-
I. Sittlichkeit-here not a moral philosophy but an ethical order or ethical so-
cial and political life. 
[415] 

100 
G. W. F. Hegel 
cept,2 because the Idea itself is nothing other than the identity of the 
two. But if this identity is to be actually known, it must be thought as 
a made adequacy. But because they are then held apart from one an-
other in an equation [as its two sides], they are afflicted with a differ-
ence. One side has the form of universality, the other the opposed 
form of particularity. Therefore, in order that the equation be com-
pletely established, what [was] first [put] in the form of particularity 
[must] be put in the form of universality, while what [was] given the 
form of universality must now be given the form of particularity.3 
But what is truly the universal is intuition, while what is truly par-
ticular is the absolute concept. Thus each must be posited over against 
the other, now under the form of particularity, again under the form 
of universality; now intuition must be subsumed under the concept 
and again the concept under intuition. Although this last relation is 
2. The terminology derives ultimately from Kant. What is at issue is the "syn-
thesis" of the particular and the universal aspects of experience. Ordinary "finite" 
consciousness never gets beyond a "relation" between the two, in which either 
the "particular" or the "universal" pole is dominant: either "concept" is sub-
sumed under "intuition," or vice versa. But in Hegel's view, ultimate truth in 
metaphysics is the identity of universal and particular, or subject and object, in 
and as the Absolute; while the Idea (i.e., ideal or true form) of political or ethical 
life is an identity of ruler and ruled, or of individual welfare and the welfare of 
the whole. This is adumbrated here, but made clear and explicit in the Philosophy 
of Right (or Law). 
In his Introduction Georg Lasson says: "For Hegel ethical life is actuality prop-
er, the totality of life which brings all the moments of life together under itself, 
and thus what he elsewhere calls subject-objectivity. This actuality grasped ac-
cording to the moment of objectivity, and so as objective subject-objectivity is a 
nature, a givenness. On the other hand, grasped according to the moment of sub-
jectivity, and so as subject-objectivity, it is the individuality of self-consciousness 
which grips actuality in itself. The first, the side of givenness, Hegel calls "intui-
tion," the second, the side of individuality, he calls "concept." The totality of 
ethical actuality is built up by the reciprocal subsumption of one side under the 
other." Lasson's own opinion is that "this dualism of intuition and concept is 
more like a shackle than an aid to the development of his thought." We have 
rendered Hegel's terminology literally here, but it is possible that his meaning 
could be made clearer if his terminology were completely abandoned and a para-
phrase substituted for translation. However the literal rendering becomes less un-
intelligible if the following interpretations of Hegel's phraseology are kept in 
mind. "Intuition" is equivalent to "a perceptible particular" as "concept" is to 
"an abstract universal." Intuitions separated from concepts are both, in Hegel's 
view, abstractions, although for a philosophy based on the understanding (as dis-
tinct from reason) they are constituent parts of our experience, related together 
but not synthesized or united in a concrete whole. For Hegel the truth is that 

101 
System of Ethical Life 
the absolute one, for the reason given, the first one is just as absolute-
ly necessary for their perfect equality to be known, since the latter 
relation is one and only one relation and therefore the absolute equiv-
alence of intuition and knowledge is not posited in it. Now the Idea of 
the absolute ethical order is the resumption of absolute reality into 
itself as into a unity, so that this resumption and this unity are an 
absolute totality. The intuition of this totality is an absolute people, 
while its concept is the absolute oneness of the individuals. 
In the first place, intuition must be subsumed under the concept. 
[416] 
Thereby the absolute ethical order appears as nature, because nature 
itself is but the subsumption of intuition under the concept, with the 
result therefore that intuition, the unity, remains the inner, while the 
multiplicity of the concept and the concept's absolute movement rises 
to the surface. In this subsumption, in that case, the intuition of the 
they are so synthesized and they do form a concrete whole, even if that whole is 
"ideal," and even if in "reality" they are "realized" separately. For example, in 
the real world we can distinguish between an individual citizen and the whole 
people to which he belongs, or between a criminal and the arm of the law. But 
the truth lying behind this distinction between "intuition" and "concept" is their 
ideal and real unity. In the ideal ethical order government and governed are one. 
And although this is "ideal," it is also the "truth" of what really exists. Hegel 
was later to put the point more clearly and explicitly by his distinction between 
"real" and "actual": a bad government may be "real," but it is not "actual," just 
as a man may be "real'' but not "actual" because he is not in conformity with 
what it is to be a man. This reminds us of Platonic "forms," but Hegel regards 
these as "merely" ideal; in his view the ideal is not so impotent as not to exist 
really also. The ideal is not transcendent and far off, but the inner truth and 
essence of reality. The "Idea" is what is absolutely true; it is the synthesis of 
intuition and concept, universal and particular, real and ideal, form and matter, 
in short of all the opposites which, for a preceding philosophy, were merely "re-
lated" and never unified. 
Such a philosophy of "relation" may begin with, or emphasize, one opposite 
and "subsume" the other under it. But which to begin with is arbitrary. To begin 
with one to the exclusion of the other produces results contradicting the original 
presupposition. Consequently Hegel starts by examining what ethical life is like 
if it is regarded as based on relations and not on absolute unity or synthesis. 
This examination must be twofold: first, we presuppose that concept is subsumed 
under intuition, i.e., that the particular is related to the universal by dominating 
it, or by being taken as the basis of the whole, from which, no doubt, abstract 
universals can be derived. Secondly, we perform the reverse procedure, i.e., we 
presuppose universals as dominant and particulars as merely illustrative of them 
-the particular "intuition" is "subsumed" under the "concept." 
The result of the examination is unsatisfactory. Both ways of looking at the 
social and political sphere are possible; one may supplement the other; one may 

102 
G. W. F. Hegel 
ethical order [its particular aspect] which is a people becomes a mani-
fold reality or a single individuality, a single man; and as a result the 
absolute resumption of nature into itself becomes something hovering 
over this single individual, or something format because the formal is 
precisely the unity which is not in itself either absolute concept or 
absolute movement.4 At the same time, precisely because this unity 
hovers over the single individuat he does not emerge from it or ab-
stract himself from it; it is in him but is concealed in him; and it ap-
pears in this contradiction, namely, that this inner light does not abso-
lutely coincide or unite with the universal light hovering over him as 
something according to which he is driven on, as impulse or striving. 
Or in this way the identity of the particular (i.e., the side onto which 
the intuition has now stepped) with the universal is determined as an 
imperfect unification or as a relation between the two. 
[417] 
1. ABSOLUTE ETHICAL LIFE ON THE BASIS OF RELATION 
Here too, as before, there must be subdivision. This abolute ethical life 
on the basis of relation, or natural ethical life must be so treated that 
(a) concept is subsumed under intuition and (b) intuition is subsumed 
under concept. In (a) the unity is the universal, the inner, while in 
(b) it enters over against [the inner] and is once more in a relation 
with the concept or with the particular.5 In both cases ethical life is a 
drive [or impulse]. This means a drive which (a) is not absolutely one 
with the absolute unity, ({3) affects the single individual, ('Y) is satis-
be a lower stage superseded by the other as a higher one; but both imply that 
universal and particular are only related to one another, and it is as if social life 
were split into its extremes and so killed. "There is missing, alas!" as Goethe 
said, "the spiritual bond." By being split in this way the bond of connection has 
been snapped, and instead of a living whole we are left with dead abstractions. 
The true absolute ethical order is a living whole, within which there are differ-
ences indeed, but they are differences united, like the parts of a living body, by 
a common life. 
3. I.e., there can be no identity, as distinct from mere equality, of universal and 
particular unless the universal is particularized and the particular universalized. 
4. Haering (Hegel, ii, 348) describes this passage as a "stone of stumbling," 
and this is not surprising. 
5. Each subsumption has two opposite subsumptive processes as its "moments." 
So whether the unity is an inward thought or an outward reality, it will appear 
on both sides of the equation as concept in relation to particular or particular in 
relation to concept at the appropriate stage of the logical development. 

103 
System of Ethical Life 
fled in this single individual-this singular satisfaction is itself a total-
ity, but (a) it goes at the same time beyond the single individual, 
though this transcendence is here in general something negative and 
indeterminate. 
The satisfaction itself is nothing but the union of concept and intui-
tion. Thus it is a totality, living but formal, precisely because this level, 
at which it is, is itself a determinate one, and thus absolute life hovers 
over it just as much as it remains something inner. But absolute life 
remains something inner because it is not the absolute concept, and so, 
as inner life, is not present at the same time under the form of the 
opposite, i.e., of the outer. And for this very reason it is not absolute 
intuition because it is not present to the subject in the relation as such, 
and so its identity likewise cannot be the absolute one. 
A. [First Level:6 Feeling as Subsumption of Concept under Intuition] 
The first level is natural ethical life as intuition7-the complete undif-· 
ferentiatedness of ethical life, or the subsumption of concept under 
intuition, or nature proper. 
But the ethical is inherently by its own essence a resumption of 
[418] 
difference into itself, reconstruction; identity rises out of difference 
and is essentially negative; its being this presupposes the existence of 
what it cancels. Thus this ethical nature is also an unveiling, an emer-
gence of the universal in face of the particular, but in such a way that 
this emergence is itself wholly something particular-the identical, 
absolute quantity remains entirely hidden. This intuition, wholly im-
mersed in the singular, is feeling, and we will call this the level of 
practice. 
The essence of this level is that feeling (not what is called "ethical 
feeling") is something entirely singular and particular, but, as such, 
is separated, a difference not to be superseded by anything but its ne-
6. Potenz. The word means "power" and is drawn from the vocabulary of 
mathematics, where x is raised to the second, third, or nth power. Schelling de-
scribes his Absolute as a series of Potenzen. Hegel uses the same metaphor at 
this time, but he later discarded it on the ground that it was purely quantitative, 
not qualitative as well. "level" rather than "power" seems to convey Hegel's 
meaning here less ambiguously. 
7. I.e., the dominance of the individual or the particular. Subject differs from 
object and is driven to overcome this difference. The drive or instinct is natural, 
and thus "natural" ethical or social life is identical with that life as relation. Sub-
ject and object are related, not unified. Difference is not overcome. 

104 
G. W. F. Hegel 
gation, the negation of the separation into subject and object; and this 
supersession is itself a perfect singularity and an identity without dif-
ference. 
The feeling of separation is need; feeling as separation superseded 
is enjoyment. 
The distinctive character [of feeling] as a level [in ethical life as 
relation] is that feeling lies in the particular and concerns the singular 
and that it is absolute feeling; but this feeling which proceeds to super-
sede the separation of subject and object must display itself as a total-
ity and therefore be the totality of the levels [of ethical life as rela-
tion]. 
This feeling (a) subsuming the concept, and (b) subsumed under 
the concept [is now to be considered]. 
(a) If feeling is presented as subsuming the concept, the formal con-
cept of feeling is presented. This is properly its concept which is ad-
duced above, namely, that [there is present] 
(a) the supersession of what is wholly and absolutely identical and 
unconscious-separation, and this separation as feeling or need, 
(/3) difference in contrast to this separation; but this difference is 
negative, namely, a nullification of separation-( margin: desire, ideal 
[419] 
determination of the object); and so a nullification of the subjective 
and the objective and of the empirical objective intuition according to 
which the object of need is outside; or this nullification is effort and 
labor; 
('Y) the nullification of the object, or the identity of the first two fac-
tors-conscious feeling, i.e., unity arising out of difference, i.e., en-
joyment. 
The subsumption of feeling under the concept or, more objectively, 
the concept of practical feeling unfolded in all its dimensions, neces-
sarily presents feeling (a) in its dimensions according to the nature of 
the form or the concept, (b) but in such a way that a whole, feeling, 
remains throughout, while the form is something wholly external for 
the feeling. 
(a) Practical feeling, or enjoyment, an identity void of intuition, 
of difference, and, therefore, of reason, proceeds thus to the absolute 
nullification of the object. Consequently, it is a complete indifference 
of the subject for ethical life, without making conspicuous a middle 
term uniting the opposites in itself; so there is no resumption of intui-
tion into itself and there is no self-knowledge in the subject. 
(aa) Need here is an absolute singleness, a feeling restricting itself 

105 
System of Ethical Life 
to the subject and belonging entirely to nature. This is not the place 
for comprehending the manifold and systematic character of this feel-
ing [of need]. Eating and drinking [are the paradigmsV 
({3{3) By this difference an inner and an outer are directly estab-
lished and the outer is plainly determined (e.g., as edible or drinkable) 
according to the specific character of the feeling. Thereby this external 
thing ceases to be something universal, identical, quantitative, and be-
comes a single particular. The subject, despite his singularity in this 
feeling and in the relation posited in the separation [of subject from 
object] remains in himself undifferentiated; he is the universal, the 
subsuming power. The specific character which the object of enjoy-
ment acquires at this level is entirely ideal or subjective-the object is 
directly its own opposite.9 The specific character does not enter the 
objectivity of intuition in such a way that something might arise for 
the subject which he may recognize as the identity of subject and ob-
ject. -Or this identity is transferred into the individual subject alone, 
[420] 
with the result that, being determined purely ideally [or subjectively], 
the object is simply annihilated. 
('Y'Y) This enjoyment in which the object is determined purely ideal-
ly, and entirely annihilated, is purely sensuous enjoyment; i.e., the 
satiation which is the restoration of the indifference and emptiness of 
the individual or of his bare possibility of being ethical or rational. 
The enjoyment is purely negative because it pertains to the individ-
ual's absolute singularity and therefore involves the annihilation of 
the object and the universal. But it remains essentially practical and is 
distinguished from absolute self-feeling by reason of the fact that it 
proceeds from difference and to that extent involves a consciousness 
of the objectivity of the object.10 
(b) This feeling in the form of difference or of the subsumption of 
intuition under the concept must itself be likewise comprehended as 
8. Need is subjective, satisfied by the destruction of the object, e.g., in eating. 
Feeling is practical when, as need, it proceeds actively to satisfy itself. At this 
stage the union of subject and object involves the physical assimilation, and so 
the destruction, of the object. 
9. I.e., it is for the subject that it is edible, so that its character as edible is sub-
jective, not inherent in the object itself. 
10. Need implies a difference between itself and what is needed. Enjoyment 
presupposes this difference. It is not a feeling of self alone, with no conscious-
ness of the object. Thus a difference and a relation between subject and object 
persists, despite the annihilation of this edible object. 

106 
G. W. F. Hegel 
a totality: (aa) as negative practical intuition (labor), ({3{3) difference 
(product) and possession, ('Y'Y) tool.11 
(aa) (margin: This is intuition subsumed under the concept; labor 
is itself the subsuming of the object; the subject is indifference, the 
subsumer; where the subject is the subsumer, the concept is domi-
nant.) Practical feeling subsumed under the concept displays the dis-
persed moments of the totality as realities. These moments are: 
(a) The nullification of the object or of the intuition, but, qua mo-
ment, in such a way that this annihilation is replaced by another intui-
tion or object; or pure identity, the activity of nullifying, is fixed; in 
this activity there is abstraction from enjoyment, i.e., it is not achieved, 
for here every abstraction is a reality, something that is. The object is 
not nullified as object altogether but rather in such a way that another 
object is put in its placeP for in this nullification, qua abstraction, 
there is no object or there is no enjoyment. But this nullification is 
[421] 
labor whereby the [object] determined by desire is superseded in so 
far as it is real on its own account, an object not determined by desire, 
and determination by desire qua intuition is posited objectively. In la-
bor the difference between desire and enjoyment is posited; the enjoy-
ment is obstructed and deferred; it becomes ideal or a relation, and on 
this relation, as a result of labor, there is posited as now immediately 
emerging 
(i)13 
the bearing of the subject on the object, or the ideal deter-
mining of the object by desire: this is taking possession 
[of the object]; 
(ii) 
next, the real annihilation of the object's form, for 
objectivity or difference remains-the activity of labor 
itself; 
(iii) 
finally, the possession of the product, or the possibility 
of annihilating the product as something [explicitly real], 
through a connection of the first kind [i.e., consumption in 
eating] with respect to its matter, as well as through this 
second one [i.e., working on it], which consists in anni-
hilating its form and in its being given a [new] form by the 
subject-i.e., the possibility of a transition to enjoyment 
11. ('Y"Y) disappears altogether at this stage, and ({3{3) partially. 
12. I.e., the object as worked upon by the subject. 
13. Roman numerals aTe substituted here and below for the Hebrew characters 
which Hegel used. 

107 
System of Ethical Life 
which, however, remains wholly ideal [or purely sub-
jective]. 
Possession is not present at all at the first stage of practical feeling, 
and likewise taking possession is there purely as a moment; or rather 
neither of them is a real moment; they are not fixed or kept distinct 
from one another. (There can be no question at all here of the legal 
basis or aspect of possession.) 
Taking possession is the ideal [moment] in this subsumption [of 
the product under the subject], or the moment of rest; labor [the sec-
ond moment] is the reality or movement, the entry of the subsuming 
subject into the reality of the object; the third moment, the synthesis, 
is the possession, preservation, and saving of the object. In this third 
moment there is present that ideal character according to the first mo-
ment, but it is present in the object as real according to the second 
moment. 
({3) The product has already been defined formally in (a) as the 
identity of the ideal character, but of it as objectively real and sepa-
rate; but the essential thing was the identity, activity as such, and so 
as something inner and so as not emerging; it must emerge on the 
object, and this second stage {3{3 considers the relation of the inhibited 
feeling to the object inhibited by its nullification [i.e., by the labor ex-
[422] 
pended to change it], or the difference present even in labor, namely, 
the difference between the reality and proper nature of the object and 
the way it is to be, and is, ideally determined by labor. In (aa) it was 
the object that was subsumed, here it is the subject. Or, in (aa), the 
ideal relation in labor was considered, here the real one. Here labor is 
properly subsumed under intuition, for the object is in itself the uni-
versal, so, where the object is subsuming, the singularity of the sub-
ject has its proper rational place; the subject is concept in itself, differ-
ence, and it subsumes [or is dominant]. 
In (aa) labor is wholly mechanical, since individuality, abstraction, 
pure causality is present in the form of indifference; it is dominant 
and is therefore something external to the object. For therewith cau-
sality is posited in truth, since this subject is something single, abso-
lutely existing on its own account, and therefore absolute separation 
and difference. Whereas, when the object and the universal are sub-
suming, causality is absent, since the object in itself is the indifference 
of the particular and one with the particular for which, it follows, 
particularity is a purely external form, not the inner essence, not sub-
jective being. 

108 
G. W. F. Hegel 
Because the object is subsuming labor under itself, it is in the rela-
tion as real (as previously it was nullified, posited as the pure abstrac-
tion of an object), for, as subsuming, it is an identity of universal and 
particular, of the latter in abstraction against the subject. In this way 
labor too is real and living, and its vitality is to be known as a totality, 
but each moment [of the totality is to be known] as itself a living in-
dividual labor, as a particular object. 
For the subsuming [or dominating] living object and living labor 
there is (a) intuition subsumed under the concept, then (b) the concept 
under intuition, and (c) the identity of the two. 
(aaa) The living object [the individual] subsumed under the con-
cept [the universal] is the plant bound up with the element or the 
pure quantity of the earth and producing itself towards the element of 
air in the production, infinitely varied (by the concept), of its own en-
[423] 
tire individuality and totality. Every part of the plant is itself an indi-
vidual, a complete plant; it maintains itself against its inorganic nature 
only because it produces itself wholly at every point of contact, or, 
withering on the stem, is devoted to producing (to the absolute con-
cept, to being the opposite of itself). Because in this way the plant is 
in the power of the element [the earth], the labor [of horticulture] too 
is principally directed against the element and is mechanical, but it is 
left to the element to compel the plant to produce. Labor can have 
little or nothing of the specific life of the plant and is therefore alive 
in the sense that it alters just the external form of the element alone 
and does not destroy it chemically; and this form is an inorganic na-
ture which itself is only related to something living and lets it alone. 
({3{3{3) The concept of the living thing subsumed under intuition is 
the animal. For since this subsumption itself is one-sided, not intuition 
subsumed under the concept in the like way over again, life here is an 
empirically real, infinitely dispersed life, displaying itself in the most 
manifold forms. For the form or the absolute concept is not itself unity 
or universality again. Thus here there is an individuality without in-
telligence, not, as in the case of the plant, where each unit of the indi-
vidual is itself a mass of such units; on the contrary, here there is in-
difference in more extended difference and distinction. 
Labor on the animal is thus less directed to its inorganic nature than 
to its organic nature itself, because the object is not an external ele-
ment but the indifference of individuality itself. The subsumption is 
determined as a taming of the animal's particular character for the 
sort of use appropriate to its nature-now more negatively, as com-
pulsion, now more positively as trust on the part of the animal; and 

109 
System of Ethical Life 
now too, just as plants are determined by the elements, so the animals 
which are destined to be annihilated in being eaten, simply have their 
natural breeding [and rearing] determined. 
If the use of plants is very simple and if labor for them is to be ex-
hibited as a need of the subject, or as how this labor is present in a 
subjective form, then [the need they supply is that of] nourishment, 
[424] 
is nonorganic, or only slightly organic and individualized, and so not 
a nourishment of a higher difference of the individual, whether human 
or animal-a weak irritability, impotent outgoing, a nullification which 
is itself a weak one owing to the weak individuality of the plant-and 
for our delight they provide sensuous enjoyments (smelling and see-
ing) which are finer than [those of] nullification, since the plant is not 
nullified. Or this is the level of the enjoyment of plants just as the 
level for animals is their domestication. The enjoyment [involved] is 
sensuous because the senses are the animal level in man, an individ-
uality of feeling which as sense is an individual, not [a member] like 
an arm, etc., but a complete organism. As enjoyment, the eating of 
plants is the subsumption of the concept under intuition as feeling; 
whereas labor for plants is the subsumption of intuition under the 
concept. Thus, from the point of view of labor, the cultivation of 
plants, taming them, is the subsumption of concept under intuition; 
the converse is the case from the point of view of enjoyment, for the 
enjoyment of the single sense is the dispersal of enjoyment. (margin: 
N.B., as regards subsumption, enjoyment and labor are converse). 
Subjectively regarded, the domestication of animals is a more many-
sided need, but in so far as they are means [to enjoyment], they can-
not be considered here yet, for this would not be a subsumption of the 
concept under intuition, not the aspect of living labor. This labor is an 
association of animals for movement and strength, and the delight of 
this propagation is above all the aspect that is relevant here. 
(yyy) The absolute identity of these two levels is that the concept 
of the first is one with the identity of the second or is the absolute 
concept, intelligence. Labor, subsumed under this intuition, is a one-
sided subsumption, since in this very process the subsumption itself is 
superseded. The labor [which produces intelligence] is a totality, and 
with this totality the separate subsumptions of the first and second 
levels are now posited together. Man is a power-level, universality, for 
his other, but so is his other for him; and so he makes his reality, his 
own peculiar being, his effectiveness in reality into an adoption into 
indifference, and he is now the universal in contrast to the first level. 
And formative education (Bildung) is this absolute exchanging in the 
[425] 

110 
G. W. F. Hegel 
absolute concept wherein every subject, and universal too, makes its 
particularity immediately into universality, and in the see-saw posits 
itself as universal at the very moment when it posits itself as one level 
and is thus confronted by its "being a level," and by the unmediated 
universality in that being, so that it itself becomes a particular. The 
ideal determination of the other is objective, but in such a way that 
this objectivity is immediately posited as subjective and becomes a 
cause; for if something is to be a power [or level] for another, it must 
not be pure universality and indifference in a relation to it; it must be 
posited for itself [as what the other is to become J or a universal truly 
and absolutely-and the intelligence is this in the highest degree. In 
precisely one and the same respect it is a universal and a particular, 
both of these absolutely at once and without any mediation, whereas 
the plant and the animal are universal in ways distinct [from their 
particularity]. 
The concept of this relation is the identity of both the two first 
levels, but as a totality it falls itself under the form of the three levels. 
(i) As feeling or as pure identity: for feeling, the object is charac-
terized as something desired. But here the living thing is not to be 
determined by being worked upon: it should be an absolutely living 
thing, and its reality, its explicit [being]-for-self, is simply so deter-
mined as what is desired, i.e., this relation of desire is by nature made 
perfectly objective, one side of it in the form of indifference, the other 
in that of particularity. This supreme organic polarity in the most 
complete individuality of each pole is the supreme unity which nature 
can produce. For it cannot get past this point: that difference is not 
real but absolutely ideal. The sexes are plainly in a relation to one an-
other, one the universal, the other the particular; they are not abso-
lutely equal. Thus their union is not that of the absolute concept but, 
because it is perfect, that of undifferentiated feeling. The nullification 
of their own form is mutual but not absolutely alike; each intuits him/ 
herself in the other, though as a stranger, and this is love. The incon-
ceivability of this being of oneself in another belongs therefore to na-
ture, and not to ethical life, for the latter, with respect to the different 
[426) [poles], is the absolute equality of both-and, with respect to their 
union, it is absolute union on the strength of its ideality. But the ideal-
ity of nature remains in inequality and therefore in desire in which 
one side is determined as something subjective and the other as some-
thing objective. 
(ii) Precisely this living relation, in which intuition is subsumed un-

111 
System of Ethical Life 
der the concept, is ideal as a determinacy of the opposites, but in such 
a way that, owing to the dominance of the concept, difference remains, 
though without desire. Or the determinacy of the opposites is a super-
ficial one, not natural or real, and practice does proceed to the super-
session of this opposite determinacy, yet not in feeling but in such a 
way that it becomes intuition of itself in a stranger, and thus ends 
with a perfect opposing individuality, whereby the union of nature is 
rather superseded. This is the relation of parents and children: the ab-
solute union of both is directly sundered into a relation. The child is 
man subjective but in such a way that this particular is ideal, and the 
form [of humanity] is only an outward [appearance]. The parents are 
the universal, and the work of nature proceeds to the cancelling of this 
relation, just as the work of the parents does, for they continually 
cancel the external negativity of the child and, just by so doing, estab-
lish a greater inner negativity and therefore a higher individuality. 
(iii) But the totality of labor is perfect individuality and therefore 
equality of the opposites, wherein relation is posited and superseded; 
appearing in time it enters every instant and turns over into the oppo-
site moment, according to what has been said above; this is the uni-
versal reciprocal action and formative education of mankind. Here too 
the absolute equality of this reciprocity exists in the inner life and, 
throughout the level we are at, the relation persists solely in the single 
individual-a recognition which is mutual or supreme individuality 
and external difference. In these levels there is a process from the first 
to the third separately, or [i] the unification of feeling is superseded, 
but for this very reason [ii] [the same is true of] desire and its corre-
sponding need, and [iii] [at the third level] each is an essential being, 
alike and independent. The fact that the relation of these beings is one 
of love and feeling too is an external form, not affecting the essence 
of the relation which is the universality in which they stand. 
(c) The first two levels are relative identities. Absolute identity is 
[427] 
something subjective, outside them. But since this level is itself a 
totality, rationality must enter as such and be real; it lies concealed in 
the idea of the formal levels. This rational element is what enters as 
mediator; it shares the nature of both subject and object or is the 
reconciliation of the two. 
This mediating term consequently exists under the form of the three 
levels. 
(aa) Concept subsumed under intuition. This therefore belongs en-
tirely to nature, because the difference involved in intelligent being is 

112 
G. W. F. Hegel 
not present in the intelligent being as the subsumption of intuition 
under the concept. It is absolute indifference, not like the indifference 
of nature which occurs in the formal levels and cannot liberate itself 
from difference. At the same time this middle term is not the formal 
identity which came before us hitherto as feeling, but a real absolute 
identity, a real absolute feeling, the absolute middle term, explicit in 
this entire aspect of reality, existing as an individual. Such a middle 
term is the child, the highest individual natural feeling, a feeling of a 
totality of the living sexes such that they are entirely in the child, so 
that he [is J absolutely real and [is J individual and real in his own eyes. 
The feeling is made real so that it is the absolute identity of the nat-
ural beings, so that in this identity there is no one-sidedness, and no 
circumstance is missing. Their unity is therefore real immediately, and 
because they [the parents] are real and separate within the context of 
nature itself and cannot supersede their individuality, the reality of 
their unity is thus an essential being and an individual with a reality 
of its own. In this perfectly individualized and realized feeling, the par-
ents contemplate their unity as a reality; they are this feeling itself 
and it is their visible identity and mediation, born from themselves. 
-This is the real rationality of nature wherein the difference of the 
sexes is completely extinguished, and both are absolutely one-a liv-
ing substance. 
({3{3) Intuition subsumed under the concept is the mediating term 
in difference or this is alone the form in which the real mediating term 
is, while the substance is dead matter; the mediating term as such is 
[428] 
wholly external, according to the difference of the concept, while the 
inner is pure and empty quantity. This middle term is the tool. Be-
cause in the tool the form or the concept is dominant, it is torn away 
from the nature to which the middle term of sexual love belongs, and 
lies in the ideality, as belonging to the concept, or is the absolute real-
ity present in accordance with the essence of the concept. In the con-
cept, identity is unfilled and empty; annihilating itself, it exhibits only 
the extremes. Here annihilation is obstructed; emptiness is real and, 
moreover, the extremes are fixed. In one aspect the tool is subjective, 
in the power of the subject who is working; by him it is entirely de-
termined, manufactured, and fashioned; from the other point of view 
it is objectively directed on the object worked. By means of this mid-
dle term [between subject and object] the subject cancels the immedi-
acy of annihilation; for labor, as annihilation of intuition [the partic-
ular object], is at the same time annihilation of the subject, positing in 
him a negation of the merely quantitative; hand and spirit are blunted 

113 
System of Ethical Life 
by it, i.e., they themselves assume the nature of negativity and form-
lessness, just as, on the other side (since the negative, difference, is 
double), labor is something downright single and subjective. In the 
tool the subject makes a middle term between himself and the object, 
and this middle term is the real rationality of labor; for the fact that 
work as such, and the object worked upon, are themselves means, is 
only a formal mediation, since that for which they exist is outside 
them, and so the bearing of the subject on the object is a complete 
separation, remaining entirely in the subject within the thinking of in-
telligence. In the tool the subject severs objectivity and its own blunt-
ing from itself, it sacrifices an other to annihilation and casts the sub-
jective side of that on to the other. At the same time its labor ceases 
to be directed on something singular. In the tool the subjectivity of 
labor is raised to something universal. Anyone can make a similar tool 
and work with it. To this extent the tool is the persistent norm of labor. 
On account of this rationality of the tool it stands as the middle 
term, higher than labor, higher than the object (fashioned for enjoy-
ment, which is what is in question here), and higher than enjoyment 
or the end aimed at. This is why all peoples living on the natural level 
have honored the tool, and we find respect for the tool, and conscious-
[429] 
ness of this, expressed in the finest way by Homer. 
('Y'Y) The tool is under the domination of the concept and therefore 
belongs to differentiated or mechanical labor; the child is the middle 
term as absolutely pure and simple intuition. But the totality of both 
[intuition and concept] must possess just this [intuitive] simplicity, 
yet also the ideality of the concept; or in the child the ideality of the 
extremes of the tool must enter its substantial essence, while for this 
very reason in the tool an ideality must enter [into] its dead inner be-
ing, and the reality of the extremes must vanish; there must be a mid-
dle term which is perfectly ideal. The absolute concept, or intelligence, 
is alone absolute ideality; the middle term must be intelligent, but not 
individual or subjective; only an infinitely vanishing and self-mani-
festing appearance of that; a light and ethereal body which passes 
away as it is formed; not a subjective intelligence or an accident of it, 
but rationality itself, real but in such a way that this reality is itself 
ideal and infinite, in its existence immediately its own opposite, i.e., 
non-existence; and so an ethereal body which displays the extremes 
and therefore, while real according to the concept, also has its ideality, 
since the essence of this body is immediately to pass away, and its ap-
pearance is this immediate conjunction of appearance and passing-
away. Thus such a middle term is intelligent; it is subjective or in in-

114 
G. W. F. Hegel 
telligent individuals, but objectively universal in its corporeality, and 
because of the immediacy of the nature of this being, its subjectivity 
is immediately objectivity. This ideal and rational middle term is 
speech, the tool of reason, the child of intelligent beings. The sub-
stance of speech is like the child-i.e., what is most indeterminate 
purest, most negative, most sexless, and, on account of its absolute 
malleability and transparency, capable of assuming every form. Its 
reality is completely absorbed into its ideality, and it is also individ-
ual; it has form or a reality; it is a subject aware of itself; it must 
therefore be distinguished from the formal concept of speech, for 
which [i.e., speech] objectivity itself is a [form of] speech; but this 
objectivity is only an abstraction, since the reality of the object is sub-
[430] 
jective in a way different from the way the subject is subjective. Ob-
jectivity is not itself absolute subjectivity. 
The totality of speech in the form of the levels: 
(i) of nature, or inner identity. This is the unconscious attitude of a 
body which passes away as quickly as it comes, but which is some-
thing single, having only the form of objectivity, not bearing itself in 
or on itself, but appearing in a reality and substance foreign to itself. 
Gesture, mien, and their totality in the glance of the eye-this is not 
fixed objectivity or objective in the abstract; but it is fleeting, an acci-
dent, a shifting ideal play. But this ideality is only a play in another 
who is its subject and substance. The play expresses itself as feeling 
and pertains to feeling, or it exists in the form of pure identity, of a 
feeling, articulated indeed, but changing, yet the play is entire in every 
moment, without the ideality of its objective character or its own cor-
poreality to which nature cannot attain. 
(ii) When the intuition of speech is subsumed under the concept, it 
has a body of its own, for its ideal nature is posited in the concept, 
and the body is the bearer, or what is fixed. This body is an external 
material thing, but one which as such is completely nullified in its sub-
stantial inwardness and self-awareness; it is ideal and without mean-
ing. But because the concept is dominant, this body is something dead, 
not something that endlessly annihilates itself inwardly, but some-
thing which, being here at the stage of difference, is annihilated only 
externally for the dominant [concept]. Thus its doubled being is like-
wise an externality; it expresses nothing but the reference to the sub-
ject and the object, between which it is the ideal middle term; but this 
linkage is made clear by a subjective thinking outside the object. On 
its own account it expresses this linkage negatively, by its being anni-

115 
System of Ethical Life 
hilated as subject, or, having an explicit meaning of its own, it ex-
presses the linkage by its inner meaninglessness, so that it is a middle 
term, in so far as it is a thing, something explicitly determinate, and 
yet not explicit to itself, not a thing, but immediately the opposite of 
itself-self-aware but flatly not self-aware, but being for another; and 
so the absolute concept is here really objective. A corporeal sign: this 
is the ideality of the tool, just as demeanor is the ideality of the child; 
[431] 
and just as to make a tool is more rational than to make a child, so a 
corporeal sign is more rational than a gesture. 
Since the sign corresponds to the absolute concept, it does not ex-
press any shape adopted by the absolute concept that has been as-
sumed into indifference. But because it expresses only the concept, it 
is bound up with what is formal and universal. Just as mien and ges-
ture are a subjective language, so the corporeal sign is an objective 
one. Just as subjective speech is not torn loose from the subject and is 
not free, so this objective speech remains something objective and 
does not carry knowledge-its subjective element-in itself directly. 
Hence knowledge is also tacked on to the object; it is not a determi-
nate character of the object but is only accosted by it and remains 
accidental to it. Precisely because the linkage is accidental, knowledge 
expresses in the object, but free from it, a reference to something sub-
jective which, however, is set forth in a quite indefinite way and must 
first have thought added to it. Knowledge therefore expresses also the 
connection between the possession of an object and a subject [who 
possesses it] . 
(iii) The spoken word unites the objectivity of the corporeal sign 
with the subjectivity of gesture, the articulation of the latter with the 
self-awareness of the former. It is the middle term of intelligences; it 
is logos, their rational bond. Abstract objectivity, which is a dumb 
recognition, gains in it [an] independent body of its own, which exists 
for itself but according to the mode of the concept, and which, namely, 
immediately destroys itself. With the spoken word the inner directly 
emerges in its specific character, and in it the individual, intelligence, 
the absolute concept displays itself as purely single and fixed, or its 
specific character is the body of absolute singularity whereby all indef-
initeness is articulated and established, and precisely on the strength 
of this body it is at once absolute recognition. The ring of metal, the 
murmur of water, the roaring of the wind does not proceed from with-
in, changing from absolute subjectivity into its opposite, but arises by 
an impulse from without. An animal's voice comes from its inmost 
point, or from its conceptual being, but, like the whole animal, it be-

116 
G. W. F. Hegel 
[432] 
longs to feeling. Most animals scream at the danger of death, but thi.to 
is purely and simply an outlet of subjectivity, something formal, of 
which the supreme articulation in the song of the birds is not the 
product of intelligence, of a preceding transformation of nature into 
subjectivity. The absolute solitude in which nature dwells inwardly at 
the level of intelligence is missing in the animal which has not with-
drawn this solitude into itself. The animal does not produce its voice 
out of the totality contained in this solitude; its voice is empty, formal, 
void of totality. But the corporeality of speech displays totality re-
sumed into individuality, the absolute entry into the absolute [mo-
nadic] point of the individual whose ideality is inwardly dispersed into 
a system. -This is the supreme blossom of the first level, but treated 
here not in its content but only in form as the abstraction of the su-
preme rationality and shape of singularity; but as this pure speech it 
does not rise above singularity. 
The negative side of this level is distress, natural death, the power 
and havoc of nature, as well as of men reciprocally, or a relation, 
though a natural one, to organic nature. 
B. Second Level: of Infinity and Ideality in Form or in Relation 
This is the subsumption of intuition under the concept, or the emer-
gence of the ideal and the determining of the particular or the singular 
by the ideal. There is causality here, but only as purely ideal, for this 
level is itself a formal one;14 the ideal is only the abstraction of the 
ideal. There is not yet any question of the ideal's being constituted as 
such for itself [or realized] and becoming a totality. Just as the single 
individual was dominant at the first level, so the universal is dominant 
here. At the first level the universal was hidden, something inner, and 
speech itself was considered there only as something singular, i.e., in 
its abstraction. 
In this subsumption singularity immediately ceases. It becomes 
something universal which plainly has a bearing on something else. 
Beyond this formal concept, however, the living natural relation be-
comes nevertheless a fixed relation which it was not previously; also 
[433] 
universality must hover over this natural relation and overcome this 
fixed relation. Love, the child, culture, the tool, speech are objective 
and universal, and also are bearings and relations, but relations that 
14. I.e., one in which the universal is still abstract and present only as ideal. 

117 
System of Ethical Life 
are naturat not overcome, casual, unregulated, not themselves taken 
up into universality. The universal has not emerged in and [out of] 
them themselves, nor is it opposed to them. 
When this subsuming universality is looked at from the point of 
view of particularity, there is nothing in this level that is void of a 
bearing on other intelligences/5 with the result that equality is posited 
among them, or it is universality which thus appears in them. 
a) [The Subsumption of the Concept under Intuition] 
This is the relation of the universal opposed to the particular as it ap-
pears in the particular, or the subsumption of the universal [the con-
cept] under intuition. The universal, dominant itself in the singular or 
the particular, bears solely on this single being; or the single being is 
first, not the ideal hovering over it, nor a multiplicity of particulars 
subsumed under the ideal. The latter consists in the purely practical, 
real, mechanical relation of work and possession. 
(i) The particular, into which the universal is transferred, therefore 
becomes ideal and the ideality is a partition of it. The entire object in 
its determinate character is not annihilated altogether, but this labor, 
applied to the object as an entirety, is partitioned in itself and becomes 
a single laboring/6 and this single laboring becomes for this very rea-
son more mechanical, because variety is excluded from it and so it be-
comes itself something more universal, more foreign to [the living] 
wholeP This sort of laboring, thus divided, presupposes at the same 
time that the remaining needs are provided for in another way, for 
this way too has to be labored on, i.e., by the labor of other men. But 
this deadening [characteristic] of mechanical labor directly implies the 
possibility of cutting onself off from it altogether;18 for the labor here 
is wholly quantitative without variety, and since its subsumption in 
intelligence is self-cancelling, something absolutely external, a thing, 
can then be used owing to its self-sameness both in respect of its labor 
[434] 
and its movement. It is only a question of finding for it an equally 
dead principle of movement, a self-differentiating power of nature like 
15. "Intelligences'" means "individuals in whom a universal element has 
emerged." 
16. I.e., the labor is divided up between many individuals. 
17. This refers to the "division of labor." The machine takes the place of the 
individual craftsman, and what originally was the product of one individual is 
now so divided up that many individuals are involved. This is a remove from a 
living whole to a more mechanical one. 
18. The labor is given to a machine instead of to an individual craftsman. 

118 
G. W. F. Hegel 
the movement of water, wind, steam, etc., and the tool passes over 
into the machine, since the restlessness of the subject, the concept, is 
itself posited outside the subject [in the energy source]. 
(ii) Just as the subject and his labor are determinate here, so the 
product of the labor is too. It is parcelled out and hence it is pure 
quantity so far as the subject is concerned. Since his quantity [of the 
common product] is not in a relation with the totality of [his] needs, 
but goes beyond them, it is quantity in general and abstractly. Thus 
this possession has lost its meaning for the practical feeling of the 
subject and is no longer a need of his, but a surplus ;19 its bearing on 
use is therefore a universal one and, this universality being conceived 
in its reality, the bearing is on the use of others. Because, from the 
point of view of the subject, the need is explicitly an abstraction of 
need in general, the bearing [of the surplus] on use is a general possi-
bility of use, not just of the specific use that it expresses, since the 
latter is divorced from the subject. 
(iii) The subject is [not] simply determined as a possessor, but is 
taken up into the form of universality; he is a single individual with 
a bearing on others and universally negative as a possessor recognized 
as such by others. For recognition is singular being, it is negation, in 
such a way that it remains fixed as such (though ideally) in others, in 
short the abstraction of ideality, not ideality in the others. In this re-
spect possession is property; but the abstraction of universality in 
property is legal right. (It is laughable to regard everything under the 
form of this abstraction as legal right; right is something entirely for-
mal, (a) infinite in its variety, and without totality, and ({3) without 
any content in itself.) The individual is not a property owner, a right-
ful possessor, absolutely in and of himself. His personality or the ab-
[435] 
straction of his unity and singularity is purely an abstraction and an 
ens rationis. Moreover it is not in individuality that law and property 
reside, since individuality is absolute identity or itself an abstraction; 
on the contrary, they reside solely in the relative identity of posses-
sion, in so far as this relative identity has the form of universality. A 
right to property is a right to right; property right is the aspect, the 
abstraction in property, according to which property is a right remain-
ing for its other, the particular, as possession. 
The negative of this level is the bearing of freedom as against the 
universal, or the negative in so far as it constitutes itself positively and 
19. At the earlier level enjoyment followed on the satisfaction of a need. Ma-
chinery makes possible the accumulation of capital, a surplus going beyond the 
satisfaction of a particular individual's need. 

119 
System of Ethical Life 
sets itself up in difference against the universal, so that it bears on it 
and is not the lack and concealment of difference. In the latter unde-
veloped respect the preceding levels would be its negative. 
The mechanical negative, i.e., what conflicts with and does not fit a 
particularity determined by the subject, does not belong to this context. 
It does not apply at all to this determinacy in so far as this is practical; 
on the contrary, mechanical negation is a matter belonging entirely to 
nature. -The negative comes into consideration here only in so far as 
it conflicts with the universal as such, and in so far as it, as a single 
individuality, gives universality the lie and abstracts from it; not when 
singularity really annihilates the form of the universal-for in that 
case the negative posits the universal as truly ideal and itself as one 
with it-but, on the contrary, when the negative cannot annihilate the 
universal or unite itself with it but is differentiated from it.20 -The 
negative thus consists in the nonrecognition of property, in its can-
cellation. But property itself is here posited as not necessary, not tied 
to the use and enjoyment of the subject. The matter [owned], so far 
as posited here as something universal, is itself therefore posited as 
something negative. The subject's tie with it is itself determined as 
merely a possible one. Thus negation can affect merely this form, or 
not the matter itself but only the matter as universal [quantity]. A sur-
plus, i.e., what already has no explicit bearing on need, is cancelled. 
As a surplus its destiny is to pass out of [the producer's] possession. 
Whether this supersession, this negation, is or is not compatible with 
this destiny must emerge from the following level. 
b) The Subsumption of Intuition under the Concept 
[436] 
A relation is established between the subject and his surplus labor; 
the bearing of this labor for him is ideal, i.e., it has no real bearing on 
[his own] enjoyment. But at the same time this bearing has emerged 
as something universal or infinite, or as a pure abstraction-posses-
sion in law as property. But what is possessed here has by its nature 
a real bearing on the subject [on his enjoyment] only when it is anni-
hilated [consumed], and the previously ideal tie of possession by the 
20. Hegel excludes two sorts of negation from consideration here: (a) the me-
chanical negative, e.g., when an "act of God" or some natural process like fire 
destroys property; (b) either the moral negation involved in theft, or the specula-
tive negative, when individuality annihilates the abstract form of the universal 
and embodies it, e.g., when property is destroyed by fire-fighters to prevent the 
fire from spreading. This leaves alienation of ownership as the sort of negation 
in question here. 

120 
G. W. F. Hegel 
subject is now to become a real one. The infinite, i.e., legal right, as 
the positive element in this whole level, is something fixed and is to 
persist; the ideal tie of possession is to persist too and yet it is to be 
made real. This whole level is in general the level of difference, and 
the present dimension [of this level] is likewise difference, and so the 
difference of difference-previously difference at rest, here in move-
ment. Difference is implied [in] the concept, i.e., the relation of a sub-
ject to something characterized as merely possible. Owing to the new 
difference, the relation of the subject to his labor is superseded, but 
because infinity, i.e., legal right as such, must remain, there appears 
instead of that ideal connection with the surplus [possession] its con-
ceptual opposite, the real connection with use and need. The separa-
tion is starker, but for that very reason the urge for unification [is 
stronger too], just as the magnet holds its poles apart, without any 
urge of their own to unity, but, when the magnet is severed, their 
identity being cancelled, [we have] electricity, a starker separation, 
real antithesis, and an urge for unification.21 What is cancelled here is 
oneness with the object through one's own labor, or the individual 
special characteristic of it [as "mine"] (magnetism [in the proposed 
analogy]). What is substituted is real difference, cancellation of the 
identity of subject and object; and therefore a real annihilation of the 
opposite or a difference which has a bearing on need. -In this whole 
level, both (a) and (b), thoroughgoing ideality first begins, as well as 
the true levels of practical intelligence; with surplus labor this intelli-
gence ceases even in need and labor to belong to need and labor. The 
relation to an object which this intelligence acquires for need and use, 
[437] 
and which is posited here, namely, the fact that intelligence has not 
worked up the object for its own use since it has not consumed its own 
labor on it, is the beginning of legal, and formally ethical, enjoyment 
and possession. 
What is absolute and ineradicable in this level is the absolute con-
cept, the infinite itself, legal right at rest in (a), or subsisting in its 
opposition and therefore inwardly concealed and hidden; and, in (b), 
legal right in motion, one accident being cancelled by another, passing 
through nothingness, so that legal right emerges and stands over 
against [the accidents] as causality. 
21. Hegel is here employing the "dynamic series" in Schelling's philosophy of 
Nature for purposes of analogy. Since this was the direct parallel in the real 
series to human action in the ideal series (see the table in the Introductory Essay 
on p. 00), this is not surprising. The reader should compare also the lectures on 
the Philosophy of Nature (324, Addition) where Hegel remarks that Schelling 
called electricity "a fractured magnetism." 

121 
System of Ethical Life 
This pure infinity of legal right, its inseparability, reflected in the 
thing, i.e., in the particular itself, is the thing's equality with other 
things, and the abstraction of this equality of one thing with another, 
concrete unity and legal right, is value; or rather value is itself equality 
as abstraction, the ideal measure [of things]-but the actually found 
and empirical measure is the price. 
In the supersession of the individual tie [of possession], there re-
mains (a) legal right, ({1) the same appearing in something specific in 
the form of equality, or value; (y) but the individually tied object loses 
its tie and (iJ) there enters in its stead something really determinate 
linked to [the individual's] desire. 
[a] The inner essence of this real exchange is, as has been shown, 
the concept that remains the same [throughout], but is real in intelli-
gences, more precisely in needy intelligences, beings who are con-
cerned with both a surplus and an unsatisfied need at the same time. 
Each of them enters upon the transformation of the individual thing 
with which he is linked ideally and objectively [as its legal owner] 
into something that is subjectively linked with his need. This is ex-
change, the realization of the ideal relation. Property enters reality 
through the plurality of persons involved in exchange and mutually 
recognizing one another.22 Value enters in the reality of things and 
applies to each of them as surplus; the concept enters as self-moving, 
annihilating itself in its opposite, taking on the opposite character in 
place of the one it possessed before, and indeed so determined that 
what was formerly ideal now enters as real, because the first level is 
that of intuition, the present one that of the concept; the former is 
ideal, the latter naturally prior, [but] the ideal in practice comes before 
enjoyment. 
[fl] Externally exchange is twofold, or rather a repetition of itself, 
[438] 
for the universal object, the surplus, and then the particular element 
in need is materially an object, but its two forms are necessarily a rep-
etition of it. But the concept or essence [of exchange] is the transfor-
mation itself, and since the absolute character of the transformation 
is the identity of the opposite, this raises the question of how this pure 
identity, infinity, is to be displayed as such in reality. 
The transition in the exchange is a manifold, divided, externally 
22. Value and price are being regarded as universal and equal for everyone. An 
equal and fixed price is a necessary presupposition of exchange between individ-
uals. Law is passive cr at rest in value and price, but it comes into movement in 
exchange. In economics Hegel usually followed, first Sir James Steuart, and later 
Adam Smith. Here his intention is to move from abstract to concrete, from equal-
ity or sameness to a synthesis of differences. 

122 
G. W. F. Hegel 
connected series of the single moments of the whole transaction. It 
may take place in one moment, in a single present instant, by the 
transfer of the possessions of both parties from one to the other. But 
if the object is manifold, the transition is likewise manifold, and the 
desired quid pro quo is something manifold, and the opposite quid pro 
quo is not there until it is complete; it is not there at the start or in the 
continuation, except as only an advance.23 Therefore exchange is itself 
something uncertain because of these empirical circumstances, which 
appear as the gradualness of the execution of the exchange, the post-
ponement of the whole execution to a later date, etc.; the present mo-
ment does not appear here. The fact that the execution of the transac-
tion is something inner and presupposes sincerity is something entirely 
formal, for the point about it is that the exchange has not happened. 
The transaction and transfer has not become a reality, and the uncer-
tainty depends on the manifold aspects [of the transaction], on their 
dispersal, and on the possibility of abstraction [i.e., withdrawal] from 
it or of freedom. 
(The third moment of this second level (b)) 
(y) This irrationality or the antithesis between (i) this empty pos-
sibility and freedom and (ii) actuality and what appears, must be super-
seded, or the inner [intentions] of the intelligent agents who are mak-
ing the exchange must emerge. This freedom must become equivalent 
to necessity, so that the transaction is deprived of its empirical con-
tingenc[ies], and the middle term of the transition, i.e., identity, is es-
tablished as something necessary and firm. The nature and form of 
the exchange remains, but the exchange is taken up into quantity and 
universality. 
This transformation of exchange is contract. In it the absolutely 
[439] 
present moment in a pure exchange is formed into a rational middle 
term which not only admits the empirical phenomena in exchange but, 
in order to be a totality, demands them as a necessary difference which 
is undifferentiated in a contract. 
Owing to the necessity acquired by the transition in a contract, the 
empirical aspect, the fact that the two sides of the bargain are fulfilled 
separately at different times, becomes unimportant-it is something 
accidental which does no harm to the security of the whole. It is as 
23. Two people may make an exchange on the spot. But if the transaction is a 
complicated one, e.g., involving cargoes of goods, the exchange will take time and 
the quid pro quo, e.g., payment for the goods, will not be there until the whole 
transaction is at an end, unless some advance is made by agreement a jump 
ahead of the due date. 

123 
System of Ethical Life 
good as if the bargain had already been carried out. The right of each 
singular party to his property is already transferred to the other and 
the transfer itself is regarded as having happened. The outwardly ap-
parent fact that the transaction has not yet been executed, that the 
transfer has not yet been empirically carried out in reality, is wholly 
empirical and accidental; or rather it has been nullified, so that the 
property has been entirely deprived of the external tie whereby it is 
not only marked as a possession but is still in the possession of the 
one who has already transferred it. 
[iJ] Thus since contract transforms the transfer from a real one into 
an ideal one, but in such a way that this ideal transfer is the true and 
necessary one, it follows that in order to be this it must itself have 
absolute reality. The ideality or universality which the present mo-
ment acquires must thus exist, but reality itself transcends the sphere 
of this formal level. This much results formally, that ideality as such, 
and also as reality in general, can be nothing other than a spirit which, 
displaying itself as existing, and wherein the contracting parties are 
nullified as single individuals, is the universal subsuming them, the 
absolutely objective essence and the binding middle term of the con-
tract. Owing to the absolute oneness in the contract, freedom and pos-
sibility are superseded with respect to the members of the transfer. 
This oneness is not something inner like fidelity and faith, in which 
inner being the individual subsumes identity under himself; on the 
contrary, in face of the absolutely universal, the individual is what is 
subsumed. Thus his caprice and idiosyncrasy are excluded because 
in the contract he invokes this absolute universality. But though the 
whole force of universality likewise enters the contract, this still hap-
pens only formally. The determinate provisions linked by that form 
and subsumed under it are and remain determinate provisions; they 
[440] 
[are] only empirically infinitely posited as this or that or the other, yet 
they subsist. They are treated as the singular aspect of the individuals 
or of the things about which the contract is made. And for this reason 
true reality cannot fall within this level. For the aspect of reality here 
is an explicitly subsisting finitude which is not to be annihilated in 
ideality, and it follows that it is impossible for reality here to be a true 
and absolute one. 
c) [The Level of the Indifference of (a) and (b)] 
The third level is the indifference of the preceding ones; that relation 
of exchange and the recognition of possession, which therefore is 
property and hitherto had a bearing on the single individual, here be-

124 
G. W. F. Hegel 
comes a totality, but always within individuality itself; or the second 
relation is taken up into universality, the concept of the first. 
(a) Relative identity or the relation. 
The surplus set into indifference, as something universal and the 
possibility of [satisfying] all needs, is money, just as labor, which 
leads to a surplus, leads also, when mechanically uniform, to the pos-
sibility of universal exchange and the acquisition of all necessities. 
Just as money is the universal, and the abstraction of these, and me-
diates them all, so trade is this mediation posited as activity, where 
surplus is exchanged for surplus. 
({3) But the intuition of this totality, yet of this totality as singular-
ity, is the individual as the indifference of all specific characteristics, 
and this is how he displays his individuality as totality. 
(i) Formally, in simplicity or intuition, the individual is the indiffer-
ence of all specific characteristics and as such is in form a living being 
and is recognized as such; just as he was recognized previously only 
as possessing single things, so now he is recognized as existing inde-
pendently in the whole. But because the individual as such is purely 
and simply one with [his] life, not simply related to life, it is impos-
sible to say of life, as it could be said of other things with which he is 
purely in relation, that he possesses it. This has sense only in so far as 
[441] 
the individual is not one such living thing but an absolutely entire 
system, so that his singularity and life are posited like a thing, as 
something particular. The recognition of this formallivingness [of the 
individual] is, like recognition and empirical intuition in general, a 
formal ideality. Life is the supreme indifference of the single indi-
vidual, but it is also something purely formal, since it is the empty 
unity of individual specific characteristics, and therefore no totality 
and no self-reconstructing whole is posited out of difference. As what 
is absolutely formal, life is for this very reason absolute subje.ctivity 
or the absolute concept, and the individual, considered under this ab-
solute abstraction, is the person. The life of the individual is the ab-
straction, pushed to its extreme, of his intuition, but the person is the 
pure concept of this intuition, and indeed this concept is the absolute 
concept itself. 
In this recognition of life or in the thinking of the other as absolute 
concept, the other [person] exists as a free being, as the possibility of 
being the opposite of himself with respect to some specific character-
istic. And in the single individual as such there is nothing which could 
not be regarded as a specific characteristic. Thus in this freedom there 
is just as easily posited the possibility of nonrecognition and nonfree-

125 
System of Ethical Life 
dom. All things are likewise, owing to their concept, the possibility of 
being the opposite of themselves; but they remain in absolute deter-
minacy or are lower levels of necessity; they are not all indifferently 
identical but absolutely different from one another. But intelligence or 
human life is the indifference of all specific characteristics. 
(ii) This formal, relationless, recognition, [presented] in relation and 
difference or according to the concept. 
At this [level] a living individual confronts a living individual, but 
their power (Potenz) of life is unequal. Thus one is might or power 
over the other. One is indifference, while the other is [fixed] in differ-
ence. So the former is related to the latter as cause; indifferent itself, 
it is the latter's life and soul or spirit. The greater strength or weak-
ness is nothing but the fact that one of them is caught up in differ-
ence, fixed and determined in some way in which the other is not, but 
is free. The indifference of the one not free is his inner being, his for-
mal aspect, not something that has become explicit and that annihi-
lates [his] difference. Yet this indifference must be there for him; it is 
[442] 
his concealed inner life and on this account he intuits it as its opposite, 
namely, as something external, and the identity is a relative one, not 
an absolute one or a reconciliation [of internal and external]. This re-
lation in which the indifferent and free has power over the different is 
the relation of lordship and bondage [or master and servant]. 
This relation is immediately and absolutely established along with 
the inequality of the power of life. At this point there is no question 
of any right or any necessary equality. Equality is nothing but an ab-
straction-it is the formal thought of life, of the first level, and this 
thought is purely ideal and without reality. In reality, on the other 
hand, it is the inequality of life which is established, and therefore the 
relation [of lordship] and bondage. For in reality what we have is 
shape and individuality and appearance, and consequently difference 
of power (Potenz) and might, or the relative identity where one indi-
vidual is posited as indifferent and the other as different. Here plural-
ity is the plurality of individuals, for, in the first level, absolute sin-
gularity has been posited in the formality of life, posited as the form 
of the inner life, since life is the form of external [identity or] absence 
of difference. And where there is a plurality of individuals, there is a 
relation between them, and this relation is lordship and bondage. 
Lordship and bondage is immediately the very concept of the plurality 
relation. There is no need for transition or conclusion here, as if some 
further ground or reason were still to be exhibited for it. 
Lordship and bondage are therefore natural, because individuals 

126 
G. W. F. Hegel 
confront one another in this relation; but the relation of lordship and 
obedience is also set up whenever individuals as such enter into [a 
moral] relation in connection with what is most ethical, and it is a 
question of the formation of the ethical order as framed by the highest 
individuality of genius and talent. Formally this [moral] relation is the 
same [as the natural one]; the difference consists in the fact that in 
ethical lordship and obedience the power or might is at the same time 
something absolutely universal, whereas here it is only something par-
ticular; in ethical lordship individuality is only something external and 
the form; here it is the essence of the relation and on this account 
there is here a relation of bondage, since bondage is obedience to the 
single individual and the particular. 
{443] 
The master [or overlord] is the indifference of the specific charac-
teristics, but purely as a person or as a formally living being. He is also 
subject or cause [as opposed to object or instrument]. Indifference [or 
identity] is subsumed under "being the subject" or under the concept; 
and the bondsman is related to him as to formal indifference or the 
person. Because the commander is here qua person, it follows that the 
absolute, the Idea, the identity of the two is not what is posited in the 
master in the form of indifference and in the servant in the form of 
difference; on the contrary, the link between the two is particularity 
in general, and, in practice, need. The master is in possession of a sur-
plus, of what is physically necessary; the servant lacks it, and indeed 
in such a way that the surplus and the lack of it are not single [acci-
dental] aspects but the indifference of necessary needs. 
(iii) This relation of bondage or of person to person, of formal life 
to formal life, where one is under the form of indifference and the 
other under that of difference, must be undifferentiated or subsumed 
under the first level, so that the same relation between persons, the 
dependence of one on the other, remains, but that the identity is an 
absolute one yet inner, not explicit, and the relation of difference is 
only the external form. But the identity must necessarily remain an 
inner one, because at this whole level it is either only a formal one 
(legal right) hovering over the particular and opposed to it, or an 
inner one, i.e., one subsumed under individuality as such, under the 
intuition of particularity, and so appears as nature, not as an identity 
subjugating a pair of antitheses or as ethical nature in which that anti-
thetic pair has been likewise superseded, but in such a way that par-
ticularity and individuality are what has been subsumed. 
This indifference of the lordship and bondage relation, an identity 
in which personality and the abstraction of life are absolutely one and 

127 
System of Ethical Life 
the same, while this relation is only something qua apparent and ex-
ternal_ is the [patriarchal] family. In it the totality of nature and all the 
foregoing are united; the entire foregoing particularity is transformed 
in the family into the universal. The family is the identity: 
(a) of external needs 
({3) of sex-relationship, the natural difference posited in the 
individuals themselves, and 
(Y) of the relation of parents to children or of natural reason, 
[444] 
of reason emergent, but existing as nature. 
(a) On account of the absolute and natural oneness of the hus-
band, the wife, and the child, where there is no antithesis of person 
to person or of subject to object, the surplus is not the property of one 
of them, since their indifference is not a formal or a legal one. So too 
all contracts regarding property or service and the like fall away here 
because these things are grounded in the presupposition of private 
personality. Instead the surplus, labor, and property are absolutely 
common to all_ inherently and explicitly; and on the death of one of 
them there is no transfer from him to a stranger; all that happens is 
that the deceased's participation in the common property ends. 
Difference is [i.e., it has here] the superficial [aspect] of lordship. 
The husband is master and manager, [but] not a property owner as 
against the other members of the family. As manager he has only the 
appearance of free disposal [of the family property]. Labor too is di-
vided according to the nature of each member of the family, but its 
product is common property. Precisely because of this division each 
member produces a surplus, but not as his own property. The transfer 
of the surplus is not an exchange, because the whole property is di-
rectly, inherently, and explicitly common. 
({3) The sex relation between husband and wife is naturally undif-
ferentiated. I have said in (a) that in respect of personality, i.e., as 
holders of property, they are definitely one. But the sex relation gives 
a special form to their indifference, for it is something inherently par-
ticular. When the particular as such is made into a universal or the 
concept, it can only become something empirically universal. (In reli-
gion things are different.) Particularity becomes persistent, enduring, 
and fixed. The sex relation is restricted entirely to these two individ-
uals together, and it is established permanently as marriage. 
Because this relation is grounded on a particular character of indi-
viduals-though its peculiarity is settled by nature and not by some 

128 
G. W. F. Hegel 
capricious abstraction-this relation seems to be a contract. But it 
would be a negative contract which annuls just that presupposition on 
[445] 
which the possibility of contract in general rests, namely, personality 
or being a subject [possessing rights]. All this is nullified in marriage, 
because there the person gives himself [or herself] up as an entirety. 
But what is supposed in a contractual relation to become the property 
of the other could simply not come into his or her possession. Since 
the relation is personal, what is supposed to be transferred remains the 
property of the person, just as, in general, no contract is inherently 
possible about personal service, because only the product, and not the 
personality, can be transferred into the possession of the other. The 
slave can become property as an entire personality, and so can the 
wife; but this relation is not marriage. There is no contract with the 
slave either, but there can be a contract with someone else about the 
slave or the woman, e.g., among many peoples the woman is bought 
from the parents. But there can be no contract with her, for in so far 
as she is to give herself freely in marriage, she gives up, along with 
herself, the possibility of a contract, and so does the man. The terms 
of their contract would be to have no contract and so the terms would 
be immediately self-destructive. 
But by a positive contract each party [in a marriage] would make 
himself [or herself] a thing in his own possession, would make his 
whole personality into a determinate characteristic of himself to which 
he is absolutely linked at the same time; yet as a free being he must 
not regard himself as absolutely bound up with any single character-
istic of himself, but as the indifferent identity of all of them. We 
would have to think, as Kant does,24 of the sexual organs as this char-
acteristic. But to treat one's self as an absolute thing (Sache), as abso-
lutely bound up with a specific characteristic, is supremely irrational 
and utterly disgraceful. 
(y) In the child the family is deprived of its accidental and empirical 
existence or the singularity of its members, and is secured against the 
concept whereby the singulars or subjects nullify themselves. The 
child, contrary to appearance, is the absolute, the rationality of the 
relationship; he is what is enduring and everlasting, the totality which 
produces itself once again as such. But because in the family, as the 
supreme totality of which nature is capable, even absolute identity re-
mains something inner, and is not posited in the absolute form itself, 
it follows that the reproduction of the totality is an appearance, i.e., 
24. Metaphysik der Sitten-Rechtslehre §§ 24-27 (Akad. VI, 277-80-omitted 
in Ladd's abridged translation). 

129 
System of Ethical Life 
the children. In the true totality the form is entirely one with the es-
[446) 
sence, and so its being is not the form driven into the separation of its 
constituent features. But here what is persistent is other than what is; 
or, reality surrenders its persistence to something else which itself en-
dures over again only in the sense that it becomes, and transmits to 
another its being, which it cannot retain itself. The form, or infinity, 
is thus the empirical or negative [form] of being other, which cancels 
one determinate characteristic only by positing another, and is only 
really positive by being always in another. Might and the understand-
ing, the differentiating characters of the parents, stand in an inverse 
relation with the youth and force of the child, and these two aspects of 
life fly from and follow one another and are external to one another. 
2. T HE N E G AT I V E 0 R F REED 0 M 0 R T R AN S G R E S S I 0 N 
The foregoing has singularity as its principle; it is the Absolute sub-
sumed under the Concept; all the levels express specific characteristics, 
and the moments of indifference are formal; universality as opposed 
to particularity is undifferentiated only in relation to lower particulars, 
and these moments of indifference are themselves particulars once 
again. There is thus plainly no [moment that is] absolute; any one 
can be cancelled. The indifference which is the absolute totality of 
each level is not inherent, but lies beneath the form [of singularity] 
which is the subsuming moment.25 The cancellation of specific charac-
teristics must be absolute in itself, the assumption of all specific char-
acteristics into absolute universality. 
This assumption is absolute and positive, but it is also purely nega-
tive. Just as, in the foregoing, absolute form expressed itself as the 
persistence of antithesis, so it expresses itself here in its opposite, or 
in the nullification of antithesis. 
But when this nullification is purely negative, it is dialectical, i.e., it 
is cognition of ideality and the real supersession of specific character-
[447) 
istics. [Here] the negative is not fixed, it is not in antithesis [to the 
positive], and thus it is in the Absolute. Absolute ethical life rises 
25. Thus, for example, all family relations are summed up in, explained by, and 
get their meaning from the infant in the cradle. "Contrary to appearances," as 
Hegel puts it, the child is the way in which the Concept (of Reason) subsumes 
the Absolute (of Life). But as he or she grows up, he or she passes through all 
the relations that are subsumed. 

130 
G. W. F. Hegel 
above specific determinacy because the Absolute cancels the determi-
nacy, though in such a way that the Absolute unites it with its opp0-
site in a higher unity; thus the opposite is not left by the Absolute to 
persist in truth but is given a purely negative meaning; but owing to 
the perfect identity with its opposite, its form or ideality is cancelled 
by the Absolute, which precisely deprives it of its negative character 
and makes it absolutely positive or real. 
The cancellation of the negative is quite different. It is itself can-
cellation of cancellation, opposition to opposition, but in such a way 
that ideality or form likewise persists in it though in a converse sense; 
i.e., cancellation maintains the ideal determinate being of singularity 
and so determines it as negative; thus it allows the singularity and 
oppositeness of determinate being to persist, and does not annul the 
antithesis but transforms the real form into the ideal one. 
In the foregoing every level and every reality of a level is an iden-
tity of opposites, absolutely inherently. The identity is subsumed un-
der the form, but the form is something external. The real persists; 
the form is what is on the surface, and its determinacy is enlivened, 
made indifferent; the real is indeed something determinate, but it is 
not determinate for itself; the real is not determined, and its essence 
is not posited, as determinate. But now the form, as negative, is the 
essence. The real becomes posited as something ideal; it is determined 
by pure freedom. 
This is the same transformation that occurs when sen~ation is pos-
ited as thinking. The specific characteristic remains the same; red as 
sensed remains red as thought, but the thought is determined at the 
same time as something nullified, cancelled, and negative. The free-
dom of intelligence has raised the specific character of the sensation 
of red to universality; it has not deprived the sensation of its opposi-
tion to other determinate sensations, but has only made the false 
attempt to do that. It has reflected on the sensation, raised it to in-
finity, but in such a way that finitude remains definitely persistent. 
It has transformed the objective reality of time and space into a sub-
jective one. Objective ideality is "being other," i.e., having other [col-
ors] around it; quite simply and in every respect ideality and infinity 
[448] 
are posited empirically as something everywhere "other." Subjective 
ideality cleanses infinity of this multiplicity, gives to it the form of 
unity, binds the specific character itself together with the infinity 
which lies objectively outside it and is manifested as "being other," 
and in this way makes infinity into a unity as the absolute determi-
nacy of the subjective or ideal as opposed to the real. And while the 

131 
System of Ethical Life 
determinacy as real, as sensation, had the form, infinity, as it were on 
the surface outside it, it is now bound up with it. 
Similarly in the practical sphere what in and by itself is negative is 
a determinacy posited by the same moment of negation according to 
the preceding level of necessity; it is itself something objective, ideal, 
and universal. The negation of this practical positing is the restoration 
of the first original particularity of the antithesis. Because the former 
objectivity is superseded, the practical sphere falls under the control 
of the inorganic and objective levels. Murder does away with the liv-
ing thing as an individual or subject, but ethical life does this too. But 
ethical life does away with subjectivity or with the ideal specific char-
acter of the subject, whereas murder does away with his objective ex-
istence; it makes him something negative and particular which falls 
back under the control of the objective world from which he had torn 
himself free by being something objective himself. Absolute ethical 
life directly cancels the individual's subjectivity by nullifying it only 
as an ideal determinacy, as an antithesis, but it lets his subjective es-
sence persist quite unaffected. And he is allowed to persist, and is 
made real, as subject precisely because his essence is left undisturbed 
as it is. In ethical life intelligence remains a subjectivity of this kind. 
This negative, or pure freedom, leads to the cancelling of the objec-
tive in such a way that the negative makes the ideal specific determi-
nacy, which in the sphere of necessity is only external and superficial, 
into the essence.26 Thus it negates reality in its specific determinacy, 
but it fixes this negation. 
But against this negation there must be a reaction. Since the can-
cellation of the specific determinacy is only formal, determinacy [as 
such] persists. It is posited ideally, but remains in its real specific 
character. And in it life is only injured, not elevated [to a higher level], 
and therefore must be restored. But in its actuality an injury of life 
cannot be restored (restoration by religion does not affect actuality); 
[449] 
but the restoration here does affect actuality, and this reconstruction 
26. This sentence is a crux. The text reads: "Dieses Negative oder die reine 
Freiheit geht also auf die Aufhebung des Objektiven so, daB es die ideelle, in der 
Notwendigkeit nur ausserliche oberflachliche Bestimmtheit, das Negative zum 
Wesen macht, also die Realitat in ihrer Bestimmtheit negiert, aber diese Negation 
fixiert." Our rendering takes "das Negative" as a nominative specifying the re-
ferent of "es." It can be taken as an accusative (a second object which "Dieses 
Negative ... macht zum Wesen"). In that case the translation should be aug-
mented. Our second sentence •hould read: "It makes itself into the essence; thus 
it negates reality etc." The sense does not appear to be materially affected. 

132 
G. W. F. Hegel 
can only be a formal one, because it affects actuality as such and the 
fixedness of negation. It is therefore external equality; the negating 
[subject] makes himself a cause and posits himself as negative indif-
ference, but therefore the proposition must be converted upon him 
[who was the subject of it] and he must be posited under the same 
characteristic of the indifference as he posited. What he negated is to 
be equally really negated in him, and he has to be subsumed just as he 
subsumes. And this conversion of the relation is absolute, for in what 
is determinate it is only possible for Reason to assert itself as indiffer-
ence, and so in a formal mode, by positing the two opposites sym-
metrically. 
There is an absolute link between crime [or transgression] and the 
justice of revenge. They are bound together by absolute necessity, for 
one is the opposite of the other, the one is the opposite subsumption 
of the other. As negative life, as the concept constituting itself into 
intuition, transgression subsumes the universal, the objective, and the 
ideal; conversely, as universal and objective, avenging justice sub-
sumes again the negation which is constituting itself as intuition. 
It must be noticed here that what is in question is the real reaction 
or reversal, and that the ideal, immediate, reversal according to the 
abstract necessity of the concept is included in general, but in this 
form of ideality it is only an abstraction and something incomplete. 
This ideal reversal is conscience and it is only something inner, not 
inner and outer simultaneously; it is something subjective but not ob-
jective at the same time. The criminal has directly injured something 
he regards as external and foreign to himself, but in doing so he has 
ideally injured and cancelled himself. Inasmuch as the external deed 
is at the same time an inner one, the transgression committed against 
a stranger has likewise been committed against himself. But the con-
sciousness of this his own destruction is a subjective and inner one, 
or a bad conscience. It is to that extent incomplete and must also man-
ifest itself externally as avenging justice. Because it is something inner 
and incomplete, it presses on to a totality. It betrays itself, reveals 
[450] itself, and works of itself until it sees the ideal reaction or reversal 
confronting it and threatening its reality from without and as its en-
emy. Next it begins to be satisfied because it descries the beginning 
of its own reality in its enemy. It produces an attack on itself so as to 
be able to defend itself, and through its resistance to the attack it is at 
peace by defending against the threatened negation the most universal 
demand, that of indifference and totality, i.e., life, of which the con-
science is one specific characteristic. [But] through victory in this set 

133 
System of Ethical Life 
battle the same pang of conscience returns, and conscience is recon-
ciled only in the danger of death and ceases [only] in that danger. But 
with the coming of every victory the fear becomes greater, the fear 
which is an ideal state of annihilation. It presses on the force of life 
and so brings with it weakness and also the reality of avenging justice. 
And it engenders this justice [even] when the enemy does not at once 
appear externally and when the conversion of the subsumption is not 
present as a reality. 
(a) 
The first level of this thus determined negation is the formal one in 
accordance with the subsumption of concept under intuition. Annihi-
lation by itself, apart from being related to something else, presup-
poses a specific deficiency, but a completely indeterminate and general 
one, affecting nothing individual but directed rather against the ab-
straction of culture as such.27 This is natural annihilation or purpose-
less destruction and havoc. Nature is thus turned against the culture 
imparted to it by intelligence, as well as against its own production of 
the organic. And just as the element [the forces of unconscious life], 
the objective, is subsumed under intuition and life, so the element in 
return subsumes under itself, and destroys, what is organic and indi-
vidualized; and this destruction is havoc. Thus culture alternates with 
destruction in human history. When culture has demolished inorganic 
nature long enough and has given determinacy in every respect to its 
formlessness, then the crushed indeterminacy bursts loose, and the 
barbarism of destruction falls on culture, carries it away, and makes 
everything level, free, and equal. In its greatest magnificence, havoc 
occurs in the East, and a Genghiz Khan and a Tamerlane, as the 
[451] 
brooms of God, sweep whole regions of the world completely dean. 
The northern barbarians who continually invaded the south belong to 
the level of understanding; their miserable enjoyment, which they 
have developed into [at least] a narrow range of culture has therefore 
a specific character, and their havoc is not mere havoc for the sake of 
27. The context implies that the hostility is directed against culture and all its 
aspects and products generally. Hegel's specific references show that the "inor-
ganic element" here is the vital forces of human nature that have not been or-
ganized by reason. He habitually uses the contrast between organic and inorganic 
in a contextually relative way, just as Aristotle does with the contrast between 
form and matter. 

134 
G. W. F. Hegel 
havoc. The fanaticism of havoc, being absolutely elemental and assum-
ing the form of nature, cannot be conquered from outside, for differ-
ence and specific character succumb before indifference and indefinite-
ness. But, like negation in general, it has its own negation in itself. 
The formless drives itself on towards indeterminacy until, because it 
is not after all absolutely formless, it bursts, just as an expanding 
bubble of water bursts into unnumerable tiny drops; it departs from 
its pure unity into its opposite, i.e., the absolute formlessness of abso-
lute multiplicity, and therefore becomes a completely formal form or 
absolute particularity and therefore the maximum of weakness. This 
advance from havoc to absolute havoc and hence to the absolute tran-
sition into its opposite is fury [or mania]; since havoc is wholly with-
in the concept, mania must intensify purity, the very opposite of 
havoc, ad infinitum, until that opposite becomes opposed to itself and 
so has annihilated itself. Standing at the extreme, i.e., at absolute ab-
straction, mania is the absolute and unmediated urge, the absolute 
concept in its complete indeterminacy, the restlessness of the absolute 
concept's infinity. This restlessness is nothing but this [extreme], and 
in its annihilation of the opposites by one another, it annihilates itself, 
and so is the real being of absolute subjectivity. The absolute concept, 
the immediate opposite of itself, is real because what it produces is by 
no means an identity of subject and object, but pure objectivity or 
formlessness. 
(b) 
This havoc, subsumed under the concept, is, as a relation involving 
difference and specific determinacy, directly turned against the posi-
tive relation of difference. The havoc of nature, so far as it is specifi-
[452] 
cally determined, can only tear possession away [from him who has 
it]; the presupposition is that havoc is in precisely the same charac-
teristic position as what confronts it, and thus it lets this position per-
sist; the indifferent moment of possession, the aspect of legal right, 
does not concern it; it only affects the particular situation. But ethical 
life, owing to its nature as intelligence, is at the same time objective 
and universal, and so in an identical relation with an "other"; the 
nullifying of a particular character of the other-and no other nullify-
ing act is relevant here except one directed at an ethical being-is at 
the same time the nullification of indifference and the positing of it as 
something negative; the positive aspect of this positing lies in the fact 

135 
System of Ethical Life 
that the specific thing remains as such and is only posited with a nega-
tive specification. Such letting the specific characteristic persist, though 
along with the nullifying of the indifference of recognition, is an in-
fringement of the law. As a phenomenon, i.e., as a real nullifying of 
recognition, this infringement is also the cutting of the tie between the 
specific thing and the individual subject. For recognition recognizes 
precisely this tie (in itself purely an ideal one) as a real one; owing to 
recognition, it is a matter of indifference whether the subject has abso-
lutely and inseparably united this specific thing with himself or wheth-
er its connection with him is only relative and this unification is put 
only formally as a possibility. By recognition the relative connection 
itself becomes indifferent and its subjectivity also objective. The real 
cancellation of recognition cancels that tie too and is deprivation, or, 
when it purely affects the tied object, theft. In this tie between the 
object and the subject, which is what property means, the nullification 
of the [moment of] indifference or legal right makes no difference to 
the specific thing, which remains unaffected; the object stolen remains 
what it is, but the subject does not, for here, in the particular case, he 
is the indifference of the connection. Now in so far as it is not the ab-
straction of his tie with the object which is cancelled [as in voluntary 
alienation], but he himself who is injured in respect of that tie, some-
thing is cancelled in him-and what is cancelled in him is not the dim-
inution of his possessions, for that does not affect him as a subject; 
on the contrary it is the destruction of his [being] as indifference by 
and in this single act. Now since the indifference of specific character-
istics is the person and this personality is injured here, the dimunition 
of his property is a personal injury, and this is necessarily so through-
out this whole level of particularity. For the injury is directly nonper-
[453] 
sonal if it is only the abstraction of the subject's tie with the object 
that is infringed; but at this level this abstraction is not made as such; 
it does not yet have its reality and support in something itself univer-
sal [i.e., a legal system], but solely in the particularity of the person. 
And therefore every deprivation is personal. The tie here is personal, 
as it is elsewhere only when it is a real or empirical one; the possessor 
has the object he possesses directly before his eyes, or he holds it, or 
has made it secure in some other way in his premises,which is how he 
regards the space he occupies along with his possessions. This empiri-
cal connection, as a specific type, is here the type prevailing at this 
level generally, for at this level there is still no suggestion of any way 
whereby the empirical connection itself could be indifferenced and 
property protected without it, i.e., a way in which the ideal connection 

136 
G. W. F. Hegel 
could be real without being empirical, so that personal integrity would 
not be infringed by the infringement of the ideal tie of possession qua 
property. 
Consequently theft is both personal and a deprivation; and the sub-
sumption of a possession, which is a property, under the desire of 
someone else (or the negation of indifference, and the assertion of a 
quantitatively greater particularity against a quantitatively lesser one, 
of the subsumption of the more different under the lesser) is might, 
not in general, but against property, or robbery must have its reaction 
or the converse subsumption. Just as there is subjugation here, i.e., the 
lesser might is subsumed under the greater, so conversely what is mo-
mentarily the greater might must be posited as the lesser. And in ac-
cordance with absolute Reason this reversal is just as absolutely neces-
sary as the former subsumption is actually robbery. But robbery exists 
only where the relation of lordship and bondage does not. But where 
this relation exists, where an individual is more indifferent, where thus 
the higher level is there as the other one, then there is naturally no 
robbery except in so far as robbery is pure and simple havoc and de-
struction, not in so far as if it were robbery proper. Therefore, because 
robbery becomes personal, person tries conclusions with person and 
the one subjugated becomes the bondslave of the other; and this entry 
to bondage is strictly the appearance of that relation which, in this 
[454] 
relation of subsumption, accrues to each of the individuals; they can-
not be beside one another without being connected. Robbery is the 
singular subsumption, not affecting the totality of the personality, and 
consequently the [individual] who makes this personal injury a matter 
of his entire personality must get the upper hand, and make the con-
version real, because he posits himself as a totality while the other 
[the robber] posits himself as particularity only, and the reality of this 
relation is subjection, but the phenomenon of its coming-to-be is sub-
jugation. 
In the foregoing relation [havoc] the reversal is absolutely annihi-
lating, because annihilation itself is absolute, and so the reaction, like 
the treatment of an animal on the rampage, is absolute subjugation or 
death. But in this relation the reaction cannot be simply the recovery 
of what was stolen, on account of the personal character of the injury, 
but instead is only the moment of an establishment of lordship and 
bondage-the fact that being subsumed is real in the robber only for 
a moment and only in the determinate respect that corresponds with 
the determinate character of the personal injury that arose from his 
act ["an eye for an eye," etc.]. But precisely because the assailant has 

137 
System of Ethical Life 
not put his whole personality into his attack, the relation too cannot 
end with the totality of the personality in a subjecting relation, but 
can only exist for a moment. It is only through warfare that there is 
occasion for bondage, a war between men, a case of mutually self-
recognizing personality, or of necessity in respect of life as a whole-
but otherwise men are slaves by nature. But except in war, the reaction 
[to injury] is formally the entirety of this relation, [like] adoption into 
the family, but materially it is equally single and particular. For the 
robber is too bad to be a slave, for he has not justified any trust in his 
own entire personality, since he has remained on the level of particu-
larity.28 
(c) 
The indifference or totality of both these negations affects the indiffer-
ence of specific determinations, or life, and the whole personality; and 
the reversal (which is established equivocally and is not one-sided as 
it would be if the relation were quite definitely and certainly on one 
side) is likewise the loss of personality through slavery or death. Be-
cause the negation can only be one specific determinacy, this determi-
[455] 
nacy (the whole being out of the question) must be intensified into a 
whole. But because it is personal, it is immediately the whole, fer the 
specific determinacy belongs to the person who is the indifference of 
the whole. And a particularity of a person, once denied, is only an ab-
straction, for in the person it is absolutely taken up into indifference. 
Denial here is an injury to life. But because this indifference has over 
against it the abstraction of the injured particularity, through the lat-
ter the former is posited ideally too, and what is injured is honor. 
Through honor the singular detail becomes something personal and 
a whole, and what is seemingly only the denial of a detail is an injury 
of the whole, and thus there arises the battle of one whole person 
28. Hegel seems to want to distinguish three cases: (a} natural slavery, where 
the pressure of natural necessity leads a man to accept bondage on condition that 
his "necessary desires" are satisfied from the surplus of the family to which he 
is bonded. (b) Subjection of a surrendered enemy, where trust is founded on the 
fact that each side knows how far the other is prepared to go if injury arises-so 
the whole relation of lordship and bondage can be materially realized. (c) Retri-
bution for injury where the lex talionis is accepted by the offender. His accept-
ance of it makes the material realization of the whole relation unjust-but also 
imprudent, for if he is willing to pay the penalty without a death struggle, we 
can expect him to offend again. 

138 
G. W. F. Hegel 
against another whole person. There can be no question of the justice 
of the occasion for such a battle; when the battle as such starts, jus-
tice lies on both [sides], for what is established is the equality of peril, 
the peril of perfect freedom indeed, because the whole [personality of 
both] is at issue. The occasion, i.e., the specific point which is posited 
as taken up into indifference and as personal, is strictly nothing in it-
self, precisely because it is only a personal matter. Anything can be 
posited as such in innumerable ways; nothing can be excluded and no 
limit can be set. Might, or rather might individualized as strength, de-
cides who dominates; and here, where the entire real personality is 
the subject, the relation of lordship and bondage must enter immedi-
ately. Alternatively, if absolute equality, the impossibility of such a 
relation between differents, is presupposed, and so the impossibility of 
one being the indifferent and the other the different, then in battle, as 
absolute difference and reciprocal negation, indifference is to be main-
tained, and the strife is to be assuaged solely by death, in which sub-
jugation is absolute, and precisely through the absoluteness of the ne-
gation the downright opposite of this absoluteness, freedom, is upheld. 
But it is a different thing when there is inequality in the negation 
and one-sidedness in the battle, which in that event is no battle. This 
inequality, where domination is purely on one side-not swaying from 
one to the other-and where the centre is set as possibility and there-
[456] 
fore the indifferent possibility of either, is oppression and, when it pro-
ceeds to absolute negation, murder. Oppression and murder are not to 
be confused with battle and the relation of mastery. Genuine and 
unrighteous oppression is a personal attack and injury in a manner 
whereby all battle is simply cancelled. It is impossible for a person 
attacked to foresee the attack and thereby start a battle. But in itself 
this impossibility cannot be proved and demonstrated-the Italians 
advance as a reason for the lawfulness of assassination the immediacy 
of a declaration of war resulting from the offense-only in that event 
the impossibility is to be regarded as actually present when no offense 
is present and the murder is committed not at all on personal grounds 
but for the sake of robbery. But even if an offense has preceded, so 
that personality and the whole [individual] is in question, the offense 
is wholly unlike total negation on the side of reality; honor indeed has 
been injured, but honor is distinguishable from life. And since life is 
brought into play in order to restore to honor its reality, which as in-
jured honor is only ideal, the linking of the ideality of honor with its 
reality is achieved only by raising to full reality the specific aspect in-
jured; and honor consists in this, that when once one specific aspect 

139 
System of Ethical Life 
is negated, then life, or the totality of specific aspects, is to be affected 
too. Thus the man's own life must be brought in question as the means 
whereby alone that negation of a single detail is made into a whole as 
it should be. (margin: 3 levels: (a) murder, (b) revenge, (c) duel. The 
centre is battle, swinging to and fro. Duel, personal injury on some 
singular point). 
This totality of negation must be conceived under its three forms: 
(aa) Crude totality, the absolute indifference of negation without 
relation and ideality, is the transformation of specific determinacy into 
personality, and the immediate establishing of the reality of the nega-
tion or [in other words] murder simply. Murder precludes the recog-
nition of this relation, the other's knowing about this relation, and 
prevents equality of peril from preceding; moreover the injury is ma-
terially wholly unequal.29 
({3{3) The second level must be the formal indifference in accordance 
[ 457] 
with which domination and its reversal occur according to the law of 
equality, but in such a way that the equality as form, as consciousness, 
hovers over the opposition of the individuals, is not a consciousness 
and recognition of the opposition. Thus the form of equality is missing 
along with the equality of peril, for peril is nothing but the approach 
of negation; yet the knowledge of the negation, the indifference, is 
here not in the peril but is purely material; the relation is subsumed 
under the concept. The true and real reversal of the subsumption lies 
in this equality and is revenge. What has been killed must itself make 
the reversal, but as killed [it] is purely something ideal. Out of its life, 
which is its blood, only its spirit can rise in revenge. Either this spirit 
can so long pursue the murderer until, in whatever way, he sets a real-
ity over against himself and himself creates a body for the spirit of the 
man he has slain, a body which, being no longer the same external 
appearance of the man slain, appears as something more generally 
universal, and the spirit wreaks its revenge in the form of fate. Or, 
however, the real life properly belonging to the spirit has remained; 
the spirit has preserved its body and the murder has destroyed only 
one single member or organ of the whole, and so this still living body, 
i.e., the family, takes on itself the work of revenge. Revenge is the 
absolute relation against murder and the individual murderer; it is 
simply the reverse of what the murderer has done; what he has done 
can in no other way be superseded and made rational. Nothing can be 
abstracted from it, for it has been established as an actuality which as 
29. What the victim ~uffers is far greater than what the murderer suffered 
through the initial injury. 

140 
G. W. F. Hegel 
such must have its right, i.e., Reason demands that the opposite of the 
situation created shall be created. The specific character of the relation 
remains, but within that character the relation is now transformed 
into the opposite one; what dominates is dominated. The only thing 
altered is the form. 
('Y'Y) The totality of this relation is what is rational and it makes the 
middle term emerge. The indifference of the justice which lies in re-
venge, but as something material and external, enters the individuals 
as a like consciousness of the emerging negation, and therefore the 
[458] 
reality of this emergence is alike too [on both sides]. Consequently an 
injustice seems to prevail, since the man who made the attack, the first 
unequal and one-sided domination (and both the opposed dominations 
must appear and display themselves as following on one another), 
should be in the wrong, but, owing to consciousness, would simply 
come into an equality of peril. When revenge is in question, undoubt-
edly only the man who was the murderer must be dominated in turn 
in some sure way, and the avengers thus escape from the equality of 
strength and they wreak revenge either by a superiority of might or 
by cunning, i.e., by the evasion of strength as such. But here in the to-
tality of the relation, things are different, i.e., it directly excludes sin-
gleness in such a way that for revenge the avenger is not a stranger or 
even only a single individual, nor is the assailant, but the member of 
a family and so not an abstraction. But since this is the case, murder is 
not an absolute negation; the spirit has lost only one member of its 
body, and neither can revenge be an absolute negation. In the totality 
of revenge the form must be put as absolute consciousness, and so the 
injured party himself, and no stranger, must be the avenger-and this 
is only the family. Similarly the injurer is not a single individual; it is 
not as single individual but as the member of a whole that he has done 
injury; in the totality [of revenge] he is not posited as an abstraction. 
In this way the middle term is directly posited at the same time, i.e., 
negatively as the cancelling of the superiority and lack of conscious-
ness in the one, and equality of peril for both, i.e., battle. Given per-
fect outward equality, the difference for the relation is in the inner life 
(and therefore the battle is a divine judgment): one side is only defend-
ing itself, the other side also attacking. Right is on the side that has 
been injured, or this side is the indifferent and dominant one. This it is 
absolutely because absolute equality must be displayed by the reversal 
and the side dominated was before now the one dominating. But with 
the magnitude of the still living body the loss of the lost member is 
diminished, and therefore also the right, and the right or indifference 

141 
System of Ethical Life 
becomes honor and therefore equal on both sides, because the partic-
ularity of the injured party's action is made into the indifference of the 
whole, into an affair of the whole. Through honor the bad conscience, 
[459] 
the urge to self-destruction, is cancelled, for honor is the urge to dom-
inate. And the injured party who utterly repudiates the singularity of 
the deed (which as this singular event is not his own) is given by hon-
or exactly the same right as, in an isolated case of personal injury, the 
injured party has, because he is protecting his life. This equality [of 
rights], in the face of which the aspect of legal right and necessary 
subsuming [or subjection] vanishes, is war.30 In war the difference of 
the relation of subsuming has vanished, and equality is what rules. 
Both parties are identical; their difference is what is external and for-
mal in the battle [i.e., they are on different sides], not what is internal, 
but something absolutely restless continually swaying to and fro (Mars 
flits from side to side), and which [side] will be subsumed [or con-
quered] is entirely doubtful and has to be decided. Either a decision is 
reached by the complete defeat of one party31-and since as a totality 
it is itself immortal, this means not that it is extirpated but that it is 
subjugated and enslaved. In this case it is a higher principle, not the 
trivial question of the original injury that is decisive, but the greater or 
lesser strength of the totality which submits in battle to that equality, 
and the test of it-an equality which was previously something merely 
ideal, and existed only in thought, while the parties lived side by side 
without connection. The question as to which of the totalities is truly 
more indifferent or stronger is submitted to the decision of battle, 
which may thus end with the [establishment of a] relationship of mas-
tery. -Or there may be no absolute decision which would affect the 
entirety of the total individuals [i.e., families or clans]; on the contrary 
they find that they are more or less equal and, at least for the experi-
enced moment, incapable, even in the case of an obvious superiority 
of one party, of carrying out to a finish the real constitution of the 
relationship. The abstract preponderance of one party would indeed 
be there, but not its reality at this moment of battle, since the force of 
this preponderance is necessarily devoted, not to the battle, but to 
other natural necessities not affecting the battle directly but the inner 
30. Legal right requires that an offender should be punished (this is the "neces-
sary subsuming"). But ordeal by battle takes no account of who committed the 
offense-this difference (the relation of the parties as injuring and injured) dis-
appears. 
31. I.e., one tribal family as subjected to the other when its champions are de-
feated; the warriors may be killed, but the family does not perish. 

142 
G. W. F. Hegel 
stability of the totality. Animus (OvJLor;) diminishes, because it is the 
feeling of the unrealized relation of the indifference of the dominating 
party. It reverts to the feeling of equality, since the reality of the battle 
[460] 
contradicts this fancied superiority of animus. And so a peace is made 
in which-whether one side acquires the position of victor and the 
other that of being vanquished and surrendering some specific things 
or whether both give up the struggle with a sense of their complete 
equality-both parties put themselves into the previous position of 
difference from one another, difference without connection or relation, 
and thus with the cessation of their connection all interest ceases too. 
Hence the rationality of this totality is, in the antitheses, the equality 
of indifference, while the middle term [between the opposites] is their 
unity in their complete confusion and uncertainty. 
3. ETHICAL LIFE 
The foregoing levels incorporate the totality of particularity in both 
its aspects, particularity as such and universality as an abstract unity. 
The former is the family, but it is a totality such that, while in it all 
the levels of nature are united, intuition is at the same time involved 
in a relation. The really objective intuition of one individual in another 
is afflicted with a difference; the intuition [of the father] in the wife, 
the child, and the servant is not an absolutely perfect equality; equal-
ity remains inward, unspoken, still unborn; there is an invincible as-
pect of involvement in nature in it.32 In universality, however, free-
dom from reiation, the cancellation of one side of the relation by the 
other, is what matters most, and the cancellation is only rational as 
the absolute concept, in so far as it proceeds to this negativity. 
But at none [of the previous levels] does absolute nature occur in a 
spiritual shape; and for this reason it is also not present as ethical life; 
not even the family, far less still the subordinate levels, least of all the 
negative, is ethical. Ethical life must be the absolute identity of intel-
ligence, with complete annihilation of the particularity and relative 
identity which is all that the natural relation is capable of; or the ab-
solute identity of nature must be taken up into the unity of the abso-
lute concept and be present in the form of this unity, a clear and also 
32. I.e., ethical individuality remains physically "comprehended" in nature, and 
so conceptual comprehension can only be in the context of physical nature. 

143 
System of Ethical Life 
absolutely rich being, an imperfect self-objectification and intuition of 
the individual in the alien individual, and so the supersession of nat-
ural determinacy and formation, complete indifference of self-enjoy-
[461] 
ment. Only in this way is the infinite concept strictly one with the 
essence of the individual, and he is present in his form as true intelli-
gence. He is truly infinite, for all his specific determinacy is annulled, 
and his objectivity is not apprehended by an artificial independent 
consciousness, nor yet by an intellectual intuition in which empirical 
intuition is superseded. Intellectual intuition is alone realized bv and 
in ethical life; the eyes of the spirit and the eyes of the body complete-
ly coincide. In the course of nature the husband sees flesh of his flesh 
in the wife, but in ethical life alone does he see the spirit of his spirit 
in and through the ethical order. 
Accordingly ethical life is characterized by the fact that the living 
individual, as life, is equal with the abs~lute concept, that his empirical 
consciousness is one with the absolute consciousness and the latter is 
itself empirical consciousness, i.e., an. intuition distinguishable from 
itself, but in such a way that this distinction is throughout something 
superficial and ideal, and subjective being is null in reality and in this 
distinction. This complete equalization is only possible through intel-
ligence or the ahsolute concept, in accordance with which the living 
being is made the opposite of itself, i.e., an object, and this object it-
self is made absolute life and the absolute identity of the one and the 
many, not put like every other empirical intuition under a relation, 
made the servant of necessity, and posited as something restricted, 
with infinity outside itself. 
Thus in ethical life the individual exists in an eternal mode; his 
empirical being and doing is something downright universal; for it is 
not his individual aspect which acts but the universal absolute spirit 
in him. Philosophy's view of the world and necessity, according to 
which all things are in God and there is nothing singular, is perfectly 
realized in the eyes of the empirical consciousness, since that singular-
ity of action or thought or being has its essence and meaning simply 
and solely in the whole. In so far as the ground of the singular is 
thought out, it is purely and simply this whole that is thought, and the 
individual does not know or imagine anything else. The empirical con-
sciousness which is not ethical consists in inserting into the unity of 
universal and particular, where the former is the ground, some other 
[462] 
singular thing between them as the ground. Here [in ethical life], on 
the other hand, absolute identity, which previously was natural and 
something inner, has emerged into consciousness. 

144 
G. W. F. Hegel 
But the intuition [individualization] of this Idea of ethical life, the 
form in which it appears in its particular aspect, is the people. The 
identity of this intuition with the Idea must be understood-viz., in 
the people the connection of a mass of individuals with one another is 
established generally and formally. A people is not a disconnected 
mass, nor a mere plurality. Not the former: a mass as such does not 
establish the connection present in ethical life, i.e., the domination of 
all by a universal which would have reality in their eyes, be one with 
them, and have dominion and power over them, and, so far as they 
proposed to be single individuals, would be identical with them in 
either a friendly or an hostile way; on the contrary, the mass is abso-
lute singularity, and the concept of the mass, since they are one, is 
their abstraction alien to them and outside them. Also not the latter, 
not a mere plurality, for the universality in which they are one is abso-
lute indifference. In a plurality, however, this absolute indifference is 
not established; on the contrary, plurality is not the absolute many, or 
the display of all differences; and it is only through this "allness" that 
indifference can display itself as real and be a universal indifference. 
Since the people is a living indifference, and all natural difference is 
nullified, the individual intuits himself as himself in every other indi-
vidual; he reaches supreme subject-objectivity; and this identity of all 
is just for this reason not an abstract one, not an equality of citizen-
ship, but an absolute one and one that is intuited, displaying itself in 
empirical consciousness, in the consciousness of the particular. The 
universal, the spirit, is in each man and for the apprehension of each 
man, even so far as he is a single individual. At the same time this in-
tuition and oneness is immediate, the intuition is not something other 
than thought; it is not symbolical. Between the Idea and reality there 
is no particularity which would first have to be destroyed by thinking, 
would not be already in and by itself equal to the universal. On the 
contrary the particular, the individual, is as a particular consciousness 
[463] 
plainly equal to the universal, and this universality which has flatly 
united the particular with itself is the divinity of the people, and this 
universal, intuited in the ideal form of particularity, is the God of the 
people. He is an ideal way of intuiting it. 
Consciousness is the infinite, the absolute concept, in the form of 
unity, but in empirical consciousness the concept is posited only as 
relation: the opposites [united] in the concept are, and so are opposed 
and their unity is as such a hidden one; it appears in both as quantity, 
i.e., under the form of being possibly parted (in one consciousness) 
and the actuality of this "being parted" is precisely opposition. But in 

145 
System of Ethical Life 
ethical life this separation is in the eyes of empirical consciousness it-
self an ideal determinacy. Such a consciousness recognizes in its oppo-
site, i.e., its object, absolutely the same thing that the object is, and it 
intuits this sameness. 
This intuition is absolute because it is purely objective; in it all sin-
gular being and feeling is extinguished, and it is intuition because it is 
within consciousness. Its content is absolute because this content is 
the eternal, freed from everything subjective. The antitheses [of the 
eternal], appearance and the empirical, fall so completely within abso-
lute intuition itself that they display themselves as only child's play. 
All connection with need and destruction is superseded, and the sphere 
of practice which began with the destruction of the object has passed 
over into its counterpart, into the destruction of what is subjective, so 
that what is objective is the absolute identity of both. 
This totality must be treated according to the moments of its Idea 
and therefore: first, at rese3 as the constitution of the state, secondly, 
its movement, i.e., the government; first, the Idea as intuition, second-
ly, the Idea according to relation, but in such a way that now the es-
sence, the totality itself, is absolute identity of intuition and concept. 
And the form under which this identity appears is something super-
ficial throughout. The extremes of the relation are simply the totality 
itself, not abstractions which would exist only through relation. 
First Section34 
The Constitution of the State 
The people as an organic totality is the absolute identity of all the spe-
cific characteristics of practical and ethical life. The moments of this 
totality are, as such, the form of (i) identity or indifference, (ii) differ-
ence, and finally (iii) absolute living indifference; and every one of 
these moments is not an abstraction but a reality. 
33. Desselben seems to be a misprint for derselben. 
34. There is no second. But this First Section, though headed The Constitution 
of the State, is divided into two parts corresponding to what is described above 
as (i) rest and (ii) movement; and the second subsection is headed Government. 
(The problem of whether "Government" is the "Second Section" or whether the 
proper complement of this section remained unwritten is discussed in the Intro-
ductory Essay, pp. 61-63). 
[464) 

146 
G. W. F. Hegel 
I. Ethical Life as System, at rest. 
The concept of ethical life has been put into that life's objectivity, 
into the annulling of singularity. This annihilation of the subjective in 
the objective, the absolute assumption of the particular into the uni-
versal is 
(a) Intuition: [Here] the universal [is] not something formal, op-
posed to consciousness and subjectivity or individual life, but simply 
one with that life in intuition. In every shape and expression of ethical 
life the antithesis of positive and negative is annulled by their inte-
gration. But the separation of particular and universal would seriously 
appear as a slavery of the particular, as something in subjection to the 
ethical law, and further as the possibility of a different subjection. In 
ethical life there would be no necessity. The grief would not endure, 
for it would not be intuited in its objectivity, would not be detached; 
and the ethical action would be an accident of judgment, for with sep-
aration the possibility of another consciousness is established.35 
(b) As this living and independent spirit, which like a Briareus36 
appears with myriads of eyes, arms, and other limbs, each of which is 
an absolute individual, this ethical life is something absolutely univer-
sal, and in relation to the individual each part of this universality and 
each thing belonging to it appears as an object, as an aim and end. The 
object as such or as it enters his consciousness is something ideal for 
the individual; but "it enters his consciousness" means nothing but "it 
is posited as individual." But it is different if the individual subsumes 
[465] 
absolute ethical life under himself and it appears in him as his indi-
viduality. Here, and generally, it is not by any means meant that the 
will, caprice, specific things posited by the individual have dominated 
ethical life so that they have come to command it and make it negative 
as an enemy and fate. On the contrary dominion is wholly and entire-
ly the external form of subjectivity under which ethical life appears, 
though without its essence being affected thereby. This appearance of 
ethical life is the ethical life of the single individual, or the virtues. Be-
cause the individual is single, the negative, possibility, specific deter-
minacy, so too the virtues in their determinate character are something 
negative, possibilities of the universal. Here, then, there is establis~1ed 
the difference between morality and natural law; it is not as if they 
35. This paragraph is a summary of Hegel's critical reactions to the "reflective 
philosophy [and religion] of subjectivity"-which were stated in detail in Faith 
and Knowledge. See further the Introductory Essay, 00-00, and Faith and Knowl-
edge, pp. 183-87. 
36. In Greek mythology a hundred-handed giant. 

147 
System of Ethical Life 
were sundered, the former being excluded from the latter, for on the 
contrary the subject matter of morality is completely contained in nat-
ural law; the virtues appear in the absolute ethical order, but only in 
their evanescence. 
Now ethical life is 
(a) as absolute ethical life: not the sum but the indifference of all 
virtues. It does not appear as love for country and people and law, but 
as absolute life in one's country and for the people. It is the absolute 
truth, for untruth lies only in the fixation of something specific; but in 
the eternity of the people all individuality is superseded. It is the abso-
lute process of formation (Bildung), for in what is eternal lies the real 
and empirical destruction of all specific things, and the exchange of all 
of them. It is absolute unselfishness, for in what is eternal nothing is 
one's own. Like every one of its moments, it is supreme freedom and 
beauty, for the real being and configuration of the eternal is its beau-
ty. It is serene and without suffering, for in it all difference and all 
grief are cancelled. It is the Divine, absolute, real, existent being, and 
unveiled, yet not in such a way that it would first have to be lifted up 
into the ideality of divinity and first extracted from appearance and 
empirical intuition; on the contrary absolute ethical life is absolute 
intuition immediately. 
But the movement of this absolute ethical life (as it is in the abso-
lute concept) runs through all the virtues, but is fixed in none. In its 
[466] 
movement ethical life enters difference and cancels it; [its] appearance 
[is] the transition from subjective to objective and the cancellation of 
this antithesis. 
This activity of production does not look to a product but shatters 
it directly and makes the emptiness of specific things emerge. The 
above-mentioned difference in its appearance is specific determinacy 
and this is posited as something to be negatived. But this, which is to 
be negatived, must itself be a living totality. What is ethical must itself 
intuit its vitality in its difference, and it must do so here in such a way 
that the essence of the life standing over against it is posited as alien 
and to be negatived. It is otherwise in education, where the negation, 
subjectivity, is only the superficial aspect of the child. A difference of 
this sort is the enemy, and this difference, posited in its [ethical] bear-
ing, exists at the same time as its counterpart, the opposite of the 
being of its antithesis, i.e., as the nullity of the enemy, and this nullity, 
commensurate on both sides, is the peril of battle. For ethical life this 
enemy can only be an enemy of the people and itself only a people. 
Because single individuality comes on the scene here, it is for the peo-

148 
G. W. F. Hegel 
ple that the single individual abandons himself to the danger of death. 
But apart from this negative aspect there also appears the positive 
aspect of difference, and likewise as ethical life, but as ethical life in 
the single individual, or as the virtues. Courage is the indifference of 
the virtues; it is virtue as negativity, or virtue in a determinate form, 
but in the absoluteness of determinacy. It is thus virtue in itself, but 
formal virtue, since every other virtue is only one virtue. In the sphere 
of difference, specific determinacy appears as a multiplicity, and there-
fore there appears in it the whole garland of virtues. In war as the 
manifestation of the negative, and the multiple and its annihilation, 
there thus enters the multiplicity of specific relations, and in them of 
virtues. Those relations appear as what they are, established by em-
pirical necessity, and therefore they quickly vanish again, and with 
them the existence of the virtues, which, having this speedy chasing 
of one another, are without any relation to a specific totality (the 
whole situation of a citizen) and so are just as much vices as virtues.37 
[467] 
The exigency of war brings about supreme austerity and so supreme 
poverty and the appearance first of avarice and then of enjoyment, 
which is just debauchery, because it can have no thought for tomorrow 
or the whole of life and livelihood. Frugality and generosity become 
avarice and supreme hardheartedness against self and others (when 
supreme misery demands this restriction)-and then prodigality; for 
property is thrown to the winds since it cannot remain secure, and its 
disbursement is wholly disproportionate to the use and need of self 
and others. Likewise the reality which has not been completely taken 
up into indifference is the immoral aspect of the specific situation, but 
what is present is existence in its negativity or the highest degree of 
annihilation. 
It is the same with labor as it was with the ethical aspect of the vir-
tues. The exigency of war demands supreme bodily exertions and a 
complete formal universal unity of the spirit in mechanical labor as 
well as supreme subjection to an entirely external obedience. lust as 
the virtues are without outer and inner hypocrisy-for in the case of 
the former its appearance and externality would be created by the 
caprice of the subject, who, however, would have had something dif-
ferent in his own mind and intention; this, however, cannot happen 
here because the ethical is the essence, the inner mind of the subject; 
neither can the inner hypocrisy occur, because it knows its ethical sub-
stance and through this consciousness maintains its subjectivity and 
is morality; (margin: in the former case there is an outward show of 
37. Courage is a virtue in war, where the other virtues are shown up as vices. 

149 
System of Ethical Life 
of it, the fact that duty illuminates itself before the eyes of the indi-
vidual himself)-so too, labor is without an aim, without need, and 
without a bearing on practical feeling, without subjectivity; neither 
having done one's duty, in the latter an inner one, the consciousness 
has it a bearing on possession and acquisition, but with itself its aim 
and its product cease too. 
This war is not one of families against families but of peoples 
against peoples, and therefore hatred itself is undifferentiated, free 
from all personalities. Death proceeds from and afflicts something 
universal and is devoid of the wrath which is sometimes created and 
annulled again. Firearms are the invention of a death that is universal, 
indifferent, and nonpersonal; and the moving force is national honor, 
[468] 
not the injury of a single individual. But the injury which occasions 
the war comes entirely home to every individual owing to the identity 
of the [national] honor [in everyone]. 
({3) Relative ethical life. This bears on relations and is not freely 
organized and moved in them but, while allowing the specific deter-
minacy in them to subsist, brings it into equality with its opposite, 
i.e., into a superficial and partial determinacy which is only concep-
tual. Thus this form of ethical life fashions legal right and is honesty. 
Where it acts or is real, it clings to the right that his own shall accrue 
to everyone and, at that, not in accordance with written laws; on the 
contrary it takes the whole of the case [into account] and pronounces 
according to equity if the legal right has not been decided, and other-
wise it must keep to legal right. But in equity it mitigates the objectiv-
ity of legal right according to pressing needs, whether it be a matter of 
empirical necessitous circumstances, or of an ignorance that is called 
pardonable, or of a subjective trust. The totality of relative ethical life 
is the empirical existence of the single individual, and the maintenance 
of that existence is left to devolve upon himself and others. 
Honesty cares for the family in accordance with the class to which 
the family belongs, and so for fellow citizens; it relieves the necessities 
of single individuals and is enraged about a bad action. The universal 
and absolute aspect of ethical life and the manner in which this aspect 
should have been present in its reality, and in which reality should 
have been subjugated, is for honesty a thought. Honesty's highest 
flight is to have many sorts of thoughts about this, but at the same 
time its rationality is that it sees how the empirical situation would be 
changed, and this situation lies too near its heart for it to let anything 
happen to it. Thus its rationality is to perceive that absolute ethical 
life must remain a thought. 

150 
G. W. F. Hegel 
In connection with the negative and with sacrifice, honesty offers 
from its acquisitions (a) to the people, for universal ends according to 
a universal principle, in taxes according to an equality of justice, and 
(b) in particular cases, for the poor and the suffering. But it may not 
sacrifice either [a just man's] entire possessions or his life, since indi-
[469] 
viduality is a fixture in it, and so person and life are not only some-
thing infinite but something absolute. Thus it cannot be courageous, 
neither may it go through the whole series of virtues or organize itself 
purely momentarily as a virtue. For purely momentary virtue is itself 
without aim and without connection with a totality other than the one 
it has in itself. The empirical totality of existence sets determinate 
limits to unselfishness and sacrifice and must stay under the domina-
tion of the understanding. 
('Y) Trust lies in the identity of the first (a) and the difference of the 
second ({3), so that that identity of absolute ethical life is a veiled in-
tuition, not at the same time taken up into the concept and developed 
outwardly, and therefore this identity in the form of its intellectuality 
lies outside it. For intuition's solidity and compactness, which lacks 
the knowledge and form of the understanding and so also the active 
use of it, precisely the same intuition, when developed, is a might 
against which that solidity is different but also mistrustfut because 
singular individuality, in which that might comes in question, may 
seem to destroy the whole and cannot illumine for it the identity of 
absolute intuition and form as a singular middle term. It is not by un-
derstanding-for from that quarter it fears, as is only fair, to be be-
trayed-that it [is] to be set in movement but by the entirety of trust 
and necessity, by an external impulse and so one affecting the whole. 
Just as trust's ethical intuition is elementat so is its labor. This la-
bor does not issue trom the understanding, nor is it differently par-
celled out in the way [characteristic] of honesty, but is entire and 
solid. It does not proceed to the destruction and death of the object 
but lets utility act and produce naturally. 
So too, without knowledge of the legal right, trust's property is pre-
served for it, and any dispute is composed by passion and discussion. 
This trust is after all capable of courage because it relies on something 
eternal. 
In the real absolute totality of ethical life these three forms of it 
[i.e., the three social classes] must also be real. Each must be organized 
[470] 
independently, be an individual and assume a shape [of its own]; for 
a confusion of them is the formlessness of the naturally ethical and 
the absence of wisdom. Of course since each is organized, it is for that 

151 
System of Ethical Life 
very reason a totality and carries in itself the other levels of its form, 
but conformably to themselves and unorganized, as they have already 
been exhibited in each case according to their concepts. 
Individualization, vital life, is impossible without specification or 
dispersal. Each principle and level must unquestionably reach its own 
concept, because each is real and must strive after its own self-satis-
faction and independence. In its concept or in its own indifference it 
has completely taken into itself its relative identity with the other's 
concept and has thus formed itself; to this self-formation everything 
which is at one level must press on; for infinity is strictly one with 
reality, although within infinity there is the difference of levels. 
The fact that physical nature in its own way expresses the levels in 
their pure shape and makes each of them independently alive appears 
more readily acceptable only because, according to the principle of the 
multiplicity of nature, each single thing should be something incom-
plete, while in ethical life each must be something absolutely com-
plete; and each makes for itself a plain claim to absolute real totality, 
because the singularity of each one is the absolute totality, or the pure 
concept, and so the negation of all specific determinacies. But this ab-
solute concept and negation is. precisely the highest abstraction and 
immediately the negative. The positive is the unity of this form with 
the essence, and this is the expansion of ethical life into a system of 
levels (and of nature), and the level of ethical life, self-organized, can 
only be organized in individuals as its material. The individual as such 
is not the true but only the formal absolute: the truth is the system of 
ethical life. 
Therefore this system cannot be thought as if it exists in purity in 
the individual, i.e., as developed, completely distributing itself in its 
levels; for its essence is ethereal, elemental, pure, having subordinated 
unities to itself and dissolved them out of their inflexibility into abso-
lute malleability. The singularity of the individual is not the first thing, 
[471] 
but the life of ethical nature, divinity, and for the essence of divinity 
the singularized individual is too poor, i.e., too poor to comprise divin-
ity's nature in its entire reality. As formal indifference it can display 
all features momentarily, but as formal indifference it is the negative, 
time, and destroys them again. But the ethical [reality] must appre-
hend itself as nature, as the persistence of all its levels, and each of 
them in its living shape; it must be one with necessity and persist as 
relative identity .. but this necessity has no reality except in so far as 
each level has reality, i.e., is a totality. 
The levels of ethical life as it displays itself in this reality within the 

152 
G. W. F. Hegel 
perfect totality are the classes, and the principle of each one of them 
is the specific form of ethical life as expounded above. Thus there is a 
class of absolute and free ethical life, a class of honesty, and a class of 
unfree or natural ethical life. 
According to the true concept of a class, the concept is not a uni-
versality which lies outside it and is an ens rationis; on the contrary 
universality is real in the class. The class knows itself in its equality 
and constitutes itself as a universal against a universal, and the rela-
tion between the different classes is [not] a relation between single 
individuals. On the contrary [by] belonging to a class the single indi-
vidual is something universal and so a true individual, and a person. 
Consequently the class of slaves, for example: is not a class, for it is 
only formally a universal. The slave is related as a single individual to 
his master. 
(a) The absolute class [i.e., the military nobility] has absolute and 
pure ethical life as its principle, and in the above exposition of that 
life it has itself been set forth, for its real being and its Idea are simply 
one, because the Idea is absolute ethical life. 
But in the real being of absolute ethical life we have only to con-
sider how this class behaves in respect to the persistence of difference 
and how its practical being can be differentiated in it. In the Idea itself, 
as was explained above, the life of practice is purely and simply nega-
tive, and [contained] in its reality are the relations and the virtues 
[472] 
connected with them which are self-motivated and committed to em-
pirical contingency. But, for this class as the reality of ethical life, the 
need and use of things is an absolute necessity which dogs it, yet one 
which is not allowed to dog it in its above-described form, in its sep-
aratedness; for the work of this class may only be universal, while 
work to supply a need would be singular. The satisfaction of a need 
is certainly itself just something particular, but here nothing is to occur 
in the shape of the satisfaction of a need or the particular character of 
something purely practical; for this satisfaction is as such pure de-
struction of the object, absolute negation, not a confusion of the ideal 
with the object or the prolongation of the consequences of this confu-
sion, not a partial putting of intelligence into the object, nothing prac-
tical, not a development of something lifeless, the result of which 
would yet be destruction. Instead the work [of this class] can be noth-
ing but the waging of war or training for this work; for its immediate 
activity in the people is not work but something organic in itself and 
absolute. 

153 
System of Ethical Life 
The labor of this class can have no relation to its needs, but its 
needs cannot be satisfied without labor, and consequently it is neces-
sary for this labor to be done by the other classes and for things to be 
transmitted to it which have been prepared and manufactured for it. 
AU that is left to it is direct consumption of them in enjoying them. 
But this relation of this class to the other two is a relation in existing 
reality that has to be taken up into the indifference [of the ethical 
totality] in the [only] way possible. The way here is equality. And 
since the essence of the relation is the utility which the other classes 
have for the first one, so that they provide it with its necessities and it 
makes the goods and gains of the others its own, it must in turn, in 
accordance with equality, be useful to the others. But this it is [first] 
in the highest way and then, too, in their way. 
In its content the tie of mutual utility is partly one of difference on 
both sides, whereby the first class is the absolute power over the oth-
ers, and partly one of equality, whereby it is negative and so imma-
nent for them in the way they are immanent for it. 
The former utility is that the first class is the absolute and real ethi-
cal shape and so, for the other classes, the model of the self-moving 
and self-existent Absolute, the supreme real intuition which ethical 
nature demands. These classes, owing to their nature, do not get be-
[473] 
yond this intuition. They are not in [the sphere of] the infinite concept 
whereby this intuition would only be posited for their consciousness 
as something external, [but] strictly. [i.e., in their conceptual knowl-
edge] it would be their own absolute moving spirit overcoming all 
their differences and determinacies. Their ethical nature's achievement 
of this intuition, this utility, is provided to them by the first class. 
Since this, displayed in the shape of something objective, is their abso-
lute inner essence, it remains for them something hidden, not united 
with their individuality and consciousness. 
The latter utility, according with the mode of the other classes, lies 
in the negative [i.e., in labor], and on the part of the first class labor 
is established likewise, but it is the absolutely indifferent labor of gov-
ernment and courage. In its bearing for the other classes, or to them, 
this labor is the security of their property and possessions, and the 
absolute security is that they are excused from courage, or at least the 
second class is. 
(b) The class of honesty [the bourgeoisie] lies in work for needs, in 
possessions, gain, and property. Since the unity involved in these rela-
tions is something purely ideal, an ens rationis, on account of the 

154 
G. W. F. Hegel 
fixity of difference, it acquires reality only in the people. It is the ab-
stract empty might in general, without wisdom38 its content is settled 
by the contingency of real things and by the caprice involved in them, 
in gain, contracts, etc. The universal and legal element in these rela-
tions becomes a real physical control against the particularity which 
intends to be negative towards it. This immersion in possession and 
particularity ceases here to be slavery to absolute indifference; it is, 
as far as possible undifferentiated, or formal indifference, (i.e., what 
it is] to be a person, is reflected in the people, and the possessor does 
not lapse, owing to his difference, with his whole being and so does 
not lapse into personal dependence; on the contrary, his negative in-
difference is posited as something real, and he is thus a burgher, a 
bourgeois, and is recognized as something universal. In the first class 
all the particular character in individuality is nullified, and thus it is 
related as a universal to the second class, which in this way is itself 
[474] 
determined similarly, but, owing to the fixity of its possession, it [is] 
only something formally universal, an absolute singular. 
Since the labor fof this class] is likewise universal, the result is 
that, for the sake of the satisfaction of physical need a [system of] 
universal dependence is set up because labor here affects the totality 
of need, not materially but only conceptually. The value and price of 
labor and its product is determined by the universal system of all 
needs, and the capricious element in the value, grounded as it is on 
the particular needs of others, as well as the uncertainty whether a 
surplus is necessary for others, is completely cancelled. -The uni-
versality of labor or the indifference of all labor is posited as a mid-
dle term with which all labor is compared and into which each single 
piece of labor can be directly converted; this middle term, posited as 
something real, is money. So too the active universal exchange, the 
activity which adjusts particular need to particular surplus, is the 
commercial class, the highest point of universality in the exchange 
of gain. What it produces is to take over the surplus available in par-
ticular activities and thereby make it into a universal, and what it 
exchanges is likewise money or the universal. 
Where barter or, in general, the transfer of property to another is 
ideal-partly owing to the universally known possession of the one, 
a universal recognition hindering the transfer (because property and 
its certainty rests in part on the transfer), partly because the two sides 
of the simultaneity of the barter become empirically separate-that 
38. A reminiscence of Plato's Republic, where it is only the Guardians who are 
wise. 

155 
System of Ethical Life 
ideality is posited in reality (by the fact that the whole might of the 
state hangs on it) as if that had actually happened which was to hap-
pen, and the empirical appearance of the exchange did not matter. Just 
as the empirical appearance of possession or nonpossession does not 
matter either, and what is important is whether the inward absolute 
tie between the individual and the thing is close or distant, [i.e.,] 
whether the thing is his property or not. Both together constitute jus-
tice in connection with property in things. 
Personal injury was infinite at the natural stage; it was a matter of 
[475] 
honor and the whole person; in the system of reality it becomes this 
specific abstraction of injury; for since the indifference of the indi-
vidual is here absolute indifference, i.e., the people (which, however, 
cannot be injured [by civil wrong]), nothing is left but precisely the 
specific and particular character of the injury. In a citizen as such 
the universal is as little injured, and is so little to be revenged or in 
jeopardy, that nothing remains but to liberate the particular by super-
seding it, i.e., the injurer is subjected to the very same treatment. Re-
venge is transformed in this way into punishment, for revenge is in-
determinate and belongs to honor and the whole [family]. Here it is 
undertaken by the people, since in the place of the particular injured 
party there enters the abstract but real universality, not his living uni-
versality, the universality of the individual. 
But, for honesty, the living totality is the family, or a natural total-
ity, and a situation of property and livelihood which is secured, so far 
as possible, for the empirical totality of its life as a whole and for the 
education of the children. 
This class is incapable either of a virtue or of courage because a vir-
tue is a free individuality. Honesty lies in the universality of its class 
without individuality and, in the particularity of its relations, without 
freedom. 
The greatest height which this class can attain by its productive 
activity is (a) its contribution to the needs of the first class and (b) aid 
to the needy. Both are a partial negation of its principle, because (a) is 
labor for a universal according to the concept, while (b) is devoted to 
something particular according to an empirical necessitous case. The 
former universal sacrifice is without vitality, while the latter more liv-
ing sort of sacrifice is without universality. 
So too the inner relation of the family is determined according to 
the concept. Whoever out of necessity binds himself to the head of the 
house does so, despite all the personal aspects of the bond of service, 
only as an absolute person by way of a contract and for a definite 

156 
G. W. F. Hegel 
term. For since each member of the household is an absolute person, 
he should be able to attain a living totality and become a paterfamilias. 
[476] 
Thi.s is precisely the relation when the bond is less personal and only 
for specific services and labor. 
(c) The class of crude ethical life is that of the peasantry. The shape 
that the levels [of ethical life] have for it is that it is certainly involved 
with physical needs; it falls likewise into the system of universal de-
pendence, though in a more patriarchal way, and its labor and gain 
forms a greater and more comprehensive totality. 
The character of its labor is also not wholly intellectual, nor is it 
directly concerned with the preparation of something to meet a need; 
on the contrary it is more of a means, affecting the soil or an animal, 
something living. The peasant's labor masters the [organic] potency 
of the living thing and so, determines it, though the thing produces it-
self by itself. 
The ethical life of this class is trust in the absolute class, in accord 
with the totality of the first class, which must have every relation and 
every influence. The crude ethical life of this third class can only con-
sist in trust, or, when placed under compulsion, it is open to the par-
celling out of its activity.39 On account of its totality it is also capable 
of courage and in this labor and in the danger of death can be asso-
ciated with the first class. 
II. Government 
In the preceding level the system of ethical life was set forth as it is at 
rest: the organic independently, as well as the inorganic absorbing it-
self in itself and forming, in its reality, a system. But this [present] 
level treats of how the organic is different from the inorganic; it knows 
the difference between universal and particular, and how the absolute-
ly universal transcends this difference and everlastingly cancels and 
produces it; in other words, the Absolute is subsumed under the abso-
lute concept, or we have the absolute movement or process of ethical 
life. This movement, spread throughout the unfolding of all levels and 
really first creating and producing this unfolding, must be displayed in 
this level. And since the essence of this level is the difference between 
[477] 
universal and particular, but also the supersession of this difference, 
39. The reference seems to be to the possibility of serfdom. Where the peasant-
ry is reduced to legal serfdom, it is "parcelled out" to particular "lords." Thus it 
would cease to have the character of a rrue class and, being under compulsion, 
would cease to trust the nobility who lead it in war and speak for it in politics. 

157 
System of Ethical Life 
and since this organic movement must have reality (and the reality of 
the universal consists in its being a mass of individuals), this antithe-
sis is to be so interpreted-since the universal is real or in the hands 
of individuals-that these are truly in the universal and undifferen-
tiated, and in the separation [of universal and particular] adopt such 
a movement that through it the particular is subsumed under the uni-
versal and becomes purely and simply equal to it. 
So far as might is concerned, the universal in its reality is superior 
to the particular, for, no matter at what level, the government is for-
mal, it is the absolutely universal; the might of the whole depends on 
it. But the government must also be the positively and absolutely uni-
versal, and hence it is the absolute level [i.e., the first class], and the 
question is always about the difference that the government is the true 
power against everything particular, whereas individuals necessarily 
dwell in universal and ethical life. 
This formal characterization of the concept of a constitution, the 
reality of the universal in so far as it is in contrast to something par-
ticular and so enters as power [Potenz] and cause, must also be recog-
nized as a totality in the separation of powers. And this system-de-
termined according to the necessity in which they are separated, and 
as the power of the regime is framed at the same time in this separa-
tion for each of these determinate features-is the true constitution. 
A truly ethical totality must have proceeded to this separation, and the 
concept of the government must display itself as the wisdom of the 
constitution, so that the form and consciousness is as real as the Abso-
lute is in the form of identity and nature. The totality exists only as 
the unity of essence and form: neither can be missing. Crudity, with 
respect to the constitution in which nothing is distinct and the whole 
as such is directly moved against every single determinacy, is form-
lessness and the destruction of freedomi for freedom exists in the 
form, and there in the fact that the single part, being a subordinate 
system in the whole organism, is independently self-active in its own 
specific character. 
This government is therefore directly divided into absolute govern-
ment and government through the single powers. 
A. The Absolute Government 
seems immediately to be the first class because that class is the abso-
lute power for the others, the reality of absolute ethical life, the real 
intuited spirit of the others, while they are in the [sphere of the] par-
ticular. But the first class is itself one class in contrast to the others, 
[478] 

158 
G. W. F. Hegel 
and there must be something higher than itself and its difference from 
the others. 
As absolute universal reality this class is, of course, the absolute 
government; but organic nature proceeds to the annihilation and ab-
sorption of the inorganic and the latter maintains itself by its own 
resources, by the inner spirit which posits organic nature and its re-
flection as an inorganic nature. This latter stands in the concept as 
something absolutely universal, and the annihilation and the empow-
ering of it by organic nature necessarily affects its particular character. 
Inherently it is the particular, though assumed into the concept and 
infinity, and this is what its persistence means. 
Similarly the absolute class is the ethical organic nature in contrast 
to the inorganic nature [of the relative classes] and it consumes the 
latter in its particularity, so that [the relative classes] must provide 
the absolute one with the necessaries of life and work, while the first 
class is individualized in intuition by this contrast, and therefore, as a 
class, the first class has in its consciousness the difference of the sec-
ond class and the crudity of the third, and so it separates itself from 
them and maintains a sense of its lofty individuality or the pride 
which, as an inner consciousness of nobility, abjures the consciousness 
of the non-noble and, what is precisely the same as that conscious-
ness, namely, the action of the non-noble. 
This spiritual individualization, like the former physical one, sets up 
a relation of organic to inorganic nature, and the unconscious limita-
tion of this movement and of the annihilation of inorganic nature must 
be posited in ethical life as known, must emerge as the newborn and 
appearing middle term; it must not remain left to itself or fail to retain 
the form of nature; on the contrary it must be known precisely as the 
limit of the particularity which is to be annihilated. But such knowl-
edge is the law. 
The movement of the first class against the other two classes is as-
sumed into the concept by reason of the fact that both of them have 
[479] 
reality, both are limited, and the empirical freedom of the one is can-
celled like that of the others. This absolute maintenance of all the 
classes must be the supreme government and, in accordance with its 
concept, this maintenance can strictly accrue to no class, because it is 
the indifference of all. Thus it must consist of those who have, as it 
were, sacrificed their real being in one class and who live purely and 
simply in the ideal, i.e., the Elders and the Priests, two groups who are 
strictly one. 
In age the self-constitution of individuality vanishes. Age has lost 

159 
System of Ethical Life 
from life the aspect of shape and reality, and at the threshold of the 
death which will carry the individual away entirely into the universal, 
it is already half dead. Owing to the loss of the real side of individ-
uality, of its particular concerns, age alone is capable of being above 
everything in indifference, outside its class, which is the shape and 
particularity of its individuality, and of maintaining the whole in and 
through all its parts. 
The maintenance of the whole can be linked solely to what is su-
premely indifferent, to God and nature, to the Priests and the Elders, 
for every other form of reality lies in difference. But the indifference 
which nature produces in the Elders, and God produces in his Priests 
who are dedicated to him alone, appears to be an indifference lying 
outside ethical life, and ethical life seems to have to take flight out of 
its own sphere, to nature and the unconscious. But this must be be-
cause here the question is about reality, and reality belongs to nature 
and necessity. What belongs to ethical life is the knowledge of nature 
and the linkage (a) of that level of nature which formally and explic-
itly expresses the specific character of an ethical level with (b) that 
ethical level. 
Nature is here related [to ethical life] like a tool. It mediates be-
tween the specific Idea of ethical life and its outward appearance. As 
a tool it must be formally adequate to that Idea, without indeed hav-
ing any independent ethical content of its own, but corresponding 
with the Idea according to its formal level and specific character. Or 
its content is nothing but precisely possibility, the negative of ethical 
specific character. This latter, posited ideally, requires a tool, or alter-
natively its subjective reality, its immediate, inherently undifferenti-
[480] 
ated body, taken up into its unity, appears, considered by itself, as its 
tool; and for the Idea, posited ideally, opposed to reality, this its body 
appears to reality as something accidental, something that finds itself, 
fits in, and conforms. 
In nature the soul frames its body directly and one can neither be 
supposed, nor conceived, without the other. There is an original unity, 
unconscious, without separation. But in ethical life the separation of 
soul from body is the primitive thing, and their identity is a totality or 
a reconstructed identity. Thus for the ideal the body is to be sought as 
something present, formal, inherently negative and to be bound up 
with the ideal; and herein consists the essence of the construction of 
the government, namely, that (a) for the specific character of the soul 
or the specific ethical character whose reality is to be known, that shall 
be found which lies outside difference, in the sense that what is found 

160 
G. W. F. Hegel 
is a specific ethical character; but that (b) at the same time this tool 
shall not be something universal, adequate for many other things, but 
precisely and only for this specific function. For, for one thing, the 
tool would otherwise be restricted against its own nature, and, for an-
other thing, it would be, for that on account of which it is restricting, 
power in general, predominance, and not one with it in essence and 
spirit. It must have its entire shape in common with that, [be] one 
with it in respect of particularity, or, so to speak, have the same inter-
est as it has except that the antithesis of ruler and ruled is the external 
form of the indifferent in contrast to the different, of the universal in 
contrast to the particular. 
Thus age is the body of absolute indifference against all the classes. 
It lacks the individuality which is the form of every single person; and 
although the priesthood exists as the indifference not abandoned to 
nature but extorted from it and destructive by self-activity of what is 
individual, it must be noticed (a) that the Elders of the first class have 
led a divine [i.e., consecrated] life by belonging to it; (b) that the El-
der of the first class must be a priest himself and, in the transition 
from an adult into a higher age, live as a priest and so must produce 
[481] 
for hims,elf an absolute and true age; (c) that the true priest needs the 
outward age as his body, that his consummation cannot be put, against 
nature, into an earlier age, but must await the highest one. 
The preservation ([the] absolute relation) of the whole is consigned 
simply to this supreme government; it is absolute rest in the endless 
movement of the whole and in connection with that movement. The 
wisdom of this government affects the life of all the parts, and this life 
is the life of the whole and is only through the whole. But the life of 
the whole is not an abstraction from the life force but absolute iden-
tity in difference, the absolute Idea. But this identity in difference is 
in its absolute and supreme outward articulation nothing but the rela-
tion of the classes constructed in the first level [i.e., within the abso-
lute class itself]. It is the Absolute as something universal, without 
any of the specific determinacy which occurs at the particular levels. 
This indifferent Idea of the supreme government does not affect any 
form of the particularity and determinacy which is manifest in the 
ramification of the whole into its subordinate systems. The govern-
ment does not have to repeat this Idea in these, for otherwise it would 
be a formal power over them; on the contrary once this difference of 
the classes is established, it proceeds to maintain it. Thus to this extent 
it is negative in its activity, for the maintenance of a living thing is 

161 
System of Ethical Life 
negative. It is government and so opposed to the particular i the abso-
lute positive soul of the living [social whole] lies in the entirety of the 
people itself. By being government, government is in the sphere of 
appearance and opposition. Thus as such it can only be negative.40 
But this absolute negation of everything that could conflict with the 
absolute relation of the absolute Idea and that had jumbled the dis-
tinction of the classes, must have a supreme oversight of the way in 
which any power is determined. No ordering whatever of any such 
power is exempt from its controt neither in so far as such a power 
establishes itself, nor in so far as it proposes to uphold itself when it 
[is] restricted by the movement of a higher power, either in generat 
in such a way as still to remain in existence, or as to be wholly super-
seded for a time. 
Anything that could have an influence on disturbing the relation 
[482] 
[between the classes] or the free movement of a higher power is in 
an absolute sense organic and within the competence of the supreme 
government. But the government's negative business in the field of 
appearance is not to be so conceived as if it behaved simply in a su-
pervisory capacity and negatively in prohibitions by veto. On the 
contrary its negative activity is its essence, but it is the activity of a 
government, and its relation to the particuliu, or its appearance, is a 
positive activity, precisely in so far as it emerges in opposition to the 
particular. Thus it is legislative, establishing order where a relation is 
developed which intended to organize itself independently, or where 
some hitherto insignificant feature gradually develops itself in its pre-
vious unrestrictedness and begins to get strong. Above all it has to 
decide in every case where different rights of the systems [i.e., the 
class structures] come into collision and the present situation makes 
it impossible to maintain them in their positive stability. 
In all systems, theoretical or actuat we come across the formal idea 
that an absolute government is an organic central authority, and, in 
particular, one which preserves the constitution. But 
40. If a living thing is to be preserved, it is necessary continually to negate or 
destroy what threatens it. Even its food has to be "negated" in order to be ab-
sorbed. A glance at Hegel's later Philosophy of Nature will show that he always 
continued to think of the most primitive aspects of growth and self-maintenance 
as a continual breaking down of determinate forms previously built up. The liv-
ing body literally consumes its own substance in order to maintain its organic 
unity. There IS thus a struggle for existence among the "organs"; and each must 
have its own self-asserting, self-defending form. This is the analogy which Hegel 
here applies to his theory of social structure. 

162 
G. W. F. Hegel 
(a) such an idea, like Fichte's ephorate,41 is entirely formal and 
empty in its negative activity, 
({3) and then there has to be ascribed to it every possible 
oversight in the government of every single case, and con-
sequently this oversight involves a crude confusion of 
universal and individual. It is supposed to dominate every-
thing, giving commands and operating as predominant, 
and yet at the same time [that it dominates] to be nothing 
nevertheless i 
('Y) the absolute government is only not formal because it pre-
supposes the difference of the classes and so is truly the 
supreme government. Without this presupposition the whole 
might of reality falls into a clump (no matter how the 
clump might otherwise ramify internally) and this barbarian 
clump would have at its apex its equally barbarian power 
undivided and without wisdom. In the clump there cannot 
be any true and objective difference, and what was to hover 
over its internal differences is a pure nothing. For the abso-
[483] 
lute government, in order to be the absolute Idea, posits 
absolutely the endless movement of the absolute concept. 
In the latter there must be differences and, because they are 
in the concept, universal and infinite, they must therefore 
be systems. And in this way alone is an absolute govern-
ment and absolute living identity possible, but born into 
appearance and reality. 
The external form of this government's absolute might is that it 
belongs to no class, despite the fact that it originated in the first one. 
From this one it must proceed, for in reality the crude living identity, 
without wisdom and undifferentiated, is the third thing, the third class, 
while the second is the one in which difference is fixed, and although 
it has unity as formal universality united with itself, it still has this 
unity floating over it. But the first class is clear, mirror-bright identity, 
the spirit of the other classes, though since it is fixed in antithesis [to 
the others], it is the infinite side, while the others are the finite one. 
But the infinite is nearer to the Absolute than the finite is, and so, if 
the expression be allowed, rising from below, the Absolute mounts up 
41. Fichte, Science of Right, Part II, Book II,§ 2 (Kroeger, pp. 259-78; compare 
also Hegel's Philosophy of Right, § 273 (Knox, p. 177). 

163 
System of Ethical Life 
and swings forth directly out of the infinity which is its formal and 
negative side. 
This government is absolute power for all the classes because it is 
above them. Its might whereby it is a power is not something external 
whereby it would be something particular against another particular, 
would have an army, or whatever else, to execute its commands. On 
the contrary it is entirely withdrawn from opposition; there is nothing 
against which it could set itself as something particular and thereby 
make itself into something particular. On the contrary it is absolutely 
and solely universality against the particular; and as this Absolute, 
this Ideal, this Universal, in contrast with which everything else is a 
particular; it is God's appearance. Its words are his sayings, and it 
cannot appear or be under any other form. It is the direct Priesthood 
of the All Highest, in whose sanctuary it takes counsel with him and 
receives his revelations; everything human and all other sanction 
ceases here. 
It is neither the declaration that such an authority is to be inviolable 
nor the whole people's choice of its representatives that gives this gov-
[484] 
ernment its sanctity; on the contrary such a sanction rather detracts 
from it. 
Choice and declaration is an act proceeding from freedom and the 
will and so can just as easily be upset again. Force belongs to the em-
pirical and conscious will and insight, and every such single act of will 
and judgment occurs in time, is empirical and accidental, and may, 
and must, be able to be retracted. A people is not bound by its word, 
its act, or its will, for all of these proceed from its consciousness and 
from the circumstances. The absolute government, on the other hand, 
is divine, is not made, has its sanction in itself, and is simply the uni-
versal. But any and every making of it would issue from freedom and 
the will. 
B. Universal Government 
Absolute government is the restful substance of universal movement, 
but universal government is this movement's cause; or it is the uni-
versal in so far as the universal is opposed to the particular in the 
form of something particular; yet in its essence the universal is still 
the universal and, on account of its form, it is the determinant of the 
particular. 
Now since universal government is related to movement, while 
movement occurs in the sphere of individuality, shape, and relation, 
the content and object of this government is a universal situation. For 

164 
G. W. F. Hegel 
what abides absolutely is the essence of absolute governmenti all that 
can accrue to universal government is a formal universal. a universal 
accident, a determinate situation of the people for this period of time. 
For this situation must itself not be an abstraction, something belong-
ing in its reality entirely to the particular and not being any modifica-
tion or particularization of the universal. as, for example, the fact that 
every man lives, has clothes, etc. Such characteristics are only abstrac-
tions as universal and are needs of the single individual. But universal 
government is directed on what there is in those needs which qua uni-
versal is a power and subsumes the whole under itself and makes it a 
power. Universal government provides for the need which is univer-
sal. and provides for it in a universal way. 
[485] 
The movement of the whole is a persistent separation of the uni-
versal from the particular and a subsumption of the latter under the 
former. But this particular is the persisting separation, and on this 
account there is stamped on it the form of the Absolute or its mo-
ments as mutually external to one another. And the movement is de-
termined in ways that are similarly manifold. 
The particular against which the universal moves at the level of 
inwardly concealed identity and outwardly revealed difference deter-
mines the movement as one proceeding to nullityi for what is flatly 
set down as particular and cannot bring identity to birth, and so is not 
absolute concept or intelligence, can only become one with the univer-
sal through nullification. 
But the particular itself, as absolute concept and as organic totality, 
i.e., a people, is a particular i and consequently both particulars fail to 
recognize one another when they posit themselves as ideally negated 
-the aspect of negation in the absolute concept-and not as ideally 
persistent. The people that finds itself unrecognized must gain this 
recognition by war or colonies. 
But self-constituting individuality is not itself at this second level a 
level which takes its inorganic aspect, the absolute concept confront-
ing it, up into itself and makes it really and absolutely one with itself. 
War produces only a recognition, an ideal positing of equality, a true 
living being. 
Since government is a subsumption of the particular under the uni-
versal. in this concept the moments of the universal opposed to the 
particular may be distinguished into two, like the subsumption itselfi 
so this subsumption is again a double one, i.e., the real one and the 
ideal one-the former being the one in which it is formal universality 
under which the particular is posited, the latter being the true one in 

165 
System of Ethical Life 
which the particular is posited as one with the universal. The mo-
ments in question are those which have been conceived as the different 
powers in the state: (i) the positing of the universal as the legislature, 
(ii) its ideal subsumption of the particular as the judiciary, or justice 
in general, and (iii) real subsumption as the executive. (Kant has con-
ceived the real subsumption or the conclusion of the syllogism as the 
judicial power, but the ideal subsumption, or the minor premise as real 
subsuming, as the executive power.)42 
Every real or living movement is an identity of these three mo-
[486] 
ments, and in every act of government all three are united. They are 
abstractions to which no reality of their own can be given or which 
cannot be constituted or organized as authorities. Legislation, giving 
judgment, and executive action are something completely formal, emp-
ty, and devoid of content. A content makes them real, but by this 
linking of form and content each of them would immediately become 
an identity of universal and particular, or, as movement, a subsump-
tion of the particular under the universal, and so a movement which 
has united all three moments in itself. 
These abstractions may of course acquire reality; each of them may 
be independently linked with individuals who limit themselves to 
them. But in that case their true reality lies in the one which unites 
the three; or, since the conclusion [of the syllogism], the executive, is 
this unification, the executive is properly always the government; and 
whether the others are not pure abstractions, empty activities, depends 
on the executive, and this is absolutely the government; and after the 
above-mentioned distinctions [between legislature, judiciary, and exe-
cutive have been made] and the ineffective authorities set up, the first 
problem comes back again, the problem of knowing the executive, not 
as such, but as government. 
Therefore the movement of the people is government, because move-
ment as such is something formal, since in it it is not absolutely deter-
minate which of the terms standing in relation in the movement is 
power and which is the particular. and the fact that they are related 
in the movement seems accidental, whereas in the movement of the 
people universal and particular are plainly bound together; the abso-
lutely universal as such is plainly determined and therefore the par-
ticular is too. 
Organic movement must be recognized, so far as intuition subsumes 
the concept and the concept intuition. But because what is self-moving 
42. Recht3lehre, § 45. (Akad., VI, 313; Ladd, pp. 77-78). 

166 
G. W. F. Hegel 
is essentially organic, this distinction is formal throughout. The intui-
tion which subsumes the concept is itself absolute concept, and the 
concept which subsumes intuition is itself absolute intuition. The ap-
pearance of this form of this antithesis is outside the organic itself; the 
[487] 
antithesis lies in reflection on the movement. For the organic itself the 
antithesis is set up in such a way that, in so far as it is the concept 
which appears as subsuming, the organism is posited as an individual, 
as an independent single entity contrasted with other individual peo-
ples as single entities; in so far as it is intuition which is subsuming, 
the organism is really and truly subsumed; it is the universal, the de-
terminant of the particular, which is inherently nullified. In so far as 
the people, the totality, is directed against its own inner particular 
character, what is proper to the totality is this particular, because here 
the universal is posited as what is implicit. 
This separation, as was said, is a formal one. The movement itself is 
nothing but an alternation of these two subsumptions. From the sub-
sumption under the concept, where the opposites are single individu-
als, indifference arises and ideally intuits the single individual, which 
is thus posited outside the organism as what is proper to indifference, 
but itself still in the form of particularity, until indifference intuits the 
single individual as also really itself, or absolute identity is recon-
structed. 
Subsumption under the concept would be the abstraction of the 
mutual relation [of the people] to foreign peoples as individuals; but 
the organic process is directly an ideal cancellation of this difference, 
or the specific determinacy is directly the one belonging to the people, 
a difference in the people itself, and the living movement cancels it ab-
solutely. There can thus be no absolute basis for the division of gov-
ernment into internal and external affairs; neither is an organic system 
comprehended within the universal system and subordinate, but at 
the same time independent and organic. But the moments of the ab-
solute intuition, since they are known as organic, must themselves be 
systems in which those forms of inner and outer are subordinate. 
Those moments, being systems, must have difference wholly from out-
side, in reflection; but implicitly they must have absolute identity in 
themselves in such a way that it has hovered over them, not as such, 
but only as a form. 
The first system of movement in the totality is thus this-that ab-
solute identity is wholly concealed in it as feeling. 
The second is the separation of universal from particular and thus 
is something duplex in its movement: either the particular remains 

167 
System of Ethical Life 
what it is and the universal is therefore only formal, or the universal 
[488] 
is absolute and the particular is completely absorbed in it. The first is 
justice and war, the second is education, culture, conquest, and coloni-
zation. 
a) [The first system of Government: System of need] 
The system of need has been conceived formally above as a system 
of universal physical dependence on one another. For the totality of 
his need no one is independent. His labor, or whatever capacity he 
has for satisfying his need, does not secure its satisfaction for him. 
Whether the surplus that he possesses gives him a totality of satisfac-
tion depends on an alien power (Macht) over which he has no con-
trol. The value of that surplus, i.e., what expresses the bearing of the 
surplus on his need, is independent of him and alterable. 
This value itself depends on the whole of the needs and the whole 
of the surplus, and this whole is a scarcely knowable, invisible, and 
incalculable power,43 because this power is, with respect to its quan-
tity, a sum of infinitely many single contributions and, with respect to 
quality, it is compounded out of infinitely many qualities. This recip-
rocal action of the single contribution on the whole, which is com-
posed of such contributions, and of the whole in turn, as something 
ideal, on the single contribution, determines value and so is a perpet-
ual wave, surging up and down, in which the contributor, determined 
by the whole as possessing a high value, amasses his assets and hence 
there comes to be in the whole a surplus included in the entirety of 
need. As a result of this circumstance, the indifference of the whole, 
regarded as a mass of the other qualities, appears as a ratio between 
them, and this ratio has altered. These other qualities are necessarily 
connected with that surplus, and this which previously had a higher 
value is now depreciated. Every single kind of surplus is rendered in-
different in the whole, and through its reception into the whole it is 
measured to fit the whole of the general need; its place and worth is 
appointed for it. For this reason it is just as little the single contributor 
who determines the value of either his surplus or his need, or who can 
maintain it independently of its relation to everything else, as there 
(489] 
is anything permanent and secure in the value. 
Thus in this system what rules appears as the unconscious and 
blind entirety of needs and the modes of their satisfaction. But the 
43. Eine wenig erkennbare, unsichtbare, unberechenbare Macht. Is there here 
an echo of Adam Smith? (See further the remarks in the Introductory Essay, pp. 
74 and 95 note 87). 

168 
G. W. F. Hegel 
universal must be able to master this unconscious and blind fate and 
become a government. 
This whole does not lie beyond the possibility of cognition, in the 
great ratios treated en masse. Because the value, the universal, must 
be reckoned up quite atomistically, the possibility of knowledge in 
respect of the different kinds [of surplus] thus compounded is a mat-
ter of degree. But from the value of the kind itself it is possible to 
know how the surplus stands in relation to need; and this relation, or 
the value, has its significance from two aspects: (a) whether the pro-
duction of such a surplus is the possibility of [meeting] the totality 
of needs, whether a man can subsist on it, and (b) the aspect of uni-
versality, i.e., whether this value of one sort of need is not dispropor-
tionate to the totality itself, for which the need exists. 
Both must be determined by intuition, in terms of the whole of 
what a man necessarily wants, and this is to be ascertained, partly 
from primitive natural conditions, according to the different climates, 
and partly from cultural conditions, by taking the average of what in 
a [given] people is regarded as necessary for existence. Natural influ-
ences bring it about automatically that sometimes the proper equilib-
rium is maintained with insignificant oscillation, while at other times, 
if it is disturbed more seriously by external conditions, it is restored 
by greater oscillations. But precisely in this last case the government 
must work against the nature which produces this sort of overbalanc-
ing sway through empirical accidents whose effect is sometimes more 
rapid-e.g., poor harvests-sometimes slower-e.g., the development 
of the same work in other districts and the [resulting] cheapness [of 
the product] which cancels elsewhere the symmetrical relation of the 
surplus to the whole; and since nature has cancelled the peaceful mean 
[of the stable price system], the government must uphold that mean 
and the equilibrium. For the lowering of the value of one sort of sur-
[490] 
plus and the impracticability of that surplus's meeting the entirety of 
need [i.e., the impossibility of making a living by producing that 
commodity] destroys the existence and confidence of part of the peo-
ple, since that part has tied its existence to the practicability of this, 
with trust in the universal.44 
44. Earlier [p. 489] Hegel said that the universal must be able to master "this 
unconscious and blind fate and become a government." So "trust in the univer-
sal" could mean confidence in the stability of an existing economic system which 
has not yet "become a government" (i.e., an economic plan or policy actively de-
veloped and pursued by government). But when once trust is shaken, distrust is 
exhibited toward the government which has allowed some economic crisis to de-

169 
System of Ethical Life 
The government is the real authoritative whole which, indifferent 
to the parts [of the people], is not anything abstract and thus is in-
deed indifferent to the singular type of surplus to which one part links 
its reality, but is not indifferent to the existence of that part itself. 
When one sort of surplus is no longer adequate to supply the totality 
of needs [of those who produce it], the abstraction of equilibrium is 
sure to restore this proportion, and so the result will be that (a) only 
so many people will busy themselves with that sort as can live off it 
and their value will rise and that (b) if there are too few of them for 
those to whom this surplus is a need, their value will fall.45 But [on 
the one hand] reality and the government have a concern about a 
[price] value that is too low because it puts in jeopardy some part [of 
the people] whose physical existence has been made dependent on the 
whole [economyj and is now [threatened] with complete ruin by it; 
and, on the other hand, the government is concerned about values 
[i.e., prices] being too high, which disturbs everyone in the totality of 
his enjoyment and customary life. These concerns are ignored by the 
abstraction of equilibrium, an abstraction which in the equilibrium's 
oscillation remains outside it as the passive indifference of reflective 
observation, while the government remains outside [the oscillation] 
as the real authoritative indifference and the determinant of difference. 
But these empirical oscillations and formal nonnecessary differences, 
to which the government is authoritatively indifferent, are accidental, 
not the necessary differential urge which proceeds to the destruction 
of the equilibrium. 
The organic principle of this level is singleness, feeling, and need, 
and this is empirically endless. In so far as it is independent and is to 
remain what it is, it sets no limits to itself,and since its nature is sin-
gleness, it is empirically endless. True, enjoyment does seem to be 
fixedly determinate and restricted; but its endlessness is its ideality, 
stroy the livelihood of a significant number of the people. It is the task of gov-
ernment to maintain the reliability of the "universal system of needs." This sys-
tem, whether "governed"' or not, seems to be the "universal" here. 
45. There may be something wrong with the text here, because Hegel appears 
to be contradicting the "law of supply and demand" on which he is plainly rely-
ing. It is when there are too many goods, services, or producers in the market to 
meet the existing demand that the supplier's "value" falls. Of course the pur-
chaser's "value" (his purchasing power) falls in a situation of scarcity. What 
Hegel seems to have meant is "only so many ... as can live off it, and if there 
are too few of them for those to whom this surplus is a need, their value will 
rise. But if there are too many of them, their value will fall." 

170 
G. W. F. Hegel 
and in this respect it is endless. As enjoyment itself it idealizes itself 
[491] 
into the purest and clearest enjoying. Civilized enjoyment volitilizes 
the crudity of need and therefore must seek or arrange what is nob-
lest, and the more different its impulses, the greater the labor they 
necessitate. For both the difference of the impulses and also their in-
difference and concentration, these two aspects which the reality of 
nature separates, should be united. The neutrality which the natural 
product has by being a totality in itself should [be] cancelled and 
merely its difference should remain to be enjoyed. 
Moreover this ideality of enjoyment displays itself also as "being 
other," as foreignness in the external connection of the product [i.e., 
it comes from "abroad"], and it is linked with scarcity; and this for-
eign sort of satisfaction, as well as the most domestic sort, the one 
already made most peculiarly our own by its manner of preparation, 
makes charges on the whole earth. 
Empirically endless, the ideality of enjoyment finally displays itself 
in objectified restricted enjoyment, in possession, and in this respect, 
consequently, all limitation ceases. 
Over against this infinity is the particularity of enjoyment and pos-
session, and since possible possession-the objective element in the 
level of enjoyment-and iabor have their limits, are determinate in 
quantity, it follows that with the accumulation of possession at one 
place, possession must diminish at another. 
This inequality of wealth is absolutely necessary. Every natural in-
equality can express itself as inequality of wealth if what is natural 
turns to this aspect. The urge to increase wealth is nothing but the 
necessity for carrying to infinity the specific individual thing which 
possession is. But the business that is more universal and more ideal 
is that which as such secures a greater gain for itself. 
This necessary inequality divides itself again within the business 
class (Erwerbsstand) into many particular types of business (Stiinde 
des Erwerbs), and it divides these into estates (Stiinde) of different 
wealth and enjoyment. But owing to its quantitative character, which 
is a matter of degree and is incapable of any definition except in de-
gree, this inequality produces a relation of master [and servant]. The 
individual who is tremendously wealthy becomes a might; he cancels 
the form of thoroughgoing physical dependence, the form of depend-
ence on a universat not on a particular. 
Next, great wealth, which is similarly bound up with the deepest 
[492] 
poverty (for in the separation [between rich and poor] labor on both 
sides is universal and objective), produces on the one side in ideal uni-

171 
System of Ethical Life 
versality, on the other side in real universality, mechanically. This 
purely quantitative element, the inorganic aspect of labor, which is 
parcelled out even in its concept, is the unmitigated extreme of bar-
barism. The original character of the business class, namely, its being 
capable of an organic absolute intuition and respect for something di-
vine, even though posited outside it, disappears, and the bestiality of 
contempt for all higher things enters. The mass of wealth, the pure 
universal, the absence of wisdom, is the heart of the matter (das An-
sich). The absolute bond of the people, namely ethical principle, has 
vanished, and the people is dissolved. 
The government has to work as hard as possible against this in-
equality and the destruction of private and public life wrought by it. 
It can do this directly in an external way by making high gain more 
difficult, and if it sacrifices one part of this class to mechanical and 
factory labor and abandons it to barbarism, it must keep the whole 
[people] without question in the life possible for it. But this happens 
most necessarily, or rather immediately, through the inner constitution 
of the class. 
The relation of physical dependence is absolute particularization 
and dependence on something abstract, an ens rationis. The constitu-
tion creates a living dependence and a relation of individuals, a differ-
ent and an inwardly active connection which is not one of physical 
dependence. To say that this class is constituted inwardly means that 
within its restrictedness it is a living universal. What is its universal, 
its law and its right, is living at the same time in the individuals, real-
ized in them through their will and their own activity. This organic 
existence of this class makes every single individual, so far as there 
is life in him, one with the others; but the class cannot subsist in 
absolute unity. Thus it makes some of the individuals dependent, but 
ethical on the score of their trust, respect, etc., and this ethical life 
cancels mere mass, quantity, and the elemental, and creates a living 
relation. The wealthy man is directly compelled to modify his relation 
of mastery, and even [others'] distrust for it, by permitting a more 
[493) 
general participation in it.46 The external inequality is diminished ex-
ternally, just as the infinite does not give itself up to determinacy but 
exists as living activity, and thus the urge to amass wealth indefinitely 
is itself eradicated. 
This constitution belongs rather to the nature of the class itself and 
46. In a marginal note Hegel refers to the "Athenian law for defrayment of 
festival expenses by the richest men of the quarter"-i.e., the law affecting "lit-
urgies." 

172 
G. W. F. Hegel 
its organic essence, not to the government; to the latter it is the ex-
ernal restrictions [that belong]. But this is its particular activity, i.e., 
provision for the subsistence of the single classes within this sphere by 
opposing the endless oscillations in the value of things. But the gov-
ernment, as the universal, itself has universal needs: (i) in general, for 
the first class which, exempt from property and business, [lives] in 
continual and absolute and universal need, (ii) for the formally uni-
versal class, i.e., for that which is the organ of government in the 
other classes and labors purely in the universal field, (iii) for the need 
of the community, of the entire people as a universal, e.g. for its 
[public] dwellings, etc., its temples, streets, and so forth. 
The government must earn [enough for] these needs, but its work 
can only consist in taking directly into its possession without work 
the ripe fruits [of industry] or in itself working and acquiring. The lat-
ter-since it is against the nature of the universal to rest in the par-
ticular, and here the government is something formally universal-
can only be a possessing and a leasing of this possession, with the re-
sult that acquiring and working affect the government not directly but 
in the form of utility, a result, something universal. But the former 
is the appropriation of the ripe fruits, and so these ripe fruits are work 
completed and so in the form of something universal, as money or as 
the most universal needs. These are themselves a possession of indi-
viduals and the cancellation of this possession must have the form of 
formal universality or justice. 
But the system of taxes falls directly into the contradiction that 
while it should [be] absolutely just for each to contribute in propor-
(494] 
tion to the magnitude of his possessions, these possessions are not 
landed or immovable but, in industry, something living, infinite, and 
incalculable. Looked on abstractly, the calculation or estimation of the 
capital involved according to the income obtained is possible, but 
the income is something entirely particular, not something objective, 
knowable, and ascertainable, like landed property. So in this way 
private possessions cannot be taxed in accordance with justice be-
cause, by being private, they do not themselves have the form of 
something objective. 
But the objective, i.e., landed property, can be interpreted according 
to the value of its possible productivity (even though here, too, par-
ticularity always has a part to play); but because at the same time pos-
session in the form of particularity is present as skilfulness, not every-
thing is comprised under that value; and if the products of landed 
property are prodigiously assessed, the value of the product is not set 

173 
System of Ethical Life 
in equilibrium, for the mass always remains the same, being that on 
which the value depends, and if production diminished, the state's 
revenues would diminish to the same extent; production would have 
to be taxed all the more in a progressive rise and its receipts would 
behave in the opposite way. Thus skilfulness has to be taxed at the 
same time, not according to its receipts, which are something particu-
lar and one's own, but according to what it expends; for the thing it 
buys makes the passage through the form of universality out of its 
particularity, or it becomes a commodity. And on account of the same 
circumstance, namely that the mass either remains the same, in which 
case the value of the article is not altered and this working class is 
impoverished, or, what follows in that event, less is produced, with 
the result that the revenue is less, and the same is the case on what-
ever branch [of industry] the tax falls; thus [the tax] must extend to 
the maximum possible particularity [of commodities]. Although for 
this reason it likewise results that less is needed, this is precisely the 
[best] external means for restricting gain, and in the taxes the gov-
ernment has a means of influencing this restriction or extension of 
single parts [of the whole economy]. 
b) The second system of Government: System of justice 
[495] 
In the first system the opposition of universal and particular is for-
mal. Value, the universal, and needs and possessions, the particular 
do not determine the essence of the matter but are outside it. The es-
sence remains its connection with a need. But in this system of the 
separation [of universal and particular] it is ideal determinacy which 
is the essence. The thing which is tied to need is, qua property, so 
determined that, even as this particular possession, it is essentially 
something universal; its connection with need-and the need is some-
thing entirely single-is something recognized. The thing is mine, and 
as mine has not been nullified. But the relative identity, in which I 
stand with it, or the ideality of nullification (i.e., posession), this ob-
jectivity is posited as a subjective one, existing in men's minds. For 
this reason, as this identity, it [i.e., the property] is intuition, not a 
single intuition of this single thing, but absolute intuition. That con-
nection [with need] has objective reality. The self is universal, estab-
lished, and has being; that tie is determined as a universal one. 
The middle term, the reality of this connection is the government. 
The fact that a tie of possession is not something ideal but is also real 
is the fact that all selves establish this connection, that the empirical 
self of the tie exists as the whole mass of selves. This mass, according 

174 
G. W. F. Hegel 
to the abstraction of its quantity, is the public authority, and this pub-
lic authority as thinking and conscious ([sich] bewusst) is the govern-
ment here as the administration of justice. 
As this administration, government is the entirety of all rights, but 
with complete indifference toward the interest of the connection of 
the thing with the need of this specific individual. For the government 
this individual is a completely indifferent universal person. All that 
comes in question in pure justice is simply the universal, the abstract 
aspect of the manner of possession and gain. But justice must itself be 
a living thing and have regard to the person. 
Right in the form of consciousness is law, which is here related to 
singular cases; but this form is arbitrary, although it is necessary for 
right to be present, in the form of consciousness, as law. 
[496] 
Right concerns singular cases and is the abstraction of universality, 
for the singular case is to subsist in it. This singular case is either the 
living being of the individual or a relative identity of his [i.e., some 
piece of his property] or the life of the individual himself regarded as 
something singular or as relative identity. 
So too the negation of singular individuality (a negation produced by 
a single individual and not by the absolutely universal) is a negation 
of [his right of] possession purely as such, or the negation of a single 
living aspect of the individual, or the negation of the entirety of the 
living individual. The second negation is a violent deed, the third is 
death. 
Absolute government could in this matter leave the second class and 
the third (which through the first lies under civil law) to themselves 
and leave them alone in the vain endeavor to assume into the infinite 
the absolutely settled finitude of possession. This endeavor is dis-
played as the [attempted] completeness of the civil laws, as an abso-
lute consciousness about judicial procedure, such that the rule would 
be self-sufficient in its form as rule and the judge would be purely an 
organ, the absolute abstraction of the singular case under discussion, 
without any life and intuition of the whole. 
This false infinite must be set aside by the organic character of the 
constitution, a character which, as organic, assumes the universal ab-
solutely into the particular. 
The organic principle is freedom, the fact that the ruler is himself 
the ruled; but since here the government, as universal, remains op-
posed to the collision [of rules] involved in the single individual, this 
identity [of ruler and ruled] must in the first place be so established 
that the equality of birth [typical of] the same [noble] class, the con-

175 
System of Ethical Life 
stitt1tion [appropriate] for a narrower circle of [noble] families, is ex-
panded into a whole [of all classes] as dwelling together under the 
same citizenship, and this dwelling together as citizens constitutes the 
living unity. Secondly, in the actuality of single legal judgments the 
abstraction of the law must not be the absolute thing; on the contrary 
the whole affair must be a settlement according to equity, i.e., one that 
takes account of the whole situation of the parties as individuals, a 
settlement productive of satisfaction and reached with the conviction 
and assent of the parties. 
This principle of freedom in its mechanical constitution is compre-
hended as the organization of law courts and is an analysis of the dis-
pute and the decision thereon. 
In the administration of the civil law it is only determinacy as such 
[497] 
that is absolutely negated in the dispute, and the living employment, 
work, what is personal, may become what is determinate. 
But in criminal law it is not anything determinate which is negated, 
but individuality, the indifference of the whole, life and personality. 
Negation in civil law is purely ideal, but in criminal law real, for the 
negation that effects a totality is real for that reason. [In a case of 
civil wrong] I am in possession of someone else's property, not by 
robbery or theft, but because I claim it as mine and justly so. In this 
way I recognize the other man's competence to possess property; but 
force and theft deny this recognition. They are compulsive, affecting 
the whole; they cancel freedom and the reality of being universal and 
recognized. If crime did not give the lie to this recognition, it could 
equally well surrender to another, to the universal, what it accom-
plishes. 
Justice in civil matters therefore simply affects something determi-
nate; but penal justice must also cancel, apart from the determinate 
thing, both the negation of universality and also the universality put 
in place of the other-opposition is opposed by opposition. 
This cancellation is punishment, and it is determined precisely by 
the determinate way in which universality has been cancelled. 
1. Civil punishment. 2. Penal punishment. 3. War. Here universal-
ity and singular individuality are one, and the essence is this totality. 
In 1 the essence is universality, in 2 singular individuality, in 3 
identity: the people becomes the criminal who is in 2 and sacrifices the 
possessions of 1; it sides with the negative in 1 and 2; for the first 
class, 3 is appropriate. 

176 
G. W. F. Hegel 
c) [The] third system of Government: [System of Discipline] 
In this system the universal is the Absolute, and purely as such the 
determining factor. In the first [system] the universal is the crude, 
purely quantitative, and wisdomless universal, in the second the uni-
versality of the concept, formal universality, recognition. Thus for the 
absolutely universal, difference exists too; this difference superseded 
[498] 
the universal in the universal's movement, but it is a superficial and 
formal difference, and the essence of the differents is absolute univer-
sality. Similarly in the first [system] the essence of the different is 
feeling, need, and enjoyment, in the second the essence of the different 
is to be a singular [person], something formally absolute. The uni-
versal, the cause, is determined by its essence like the particular. 
I. Education; II. Training (Bildung) and Discipline (Zucht); the first 
consists formally of talents, inventions, science. What is real is the 
whole, the absolutely universal, the inherently self-moving character 
of the people, the absolute bond, the true and absolute reality of sci-
ence. Inventions affect only something singular, just as the single sci-
ences do, and where these are absolute in the shape of philosophy, 
they yet are wholly ideal. Training in the truth, with the destruction 
of all appearance, is the self-developing and deliberating and con-
scious people; the other side is the police as disciplining singular cases. 
The great discipline consists of the universal mores, the [social] order, 
training for war, and the testing of the reliability of the single indi-
vidual in war. 
III. Procreation of children; the way that a people becomes objec-
tive to itself as this people; the fact that the government, the people, 
produces another people. Colonization. 
[C. Free government] 47 
47. A and B are "Absolute Government" and "Universal Government," the lat-
ter having been divided into a, b, c. (This heading was added by Lasson.) 
Possible forms of a free government: I. Democracy. II. Aristocracy. 
III. Monarchy. 
Each is capable of becoming unfree: I. Ochlocracy. II. Oligarchy. 
III. Despotism. The external and mechanical element is the same. The 
difference is caused by the relation of ruler to ruled, i.e., whether the 
essence is the same and the form of opposition is only superficial. 
Monarchy is the exhibition of the absolute reality of ethical life in 
one individual, aristocracy in several individuals. The latter is distin-
guished from the absolute constitution by hereditariness, still more by 

177 
System of Ethical Life 
landed estate, and, because it has the form of the absolute constitu-
tion and not its essence, it is the worst constitution. -Democracy 
exhibits this absolute reality in everyone; consequently it involves 
confusion with possession, and there is no separation of the absolute 
class. For the absolute constitution the form of aristocracy or mon-
archy is equally good. That constitution is democracy too in the [or-
ganization of the] classes. 
In monarchy a religion must stand alongside the monarch. He is the 
[499) 
identity of the whole, but in an empirical shape; and the more empiri-
cal he is, the more barbaric the people is, and the more the monarchy 
has authority, and the more independently it constitutes itself. The 
more the people becomes one with itself, with nature and ethical life. 
all the more does it take the Divine into itself and suffer loss [lose 
<faith>?] in this religion that resists it; and then by reconciliation 
with the world and itself it passes through the lack of imagination that 
typifies irreligion and the understanding. 
This is the case also in aristocracy, but on account of its patriarchal, 
or pap for the children48 character, there is little imagination or re-
ligion. 
In democracy absolute religion does exist, but unstably, or rather 
it is a religion of nature; ethical life is bound up with nature, and the 
link with objective nature makes democracy easy of access for the in-
tellect. For the positing of nature as something objective-Epicurean 
philosophy-the religion must be purely ethical, and so must the 
imagination of the absolute religion, and art, too, which has produced 
a Jupiter, an Apollo, a Venus-not Homeric art, where Jupiter and 
Juno are air and Neptune is water [so that it is natural, not ethical]. 
This separation must be complete, the ethical movement of God abso-
lute, not crime and weakness [as in the Homeric gods] but absolute 
crime-death [as in the Crucifixion]. 
48. Lasson misread Brey tornBergriff here. 

Appendix 
THE SUPPOSED CONCLUSION OF THE System of Ethical Life AND THE CON-
TINUATION OF THE LECTURE MANUSCRIPTS UPON WHICH IT WAS BASED (as 
reported by Rosenkranz in his Life of Hegel, pp. 132-41). 1 
132] 
Hegel made the conclusion2 of his philosophy of spirit at the end of 
the system of philosophy itself initially by seeking to make out the 
necessity of philosophy in [the life of] a people as the ideal comple-
ment of war. The absolute labor is simply death, in that it suspends 
the determinate singularity; for this reason military valor brings into 
[the life of] the State the absolute sacrifice. But since for those who 
do not die fighting, there remains the humiliation of not being dead, 
and of still having the selfish enjoyment of their own singularity, 
[133] 
there remains only speculation as the absolute cognition of truth, as 
the form in which the simple consciousness of the infinite is possible 
without the determinacy of the individual, independent, life. "The 
absolute consciousness of the individuals of the people, the living spir-
it of the same, must be pure, absolute, consciousness, absolute spirit 
both in respect of form and in respect of content; and the spirit of 
the people becomes spirit of the natural and ethical universe. Only 
then is the spirit absolute in its absolute self-equality, in the aether of 
its simple Idea [so that] the end of philosophy returns again to its be-
ginning."3 
1. The further additions quoted from the manuscript itself by R. Haym (Hegel 
und seine Zeit, Berlin 1857) have been inserted in their proper place. 
2. Rosenkranz is certainly wrong about this. See note 3 below. 
3. The fragment which Rosenkranz has here summarized and from which he 
quotes the end, was certainly not part of the System of Ethical Life. The con-
tinuity between our manuscript of the System of Ethical Life and Hegel's "oral 
communication of his philosophy" is evident enough. On the other hand Rosen-
kranz would not have been tempted to see in his fragment the missing conclu-
sion of Hegel's supposed "Frankfurt" system if it formed part of a lecture course 
for which he had a continuous manuscript. (He treats the lecture manuscripts 
that are recognizable as such as "didactic modifications" of the "Frankfurt" sys-
tem.) What he quotes here, must therefore have been a loose fragment even 
when he had it. It is unmistakably (to us, as to him) the conclusion of a "system," 
and Hegel's reference to "the natural and ethical universe" virtually guarantees 
that it is not later than 1804. It could conceivably be earlier than the System of 
Ethical Life. But in all probability it was the end either of the "First Philosophy 

179 
Appendix 
But this ending did not satisfy Hegel when he came later on in Jena 
to the oral communication of his philosophy. He worked out the con-
cept of the distinction of constitutions further and identified the free 
estate in Monarchy as the Nobility, which stands over against Majes-
ty [i.e., against the Monarchy] in a tacit battle that has the form of 
obedience. But more especially he followed out the concept of the re-
ligious cult as that in which a people comes to its highest self-enjoy-
ment; and he did this in a fashion notable for its simplicity and intel-
ligibility. He claimed that in Religion the reality of the objective world 
itself, and subjectivity and particularity along with it, are posited as 
superseded. Where it [i.e., subjectivity and particularity] is still held 
on to as negative freedom in this highest region of universal ration-
ality, even just as virtuosity (as he remarked in criticism of Schleier-
macher's Discourses on Religion, which were epoch-making at the 
time) then there is no serious intent to let the spirit appear in spiritual 
shape. On the contrary it is the essence of religion that the spirit is 
not ashamed of any of its individuals [meaning that the religious com-
munity does not need virtuosos of religious experience]; it does not 
refuse to appear to anyone, and everyone has power over it, power to 
conjure it up. The supersession of subjectivity is not the sheer nulli-
fication of it, but just the nullification of its empirical individuality, 
and by this means it is a purification for the absolute enjoyment of its 
[i.e., the spirit's] absolute essence. For in religion the ideal shape of 
the spirit is real, while its real side is ideal; and in it the spirit appears 
for the individual. Hence it has for him, imprimis, the shape of an ob-
jective [power] which lives and moves in the people as its Spirit, and 
is alive in all of them. In Science the spirit appears in an objective 
[134] 
shape, the shape of being, but it is still the spirit that is also subjec-
tive. In respect of its subject matter speculative knowledge (das Wis-
sen) has no particular advantage over Religion. Religion's essence 
drives the spirit back together, out of the extension of empirical exis-
tence, into the supreme point of intensity, and sets it forth objectively 
for intuition and for thought, so that spirit has enjoyment of itself and 
of its own intuition, and in this enjoyment it is at the same time real, 
i.e., it recognizes itself in the individual, and the individual recognizes 
himself in it. As the totality of empirical existence setting itself forth 
objectively, the essence of God has a history for the spirit. His living 
of Spirit" of 1803/4 or of its immediate predecessor the philosophiae universae 
delineatio of summer 1803. (See further the Introduction to the "First Philosophy 
of Spirit," pp. 20Q-01). 

180 
Appendix 
being is events and actions. The most living God of a people is its na-
tional God, in whom its spirit appears transfigured, and not just its 
spirit but also its empirical existence, the untruth and uncertainty of 
its life, appears as a sum of singular traits. In religion the spirit is not 
in the ideality of philosophic science, but is in connection with reality; 
so it necessarily has a limited shape, which when fixated for its own 
sake, makes up the positive side of every religion. The religious tradi-
tion thus expresses two things at once: on one side the speculative 
Idea of the spirit, and on the other the limitation derived from the 
empirical existence of the people-not the limitation of the Idea in the 
way that art must employ such limitation in general. And since reli-
gion, qua religion, must exclude philosophic science and art, there-
fore it is an activity which complements art and science; it is the cult 
which raises subjectivity and freedom to their highest enjoyment, be-
cause it offers up a part of its singularity to the great spirit in divine 
service and by this sacrifice makes the rest of its property free. 
Through the reality of the nullification of singularity in the offering 
the subject saves itself from the onesidedness of the deception (Be-
trug) that its exaltation is only a matter of thought. This action, the 
irony toward the mortal and profitable activity of men, is reconcilia-
tion, the basic Idea of religion. In so far as singularity wants to main-
tain itself against rational universality, it comes to be in sin, it comes 
to transgression. Here the spirit is reconciled only as fate in punish-
[135] 
ment. Reconciliation is exalted above punishment and appears there-
fore as justified necessity.4 For since reconciliation in general is directed 
only to the spirit and cannot supersede the [causal] chain of determi-
nate existence, nothing in fate is changed by it. Only the essence of 
the actual battle (Energie des Kampfes) against fate-as the poten-
tiality of setting at risk the whole range of empirical existence-is also 
the potentiality of reconciliation with fate, since the spirit has torn 
itself free from fate through the ethical character of the battle. 
Religion must, as Hegel expressed it in the style of nature-philoso-
phy that was then fashionable, come on the scene of world history 
in the following three forms (in accord with the three universal di-
mensions of Reason and within the bounds of climatic modification 
according to its empirical difference): 
1) in the form of Identity, in the original reconciliation between 
spirit and its real being in individuality; 
4. Gerechte Notwendigkeit-i.e., reconciliation involves both justice (like pun-
ishment) and necessity (like fate). 

181 
Appendix 
2) in the form where the spirit begins from the infinite difference 
of its identity and reconstructs from this difference a relative 
identity and reconciles itself; 
3) this identity, subsumed under the original absolute one, 
will posit the being-at-one of Reason in its spiritual shape 
with Reason in its real being or in individuality as originat 
and will posit at the same time its infinite antithesis, and 
its reconstruction. 
In the first dimension, as original reconciliation, religion is nature 
religion. For the imagination of its pantheism nature is in and for itself 
a spirit and is holy. Its God has not retreated from any element. A 
curse may have lain on the heads of single individuals, but no univer-
sal aspect of nature is abandoned by God. The spirit may be wroth 
against such peoples at isolated moments, but they are certain of their 
reconciliation. The daily round of life is a converse with the Gods, 
a reciprocal giving and receiving from them, and every outward mo-
tion is full of significance as a word of fate. The shapes of the Gods 
cannot be resolved into actual things, or historical explanations, or 
thoughts. The eternity of the ideals of a beautiful mythology rests nei-
ther on its perfect artistic beauty, nor on the truth of the Ideas that 
they express, nor on the actuality that belongs to them, but precisely 
[136] 
on the identity of all of these factors and their indivisibility. 
In a second period this beautiful world of the Gods must pass away, 
along with the spirit that enlivens it. It can abide only as a memory. 
The unity of the spirit with its reality must be rent. The ideal principle 
must constitute itself in the form of universality, while the real prin-
ciple set9 itself up firmly as singularity, and nature is left lying be-
tween them as a desecrated corpse. The spirit must abandon its dwell-
ing in living nature and raise itself up as a potency against it. Ethical 
grief (Schmerz) must be infinite. The time of this grief came when 
the Romans smashed the living individuality of the peoples, putting 
their spirits to flight and destroying their ethical life, before extending 
the universality of their lordship over the dismembered singular parts. 
At the time of this dismembering, for which there was no reconcilia-
tion, and of this universality that had no life, in this boredom of the 
world when peace was lord over all of the civilized earth, the original 
identity had to rise out of its rent condition, it had to lift its eternal 
force above its grief and come again to its own intuition. Otherwise the 
human race must have perished inwardly. And the first theatre for 
the appearance of ethereal Reason reawakened in the world that had 

182 
Appendix 
ceased to be Nature, had to be the very people which in the whole 
course of their existence has been the most rejected of the peoples, 
because in it the grief was bound to be deepest, and its utterance must 
have had a truth intelligible to the whole world. 
In this way Christ became the founder of a religion, because he ut-
tered the suffering of his whole world from the inmost depth; he 
raised the force of the divinity of the spirit above it, the absolute cer-
tainty of reconciliation, which he bore in himself; and by his confi-
dence he awoke the confidence of others. He uttered the suffering of 
his ti~e, which had become untrue to nature, in his absolute contempt 
for a nature become worldly and his absolute confidence of reconcilia-
tion, in his certainty that he is one with God.-The contempt that he 
[137] 
expressed towards the world was necessarily bound to be avenged 
upon him as his fate by his death; and this death had to vindicate the 
contempt of the world and make it the fixed point [scilicet of the new 
religion]. These two necessary elements had to become the pivot of the 
new religion: the expulsion of the Gods from nature, hence contempt 
for the world; and the fact that in this infinite division a man still bore 
within himself the confidence of being one with the Absolute. In this 
man the world was again reconciled with the spirit. Since the whole of 
nature had ceased to be divine, only the nature of this man could be 
divine and nature could become hallowed again only from him as fo-
cus. But because man, being certain that he was not himself divine, 
could look upon divinity only in this man and had to make the coming 
of individuality to oneness with the absolute spirit hang upon his per-
sonality, his finite existence (sein Dasein) became the starting point of 
this religion itself. The more striking tendency of this religion was 
bound at first to be contempt for the world and of the universal which 
existed as State; and the symbol of this contempt was the cross, which, 
being the gallows of the world, was the most shameful and dishonor-
able thing. [According to Haym, Hegel's actual words were: "In the 
context of our ethical customs this new religion would have had to 
make the gallows, which is now what the cross was then, into its battle-
standard."P A more distinctive or unambiguous [literally "neces-
sary"] signal of absolute division from the world and of total war 
against it to wipe it out could not be established. 
The other side of the infinite grief of this absolute division was its 
reconciliation in the faith that God has appeared in human form and 
has thus reconciled human nature with himself in this singular shape 
5. Hegel und seine Zeit (Berlin, 1857; reprinted, Hildesheim, 1962), p. 509, 
note 13. 

183 
Appendix 
as the representative of the species. This single human shape ex-
pressed in its history the whole history of the empirical existence of 
the human race; it had to do this in order to be the national God of the 
race. But at the same time it expressed this history only so far as it 
was the history of God. In other words the principle is infinite grief, 
the absolute rending of nature. Reconciliation has neither meaning nor 
truth without this grief. In order for this level [Potenz] of religion to 
exist it must eternally produce this grief so as to be able to reconcile it 
eternally. The empirical condition of the world in which the religion 
originated was bound to be superseded through the struggle of this 
reconciling religion, so that the world was really happier and more 
[138] 
reconciled, and the religion must in this way surpass itself. So it must 
bear within itself the principle by which the infinite suffering is 
aroused in order to reconcile it infinitely. It has this principle, the fate 
of the world, necessarily in the history of its God who has died the 
death of a transgressor. The death of a transgressor could itself be just 
a single death. The view of death as a universal necessity can arouse 
no infinite religious grief, but he who died on the cross is simultane-
ously the God of this religion and as such his history expresses the 
infinite suffering of nature deprived of its gods. The divine was 
bruised in the everyday routine of life, the divine was dead. The 
thought that God himself had died on earth, that alone expresses the 
feeling of this infinite grief; just as the thought that he is resurrected 
from the grave expresses its reconciliation. By his life and death God 
is humbled, by his resurrection man has become divine. This religion 
cannot let the infinite grief and the eternal reconciliation depend on 
the accidental empirical existence of the single [believers]. It must 
constitute itself as a cult through which the grief is aroused and the 
reconciliation shared. Nature religion must leave it to chance how far 
the original reconciliation is alive in a single [worshipper]. But the re-
ligion that proceeds to the reconstruction of the indifferent harmony 
must produce that infinite difference by doing violence to nature so as 
to make it possible for its reconciliation to be a reconstructed one. 
This then is what has happened with perfect wisdom in the Chris-
tian religion. Man is led up to the grief of the divine death and of the 
mortality of all life by an infinite sum of instituted situations, and then 
awakened from this death, and hallowed in oneness with the God-
Man again (in whom the race is reconciled) by the eating of his body 
and the drinking of his blood, the most inward type of union. The 
history of God is the history of the whole race and every single hu-
man being goes through the whole history of the race. All nature is 

184 
Appendix 
[139] 
hallowed again, beginning from the reconsecrated man; it is a temple 
of the newly awakened life. The new consecration is extended to ev-
erything. The lordly authority of the monarch is consecrated by reli-
gion; his sceptre contains a piece of the Holy Cross. Every land has 
been provided with special messengers of God and is marked by their 
traces. Everyone of them can boast its own sacred history of recon-
ciliation and has individualized the new consecration. To every single 
act and everything in the highest and lowest activities the consecra-
tion is given anew that they had lost; -the old curse that lay on all 
things is dissolved; the whole of nature is received into the state of 
grace and its grief reconciled. 
Through this reconstructed religion the other side, the ideality of 
the spirit in the form of thought, is added to the only form of spir-
itual ideality that can exist in nature religion, namely, art, and the 
folk religion must contain the highest Ideas of speculation expressed 
not just as a mythology but in the form of Ideas. It reveres the Abso-
lute in the form of Trinity. God as the paternal principle being abso-
lute thought; then his reality, the Father in his creation, the eternal 
Son, who, as the divine reality has two sides, the one being that of 
his genuine divinity, according to which the Son of God is God, the 
other the side of his singularity as world; finally the eternal identity 
of the objective world with the eternal thought, the Holy Spirit. Since 
religion proceeds from the infinite grief, the reconciliation of this grief 
has this connection objectively at the same time in the reconciled God 
as love; and the divinity in which this love finds its own felicity must 
come to be the Mother of God herself. 
In Catholicism this religion has come to be a beautiful one. Protes-
tantism has superseded the poetry of consecration. the individualiza--
tion of holiness, and has poured the color of universality over a 
patriotically hallowed nature, transposing the patria of religion and 
the appearing of God into the distance once more-far from the peo-
[140] 
pie's own fatherland. It has changed the infinite grief, the sense of 
life, the confidence and peace of reconciliation into an infinite yearn-
ing. It has imprinted on religion the whole character of northern sub-
jectivity. Since it has in general transformed the whole cycle of grief 
and reconciliation into yearning, and yearning into thinking and know-
ing about reconciliation, and since the violence and [external] neces-
sity with which the grief was aroused thus falls away in it, its char-
acter as infinite grief and reconciliation became the prey of chance, 
and this form of religion could pass over into empirical reconcilia-
tion with the actuality of existence (Dasein) and an unmediated and 

185 
Appendix 
untroubled immersion in the common round of empirical activities 
(Existenz) and necessities of everyday. The religious exaltation and 
hallowing of empirical existence, the Sabbath of the world, has dis-
appeared and life has become a common unhallowed workaday matter. 
Though Hegel at that time considered Protestantism to be just 
as much a finite form of Christianity as Catholicism (a fact which 
emerges clearly enough from the above report), still he did not, like 
many of this contemporaries, on that account go over to Catholicism. 
He believed rather that through the mediation of philosophy a third 
form of religion would emerge out of Christianity. He said in this con-
nection: "Since that beauty and holiness [of Catholic Christendom) has 
gone under [in nationalism], it can neither come back again, nor can 
we mourn for it. We can only recognize the necessity of its passing 
and surmise the higher thing for which it has to prepare the way and 
which must take its place. -From what we have already said, in other 
words, it is evident that the reconstruction occurs within the sphere of 
the antithesis from which the grief came, and the whole form of reli-
gion up to this point belongs primarily in the Potenz of the relative 
antithesis, for Nature is hallowed, but not by a spirit of its own; it is 
reconciled, but it remains for itself a secular thing as it was before. 
Consecration comes to it from something external. The entire spiritual 
sphere has not risen up into the spiritual region from its own ground 
and soil." [Haym continues here: "This idealistic sphere forms an ad-
venturous realm without rules; it has tumbled together at random 
from the histories and the imagination of all peoples and climates, 
without significance or truth for nature, which is placed in subjection 
to it, and equally without allowing that the spirit of the individuals of 
a people can maintain their right within it; it is without personalized 
(eigentiimliche) imagination, as it is without personalized consecra-
tion."]6 "The infinite grief is permanent in the hallowing, and the 
reconciliation itself is a sighing for Heaven. -Once the alien conse-
[141] 
cration has been withdrawn from Protestantism, the spirit can venture 
to hallow itself as spirit in its own shape, and reestablish the original 
reconciliation with itself in a new religion, in which the infinite grief 
and the whole burden of its antithesis is taken up. But it will be re-
solved purely and without trouble, when there is a free people and 
Reason has found once more its reality as an ethical spirit, a spirit 
which is bold enough to assume its pure shape on its own soil and in 
its own majesty. Every single [person] is a blind link in the chain of 
6. Hegel und seine Zeit, (1962), p. 165. 

186 
Appendix 
absolute necessity on which the world develops. Every single [person] 
can extend his dominion over a greater length of this chain only if he 
recognizes the direction in which the great necessity will go and learns 
from this cognition to utter the magic word which conjures up its 
shape. This cognition, which can both embrace in itself the whole 
energy of the suffering and the antithesis which has ruled in the 
world and all the forms of its development (Ausbildung) for a couple 
of thousand years and can raise itself above it all, this cognition only 
philosophy can give." [Haym: Through philosophy "Reason gets its 
vitality (Lebendigkeit) and nature gets its spirit back again.'T 
7. Lac. cit. 

Hegel's First Philosophy 
of Spirit 
(being Part III of the ''System of 
Speculative Philosophy" of 1803/ 4) 
translated with an Introduction 
by H. S. Harris 

INTRODUCTION 
For the Summer term of 1803 Hegel announced his first "encyclopae-
dic" course: philosophiae universae delineatio or an "outline of univer-
sal philosophy." In the language of the Identity Philosophy Universum 
was the technical term for the Absolute as a totality. Thus we have in 
the language of the announcement a flicker of evidence to confirm that 
the system of 1803 is structurally similar to that of 1801.1 Hegel was 
lecturing (or at least offering to lecture) on "Naturrecht" regularly 
every term, and I have suggested in my "Interpretation" that the so-
called "System of Ethical Life" was distilled out of his regular lectures 
on "natural law" in a form which he thought would be suitable for 
direct incorporation into the system of "universal philosophy" as he 
then conceived it. 
But in order to complete the "universal philosophy" Hegel had for 
the first time to write a systematic sketch of his own philosophy of 
Nature. The "Introduction to Philosophy," which he gave during his 
first term, began with an outline of the Idea of Philosophy, in which 
the reality of the Idea was divided into two moments: body and spirit. 
Nature, and imprimis the solar system, was declared to be the real 
body of the Idea; Sittlichkeit, and ultimately the life of a free people, 
was likewise its real spirit. Between these two stable realities the im-
mortal process of the earth and the mortal process of human life and 
consciousness made the bridge for the transition from nature to spirit.2 
So the philosophy of Nature must "come down from heaven to earth" 
and reach its culmination in the theory of the living organism that is 
rational, whereas the philosophy of spirit must "rise up" from the first 
dawn of cognitive awareness to the systematic exposition of the "in-
tuition of the Volk." 
Hegel's first two attempts at a philosophy of Nature fit directly into 
this pattern.3 So does the System of Ethical Life on the other side of 
the central turning point. But the System of Ethical Life does not quite 
touch the center point properly. It begins-as a practical philosophy 
naturally would-with the development of need, labor, and enjoyment 
out of the primitive unity of feeling. In short it begins with desire 
(Begierde). But the parallel between "natural" and "transcend~ntal" 
philosophy in the Difference essay requires, (and the introductory lec-
ture of 1801 confirms) that the first phase of the "resurrection" must 
be theoretical. Not die Begierde but das Vorstellen is the first Potenz 
of the philosophy of Spirit.4 
In the Difference essay itself Hegel speaks of the "self-constitution 

190 
H. S. Harris 
of intelligence as a point" (i.e., the individuated human mind) as a 
turning point which is external to both alike, but at the same time as 
the "center where Science establishes itself."5 He experienced the diffi-
culty that arises from this ambivalence in his efforts at theory con-
struction. Each of the two sciences of the "real Idea" tends toward this 
center; but the philosophy of nature "tends" toward its culmination 
in man as the embodiment of theoretical Reason, whereas the philoso-
phy of spirit seeks its point of origin in the free spontaneity of prac-
tical reason. Thus Reason (considered as a "totality" and for itself) 
is half inside and half outside of each of the two "philosophical sci-
ences." When the science of the Idea is expounded as one single whole, 
it is the higher science that is most seriously affected by the proper 
completion of the "totality." For now its point of origin, which in the 
practical science as an independent whole was defined from the point 
of view of the final goal, or realized totality, is itself the totality of ra-
tional nature concentrated into a point and known as a point. Nature 
is the reality of the Idea as simple substance or being; Spirit is the 
reality of the Idea as thinking substance, or conscious-being. Thus the 
initial totality that we arrive at as we pass over from nature to spirit 
in the continuous exposition is that of being-conscious, it is the mo-
ment of absolute contraction of Nature into the living self where Be-
wusst-sein or consciousness comes to birth. 
The fact that the "concept" of spirit is consciousness is not men-
tioned in the System of Ethical Life. But one might think that it is so 
clearly implicit there that it can be made explicit by simple addition. 
I assume that this is what Hegel himself believed when he began to 
compose the System of Ethical Life for an "outline of universal phi-
losophy" which still had a gaping hole at its center. If that hypothesis 
is correct, then we must add that Hegel became dissatisfied with his 
exposition very soon, when he tried to fill the hole in this simple addi-
tive way. We can see from the philosophy of Spirit of 1803/4 that 
having once laid it down that "Bewusstsein" is the "concept" of spirit, 
he was unwilling to abandon the standpoint of "consciousness" at all. 
In the philosophy of Nature the great stages of the Idea's expression 
are spatially distinct. First there is the "system of the Sun," and then 
(within it) there is the earthly system. Within that again, but distin-
guished from it by mortality, there is the system of the living orga-
nism. Life reaches its point of absolute contraction in the conscious-
ness of the cognitive organism. But the expansion of that "point of 
contraction" ought now to take place continuously from within. The 
need for a spatial stage upon which the drama can be observed is what 

191 
Introduction 
typifies Nature as opposed to Spirit. There ought to be no need to look 
at Spirit from the outside, to observe it as we observe the "natural his-
tory" of an organic species. Spirit, as conscious-being, must evolve for 
itself-or from within-continuously, passing from the small, tem-
poral auditorium of mortal organic awareness, to the greater one of 
the Volk and its history, in a continuous unbroken flow (and from 
there to the eternal history of the divine life in which the "logic" of 
the Idea would receive its experimental confirmation). The process 
does indeed involve an observer, for the identity of the conscious self 
with the world that it is conscious of can only become evident initially 
to a third {observing) consciousness. But it is a process that takes 
place within consciousness, and the function of the philosopher is not 
just to observe it, but to participate practically in bringing it to con-
sciousness.6 
In the System of Ethical Life, however, natural consciousness, and 
even Sittlichkeit itself, the ethical consciousness of the free people, is 
viewed from a speculative point of view which is sometimes inside the 
evolution of consciousness itself and sometimes outside it. Sometimes 
we move with it as it unfolds for itself, and sometimes we observe it 
from an eternal standpoint which reduces the motion and sequence of 
forms to the flickering of shadows in the firelight. 
For the Identity Philosophy a flickering show is, indeed, what all 
the motion and sequence of empirical consciousness amounts to. But 
if I understand Hegel's position rightly, he held that it ought to be 
possible to exhibit the ideal evolution of spirit itself without any flick-
er. The speculative philosopher is (as the name implies) an observer. 
But when he is observing the development of spirit itself, there is no 
need for a continual alternation of the historical-genetic and the con-
ceptual-analytic standpoint (such as we find in the System of Ethical 
Life at least until we arrive at the level of Sittlichkeit itself). The evo-
lution of spirit is itself a steady movement toward logical or absolute 
cognition. Its phases only need to be identified in the flickering light 
of ordinary experience and the connecting thread pointed out as they 
are arranged. Conscious-being is in itself a rational process of evolu-
tion, since it is the realization of Reason for itself rather than outside 
of itself. 
At any rate what distinguishes the philosophy of Spirit of 1803/4 
is the evident determination to bring out the "infinity" (of natural 
being) which is focussed in the "simplicity" of immediate awareness, 
without abandoning the standpoint of consciousness itself. The most 
important, and the most difficult, step toward understanding the text 

192 
H. S. Harris 
as a whole is the comprehension of Hegel's theory of consciousness. 
That this is indeed difficult is evident enough from Hegel's own strug-
gles to state it. He wrote it out four or five times in different ways. 
But once we are over this initial hurdle, the development and sequence 
of the argument is much easier to follow than the logical thread of the 
System of Ethical Life; and since the content of Hegel's views has not 
changed much, the later manuscript will be found very helpful for the 
understanding of the earlier one. 
The best way to approach Hegel's own struggles is from the end. 
When he gives up the attempt to say what consciousness is and begins 
to tell us what it does, he finally touches upon some traditional prob-
lems in a way that is illuminating. There is a traditional dispute, with 
a long history, about whether colors, sounds, and other "secondary 
qualities" exist really "in the thing" (realism) or only "in the mind" 
(idealism). Hegel's discussion of this problem shows us how different 
the standpoint of "consciousness" is from either of these traditional 
positions. "The thing" and "the mind" are just the antithetic "sides" 
of the a priori synthesis of consciousness. To look for the "ground" 
of color, etc. in either of these sides is to lose sight of the real problem 
about color, which is the problem of relating particular colors, (and 
color-perceptions) with the universal"color." "Color" exists in three 
"potencies." First, there is "sensation." A sensation is a determinate 
event "in the thing" (the objective world of bodies). This is the justi-
fication of "realism." Secondly, colors exist as imagined concepts. He-
gel does not refer to Hume's problem about the "missing shade of 
blue," but it is plain that he would hold that we can imagine it. And 
what we imagine exists "in the mind." This is the justification of sub-
jective idealism. But what is interesting is the power of memory to 
classify the imagined shades by names. Thus "blue" embraces many 
shades-and the color vocabularies of different communities vary con-
siderably in the way in which they divide up the array of discrimin-
able color sensatiuns. 7 
If we think about this problem, instead of the traditional one, we 
can begin to see the power, and the attraction, of Hegel's doctrine. 
Determinate sensations are bodily states of an organism interacting 
with an environment. The consciousness of them that the organism is 
said to have is the expression of a power to discriminate and organize 
sensations which the organism does not have, could not have, in isola-
tion from other conscious organisms. Consciousness is free and spon-
taneous, for my sensations are uniquely mine, and only I can express 
the consciousness of them. But as a medium of expression conscious-

193 
Introduction 
ness cannot be private to me. Anything that I can express, even to my-
self, is in principle universal, or communicable to other conscious 
beings. Consciousness is essentially a universal medium, and only a 
community of beings capable of becoming conscious can produce any 
actual conscious beings. What distinguishes human from animal ex-
istence is man's communal capacity to rise into this "aether" and to 
shape its absolute plasticity into definite patterns of communication. 
If we take this theory of language (the first Potenz of conscious-
ness) back with us to the beginning of the manuscript, I think that 
most of Hegel's struggles to present the bare concept, the aether of 
the spirit itself,S will become comprehensible. He is trying to find the 
most abstractly general description of the unformed element or me-
dium, which takes on different shapes and patterns in every human 
language and in every other aspect of communal life and experience. 
Inevitably, in order to avoid the limited perspective that is directly 
implied in any one formulation (a limitation that is bound to give rise 
to pseudoproblems like the one about "secondary qualities" in our 
own philosophical tradition), he is driven to offer several alternative 
formulations side by side. But he cannot decide how to order them or 
array them in relation to one another. 9 
The formula that is basic to all of his drafts, because it is the one 
that is structurally necessary for the "indifference point" between 
Nature and Spirit in the Identity theory, is that "consciousness is the 
concept of the union of the simple with infinity." These are the two 
"sides" (mind and thing-world) which we have already met in our 
quick look at the controversy between realists and idealists. But now 
the sides are so abstractly characterized that mind and world can each 
take either role. Already, in dealing with the dialectic of intuition and 
concept in the System of Ethical Life, we saw that we must sometimes 
view "Nature" as the realization of "the concept" (i.e., as the instan-
tiation of the range of real possibility). This is no harder really than 
thinking of it as a Parmenidean equilibrium of simple being.1° Com-
mon sense avoids that extreme but likes to insist, with Bishop Butler, 
that "everything is what it is, and not another thing." What Hegel is 
asking us to see is that "everything is what it is" in the context of an 
evolving system of interpretation (apart from which we cannot speak 
of things at all). This system of conscious interpretation enters into 
the constitution of "things." The mistake of the realists is their com-
mitment to "nominalism." Nothing that can be named is absolutely 
singular, because conceptualizing consciousness is the medium of ex-
istence for nameable "singular" things. 

194 
H. S. Harris 
On the other side the status of "the mind" is absolutely ambivalent 
in the same way. In its theoretical activity it appears to be the "place 
of forms" as Aristotle called it; its whole activity is a generation of 
universal entities (as was instanced in the case of "blue"). At the same 
time we are always conscious of ourselves as uniquely singular, once 
we become conscious of ourselves at all. When we begin to act, this 
singular self-consciousness becomes unavoidable; and in the action of 
the uniquely singular being the ontological ambivalence becomes fully 
explicit; for here the agent consciousness stands forth as the singu-
larized concept imposing itself upon the stuff of the world. 
All this ambivalence receives both its explanation and its justifica-
tion from the fact that Hegel is trying to get away from the normal 
opposition of self and world and to find a neutral position from which 
this opposition itself can be comprehended. "Consciousness," as he 
defines it, is this neutral position. We ordinarily think of "conscious-
ness" as a peculiarly subjective thing-perhaps I should even say the 
peculiarly subjective thing. Each of us has his own and it is uniquely 
private to him. That is why it is essential, for the correct understand-
ing of Hegel's doctrine to pay particular attention to the universal, 
shared aspect of consciousness, its essentially communal basis and ori-
gin. 
Because every conscious mind appears to itself to be indubitably 
singular and unique, the communal aspects of experience naturally 
appear to us to be the necessary structures of the individual mind it-
self (as a mental entity). This is to say these structures make up the 
"concept" of the mind itself. Thus when Kant recognized that our 
"objective world" is a product of conscious interpretation, he simply 
assumed, as did everyone else schooled by Descartes and Locke, that 
he was discovering the fixed structures of the human mind as a singu-
lar thing. It becomes quite evident that he was not doing any such 
thing, that he was identifying rather the commonly posited structures 
of the conscious world of the great scientific revolution, as soon as we 
examine his theory of the mind from the standpoint of an earlier sci-
entific culture like that of the Greeks. 
The conscious world of the Greeks is as full of spiritual agencies as 
Kant's world of scientific understanding is devoid of them. The scien-
tific thinkers of the Greek world formulated their theory of the ration-
al totality of experience in terms of the "divine life"; and it is not at 
all hard to see why they did so. Since the singularity of every rational 
consciousness is an indubitable certainty for it, there is an inescapable 

195 
Introduction 
tendency to formulate our awareness of the universal, communal, ba-
sis of consciousness in terms of one great consciousness that is as sin-
gular as the individual minds that depend on it. Kant felt this pull just 
as the Greek thinkers did. He responded by banishing all of this imag-
inative religious consciousness to the noumenal realm of faith. But it 
is just as "necessary" as the structures of the phenomenal realm. If 
the "necessities" of consciousness conflict, we can properly speak of 
"dialectical illusion"; but it is a mistake to suppose that we can cer-
tainly identify where the illusion is. That certainty is itself a dialectical 
illusion. Hegel's object, in seeking to establish the standpoint of "con-
sciousness" as a neutral one vis a vis the great conceptual dichotomies 
of self and world, singular and universal, is to avoid precisely this pit-
fall. 
All of the rational certainties from which dialectical illusions (and 
hence conflicts) arise have their origin in the indubitability of our own 
existence as singular consciousnesses. Greek mythmaking is the projec-
tion of this certainty at the intuitive (or imaginative) level. Kant's 
noumenal world is the projection of it at the conceptual level (the level 
of "Understanding"). But according to Hegel, "the highest existence 
of consciousness is when for the individual his opposite itself has its 
being as absolute consciousness, that is, as unity of what is conscious, 
with what it is conscious of, the singularity of the individual is eine 
aufgehobene."11 
Once we have comprehended the basic perspective and the ultimate 
goal, the sequence of the argument should be fairly easy to follow. 
We have already dealt briefly with the evolution of imagination into 
language, via memory. The practical correlate of this is the transfor-
mation of the physical world by human labor. We should notice at 
once that the essential relation between consciousness and nature ( es-
pecially the natural sensory existence of the living organism) is one of 
domination. 12 Imagination, memory, and conceptualization (which be-
gins with naming) involve the domination of natural sensation, its 
subjection to the higher purposes of conscious existence. Once we 
recognize this, we can begin to see why the transition from natural 
existence to properly social (or rationally conscious) existence must 
necessarily involve a "struggle for recognition."13 
The development of language and labor begins in the context of a 
kinship-organization-the family. This is the natural level of con-
scious existence, where the spirit is in bondage (gebunden)Y When we 
do reach political existence, we shall find Hegel claiming that the 

196 
H. S. Harris 
Greeks were right in holding that prepolitical man is "barbarian," i.e .• 
he cannot talk properly.15 Apparently he means that the speech of a 
small tribe must express the untransformed natural environment, not 
the physical subjection of nature in practical consciousness. Since the 
active subjugation of nature is essential to the development of con-
sciousness, tribal societies that have accommodated to a natural en-
vironment are bound to have all their values wrong. Language must 
express the viewpoint, not just of man the maker, but of man the self-
maker, the creator of institutions and values, the educator. 
This same transvaluation of values explains the contrast between 
the natural labor which Hegel analyses16 under the Potenz of "the tool" 
here and the slave labor that is his concern in the Phenomenology. 
In our manuscript he is thinking of the free labor of Greek artisans. 
This is the real subjugation process through which the foundations of 
human culture are laid. But again, when he came to analyse labor in 
modem society, Hegel found that the natural value of labor as self-
expression is invertedY No doubt this was what caused him to focus 
his attention in the Phenomenology upon the servile labor that results 
from surrender in the life-and-death struggle. 
The family is treated here, just as it was in the System of Ethical 
Life, as the "totality" of natural consciousness. It is the natural com-
munity that makes free consciousness possible, through the process of 
self-recognition in the other, which distinguishes human sexual rela-
tions from the natural drive of the brutes. Once more we may note 
that Hegel was obliged in the Phenomenology to focus attention on a 
"struggle for recognition" between the sexes in order to account for 
the transformation of natural ethical existence into the conscience-
governed freedom of his own rational world. But there is no hint of 
that inevitable rift in the domestic lute as yet. 
What we do find here, but not in the Phenomenology, is the key-
stone for the theory of domestic education as the natural relation of 
"independent and dependent" consciousness.18 The child passes from 
an unconscious to a conscious state of being by recognizing his real 
self in the conscious world of his parents. The relation of dependence 
is mutual, for the parents know that their achieved consciousness, 
their self-possession or independence, can only be preserved by trans-
mitting it to the child. The parents know that they are mortal, and 
their education of the child is a conscious preparation for the day 
when they will step aside, and he will take their place. "In this way 
the totality of consciousness is in the family the totality as an evolu-
tion into being for sel£."19 Self-possession involves conscious family 

197 
In traduction 
responsibility. Without that there would never be an independent 
consciousness prepared to embark upon the struggle. 
Because the text is fragmentary, we cannot say for certain how He-
gel intended us to regard the transition from consciousness in the 
bonds of nature to the free consciousness of the Volk. It seems best to 
follow the structural analogy of the System of Ethical Life and to take 
"the Negative" as a moment of transition from the lower level to the 
higher one. But since Hegel was evidently writing under pressure and 
giving only the barest summary of his views even about the higher 
level of communal consciousness, the articulation of the system be-
comes very sketchy even in the fragments that we do have.20 
The import of the text itself is fortunately quite clear. The indepen-
dent consciousness that emerges from the family with a full awareness 
of its responsibility must be prepared to lay down its life for the sake 
of its independence. There are of course-as Hegel has already noticed 
in his treatment of "lordship and bondage" in the System of Ethical 
Life21-naturally submissive or dependent individuals. But for the 
maintenance of a free community a military elite is essential. So the 
self-sacrificing independent consciousness of the fighting man must 
be developed within the natural community before a truly free social 
consciousness will be possible. This is the consciousness of the biblical 
"strong man that keepeth his goods." 
Hegel obviously delights to lay out the structure of the ethics of 
"honor," because it shows forth "consciousness" both in its integrity 
(honor allows no distinction between subject and object, the tiniest 
trifle in the "outer world" can become a "point of honor") and in its 
dialectical character (in order to prove that he is strong enough to keep 
his goods, the independent consciousness must sacrifice all goods, 
even life itself). The dialectic of independence thus leads to the real 
conquest of nature. The free consciousness must regard all natural 
goods (even its own self-preservation) with contempt.22 In this way 
singularity is consciously "superseded." The noble consciousness con-
tradicts itself in its own self-assertion, since it accepts death willingly. 
In the natural course of ethical life the conscious recognition of mor-
tality is the great educational force, for it is the acceptance of death as 
inevitable that makes education the ultimate concern of the family. 
But the willing acceptance of death for the sake of whatever "whole" 
the natural course of ethical life has generated makes a new kind of 
whole, and a new kind of ethical life based on free decision, possible. 
This great transition, from the natural bondage of self-preservation 
to the freedom of self-sacrifice for the polis, is what Hegel was princi-

198 
H. S. Harris 
pally interested in. It has to be conceived as a struggle for recognition, 
it has to be based on an ideal of personal honor, personal integrity, be-
cause simple self-sacrifice is evidently not enough. The warriors of 
warlike tribes can exhibit a natural bravery that wreaks havoc in the 
lives of their more civilized neighbors. But unless they have arrived at 
understanding of the civilization that they conquer (so as to have lord-
ship over it as their conscious aim), their bravery is not the virtue of 
courage.23 It will have educational significance, if any, only for their 
opponents. Independent existence is an essential presupposition of 
self-consciousness, and self-consciousness is the transformed medium 
of free ethical life. 
Very soon Hegel will become conscious of the educational signifi-
cance of defeat in the struggle. We can see this already in the "Phi-
losophy of Spirit" of 1805/6, where tyranny is treated as an essential 
moment in the establishment of the rule of law.24 In the Phenomenol-
ogy defeat assumes focal significance. But in the first philosophy of 
Spirit, as in the System of Ethical Life, the resurgence of the van-
quished goes unnoticed. The long history of class struggle within the 
polis is simply ignored. It is as if Athens had no history between The-
seus and Themistocles. We pass directly from the mutual recognition 
of tribal chieftains or feudal barons to the legal equality of the Na-
poleonic Code. 
It would seem that during the period of his commitment to the Iden-
tity theory Hegel saw very little that was of speculative interest in the 
great stretches of human history that lay between periods of ideologi-
cal revolution. Speculative philosophy was for him the final flowering 
of a revolutionary period, the birth of the new age in consciousness;25 
and since on the side of theory it was always the same speculative vi-
sion that was reborn,26 the capacity to leap from peak to peak over 
vast tracts of historical time was a mark of speculative insight. Specu-
lation itself comes to birth when it is needed; and the need arises when 
the unity of social consciousness has broken down, when the aether of 
human communication is riven by the separate existence of great cate-
goreal worlds within which independent consciousness is possible.27 
Speculation itself must recollect and harmonize all of the "imperfect" 
philosophies that express this independent consciousness.28 But Hegel 
does not yet see any need for it to recollect the development of the 
consciousness of the age as a whole. It must rather "collect" the con-
sciousness of the new age by organizing it into the new speculative 

199 
Introduction 
synthesis. This is what Hegel appears to be doing in the final pages of 
his first philosophy of Spirit. The great leap from Theseus to Napoleon 
is taken as intuitively obvious. We could not be doing speculative 
philosophy, as we know that we are, if we were not at a point of his-
tory that can be recognized as a new beginning. 
There can be little doubt that in his Platonic "collecting" of the as-
pects of true or free social consciousness Hegel intended to display the 
necessity of the class structure which he takes as basic in the System 
of Ethical Life. For the same structure reappears in the "Philosophy of 
Spirit" of 1805/6.29 We can even surmise with some confidence that 
he meant to do this by repeating the cycle of finite consciousness (or 
consciousness in natural bonds), since the pattern of repetition is clear 
enough in what remains to us of the manuscript. 
The first level of communal consciousness, Language, is the great 
medium of spiritual unity. We have already considered the difference 
between tribal speech and the language of a free Volk, and no more 
needs to be said about that here. We should notice, however, that free 
language is the medium within which all social differences are to be 
articulated and that after this articulation has taken place, it will be 
the medium of cultural reunification through the artistic and religious 
experience of the community. We can see fairly clearly from the orig-
inal lecture announcement that this final synthesis is no longer re-
garded by Hegel as a separate part of the system of speculative phi-
losophy. 
When Hegel began the practical articulation of social consciousness, 
with labor and possession, however, a problem declared itself, which 
puts the wisdom, and even the feasibility, of his direct leap from tribal 
origins to modern times in doubt. Even the System of Ethical Life, 
with its evident echoes of the Republic, was a design for modern liv-
ing. But the first philosophy of Spirit is conceived more straightfor-
wardly in the terms of the great "contract theories" that it seeks to 
replace. The Hellenic inspiration is clear enough; it becomes quite 
clamant in the first pages on the Volk. But the attempt to develop com-
munal consciousness in the world of machine manufacture and in-
ternational trade forces Hegel to spell out the enormous difference 
between the ancient polis and the modern state. In a passage which 
anticipates Marx/0 he shows quite clearly why the consciousness of a 
modern laborer must differ toto coelo from that of a classical artisan. 
The economic process in which he is only a vanishing element, re-

200 
H. 5. Harris 
placeable on the instant, is inexorably forcing him back into the bond-
age of natural need, without even the reasonable hope of natural en-
joyments. 
The modern social order is one where dependence on nature has 
been replaced by dependence on the understanding. The economic 
structure is like the solar system; it is a dead body which moves me-
chanically. But unlike the solar system it does not move reliably. Con-
sciousness, which is parcelled out in it, can only suffer the fate of Job 
under its domination. 
Hegel's analysis breaks off as he is moving from labor to posses-
sion, from the worker to his employer. It is clear enough that he had 
no thought of going in a Marxist direction. He would have dismissed 
the idea of a classless society as a Utopian dream, and the goal of sci-
entific communism he would have attacked (as he attacked the social-
ism of Fichte)31 as an extreme form of tyranny-the tyranny of ab-
stract understanding. As soon as we put the theory of the natural 
classes in the System of Ethical Life into the context of the "conscious-
ness" theory of the first philosophy of Spirit, we can see why he al-
ways thought of civil society in terms of self-regulating "corporations." 
These communal systems are the necessary foundation of individual 
self-awareness. If he were alive now, he would be a keen analyst of 
pressure groups and lobbies, and especially of the relations between 
trade unions, employers' unions, corporate interests, and the central 
government. The economic machine is to be caged and fenced in, like 
our not very domesticated stock. We can expect to change it to the 
same limited degree (and in the same indirect and very gradual ways) 
as we do our stock. 
It is obvious enough in the last pages of our manuscript that Hegel 
is compressing and summarizing his material. No university course 
could end where our manuscript does; he must either have written 
more than we now have or else used older material for the completion 
of his lecture program at the end of the term. Minimally, he had to 
run through the forms of social consciousness required by the class 
structure of the System of Ethical Life, moving from the bourgeoisie 
to the military aristocracy and from that to the "absolute conscious-
ness" of the intellectuals-artists, priests, and philosophers. 
If we accept the hypothesis that the fragment which Rosenkranz 
took to be the "lost" conclusion of the System of Ethical Life is actu-
ally the conclusion of the "outline of universal philosophy" of Sum-
mer 1803, then we have good evidence that Hegel had already brought 
one such survey of the "forms of consciousness" to an extremely rapid 

201 
Introduction 
and condensed conclusion. This is the most natural hypothesis, be-
cause that fragment seems so plainly to be the dosing of a survey 
based on the earlier quadripartite plan (Logic-Real Body-Real Spirit 
-Absolute Idea). In that case Hegel did have a usable survey available 
which he could easily adapt to his newer triadic model. So perhaps he 
simply used it and never did finish our manuscript. 
On the other hand we can quite plausibly argue that the Rosen-
kranz conclusion does not seem to come from a survey in which the 
"resumption of the whole into one" was accorded an independent 
treatment. Perhaps the use of the "parallel universes" terminology is 
simply an accidental employment of the familiar language of the Iden-
tity theory at the end of the new tripartite scheme. Hegel continued to 
use a parallel division of philosophy ("Speculative" and "Real" phi-
losophy, with the former divided into Logic/Metaphysics and the lat-
ter into philosophy of nature/philosophy of spirit) until1806, in spite 
of the absorption of the fourth part of his original scheme into the 
third. So perhaps the Rosenkranz fragment is in fact the conclusion 
that Hegel wrote for our present manuscript. It is certainly summary 
enough, and the emphasis on death as the "negative absolute" is per-
fectly appropriate. But no decisive argument is possible from the inter-
nal evidence, precisely because this emphasis is one of the major links 
between the System of Ethical Life and the first philosophy of Spirit. 
Hence the Rosenkranz fragment has much the same import as an indi-
cation of how Hegel conceived the culmination of the philosophy of 
Spirit whether he wrote it in 1803 or in 1804. 
Instead of speculating idly about what we do not have, or cannot be 
certain about, we must appreciate the significance and the varied rele-
vance of what we do have and what we can be sure of. At first sight 
our present manuscript appears very difficult in itself. But all of its 
difficulties really boil down to the initial one. Once the basic concep-
tion of "consciousness" is grasped, this manuscript has two great 
values. First it helps us to understand the more complete System of 
Ethical Life which preceded it. That is the reason why it is published 
here alongside that first statement of Hegel's social philosophy; and 
the main object of my commentary upon it here has been to maximize 
this usefulness. But secondly it anticipates Hegel's more ambitious at-
tempt to systematize the forms of "consciousness" in the Phenomen-
ology. I have tried to illustrate that aspect too, but I have not been 
able to offer more than the most general pointers. All of the Jena "sys-
tems" must be viewed together for the proper appreciation of what 
any one of them contributes to that end. The two documents trans-

202 
H. S. Harris 
lated in this volume (with their appendixes) are perhaps the most 
important and the most obviously relevant ones. I believe that any 
thoughtful student who studies them together will find, first, that they 
are each of them more intelligible than they are when considered in-
dependently, and secondly, that they help more in the understanding 
of Hegel's first great published work, when taken together, than they 
do taken separately. 
NOTES 
1. The use of the term universum 
is attested for 1801 (and explained) in 
the fragmentary lecture manuscripts 
recently discovered (see N.K.A. V). In 
1802 Hegel used it to formulate his 
published critique of Schleiermacher 
(Faith and Knowledge, pp. 150-52). 
The fragment which Rosenkranz 
wrongly believed to be the conclusion 
of the System of Ethical Life (see note 
3, pp. 178-79) is almost certainly not 
earlier than 1803, and the way the 
term is used there suggests quite 
strongly that it is the conclusion of 
this "outline of universal philosophy." 
In that case the hypothesis of struc-
tural continuity between 1801 and 1803 
must be regarded as securely con-
firmed. Hegel's conception of the 
"System" developed considerably in 
the interim (as the newest manuscript 
finds reveal, and the essay on Natural 
Law confirms). But the fourfold articu-
lation of the Absolute as a "Sub-
stance" is maintained. 
2. Compare the "system outline" 
given by Rosenkranz and cited in full 
on p. 6. The fragments upon which 
his summary was based will be pub-
lished in N.K.A. V. The scheme differs 
from that given in Difference (pp. 
166-72) because of the insertion of 
Logic at the beginning as the funda-
mental science of the Idea. Hegel's own 
comments upon this addition were 
quoted by Rosenkranz and are trans-
lated in Appendix, p. 262. 
3. It is fully confirmed in the system 
of 1804/5 (which is continuous until 
it breaks off altogether at the begin-
ning of the theory of the organism). 
The system of 1803/4 is fragmentary, 
and no part of the theory of the solar 
system has survived. But the "transi-
tion to the earthly system," which we 
do have refers back to it in a summary 
fashion that is quite unambiguous 
(N.K.A. VI, 4, lines 2-7). 
4. I could see this implication clearly 
in the Difference essay before the 
lecture manuscript was discovered (see 
Difference, pp. 59-60). Of course my 
conjectural reconstruction there does 
not agree perfectly with the lecture 
manuscript, but I do not think that the 
Difference essay itself agrees perfectly 
(at p. 168) with the lecture manuscript 
either. I assume that in the months 
after Schelling's "breakthrough" 
Schelling and Hegel continually dis-
cussed and reformulated the plan for 
the systematic exposition of "the 
Idea." 
5. See Difference, pp. 169-70. 
6. We can see the method of the 
Phenomenology coming to birth in 
Hegel's explicit discussion of this prob-
lem on pp. 212-14. 
7. See especially pp. 224-25. 
8. There is nothing particularly met-
aphorical about Hegel's description of 
consciousness as "aether.'' His concep-

tion of the aether (for which, see p. 
205, n. 3) is better exemplified by con-
sciousness than by anything in nature. 
It is not at all surprising, to my mind, 
that although he no longer made any 
use of his concept of the aether in 
his mature Philosophy of Nature, he 
always continued to employ it in the 
Philosophy of Spirit. Of course, as K. L. 
Michelet pointed out long ago, Hegel's 
conception of the aether has little or 
nothing in common with any physical 
theory of the aether. That is why I have 
chosen to maintain the initial diph-
thong-which reminds us that we are 
speaking of one of the Greek elements. 
Even Hegel's continual appeals to 
the four elements of this mortal world 
are not poetic or metaphorical. For 
instance, when he says that "con-
sciousness steps forth from the earth" 
(pp. 207-08 n.), he certainly means us 
to remember the myths of Deucalion 
and Pyrrha and of Cadmus, (as op-
posed to the story of the making of 
Adam). But he is interested in the 
scientific sense of the Greek myths. 
The natural existence of man is that 
of a living organism generated and 
sustained within the immortal organic 
process of the earth (compare pp. 
214-16). I have generally chosen to 
ignore Hegel's philosophical theory of 
the natural background of spirit. But 
this is not because I consider it un-
necessary or unimportant. Rather it is 
because the historical interpretation 
of it is generally quite simple and be-
cause a proper revision of it in terms 
of our own scientific world view is 
not at all simple. Such a reconstruction 
is, in my view, highly desirable. But 
it is also, for the most part, beyond 
my competence. 
9. The dialectic of "sense certainty" 
in the Phenomenology was his even-
tual solution to this problem. But the 
complex of drafts in which he origi-
nally confronted the problem casts as 
203 
Introduction 
much light on this "solution" as the 
solution does upon them-see espe-
cially pp. 218-20. 
10. This is what the solar system 
exemplifies once its proper periodicity 
(the so-called "Great Year") is known. 
Hegel is obviously pointing an anal-
ogy with this reconciled unity of rest 
and motion in nature in the cancelled 
passage in note 7 on p. 207. 
11. See p. 207, note 8 (the emphasis 
is mine). The passage comes from the 
first draft and was subsequently can-
celled (see pp. 204, 212-13 for revised 
versions that were allowed to stand). 
As both of the revised versions show, 
Hegel was here interested in the "in-
dividuation" of the Volk in its 
God-consciousness. But "absolute 
consciousness" as defined here is not 
properly the consciousness of God as 
a great individual. Singularity is 
aufgehoben in it; that is to say, it is 
more like Fichte's impersonal concept 
of God as the "moral world order," 
except that the gulf between the 
phenomenal and noumenal worlds is 
overcome in the Hegelian version. In 
other words it is the absolute con-
sciousness of the human historical 
experience as a community of con-
scious world interpretation. Religious 
consciousness is in the mode of imag-
inative presentation. Speculative 
philosophy gives it the conceptual 
form of "absolute consciousness." 
Compare the fragmentary "conclusion" 
quoted by Rosenkranz and translated 
on p. 178 above. 
12. Compare pp. 217 and 221-22. 
Collingwood's theory of consciousness 
as the domination of sensation is a 
direct development of this Hegelian 
position-see his Principles of Art, 
Book II, and New Leviathan, pp. 18-
66. 
13. Compare pp. 227-28. 
14. See p. 216. 
15. See p. 245. 

204 
H. S. Harris 
16. See p. 229-31. 
17. See pp. 245-49. Compare the 
System of Ethical Life, pp. 117-18. 
18. I believe that it is, in fact, pres-
ent in the Phenomenology as the bare 
concept which Hegel states before 
proceeding to develop the experience 
of the struggle: see Phenomenology, 
trans. Miller, sections 178-84. But 
Hegel does not make this explicit. The 
whole pattern is not made explicit 
here either, since Hegel develops the 
totality in terms of mutual self-sacri-
fice. But if we read the discussion here 
(pp. 233-35) in the context of the 
theory of the family and of education 
in the System of Ethical Life (pp. 109-
11), the whole relation emerges 
quite clearly. 
19. p. 234-35. 
20. See note 45 to p. 235. 
21. See p. 125. 
22. Compare here the passage 
quoted by Rosenkranz and translated 
in Appendix 2 at p. 261. 
23. Compare the System of Ethical 
Life, pp. 133-34. 
24. N.K.A. VIII, 255-60. 
25. See the passages from lectures 
cited by Rosenkranz (Appendix 2, 
pp. 255-56, 260, 263-64. 
26. See, for instance, Difference, pp. 
87, 88, 114; and the passage from 
the "Logic and Metaphysics" lecture of 
1801 cited in Faith and Knowledge, 
pp. 1Q-11. 
27. The "need of philosophy" is 
discussed at length in Difference, pp. 
89-94. Hegel was still concerned to 
explain it in the lectures of 1803 (see 
the fragments in N.K.A. V). 
28. See Faith and Knowledge, pp. 
56-66, 189-91. 
29. See N.K.A. VIII, 266-77. 
30. This has been brought out very 
well by Avineri, Hegel's Theory of the 
Modern State, pp. 92-95. 
31. See Difference, pp. 144-49. 

Hegel's First Philosophy 
of Spirit 
An Interpretation 
(Jena 1803/4) 
The first part of [the system of speculative] philosophy1 constructed2 
the Spirit as Idea; and it arrived at the absolute self-identity, at abso-
lute substance which in coming to be through the activity against the 
passivity within the infinite antithesis absolutely is just as it absolutely 
comes to be. [In the second part] this Idea fell absolutely apart in the 
philosophy of Nature; absolute Being, the Aether,S sundered itself from 
its Becoming or Infinity, and the union of the two was the inner aspect, 
the buried [essence] which lifted itself out in the organism and exists in 
1. The three "parts" of the system are: I: Logic and Metaphysics, II: Philoso-
phy of Nature, and III: Philosophy of Spirit. Nothing survives from the "first 
part of the present system." 
2. "Construction" is Schelling's technical name for the method by which each 
Potenz of the Absolute Identity is developed from an original "identity" to a "to-
tality.'' Construction replaces the method of "transcendental deduction" in the 
Critical Philosophy and its many epigones. From Hegel's formal definition of it 
in the Logic of 1804 (N.K.A. VII, 113} it is evident that the method is thought of 
as analogous to the procedure of "construction" in Euclidean geometry. Thus the 
terminology was adopted as a conscious homage to Spinoza's "geometric meth-
od." But the procedure itself, at least as conceived by Hegel, owes more to Plato 
and Socrates than to Spinoza. It is the process by which a formal definition is 
shown to involve what it excludes, or by which a division is generated, of which 
the universal concept thus "constructed" is the relating ground. The clearest 
illustration of the procedure meant is the System of Ethical Life itself. But the 
conceptual thread of that work is difficult to follow precisely because the proce-
dure is there exemplified without being explained. 
3. In the fragments of 1803/4 no discussion of the "aether" survives_ In 1804/5, 
however, Hegel describes it thus: ". _ . the absolute ground and essence of all 
things, is the aether or absolute matter, that which is absolutely elastic and de-
spises every form, but which is likewise absolutely plastic, giving itself and ex-
pressing every form .... The aether is not the living God; for it is only the Idea 
of God; but the living God is he who [is] self-cognitive from his own Idea and 
cognizes himself as himself in the other of himself. The aether, however, is abso-
lute spirit which relates itself to itself, [but] does not cognize itself as absolute 
spirit" (N.K.A. VII, 188, lines 4-13). In 1805/6 Hegel restates this theory of the 
aether, but he makes it clear that his "aether" is not really a physical hypothesis 
(see Hegel's Philosophy of Nature, trans. M. J. Petry, I, pp. 188-89). 
[268, 
Fragment 
16] 

[265, 
Fragment 
15] 
[266] 
206 
G. W. F. Hegel 
the form of singularity, that is, as a numerical unit; [finally] in the 
philosophy of Spirit it exists by taking itself back into absolute univer-
sality, it is really the absolute union [of Being and Infinity, essence and 
existence] as absolute Becoming.4 
(A: THE FORMAL CONCEPT OF CONSCIOUSNESS.] 
In the spirit the absolutely simple Aether has returned to itself by way 
of the infinity of the earth; in the earth as such this union of the abso-
lute simplicity of aether and infinity exists; it spreads into the universal 
fluidity, but its spreading fixates [i.e., fragments] itself as singular 
things; and the numerical unit of singularity, which is the essential 
characteristic (Bestimmtheit) for the animal becomes itself an ideal fac-
for, a moment. The concept of Spirit, as thus determined, is Conscious-
ness, the concept of the union of the simple with infinity;5 but in the 
spirit it exists for itself; or as the genuine infinity; the opposed [ mo-
ment] in the [genuine] infinity in consciousness is this absolute sim-
plicity of both [singularity and the infinite] 6 This concept of Spirit is 
what is called Consciousness; what is opposed to it is itself a simple 
[being] such that it is implicitly infinite, a concept; every moment [of 
consciousness] is in itself completely the simple immediate opposite of 
4. This first paragraph is written on a separate sheet. Hegel did not make any 
insertion sign in his continuous manuscript. However the same sheet contains 
two other passages which were written for insertion at points that are securely 
identifiable in the revised text a little further on, and only one of these insertions 
is clearly marked by Hegel himself. It is clear enough that the passage was 
drafted while Hegel was revising his first version, and the heading itself (which 
is repeated from his main manuscript) shows exactly where the new text was in-
tended to go. The new beginning makes a short digressive intermission in the 
continuity of the argument in the first version. But it appears to me to be supple-
mentary to Hegel's review of the philosophy of nature there, rather than alterna-
tive to it. So I have, rather hesitantly decided to treat it as an insertion (like the 
other passages on the sheet) and not as a parallel text (which Hegel either aban-
doned or remained undecided about). The reader should note that the considera-
tions that have influenced my decision were bound to be weighed by Di.ising and 
Kimmerle, since Hoffmeister had already treated the text in my way. But they 
decided, nonetheless, to segregate this passage as a distinct fragment. 
5. This passage "and the numerical unit ... the simple with infinity" is writ-
ten on the same sheet as the opening paragraph (see note 4) and clearly marked 
for insertion at this point. 
6. I have tried here to translate exactly what Hegel wrote: "das entgegen· 
gesetzte in der Unendlichkeit in ihr ist diese absolute Einfachheit beyder selbst." 

207 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
itself;7 the singular taken up in universality without conflict; but con-
sciousness is likewise itself the immediate simple opposite of itself, 
[for] on the one hand it opposes itself to the one [being] of which it is 
conscious, by sundering itself into active and passive; and on the other 
[267] 
hand [it is] the opposite of this sundering, the absolute union of the 
distinction, the union of the distinction both in being and superseded. 
[At this point the continuity of the revised version is broken. 
The continuous first draft, which we have, has been crossed out-
including a revision which was partially crossed out. It seems 
clear that both text and revision were cancelled because Hegel 
wrote a new version of the whole passage on a separate sheet 
which has been lost. The final state of the cancelled text is given 
here in angled brackets.] 
<In the animal the immediate experience of supersession (Aufge-
<266> 
hobenwerden) was indeed restricted and an opposite for it; but this 
opposite was itself another than itself [i.e., its mate] in such a way that 
the other-being, was the unity outside it; the animal is in itself the 
simple universal, but because what was opposed to it was not the uni-
versal, this universality [of the rational consciousness] did not exist as 
such, but is for itself always just a particular [animal]. The existence 
<269> 
of this universality is what is identical in both antitheses, it is that 
wherein the intuiting and the intuited infinity are one.8 
7. At this point the first version continues: "and as simple infinity, an infinity 
brought to rest. Both [simplicity and infinity] are strictly at one without move-
ment, absolute rest in absolute motion, and absolute motion in absolute rest." 
(The next paragraph of the cancelled first version is printed in the text.) 
8. Here Hegel began his revision. But he cancelled the first sentences of his 
revised text (down to the point where the angled brackets end in our text). The 
original text (which was, of course, also cancelled) continued as follows: <269> 
The universality exists as consciousness; but the consciousness of the individual 
is at the same time the mnsciousness of singularity, [and] as such it is nothing 
qua universal. It is the unity of the infinite as a single being and as a universal 
self-identical being; the individual is a single being and is the unity of both 
[singular and universal] as consciousness. The highest existence of consciousness 
is when for the individual his opposite itself has its being as absolute conscious-
ness, that is, as unity of what is conscious with what it is conscious of, [and] the 
singularity of the individual is a suspended one. The infinity of consciousness is 
the supersession of the opposite in its simplicity; the essence is alwavs this mid-
dle, within which the superficial, self-cancelling antithesis of what is conscious 
with what it is conscious of has its being (ist). This middle, i.e., consciousness as 
absolute, must realize itself. It is not real, insofar as it is consciousness of the 
individuaL for this is rather its ideality, its cancelled characteristic. It steps forth 

[269, 
Fragment 
17] 
[270] 
208 
G. W. F. Hegel 
Consciousness, the concept of spirit, is within itself the opposite of 
itself in its simple unity. The form of the opposite is determined by the 
essence of consciousness; the terms of its antithesis are as absolutely 
simple as it is itself; the one is posited under the form of simple unity, 
the other under that of simple multiplicity.> The simple essential mul-
tiplicity is the thus determined concept, the single [being] immediately 
taken up into positive universality, the single [being] as self-identical, 
or its other-being, its nonidentity made identical with itself. What is 
opposed to it is unity as absolutely unequal [or] as absolutely exclusive, 
[i.e.,] numerical one; this is indeed self-identical but in its self-identity 
it is the direct other of itself as absolutely negating [itself], or the abso-
lute singularity.9 
In as much as the concept of Spirit [is] the absolute union of abso-
lute singularity (for the multiplicity as negated) with the absolute mul-
from the earth as consciousness of the singular [being]. Its existence in this 
mode is rather the being of the individual and subsumes it under singularity; 
only the abstraction of consciousness is posited. Its true existence is [such] that 
in it the individuality that the individual brings with him from his animal exist-
ence cancels itself, and that consciousness is negative in subjecting the animal 
organization under itself and positive in organizing itself as absolute conscious-
ness within itself; as this pure consciousness it supersedes itself as an opposite 
along with what is opposed to it. In antithesis to the individual generally, pure 
consciousness is itself <270> the abstraction, it only exists with the characteristic 
of singularity. 
Because it exists as absolute middle, it exists equally absolutely as something 
that is in the individuals, and as something opposed to them, etc. (as in text at 
p. 209, line 15). 
9. Here Hegel cancelled his first revision and wrote a new version on the back 
of sheet 115-the sheet already used for two previous additions to these opening 
pages of his third section. He did not indicate clearly that this passage was to be 
inserted here, but, as the reader will see, the sequence of thought is natural at 
the beginning. The word flow from this insertion on to the back of the present 
sheet can also be construed naturally (see note 10). The cancelled revision con-
tinued to the bottom of the recto of this present sheet (117) as follows: 
"The Earth was, in general, the element of the numerical unit; but [it was] 
only this unit as infinite divisibility, i.e., the unit itself was only [there] as possi-
bility, it existed as individual [for the first time] in the organism; but vegetable 
as well as animal singularity is only directed to this end, to maintain itself for 
itself; but according to its essence [its end is] to supersede itself; and its return 
into itself, its coming to absolute singularity is just the supersession of itself and 
the coming to be of another singularity [i.e., its offspring] ; its maintenance of 
singularity lis] not in absolute singularity. In consciousness the numerical unit 
which negates all multiplicity exists for the first time truly and the negated mul-
tiplicity [exists likewise] as a simple multiplicity." 

209 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
tiplicity which is itself positive or implicitly universal, simple multi-
plicity, the concept must realize itself. 
The whole consciousness-this unity of singularity, [or] negative 
unity, with the posited implicitly universal multiplicity of the determi-
nate concept-must elevate itself to absolute singularity, [and] must 
elevate singularity as such to totality; and from this self-shaping of the 
individual [consciousness must] pass over likewise into its opposite; 
and just as, in the former [the self-shaping of the individual], the ab-
solute concept of consciousness exists as absolute singularity, so in the 
latter [i.e., the plurality ofindividualsJ [it must] exist outwardly as de-
terminate concept, i.e., as something essentially multiple within itself; 
and must resume itself out of both sides into absolute totalityl0 so that 
it exists equally as one great individual, [or] as the spirit of a people 
which absolutely is in the individuals who are its singular [moments], 
[271] 
[or] organs; and as opposed to them even in their organic functions 
[for] it exists as object of their singular consciousness, as something 
external, because although they are absolutely one in it, they likewise 
cut themselves off from it and are on their own (fi:tr sich). It is their 
universal unity and absolute middle; and [is that] wherein they are 
posited ideally, as superseded, yet their supersession in it is at the same 
time [posited] for themselves; in their supersession the living spirit of 
the people is; their supersession is for themselves; it is implicitly the 
consciousness of any one of them, even in so far as it is a single [being]; 
and hence it appears; it exists at the same time as something distinct 
from them, something intuitable; as another being of the individuals, 
than they are [on their own account]; but in such a way that this other-
being of theirs is [their] absolutely universal self for themselves. 
In so far as we are cognizant of the organization of the spirit, we do 
not regard consciousness as the merely inner aspect of the individuals, 
or the way in which the moments of the antithesis appear in the indi-
viduals as such as distinct capacities, inclinations, and passions, etc. 
which are related to particular objects as to determinate concepts. In-
stead, because we recognize consciousness generally, according to its 
concept, as the absolute union of singularity and the determinate con-
cept, we take cognizance of its organic (organisierenden) moments too, 
[272] 
10. This is the end of the insertion from the back of sheet 115, where half of 
the page is left empty. The following clause, "So that ... spirit of a people" is 
written in the margin of sheet 117 verso and forms a bridge joining the inserted 
passage to the running revision of the main text. The connection of this marginal 
bridge passage with the insertion and with the body of the text eluded Hoff-
meister. But it is completely convincing as soon as the sequence is recognized. 

[280, 
Fragment 
19]12 
210 
G. W. F. Hegel 
in the way that they are on their own account as moments of the abso-
lute consciousness, not as something which is merely, in the form of 
the individual, one side of the absolute consciousness; [i.e., not merely] 
as if it were passion, drive, inclination, etc. but [the absolute conscious-
ness] as it absolutely is for itself, and as it organizes itself on its own 
account, and is thus assuredly in the individuals, but directly as their 
other side, the one which they set against themselves as individuals; 
but consciousness is the essence of both.U 
The first form of the existence of the spirit is consciousness in gen-
eral, the concept of spirit as it makes itself into the totality, whether as 
this concept [i.e., ideally] or as consciousness [i.e., really]; [for con-
sciousness in general is] its purely theoretical existence, [and] here in 
its [mere] concept its opposed moments are similarly universal con-
cepts in general; hence they are not internally related (sich beziehende) 
to one another as absolute opposites [i.e., in real existence} but have a 
formal internal connection in the simple element of consciousness; they 
are unimpaired (unangegriffen) in their being for themselves and are 
only reciprocally self-cancelling in their form, still subsisting on their 
own account apart from this. But because consciousness takes their 
11. In the first version this paragraph read as follows: <271> "Hence, in so far 
as we are cognizant of the organization of the spirit, we do not regard conscious-
ness as the merely inner aspect of the individuals, but rather as existing, as what 
[really] is in them, their essence, but likewise as set against them in as much as 
its infinity is real; consciousness is at one time such that even while it is the 
consciousness of individuals, it is their supersession as individuals, and likewise 
an external [object] for them; we treat it, therefore, not in the form of possibili-
ties, capacities of the individuals, but as it is for itself outwardly with equal ab-
soluteness, and as having its own necessary organization in this being for itself." 
[Between the cancelled draft and the new one Hegel inserted: "absolute unity." 
This may be meant as a paragraph heading.] 
12. We have now come to the end of sheet 117. It is quite likely that sheet 99 
followed next in the first version. Hegel wrote two different later drafts which 
contain revised versions of the first lines of sheet 99. One of them (fragment 18) 
begins with other material and is continuous with the main body of following 
text (fragments 20, 21). Fragment 19, which I have inserted here, is more distant-
ly related to the first lines of sheet 99 but deals with much less extraneous 
ground. The probability is, therefore, that it was the latest version. But given the 
state of our evidence it has to be treated as a "paraJiel" discussion, not as part 
of the more or less continuous manuscript. I have therefore chosen to place it 
here, because the continuum is broken here in any case, rather than make an 
artificial break for it (as the editors of the Critical Edition do) or relegate it to a 
footnote at the point of closest parallel (which seems inappropriate for what may 
well be Hegel's most considered statement of this phase of his argument). Further 
justification for not following either of these courses will be found in note 14. 

211 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
form from them in this way, it determines the antithesis as absolute 
form subsisting on its own account, absolute introreflection, absolute 
emptiness of the concept, on one side, and absolute matter on the other. 
Consciousness exists, first as memory and its product speech, and by 
way of the understanding (as the being of the determinate concept) it 
becomes the simple absolute concept, absolute introreflection, the emp-
tiness of the formal capacity of absolute abstraction; and the connec-
tion of the antithesis becomes a superseding of [terms that] implicitly 
differentiate themselves in mutual opposition; the theoretical process 
passes over into the practical process in which consciousness likewise 
makes itself into totality [and] thus gains here13 a real existence op-
[281] 
posed to the previous ideal one; for in labor it becomes the middle as 
the tool; whereas in the first potency [i.e., memory and speech] it 
proved its ideal lordship over nature, here it proves its real lordship 
and thereby constitutes itself as spirit for itself withdrawn from nature 
and independently self-shaped; it has superseded the antithesis on the 
external side, so that it falls apart within itself and realizes itself in mu-
tually differentiating moments, each of which is itself a consciousness, 
in the difference of the sexes, in which it likewise supersedes the singu-
lar desire of nature, and makes it an abiding inclination, having come 
to the totality of singularity in the family, and raised up inorganic na-
ture into a family holding, as the singularly enduring outward means 
for the family (Mitte derselben); and from here it passes over to its 
absolute existence, to ethical life. 
Both of these [processes], the ideal constitution of consciousness as 
formal Reason, absolute abstraction, absolute emptiness [and] singu-
larity, and its real constitution as the family, the absolute riches <can-
celled: absolute fulfillment> of the single being, are themselves iust 
the ideal moments of the existence of the spirit, or the way in which it 
organizes itself immediately in its negative relation to nature. Spirit 
comes forth as ethical essence, free being for itself and enjoying its own 
absolute self: in the organization of a people the absolute nature of 
spirit comes into its rights. 
13. The words "so nier" come from the middle of a cancelled passage and were, 
perhaps, left standing by mistake. Hegel originally wrote: " ... makes itself into 
totality, <and just as it becomes absolute emptiness, simplicity against absolute 
multiplicity, in the critical process, so here [not cancelled] [it comes] to riches 
within itself, a totality of being,> it gains etc." 
14. Hegel wove part of his first draft into the third sheet of this revised ver-
sion. It is possible that some of the first draft was suppressed or destroyed when 
he completed this version. But it is a bit more likely that the first pages here 
were written either as a review of the doctrine already expounded, or-more radi-

[273, 
Fragment 
18]14 
(274] 
212 
G. W. F. Hegel 
The essence of consciousness is that there is absolute unity of the 
antithesiS immediately in an aetheric identity. It can only be this in as 
much as immediately, so far as it is opposed, both terms of the antithe-
sis are consciousness itself, [and are] in themselves, as terms of the an-
tithesis, immediately the opposite of themselves, [i.e.,], they are the 
absolute difference cancelling itself, they are the superseded difference, 
they are simple. -In this unity of the antithesis, that which is self-
conscious is one side, and that of which it is self-conscious is the other 
side of the antithesis. Both sides are essentially the same; both [are] an 
immediate unity of singularity and universality. But this being-con-
scious, and that of which it is self-conscious, only is this unity of con-
sciousness for a third [consciousness] not for the unity itself; for in the 
antithesis of the conscious being and that of which it is conscious, the 
one is rather not what the other is; consciousness arises as a self-con-
scious being from itself as consciousness. [i.e.,] as the actively negating 
identity which, from its becoming conscious to itself of something oth-
er than it is, returns into itself, and supersedes this other, by the expedi-
ent of passing on to yet another. Consciousness itself, although in its 
essence it is equally the supersession of both, appears only on one side, 
the side which is characterized as active and hence as cancelling; it pos-
its only itself as consciousness, not that of which it is conscious; and it 
is therefore only singular, formal, negative, not absolute consciousness; 
for that which it is conscious of, it does not posit as like itself; this self-
equality it has only in a negative way, in that it supersedes this [object] 
that it is conscious of as something not like it; but it only is consciou_s-
ness so far as it opposes itself as an other; it must therefore let another 
that is unlike it enter in the place of the other [that is itself] it cancels 
every such unequal; but it arrives in this way only at the empirical ex-
ternal infinity, which the other of itself always has outside it. But this 
empirical consciousness must be absolute consciousness, i.e., it is im-
mediately the other of itself, it must have its other-being, its positive 
equality with consciousness, in itself. It is absolute consciousness, when 
cally-to take the place of the earlier draft as a whole (except for its introduc-
tory paragraph). If Hegel wrote the new draft with either of these ideas in mind, 
then his subsequent writing of fragment 19 represents at least a tentative deci-
sion either to return to his previous draft (if he had been thinking of replacing 
it) or not to burden it with so much repetition (if review was what he has had in 
mind). In either case fragment 19 belongs logically with the preceding discussion 
and forms an alternative transition, or bridge-passage, to the systematic exposi-
tion· ("Fragments" 20, 21) from which "fragment" 18 has been artificially sepa-
rated by Di.ising and Kimmerle. 

213 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
this other than itself is its own perfected consciousness/5 without any 
being on its own account, without any genuine distinction, only distinct 
from it through the empty contentless form of other-being, so that the 
form, because it is so devoid of content, is implicitly universal and 
[only] ideal. -This is the goat the absolute reality of consciousness, 
to which we have to elevate its concept. It is the totality which it has as 
the spirit of a people, spirit which is absolutely the consciousness of all, 
for they intuit it, and as consciousness set themselves against [itL but 
directly recognize all the same that their opposition, their singularity is 
superseded in it, i.e., they recognize their consciousness as an absolute-
ly universal one. 
Consciousness as its [own] concept has raised itself directly from 
the animal organization [margin: This consciousness, having come into 
being, it must come to be for itself]; we have freed it from that; in as 
much as we have recognized in principle the suspension of the antithe-
sis as a being, (or] as something subsistent, not implicitly ideat [but] 
as it is in nature; [in other words, we have recognized] that everything 
differentiated, (and] opposed is in virtue of its difference immediately 
in its opposite implicitly, and therein it is not. Consciousness is the 
simple-being of infinity, but since it is consciousness, it must be this 
supersession of the antithesis for itself; it must itself for the first time 
become real consciousness apart from its concept. Up to this point, in 
[275] 
nature, wherein the spirit does not exist as spirit, it is we who have 
been in our cognition the existing spirit of Nature/6 which does not 
exist in it as spirit, but as entombed [or] is only in nature as something 
other than itself. What is in the sphere of spirit, is its own absolute 
activity; and our cognition, in that it raises itself out of nature, [and] 
the antitheses that have standing in nature are ideal, having been can-
celled, must be recognized as a cognition of the spirit itself. Or (it must 
be recognized as] spirit's coming to be, i.e., its merely negative relation 
with Nature. This negative relation with nature is [the] negative side of 
spirit in general, or how it organizes itself within itself as this negative: 
or in other words, how it becomes [the] totality of consciousness of the 
15. In Hegel's text the comma comes earlier: "It is absolute consciousness in as 
much as this other than itself is, etc." But I think the intended sense is the same, 
and it is clearer when the comma is moved. 
16. Again I have been forced to move a comma (following this time, the ex-
ample of Hoffmeister). What Hegel wrote translates literally as "We have in our 
cognition the existing spirit, of nature been which in it ... " But the German 
auxiliary is "we are" not "we have," so Hegel's comma made sense as it came 
from his pen. The tense shifted from present to past as he wrote. 

214 
G. W. F. Hegel 
single [mind]. For consciousness (in] itself, as active, as negative, as 
cancelling the being of its other-being/7 is consciousness as one side 
of it only; it is subjective consciousness, or consciousness as absolute 
singularity. 
Consciousness is the ideality of the universality and infinity of the 
simple in [the] form of opposition; as universal it is undistinguished 
unity of both [universality and infinity]. But as infinity [it is] the ideal-
ity in which its opposition is; and the two [aspects of universality and 
infinity] are distinct and external to one another in consciousness, they 
separate themselves; their unity thus appears as a middle between 
them, as the work of both, as the third whereby they are related, in 
which they are one, but [as] that wherein they likewise distinguish 
themselves; the conscious being distinguishes this middle from him-
self, just as he distinguishes himself from what is distinguished in con-
ciousness; but with the difference (Unterschied) that he also relates 
both [himself and the object of consciousness] to this middle; absolute 
universality comes to be the middle only in the subject, in the isolating 
of the antithesis. As this middle it [subjective consciousness] is itself 
an opposite, or it has therein the form of its existence; for its existence 
[276] 
is that wherein it is an opposite. Hence, when we are cognizant of the 
articulation of consciousness to its totality, we cognize it as it is [for] 
itself as a moment, [or] in a determinate aspect, and it is as determin-
acy, as one [term] in [a pair of] opposites18 in as much as it is a middle; 
and its organization in the reality of its moments [is] an organization 
of its forms as middles. It must be for itself as [an] absolutely univer-
sal simple [being] likewise become the opposite of itself, it must go 
through the antithesis; or [it must] be synthetically opposed [in the] 
product; and it is only a determinate [subject], posited as moment of 
its totality, insofar as it is as [a term] in the antithesis; or it exists in as 
much as it is that wherein both terms, the self-conscious being, and 
that of which he is self-conscious, are posited as one, and also oppose 
themselves to it; in other words consciousness itself is in this way 
something afflicted with a determinate character, an existent. 
The being of consciousness in general is, to begin with-when it 
posits in itself the reflection that was previously ours-that it is the 
ideality of nature; in other words it is at first in [a] negative relation 
with nature, and in this negative relation it exists as tied to nature itself 
17. Again I follow Hoffmeister in moving the comma (which Hegel placed after 
''cancelling"!) 
18. The reading of Hegel's erratic shorthand is uncertain here. Quite possibly 
·'e in" is simply "ein," so that the translation should read simply "as an opposite." 

215 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
within the relation; the mode of its existence is not a particular [or] a 
singular aspect of nature, but a universal [moment] of nature, an ele-
ment of it; the elements in which [consciousness] exists as middle are 
just the elements of air and earth, as the indifferent self-identical ele-
ments, not the unrest of fire and water; for consciousness only is qua 
absolutely self-identical, 19 and qua existing middle it is itself posited as 
a quiescent indifferent middle. 
As concept of consciousness this middle is in that element which is 
the simple self-identical one among the elements; its external middle 
[medium] 20 is the air. 
Thus the first three moments of the existence of consciousness are 
[277] 
[i] that it exists as [something] ideal, as something not stable, but eva-
nescent in its appearance, in the element of air.21 Next, [ii] that it sinks 
19. Hegel's first impulse was simply to say this, and he finally returned to it. 
But he was momentarily tempted into an analogy from his philosophy of the or-
ganism: "for already in the plant, the absolute unity of these two [i.e., fire and 
water] is posited, and they have gone into supersession." (1he whole passage 
about the four natural elements is an insertion made after the writing of the final 
brief paragraph about the air, with which Hegel made his transition back to the 
revision of his first draft.) 
20. Hegel wrote first: "external middle." He then wrote in "medium" below the 
line but failed to cross out "middle." Both Hoffmeister and DUsing-Kimmerle 
think that it was only left standing through an oversight. My reasons for thinking 
otherwise are given in the next note. 
21. We have now reached sheet 99, where Hegel begins once more to revise his 
first draft. The two paragraphs of the first draft (which must enter into consider-
ation for the comparative study of fragments 18 and 19) originally read as fol-
lows: 
<277> The first form of its existence is that it exists as [somethingl 
ideal, as something not stable, but evanescent in its appearance, in the 
element of air, next, that it sinks down from the air into the e01rth, and 
comes forth from this as surpassed (geworden) earth. And these three 
forms of its existence constitute precisely the ideal potency of its existence, 
since it is itself submerged in externality, in nature, at this stage: it must 
free its existence from this [natural externality], and consciousness itself 
must also be the form of its existence, its externality. 
That first existence in bonds is its being as speech, as tool, and as pos-
session; <278> but the second [existence is] as people. 
Fragment 19 preserves less of the content above. But it begins with the same 
phrase (which is altered in fragment 18). Since Hegel preserved both versions, we 
may tentatively conclude that he never quite decided whether he wanted earth, 
air, fire, and water in his discussion here or not. The fact that he left both Me-
dium and Mitte standing in the previous paragraph confirms this hypothesis. The 
air as external medium belongs with fragment 19 (and the sentences inserted 

216 
G. W. F. Hegel 
down from the air into the earth itself as a singular individuality; [a] 
changeable external element, and there stabilizes itself_ becoming a 
middle for itself, as it moves out of its concept, the form of its simplic-
ity, to become practical-a middle in which the opposite [aspects] of 
consciousness are really connected; and [iii] this mode of its existence 
as earth singularized, overcome (geworden), or subdued, comes forth 
as an earth which is posited like a third element, a universal earth [ris-
en] out of its natural singularization. But as consciousness is absolutely 
free on its own account, it tears itself away from this [mode of] its ex-
istence in the determinate elements, and its element is just the absolute 
element of the Aether. 
That first existence of consciousness as middle in bonds, is its being 
as speech [in the air], as tool [in the earth], and as [family] goods. Or 
as simple union [of the opposites, rather than middle between them, it 
is] memory, labor, and family. For the standpoint of [subjective] con-
[278] 
sciousness which only looks at the antithesis of consciousness, these 
two [moments) of consciousness itself appear on the two sides of the 
antithesisi memory [in the simple union) appears on the side of that 
which is self-conscious; speech [the middle] on the other side; similar-
ly labor and family are on the self-conscious side, tool and family goods 
on the other. But the truth is that speech, tool, and family goods are 
not merely the one side of the antithesis that is opposed to [the sub-
ject] who posits himself as conscious, they are just as much connected 
with him; and the middle [is] that in which he separates himself from 
his true antithesis: in speech, from others to whom he speaks; in the 
tool, from that against which he is active with the tool; through the 
family goods, from the members of his family. He is qua agent; these 
middles are not what he acts against-not against speech, tool as such, 
family goods as such-but they are the middles, or as it is called, the 
means, whereby, through which, he is active against something else. 
Likewise [the subject] is only active through the other side of the 
middle, through memory, labor, and family; the activity of the individ-
ual can be·directed against either side and against their single moments 
[e.g., most obviously, tool, labor, family goods]; and it can posit the 
about the elements (p. 215 lines 3-8) would have been cancelled, if Medium 
and tragment 19 were finally adopted). On the other hand the air as "external 
middle" belongs with the revised text of fragment 18 as we have it. For this rea-
son I have ventured to disagree with both German editions and have given it 
pride of place. 

217 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
moments themselves as ideal. But not in the way that it can posit single 
things as ideaC [by] destroying [them]_ for the moments are absolutely 
necessary [and] universal; and for all that they appear to him as "his/' 
as posited ideally in him, they are none the less absolutely necessary in 
themselves, and it is the individual who as a single being stands under 
their lordship, rather than they under his. But in principle, there is here 
no lordship relation either of or over the individuaC for the individual 
is only a formal side of the antithesis, whereas the essence is the unity 
of both sides, and this unity is consciousness, which, as such, presents 
[279) 
itself as universal on both sides of its universality. Each of these two 
sides in their opposition is the unity of both, [i.e.,] the unity of that 
ideal antithesis of the conscious individual and what is opposed to him; 
the unity both as universal-memory, labor, and family-and also as 
existing unity or as middle [speech, toot and family goods]; [both uni-
ties] are the absolute universal. The existing unity is the universal as 
existing, and as existing absolutely: as enduring, having universal ex-
istence.22 The sides of the antithesis, on the other hand-the active 
individual and his passive object-are only enduring as antithesis in 
general/'3 and this universality of theirs as antithesis is precisely the 
existing middle; what they are on their own account is the changeable 
[or] contingent [aspect]_ that belongs to the empirical necessity of na-
ture as such. What [is] essential in them, [or] universaC is this middle. 
Consciousness as existing certainly exists in the antithesis of active 
against passive; but what is (das Seyende) in this opposition itself, just 
that is the middle of existing consciousness. Those ideal sides of the 
antithesis of consciousness are like the ever-changing and perishing fire 
and water; but consciousness as universal and as middle [is like] air 
and earth. In coming to be this middle [consciously L consciousness 
gains existence; it comes to an enduring absolute product, while nature 
on the other hand could not [come] to any enduring product; it never 
arrives at any genuine existence, but always is just the difference, and 
for this reason, too, it never reaches the fifth element [the aether]; in 
the animal it only gets as far as the sense of voice and hearing, i.e., to 
the immediately vanishing hint of the [real] process [of consciousness] 
reduced to simple being (einfach geworden) and the wholly formal ex-
istence of the inner [conceptual side]. 
22. Hegel added "as existing IN ITSELF" (doubly emphasized). But he crossed 
it out. 
23. I.e., no single agent, object, conflict, or product endures, but the concept 
always has application. 

[282, 
•agment 
20] 
[283] 
218 
G. W. F. Hegel 
First Level: [Speech] 
As spirit, the product of Reason, the first product is the middle as its 
own concept, [or] as consciousness; and it realizes itself in conscious-
ness, i.e., it is memory and speech; from this middle the spirit generates 
the practical antithesis through understanding and formal Reason, and 
supersedes it in labor.24 
[a) Intuition]. 
Consciousness in its ideal potency, as concept, has elevated itself im-
mediately out of sensation; sensation, posited as ideal or as superseded 
is a singularity for which other-being is something else outside it, not 
immediately itself [margin: another sensation than that of the sensing 
[organism], or another sensing of the thing, which is the same]. The 
ideality of sensation, or its coming to be consciousness, has as its im-
mediate goal that [active] sensation shall become in consciousness 
something inwardly opposed that has its other-being, and hence pre-
cisely the object sensed, in itself, and the sensing [subject] shall become 
in himself a universal. Sensation as singular is to become infinitely 
singular. Singularity as such, which is implicitly infinite, so that in this 
singularity it abides wholly in its determinacy, or separated infinity in 
the immediate existence of its concept, is time and space, and conscious-
ness intuits in time and space immediately; in space the singular as a 
subsistent, and its own other-being outside itself; but as it is equally 
posited in time, it is as something transient, something implicitly ideal, 
being no longer, even while it is; not that it just passes away in time, 
but that it is posited with reflection as being in time. It does not intuit 
space and time as such, they are universal and empty, higher idealities 
in themselves, concepts, but it intuits them only as both being and not 
being qua universal; [being] when it posits them as singular particular-
24. The first version began: "A. Formal Existence I I. Level of Speech/" [Hegel 
did not cross these headings out and may have intended to use at least the sec-
ond one]. 
"Consciousness is as such something external [for] itself; it does not exist in 
flame and water, for it is as absolutely quiescent infinity, not the former [fire], 
and since in its simplicity it still moves itself from within, it is not identical in 
form with the latter [water]. Its external element can only [be] the one that is in 
itself simple, the air, and the synthetic one whose essence itself is also this sim-
plicity [i.e., the earth]." (The material here was mostly absorbed in fragment 18. 
See especially the insertion on p. 21S at lines 3-8). 

219 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
ized [contents] as filled [time and space]; [not being] because even 
[284) 
while space and time are the positive universal [side] of consciousness, 
it makes them at the same time immediately and formally the opposite 
of themselves and particularizes them; that being of consciousness [i.e., 
its positing space and time] is just as much theoretical, passive, as it is 
practical; the theoretical side consists in its being in the form of positive 
universality, and the practical in its being simultaneously in negative 
universality, and particularizing this universality itself. This form of 
consciousness is empirical imagination; as positive universality, intui-
tion is in the continuity of time and space generally; but at the same 
time [empirical imagination is] breaking it up, and turning it into de-
terminate singular beings, i.e., making it into filled pieces of time and 
space. 
b) [Imagination]. 
But this singularizing remains immediately in the universal element 
of consciousness [i.e.,] in the universal space and the universal time 
within consciousness itself. And it abides in such a way that (a) this 
space and time of consciousness is immediately just as much an abso-
lutely empty simplicity as it is a full one; those singularities of intuition 
have disappeared in it now, and it is their universal possibility. Within 
this empty possibility they have been set free from the side of sensa-
tion, which they had in them. The side of sensation was their singular-
ity, [i.e.,] an external contextual dependence on other [singular things] 
according to their [causal] necessity. But now they belong only to the 
universality of consciousness. But [b] this empty time and space of 
consciousness particularizes itself just as absolutely once more, and re-
calls every [intuited] bit within itself. With respect to its content this 
[285) 
particularization is just those primary sensible representations, but the 
universal [form] that is particularized is the universal element of con-
sciousness itself, its empty infinity as time and space; the recalling 
within itself of intuitions had previously or in another place. The de-
terminacy of the sensation, the this of time and space,25 is abolished in 
it, and their succession and coordination appears as a free one, it is 
quite contingent (gleichgiiltig) for the universal element; [it is] an ac-
tive reproducing, since it is this universal element that is particularized. 
This formal being of consciousness has no genuine reality, it is some-
25. Reading "'das dieses der Zeit und des Raumes, getilgt," instead of Hegel's 
"das dieses, der Zeit und des Raumes getilgt." 

220 
G. W. F. Hegel 
thing subjective, it does not exist externally; it only is as the form of 
the abstract, pure, concept of infinity, as space and time, the concept of 
infinity as it immediately is as consciousness; and consciousness as this 
empirical imagination is a waking or sleeping dream, empty and with-
out truth, [occurring in human experience] either as permanent de-
rangement, or as a transient state of sickness, when consciousness falls 
back into the animal organism, and only is as its concept. 
This dumb consciousness is its formal being in its own univeral ele-
ment of infinity, and only the formal specification of this universal ele-
[286] 
ment; it must gain an existence, become external/6 or [in other words] 
posit what is then distinguished in the formal way in intuition as some-
thing external, [the point] at which the two opposites, the intuiting and 
the intuited, are separated, and consciousness is as an existing middle. 
This existence of consciousness will be just as inadequate and formal, as 
consciousness itself is in its universal aspect [i.e., existence will match 
concept]. It can express nothing in itself, [except] that what is intuited 
should quite generally be posited as something other than it is, but that 
consciousness is still not truly for itself therein, but only as something 
that is still connected with the antithesis to a subjectivity, something 
opposed to the being of the subject, just as it is to what is opposed to 
the subject; and precisely for this reason the opposed [object] remains 
what it is, it still has its being on its own account, and its other-being 
is only posited as something that ought to be; consciousness, as its own 
concept falling apart into space and time, is, so to speak, just too weak 
to suspend the antithesis of subject and object completely; and in its 
externalization [it is too weak] to represent the actual union [of its con-
cept and its existence] as more than an ought. Consciousness as this 
existing middle of its concept is thus just a sign in general, in which 
something intuited, wrenched out of its context, is posited as connected 
to another, but [only] ideally, because it still subsists in truth in its con-
text; the significance is its ideality as external to it, and [the sign] is 
26. The first version continued: "[it must] be on its own account, outside of 
the individual. This externality is, in the first place, something wholly universal 
[and] <286> indifferent; and precisely for this reason consciousness is not yet in 
it for itself, since this externality is not at the same time a negatively infinite, 
[or] self-cancelling one. This positively universal externality does indeed, qua 
universality of consciousness, supersede the intuited [single sense-impression] as 
what it is, and posits it as a universal, as something other than it is; but it re-
mains what it is, it still has its being on its own account, and its other-being is 
not immediately [and] as such in it. This externality is signifying in general, in 
which, etc., [at line 4 from bottom]. 

221 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
itself a being that subsists}7 a thing; [it is] infinite in this respect, that 
[287] 
it means something other than it is, it is posited as something other 
than it is on its own account; [it is] contingent for that of which it is 
the sign; [and] no longer having being by itself on its own account. 
And the supersededness of the subject is no more posited in the sign 
than the supersededness of the intuited [object]; the meaning of the 
sign is only in relation to the subject; what the subject thinks by means 
of the sign depends on his caprice, and is only comprehensible through 
the subject; the sign does not have its absolute meaning within itself, 
i.e., the subject is not superseded in it. 
c) [Memory]. 
This dumb signification must absolutely cancel the indifference of the 
subsistence of the ideal terms ;28 the meaning must be on its own ac-
count, in opposition to that which it means and that for which it has 
meaning; and the sign as something actual [must] thus directly vanish. 
The idea of this existence of consciousness is memory, and its existence 
itself is speech. 
Memory, the Mnemosyne of the ancients, is according to its true 
meaning, not the fact that intuition, or what have you, is the product 
of memory itself in the universal element, and has been recalled from 
it, while the element gets specified in a formal way that does not affect 
the content at all, but the fact that memory makes what we have called 
sense intuition into a memory-thing, a thought content: it suspends the 
form of space and time in which they [the sense-impressions] have 
their other outside of them, in time [that is] likewise ideal, and posits 
them implicitly as other than themselves. In this [product] conscious-
ness gains for the first time a reality, because the connection to the out-
side gets nullified in that which is only ideally in space and time (i.e., 
[288] 
has its other-being outside it): and it gets posited ideally on its own 
account, in that it becomes a name; in the name its empirical being as 
a concrete internally manifold living entity is cancelled, it is made into 
a strictly ideal, internally simple, [factor]. The first act, by which Adam 
established his lordship over the animals, is this, that he gave them a 
name, i.e., he nullified them as beings on their own account, and made 
27. Only the sign satisfies this condition. Hence the emendation proposed by 
DUsing and Kimmerle-dieses (das Zeichen) for diese (die Idealitiit)-·is probably 
correct though not unavoidably necessary. 
2~. Hegel added here in his first draft: "it is theoretical, it must become practi-
cal. 

222 
G. W. F. Hegel 
them into ideal [entities]. This sign was previously, qua [natural] sign, 
a name which is still something else than a name on its own account; it 
was a thing, and what is signified has its sign outside it, it was not pos-
ited as something superseded, so that the sign does not have its mean-
ing in itselt but only in the subject, one must still know specifically 
what the subject means by it; but the name is in itself, it persists, with-
out either the thing or the subject. In the name the self-subsisting real-
ity of the sign is nullified. 
The name exists as speech. Speech is the existing concept of con-
sciousness, so that it does not fixate itself, but immediately ceases to 
be, when it is. It exists in the element of air, as an externality, (i.e., 
manifestation] of the formless free fluidity [of the aether]; it is as ab-
solutely external to itself as [that fluility] is which has universally 
communicative existence.29 The empty voice of the animal gets an in-
finite, internally determined meaning [or: a meaning that is internally 
determined in an infinite way]. The pure sounding of the voice, the 
vowel, distinguishes itself, because the organ of voice indicates its arti-
[289] 
culation as an organ [of conscious spirit] in its distinctions; this pure 
sounding gets interrupted by the mute [consonants], the authentic re-
strictions of mere sounding, and the principal means by which every 
tone has a meaning on its own account. For the distinctions of mere 
tone in a song are not determinate distinctions on their own, but are 
determined in the first place through the preceding and following tone. 
Speech as articulated sounding is the voice of consciousness, because 
every tone within it has meaning, i.e., because there exists in it a name, 
the ideality of an existing thing; [in other words] the immediate non-
existence of the thing. 
Infinite as it is in its simplicity, speech thus interrupts itself as infin-
ity of consciousness within itself, it organizes and articulates itself; and 
it becomes a manifold of names. But it recovers itself out of the abso-
lute manifold likewise. The name as such is just the name of the single 
thing; speech is the relating of names, or once again it is the ideality of 
29. Perhaps I am wrong in seeing an intentional reference to the aether here. 
But it makes little difference to what is asserted about language. The text can be 
read: "for it [speech] is absolutely external to itself, when it is; it has the abso-
lutely communicative existence." This seems to be the only clear sense of the 
first draft. In that first draft Hegel added: "[it is] the first simple existence of 
rationality, [or] simple, pure, Reason; for the element of air leaves it free on its 
own account. (margin: "vowels and consonants") (This last clause, with its mar-
ginal comment, is more fully explicated in the revised text. The first clause was 
simply eliminated because, if my zeading is right, Hegel elected to refer back to 
the aether rather than forward to Reason.) 

223 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
the multiplicity of names, and it expresses likewise this relation, the 
achieved universal (das gewordene Allgemeine); in other words it be-
comes understanding. In the universal element of speech names [are] 
only formally ideal in themselves, they express the concrete determin-
ate [thing]; but the unity of the element in which they are, posits them 
equally as these determinate [things], i.e., as different from one an-
other, [it posits] their relation, or themselves as absolute particulars, 
which means that in their determinacy they are likewise self-suspend-
ing. "Blue," [for instance,] is to begin with ripped out of the continuity 
of its [special] being, cut away from the variously specified [field] in 
which it is; but it is still always this determinate [color]. In memory, 
however, it is both for itself [i.e., independent] and at the same time 
also alongside others, and related to others though the negative unity 
[290] 
of memory; it is posited as this relatedness, as implicitly a universal, 
something other than it is, according to the determinacy of its content; 
it is color, and a concept of the understanding, a determinate concept. 
It is the universal of distinct colors; but not as if it were something ex-
tracted from them, for it is rather an abstraction, that is, their deter-
minacy is immediately a cancelled [aspect] in their being. "Blue" is for 
the spirit at this level as "color." 
Determinacy :30 The singularity of sensation has thus developed 
through these stages to the determinate concept. For empirical intuition 
it was posited generally as a being in space and time, and in a wholly 
formal way as a superseded being, so that it remained (in this super-
session) completely self-dependent (fur sich), and only the requirement 
that it should become superseded was expressed in its formal superses-
sion. In the name the positing of empirical intuition as ideal is realized, 
but the name is itself still a single ideality; the negative unity of con-
sciousness must relate it to others, [just] as they are at rest beside and 
outside of one another in their universal element; and in this relating 
it must cancel the singularity of their content, and fix them as related 
to concepts of the understanding. Since we are considering conscious-
ness as such, as unity of what appears as active and what appears as 
passive within it, the consideration of consciousness as it appears in 
30. This paragraph was added in the margin. Hegel did not mark a new para-
graph in the manuscript but he inserted the word: "Determinacy" between the 
lines. I have elected to treat this as a topic heading and have therefore made a 
paragraph break. (The first draft proceeds at once to the controversy about "sec-
ondary qualities": "It is here, especially, that what is called 'realism' parts com-
pany with what is called 'idealism'-though they are divided about consciousness 
as a whole-to wit, about whether the somewhat that is 'color', etc." (See p. 
224 at line 2 from bottom). 

224 
G. W. F. Hegel 
the antithesis (i.e., subjective and objective) has no meaning for us. We 
consider the moments of self-organizing consciousness neither on the 
side of the subject (in the form of capacities, inclinations, passions, 
drives, etc.) nor on the other side of the antithesis, (as a determinacy 
of things), but absolutely as it is on its own account, as the unity and 
middle of both [subject and object]; there is within it the motion of an 
[291] 
agent against a patient; but as the motion itself it is the unit in which 
the antithesis is just implicitly a superseded one, all of its moments are 
in the agent as capacities [and] inclinations, just as they are deterrni-
nacies of the other [side, i.e., the thing]; but the essence is the middle; 
and the middle of consciousness, in its being as a moment of the organ-
ization of its own totality, belongs to both sides; in other words they 
are both [related] to the same [middle], but determined according to 
their antithesis; in empirical intuition one [side] is empirically intuitive, 
the other empirically intuited, the name giver and that to which the 
name gets given, thus the cornprehender and the comprehended. It is 
superfluous to point this out; but it is quite false [i.e., mistaken] to 
treat these moments of consciousness as corning to be put together in 
empirical intuition (just as it is [false, i.e., mistaken] in memory and in 
conception). [The synthesis is not put together] from the two sides of 
the antithesis in such a way that each of the sides contributes a part to 
the one whole; and [it is a mistake] to ask what the active [contribu-
tion] of each part is in this putting together. This is the standpoint of 
ordinary consciousness, for which consciousness is always just a side 
of the antithesis; [from this standpoint] the individual when defined as 
active (in der Bestimmtheit als thiitiges) is pictured as the essence, but 
in such a way that this consciousness, as thus defined, is a contingent 
one which the individual may either have or not have; for he has 
power over its moments and free choice about it. [On this view] con-
sciousness is a property, but on the contrary consciousness is the es-
sence [and] spirit [is] the absolute substance, which has activity within 
itself upon one side of the antithesis of its infinity, but activity that is 
absolutely ideal and has only a cancelled being. 
Thus31 what are called "realism" and "idealism" are developed en-
tirely at the standpoint of the antithesis, and [part company] on the 
question whether the somewhat that is "color" is grounded in the ob-
[292] 
ject or in the subject, in the active or in the passive side of conscious-
31. We now return to the first draft. Again, Hegel did not mark a new para-
graph here-but it seems best to assume that he intended one. (The reader should 
note, however, that the discussion of "determinacy" continues.) 

225 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
ness. [The dispute is framed] in such a way that these two sides subsist 
absolutely in and for themselves and are not rather [present] in con-
sciousness itself only as superseded. Realism leaves to the subject 
only the formal activity of comparing the similarity in being; idealism, 
which treats the ideal side of the antithesis as the absolutely real, that 
which is on its own account as absolute substance, leaves nothing at all 
to the object. There is honestly nothing to be said about such an irra-
tional conflict. Color is in its three potencies: in sensation as the deter-
minacy of blue (for example), and then in formal ideality [of imagin-
ation] as concept, and as name [in memory] as related to others, which 
it is opposed to and which it is at the same time like (in this respect 
that they are colors); and at this level [memory] it is simply, univer-
sally, as color. That [dogmatic] realism and idealism sunders this es-
sential totality of the three levels of determinacy. Realism holds that 
determinacy is on its own account, and relatedness likewise, is so far as 
it is simultaneously opposed; or the universality of color [is on its own 
account] in so far as it is submerged in the difference of the colors. It 
leaves to consciousness, to the subject, only one side of the third po-
tency, the drawing out of the relatedness that already is in the differ-
ence, the isolation or abstraction of the universal. Idealism vindicates 
the claim of the subject at the two higher levels of determinacy and 
indeed at the first level as well-the determinacy of blue (sensation]. 
The dispute bears properly upon the potency of the middle, which is in 
conflict with itself, for this is the level where the determinacies as such 
and their relatedness are posited together both in unity and as distinct. 
It emerges from the previous discussion, that determinacy, as being on 
[293] 
its own account, belongs to nature as the way in which color comes to 
its totality; at the same time determinacy only is in connection with its 
suspendedness or with the spirit. It is as singular sensation. Spirit as 
sensing is itself animal, submerged in nature; in the progress upwards 
to the relating and distinguishing of colors, and to their coming forth 
as color, as concept, the nature of color itself becomes spirit; it is just 
as much as determinate color, as it is not as determinate color. As for 
the subject himself, in the very crude terms in which realism and ideal-
ism set up their disputed question, [viz.,] whether outside the subject 
the determinate, distinct colors (self-related in their distinction) are 
something, quite regardless of the existence of the subject, it must be 
stated therefore, that the subject as such is only a unique singularity, 
that is, something such that the totality of determinacies (including the 
determinate colors) is outside him. But in so far as he is not absolute 
singularity, but consciousness, they are in him; and likewise in so far 

226 
G. W. F. Hegel 
as the determinacy of the color "blue" is not a singularity, [the subject 
or consciousness] is equally the totality of color, apart from which 
there is no color. But it is a completely ridiculous idealism which takes 
the subject, the active side of the antithesis, as a term of the antithesis, 
and as a subsisting (seyend) determinacy, yet wants to free it from de-
terminacy, from [any] externality affecting it; for so far as it is freed 
from determinacy, it ceases to be subject, this one term of the antithe-
sis; and it is nothing but the union of both terms, the spirit, conscious-
ness. This is the Absolute that we are discussing. But properly speaking 
we ought not to talk about either a subject, or an object, of this kind, 
[294] 
but about the spirit; and in that perspective, we have seen how qua 
totality it comes to be nature, and how it comes to be spirit. Subject as 
such, it only is as sensation, that is, as singularity whose immediate 
other-being is outside it;32 and the articulation of consciousness is how 
it comes itself to consciousness, [or] how the inner concept of con-
sciousness posits itself as consciousness proper. 
Sensation becomes concept of consciousness when it elevates itself 
to memory and speech; but it reaches only the concept, that is, only 
formal consciousness. The singularity of sensation is certainly posited 
[in memory] as ideal; but these idealities are themselves a mass of 
idealities, they are not as absolute unity. This multitude must become 
mutually differentiated, it must raise itself to connection; and their con-
nection, the concept, must be what is posited. 
Speech that elevates itself to understanding, once again goes into 
itself by doing so, it supersedes the singular spoken name-the concept 
itself, like everything else, falls within speech, and [it is] absolutely 
communicative.33 The suspended name, the name as posited not ac-
cording to its singular being, but only according to its relation, i.e., as 
universal or the concept, must be absolutely reflected into itself. Lan-
guage must fade away in consciousness just as it does in the outer [air]; 
the concept of the understanding is just the unity of consciousness re-
[295] 
turning out of the name, self-relating to singularity itself and therefore 
a determinate concept, not the absolute unity of consciousness; it must 
be in the mode of something absolutely returned [i.e., pure essence], 
32. Hegel added in the first draft: "But this is what is self-cancelled in speech, 
in the being of consciousness." (In his revision he inserted the next paragraph to 
replace this comment.) 
33. Compare note 29. In the first draft Hegel added here: "But as determinate 
concept it ceases to be an existing [entity] opposed to the conscious being; it 
makes no difference to the concept whether it is spoken or not." (The long inser-
tion below took care of this point in the second draft.) 

227 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
not, that is to say, [like] the relation of colors, for example, but abso-
lutely undetermined, the abolished determinacy of relation, pure relat-
ing, the absolute emptiness of the infinite, the formal aspect of ration-
ality, the simple, absolute abstraction of unity: reflection as point.34 As 
this absolute abstraction, consciousness has become absolute in its neg-
ative connection; it abolishes all determinacy, [and] is purely self-iden-
tical. But because this absolute being is strictly only negative, he is in 
himself empty, and immediately the contrary of what he wanted to 
bring to pass within himself; the totality of being confronts this abso-
lutely empty unit; what he negates is the unit of formal rationality, just 
as much as his absolute negation [of it] is; the consciousness that pos-
ited singularity previously within itself as an ideal [factor], as a super-
seded being, has posited the formal, mere ideality, on its own account, 
having cut it off from singularity, which last gains an absolute reality. 
In freeing itself from singularity, that [rational] unit has rather posited 
the antithesis as absolute, without [its terms] being mutually deter-
mined, and the terms of the antithesis subsist as absolutely real against 
one another. Consciousness has come to be as the unit of individuality. 
The unit of individuality previously came to be for us [i.e., in the 
philosophy of Nature] in the Earth the element of singularity, and 
everything that pertained to it had the character of this singularity; 
but this point of reflection, the absolute being-returned-into-self, was 
only our concept, it is not realized in the Earth as such, it does not exist 
[296] 
in it; instead it is only posited as a requirement, namely, as infinite 
divisibility, i.e., only as the infinite possibility of its being. It exists for 
the first time in consciousness as its absolutely negative side; it exists 
first, when consciousness makes itself into this point. 
This absolutely simple point of consciousness is its own absolute 
being; but as a negative, or in other words it is the absolute being of 
the individual as such, as a singular being. It is the freedom of his pri-
vacy [obstinacy, Eigensinn]; the single being can make himself into 
34. The long insertion that follows here in the text replaces the following in 
the first draft: "This is how it [reflection] made itself into the consciousness of 
the individual in the first place. The consciousness [spoken of] thus far was only 
the Idea of it. As consciousness of the individual, consciousness exists as absolute 
singularity and absolute universality simultaneously. Just as what precedes always 
realizes itself in what follows, so the existing Idea of consciousness as language is 
itself only existent as consciousness of individuals; and as previously the coming-
to-be of the individual <296> was a reciprocal exchange between his universality 
and his infinity itself as a universal, so it is now an exchange between his univer-
sality and him as absolutely opposed multiple infinity qua singular [being]. Con-
sciousness qua consciousness of the single being, etc." (See p. 228 at line 13.) 

228 
G. W. F. Hegel 
this point, he can abstract from everything absolutely, he can give 
everything up; he cannot be made dependent on anything, or held to 
anything; every determinacy by which he should be gripped he can cut 
away from himself, and in death he can realize his absolute indepen-
dence and freedom [for] himself as absolutely negative consciousness. 
But death has the contradiction of life within it; just as the point of 
absolute reflection, the simple empty singularity, instead of supersed-
ing singularity in truth, is itself only absolute singularity which is con-
fronted by the totality of determinacies, as something that is just as 
absolutely on its own account, sundered [from the negative unit] by an 
absolutely empty gulf with no bridges (beziehungslose). So that the 
antithesis, together with its relation, its ideality, has the opposite form 
to the one that went before. Consciousness, qua consciousness of the 
single [being], is set against other single [beings], and it must now 
posit singularity as something superseded; or it [must be] practical 
consciousness, consciousness as existing thing against [other] existing 
things. 
[297] 
Second Level: The Tool 
With this absolute opposition consciousness as language has gone out 
of the middle. There is no middle, in which the terms of the antithesis 
are connected and by which they are cut off from one another; the 
middle term [is] invisible, it [is] the entombed spirit35 of the absolute 
opposition. This universal indifferent spirit must prove itself as infinite 
spirit, by cancelling the singularities, and bringing itself to birth as the 
existing middle. 
The consciousness that organized itself in language into the totality 
of the ideal, began from the concept of infinity, and its organization was 
carried out in the determinacy of the first level [i.e.,] in the element of 
indifferent universality, so that the opposites in their union subsisted 
indifferently as universal and particular within one another in the con-
cept, without their implicit contradiction of one another as such being 
[298] 
posited; or in other words, their opposition in being was abstracted 
from, it was [treated] as something external to them, not posited in 
35. The first version began: "As language consciousness had become conscious-
ness being for itself as singular; as absolute reflection it has gone out of the 
middle and [is the] invisible middle, the entombed, etc." (The next paragraph was 
added entirely in the revised draft.) 

229 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
them. This first level passes of its own accord over into its opposite, 
into the absolute opposition in being, and that indifferent element of 
universality in which the opposites are at rest in one another disap-
pears; the opposites, as they emerge from the preceding level, are ab-
solutely opposed, without relation. The former theoretical unity be-
came the absolute contrary of itself as it was realized; it came to be 
absolute singularity and opposition; and the relation now posited be-
comes a practical one; absolute singularity must fulfill itself, it must 
cancel the absolute opposition; but as it thus elevates itself practically, 
by its own effort, to absolute totality, it again comes to be the contrary 
of itself. For this practical level, along with the [previous] theoretical 
one, are only the two ideal levels; each posits consciousness only in the 
abstraction of one form of the antithesis-the theoretical level posits it 
in the abstraction of indifferent simple universality, the practical level 
that we are now discussing in that of the absolutely differentiated, ab-
solutely opposed relation. 
The absolute unit of reflection is itself only a negative one through 
negation, i.e., through its relation with an opposite to which it is essen-
tially linked; in its absolute reflection it has freed itself from the rela-
tion to another, but the absolute reflection itself only is as this relation 
to another; consciousness, as absolute reflection, has only changed the 
form of the opposition and relation; it is related to an absolute oppo-
site, a dead thing, and it is the contradiction of a relation to something 
absolutely unrelated; the relation must be realized, and the absolutely 
singular consciousness is directed against itself as if it were its own 
(299] 
nullification36 as this absolute singularity; and consciousness is as prac-
tical relation. 
[a) Desire] 
ANIMAL desire is a beast-consciousness in which the nullification re-
stricts itself, and the terms of the antithesis are only posited as going 
to be cancelled; desire is an ought-to-be nullified; the desired [object], 
like the actual state of cancellation itself and its ideality, a restriction 
36. This is the only clause that survived from the first version of this para-
graph, which read: "For the singularity of conscience, the single [object] is an 
absolute opposite where we have left it, a dead thing; and the single conscious-
ness is directed against itself as if it were its own nullification. This practical re-
lationship is the opposite of the previous one in which consciousness was deter-
mined as universal, while here [it is determined] as a single being absolutelv 
opposed [to the universal]." 

230 
G. W. F. Hegel 
of the state of cancellation, are pulled apart from one another in time, 
but the actual coming-to-pass of the cancellation, the stilling of desire, 
is an immediate state of cancellation without any ideality, without con-
sciousness; human desire must be [only] ideally cancelled [even] in the 
suspending itself, and the object must abide even when it has been can-
celled, and the middle as the abiding supersession of both, must exist as 
opposed to both; the practical connection is a connection of conscious-
ness, i.e., the simplicity of nullification must even in its simplicity go 
apart from itself, it must be inwardly restricted and opposed [to itself]. 
The simplicity of nullification must be the universal unity, the super-
seded state of both antitheses, and at the same time the middle in 
which they are one, and in which, as their one, they separate them-
selves from their superseded state. That is to say, the one side of the 
antithesis, the side that appears as active, the unit of individuality, 
must work on the other side, the one that appears as passive. In labor 
[300] 
desire wrenches the object to be nullified entirely out of its context, 
specifies it, and posits it as connected with a desiring [being]; in so far 
as desire as such is, both [terms of the antithesis] subsist in this con-
nection, they are at rest; being only ideally cancelled, desire (as moving 
toward nullification) must :37 [i] cancel both the object and itself; but 
[ii] in the cancellation [desire must] itself be consciousness, an ideality 
of the cancelling. Thus the individual, as laboring, is active, and the 
object gets superseded, while both still subsist. Desire does not come 
to its satisfaction in its nullification, and the object continues to subsist 
even as it is nullified. Labor is this practical consciousness as [the] 
connection, [the] universal union of both [terms]; it must likewise be 
as middle, in which they are connected as opposed, and whereon they 
abide as separately subsisting; hence labor as such has its abiding ex-
istence; [it isl itself a thing. The tool is the existing rational middle, 
the existing universality, of the practical process; it appears on the side 
of the active against the passive; it is itself passive on the side of the 
37. This colon replaces a semicolon in Hegel's text. The first version read: 
" ... they are at rest; it [desire] is not a cancelling; but it is essentially this [in 
animal life or as a natural drive], and [in desire] as labor, the individual is active, 
and the object gets superseded, while both still subsist. Labor as the unifying 
middle, the middle subsisting in both terms as things, is itself a thing that abides 
[i.e., the tool], active through desire and passive against it, and active against the 
object. The tool is the existing t·ational middle of the practical process, that which 
endures in traditions, whereas both the subject and object of desire subsist only 
as individuals and pass away." (Here the "Third Level" begins in the unbroken 
tirst draft.) 

231 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
laborer, and active against what is worked on. It is that wherein labor-
ing has its permanence, that which alone remains over from the labor-
ing and the product of work, that wherein their contingency is eternal-
ized [immortalized]; it is propagated in traditions, whereas both the 
subject and the object of desire subsist only as individuals, and pass 
away.38 
[Third Level: Possession and the FamilyJ39 
[Sexual desire, in its natural simplicity?] is a restricted nullification 
through need, or something absolutely external. The freedom of con-
sciousness supersedes this need, and restricts the nullification in enjoy-
ment, through consciousness itself; it makes the two sexes into con-
sciousness for one another, into beings on their own account, beings 
that subsist; and [they subsist] in such a way that in the being-for-self 
of the other, each is him/herself; so that each is conscious of their own 
singularity-for-self in the consciousness of the other, that is, in his/her 
singularity, or being for self; and the connection of the sexes comes to 
be one, in which in the being of the consciousness of either party, each 
is him/herself one with the other, or [there is] an ideal [union?] .... 
<But as desire passes over into enjoyment, the individual super-
sedes his antithesis and his activity, as well as his inorganic nature, and 
becomes [a] shaped totality which reflects itself into itself as realized 
Idea, and which realizes itself in the sundering of the sexes. Desire re-
stricts itself here necessarily, too; the woman comes to be a being on 
her own account for the man. She ceases to be [simply] an object of his 
desire; desire becomes something ideal, and a [conscious] intuiting, it 
comes to be inclination.> Desire thus frees itself from its connection 
with enjoyment/0 it comes to be an immediate union of both in the 
38. In the first version (see previous note) this is the end of the section. But 
Hegel added here an inserti.on sign and the note "see separate sheet." Unfortun-
ately we do not have this sheet. What we do have is the first version (which 
shows us how much of the text was replaced) and a half sheet which contains 
part of the revised version. It is fragmentary at both ends, so it probably comes 
from inside the lost (folded) sheet. It is likely, in any case, that part of the lost 
material was a continuation of the present discussion of "the tool." 
39. The heading comes from the cancelled first draft. The text is first the sur-
viving fragment of the revised version, then the cancelled passage from the con-
tinuous first draft. The cancelled passage is given-as always-in < 
>· Thus 
where the angled brackets end, we return to Hegel's revised text. 
40. The first version continued thus: "and has made itself something abiding 
[301, 
Fragment 
21] 
[302] 
<301> 
{302] 

232 
G. W. F. Hegel 
absolute being for self of both, i.e., it becomes Love; and the enjoy-
ment is in this intuiting of oneself in the being of the other conscious-
ness. The connection itself becomes in the same [way] the being of 
both, and something that abides as much as they do [separately], that 
is, it becomes marriage. 
Just as in marriage each [partner] is mutually in the consciousness 
of the other, so each is mutually consciousness in the other, as his/her 
whole singularity; and the spouses give themselves a wholly communal 
existence, in which they are one not in the linkage with any one singu-
larity (a particular purpose), but as individuals, according to the total-
ity in which they belong to nature. This bond, as involving the totality 
of someone' s consciousness, is just for this reason sacred, and is wholly 
removed from the concept of a contract, which some have wanted to 
view marriage as. In this living union of both, for which the conscious-
ness of each has been exchanged, so that it is [both] as his/hers and 
[as] the consciousness of the other, consciousness is likewise necessar-
[303) 
ily the middle term, at which the two divide and in which they are one; 
it is their existing unity. This middle, wherein they recognize them-
selves as one [and] their antithesis is cancelled, and in which they 
are, just for this reason, once more opposed, is on its own account. 
The side of it in which they recognize themselves as one, and as 
superseded, is necessarily a consciousness, for it is only as conscious-
and enduring, as love; it does not die away in enjoyment, but becomes an abid-
ing linkage and comes through Reason to marriage; a sacred bond, wherein the 
spouses give themselves a wholly communal existence, they are one not in con-
nection with some one singularity, but as whole individuals, according to the 
totality in which they belong to nature; [a bond] that is just for this reason 
sacred, and is wholly removed from the concept of a contract. Through the child 
there comes into being, not, as in nature, an endurance of the being of the 
middle only for a moment, only a moment of self-cognition in a third, but an 
essential (an sich) enduring of it. And in marriage, for the first time, a middle is 
posited in the way in which it exists in the individuals themselves or in the way 
that their opposite is the whole of themselves; speech is likewise only real in 
individuals, but they are not in it simply as individuals, but only universally as 
consciousness, and the universal of speech is for the individuals a formal [unity). 
The middle here [in marriage] embraces them wholly and completely in itself. 
Even as it is this spirit of several, and hence is sacred, <303> so also there stands 
opposed to this sacred middle a dead one (or just because it is the absolute union 
of both, so too it is opposed to them). The individuals are, first of all, themselves 
this death coming to pass; which belongs to their nature as single individuals; 
but in this coming-to-be-dead of theirs, they equally intuit their coming-to-life; 
the child is not, as in the [breeding] relationships of animals the existing genus, 
but the parents recognize themselves in it as genus, etc." (See p. 233 at line 4.) 

233 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
ness that they are one; it is the child in which they recognize them-
selves as one, as being in one consciousness, and precisely therein 
as superseded, and they intuit in the child their own coming super-
session. They recognize themselves in it as genus, [i.e.,] themselves 
as other than they themselves are, namely, as achieved (geworden[ 
unity. But this achieved unity is itself a consciousness in which the 
coming supersession of the parent is intuited, i.e., it is a conscious-
ness in which the consciousness of the parents comes to be; in other 
word the parents must educate it. As they educate it, they posit 
their achieved consciousness in it, and they generate their death/1 as 
they bring their achievement to living consciousness, [for] their reflec-
tion into self, the emptiness of absolute singularity, realizes [itself], 
and qua achieved consciousness becomes inorganic nature, to the total-
ity of which man as [i.e., in the person of the] child raises himself. 
Thus far absolute opposition, the other of consciousness, was for con-
sciousness a pure other; here consciousness itself has become another: 
for the parents, the child, for the child, the parents;42 and the education 
[304] 
of the child consists in this: that the consciousness that is posited for 
him as other than that which he is himself, shall become his own; or his 
inorganic nature, which he consumes inwardly, is an achieved con-
sciousness; the process of individuality is a shaping, and what the 
evolving shape consumes inwardly, is achieved individuality. Just as 
previously in the practical self-shaping of consciousness, consciousness 
appeared as a real being opposed to nature, so here it appears as an 
evolution-into-being for itself. At the theoretical level consciousness 
came to be for itself as its concept, which it had achieved [as simple 
being] in the animal; in the theoretical process it came to be for us as 
an absolutely single [mind] in the formal [element of] rationality; at 
the practical level this absolute singularity came to be for itself; for us 
[it earlier came to be] something that has its consciousness in another; 
here it comes to be that for itself. Consciousness becomes something 
that another consciousness posits within itself. In his education the 
unconscious unity of the child is superseded, it articulates itself in-
wardly, it becomes cultured consciousness; the consciousness of the 
41. The first version continued: "with consciousness which, as it previously 
was an absolute being, here realizes its reflection into self, the emptiness of abso-
lute singularity, as perishing in sexual enjoyment, and qua achieved, etc." (See 
line 13.) 
42. The first version continued: "The essence of the relation belongs to nature, 
the process of individuality as a natural one is a shaping, and what the evolving 
shape consumes inwardly is achieved individuality. In his education the uncon-
scious unity, etc." (See line 2 from bottom.) 

234 
G. W. F. Hegel 
parents is its matter, at the cost of which it is formed; they are for the 
child an unknown, obscure presentiment of himself; they cancel his 
simple state of self-containment; what they give him they shed them-
selves; they die in him; for what they give him is their own conscious-
ness. Consciousness is here the coming-to-be of another consciousness 
in him, and the parents intuit in his evolution their own passing into 
supersession. The world does not come to this [new] consciousness as 
[305] 
a process (ein werdendes) as it did previously in the absolute form of 
something external, for it has been penetrated thoroughly by the form 
of consciousness; [the child's] inorganic nature is the knowledge of his 
parents, the world is already prepared [on his behalf]; and it is the 
form of ideality which comes to the child.43 Since the world comes to 
the evolving consciousness as this ideal world, the problem for con-
sciousness is to find the meaning, the reality, of this ideal, to find out 
how the ideal exists; it must realize this ideality. Hence the previous 
relationship of consciousness [to the world] is reversed; previously, 
for active consciousness as one side of the antithesis the EXTERNAL 
[world] was [there] as the other side, the single [system of things] 
inwardly determined in a manifold way, but not ideal. Here conscious-
ness is the singular [term], and the other side of its antithesis is the 
ideal [term], a world as it is in consciousness. Thus the antithesis is 
superseded for the active consciousness, which has been in antithesis 
till now; for the other side, which was thus far posited as noncon-
scious, is itself a consciousness, and so here [the process] is the other 
way to realize the ideal world. This is how consciousness generates 
itself for itself as identity of inner and outer. For the child the contra-
diction between [his] real world, and the ideal world of his parents is 
present, but for him as evolving consciousness, this contradiction is 
cancelled, in that his consciousness posits the real side for him ideally 
(as nonconscious), and realizes the conscious side (the ideal one of his 
parents). The activity of consciousness as an agent is this absolutely 
opposed activity; it unites both [sides of the antithesis], and it is in the 
[306] 
first place a consciousness that has achieved itself. Thus both the ex-
ternal [world] and the inwardness, the ideality [of the individual], are 
equally superseded; both are present for it as something external. 
In this way the totality of consciousness is in the family the totality 
43. The first version continued: "Culture is the finding of what the existence of 
the world was for one's parents; it is the reversal of the previous relationship 
in which the external [world] was idealized m active consciousness; here [the 
process] is the other way, to realize the ideal world, etc." (See line 25.) 

235 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
as an evolution into being for self; the individual intuits himself in 
the other; the other is the same whole of consciousness, and it has its 
consciousness in the other, in the generated [consciousness of the 
child?] .... 44 
(B. TRANSIT I 0 N T 0 REAL EXISTENCE : THE NEGATIVE] 45 
[There is a lacuna in the text here. One or more sheets are 
missing. Since the cancelled draft on the next sheet that we have 
does not overlap very much with the revised version (which 
begins with a marginal insertion continued from the previous 
page, now lost) I give both versions in the text. The cancelled 
version is given first in angled brackets.] 
<Every form between absolute singulars is a neutral one, for it makes 
no difference [formally] whether one makes another a gift, or one robs 
him and puts him to the sword; and there is no boundary between the 
least and the greatest outrage. 
44. The sheet is full and breaks off in midsentence. The sheet that follows next 
does not connect directly with this one even in the first version. Thus at least 
one sheet is missing. See further the following note. 
45. This heading has no textual status whatever. But it is clear that Hegel was 
approaching his major turning point at the end of fragment 21. The heading of 
fragment 20, "A. Formal Existence," points to a complementary "Real Existence" 
somewhere further on. I am assuming that this complement is "Ethical Life" or 
"The Volk." It is probable, however, that Hegel did not divide up the levels of 
the "real existence" of wnsciousness by the insertion of headings, since he did 
not mark off the transition to "the people" -which is certainly the third level (or 
"totality" of the development)-in any way. It is transparently clear I think that 
Hegel was becoming pressed for time. Either his writing time or his lecturing 
time-and almost certainly both--was running short. For this reason he could 
not develop the "real" stages of consciousness as fully as he would like, and he 
did not, therefore, set up a skeleton for which there was no flesh. The "struggle 
for recognition" must however be the second level-the moment of "opposition" 
or "antithesis"-since he makes his transition directly from it to the "totality." 
I assume that "the Family" is the "totality" of the first level-the level of "Na-
ture" in the System of Ethical Life-and that the "struggle for recognition" is the 
transition in "consciousness" from the "natural" (i.e., patriarchal) society to a 
properly political one. On this hypothesis the lacuna in our text need not be, and 
probably is not, a large one. It may be that we have lost only a single sheet. But 
then again we may have lost several and my hypothesis about the form of the 
argument may be quite mistaken. It seems to me, however, that in both versions, 
Hegel was not so much developing his doctrine here as summarizing it in order 
to make a rapid transition. 
<307, 
Fragment 
22> 

[307, 
:ragment 
22> 
[308] 
236 
G. W. F. Hegel 
The single individual is a whole and everything distinguishable in 
him is posited in this wholeness; [the singular whole] is without the 
emergence of the universal; the relation of single individuals to one 
another is a relation between them as wholes, for the emerging univer-
sal would be precisely the bringing to an end of their singularity. Since 
they cannot articulate themselves in their relation, every single nega-
tion of property is a negation of the totality [of the one injured], and 
at the same time this negation must occur.> The single individual is 
<as such only a rational being (Wesen)>, in as much as every single 
aspect of his possession etc., (see line 21 below) . 
. . . it is absolutely necessary that the totality which consciousness has 
reached in the family recognizes itself as the totality it is in another 
such totality of consciousness; in this cognition each [family head] is 
for the other immediately an absolute singular. Each posits himself in 
the consciousness of the other, cancels the singularity of the other, or 
each [posits] the other in his consciousness as an absolute singularity 
of consciousness. This is reciprocal recognition in general, and we are 
to see: how this recognition merely as such, as the positing of one's 
own consciousness as a singular totality of consciousness in another 
singular totality of consciousness, can exist. The single [family head] 
is one consciousness, only in as much as every singular aspect of his 
possessions, and of his being, appears bound up with his whole es-
sence, it is taken up into his indifference; [in other words,] in so far as 
he posits every moment as himself, for this ideal being of the world is 
what consciousness is. The injuring of any one of his single aspects is 
therefore infinite, it is an absolute offense, and offense against his in-
tegrity, an offense to his honor; and the collision about any single 
point is a struggle for the whole;46 the thing, the determinate [prop-
46. Here Hegel wrote a new version of several pages of his text in the margins. 
When he cancelled the first version after the revision, he forgot to cross out the 
original draft on the back of the first sheet. This first version (with the actual 
cancellation shown in brackets) reads: " ... the whole. <And that collision both 
must and ought to occur, since it can only be known whether the singular con-
sciousness is, as such, a rational indifference, in as much as he posits every 
single detail of his possessions and his being in the collision, [and] connects 
himself with it as a whole [i.e., he is rationally indifferent to the distinction be-
tween the integrity of his inner and that of his outer personality]; this can only 
be demonstrated in that he posits [i.e., stakes] his whole existence upon his 
maintenance [as an external whole] and purely and simply does not divide him-
self; and the proof> ends only with his death. The appearance of the single 
[consciousness] against the other, is a manifold holding, his [family] goods, the 

237 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
erty], does not come into consideration as to its value, or as a thing at 
all; it is, rather, wholly nullified, wholly ideal; the point is just this, 
that it is connected with me, that I am one consciousness [and it] has 
lost its antithetic status as against me. The two [consciousnesses] that 
mutually recognize one another as this totality of single aspects, and 
want to know that they are recognized, come forth against each other 
as this totality; and the meaning which they give one another in their 
opposition is: [a] that each appears in the consciousness of the other 
as someone who excludes him from the whole extension of his singular 
aspects; ({3) that he is an actual totality in this exclusive agency of his. 
Neither can prove this to the other through words, assurances, threats, 
or promises; for language is only the ideal existence of consciousness, 
but here there are actual [consciousnesses], i.e., they are absolutely op-
posed absolute beings for themselves in opposition; and their relation 
external middle; this, by its very nature qua external, is a universal [i.e., it can 
be anybody's], and the unrelated singular [consciousnesses] are mutually within 
it. But it is someone's goods; the connection of several with it is negative, exclu-
sive. Whether the exclusive connection of the one [owner] with it is a rational 
one, whether he is in truth a totality, upon this recognition <309> depends the 
relation of the single [consciousness]; each can only get recognition from the 
others, so far as his manifold appearance is indifferent in him, [i.e.,] he proves 
himself as infinite in every single detail of his possession, and avenges every in-
jury to the point of death. And this injury must occur, for consciousness must 
advance to this recognition, the single [agents] must injure one another, in order 
to recognize whether they are rational; for consciousness is essentially of this 
sort, that the totality of the single [consciousness] is opposed to him, and in this 
othering-process is yet the same as he, that the totality of the one is in another 
consciousness, and is the consciousness of the other, and even this absolute sub-
sistence that it has for itself, is in this other consciousness. In other words it gets 
recognition from the other. But this, that my totality as the totality of a single 
[consciousness] is precisely this totality subsisting (seyende), on its own account, 
in the other consciousness, whether it is recogni7ed and respected, this I cannot 
know except through the appearance of the actions of the other against my to-
tality; and likewise the other must equally appear to me as a totality, as I do to 
him. If they behave negatively, if they leave one another alone <then neither 
has appeared to the other as totality, nor has the being of the one as a totality 
in the consciousness of the other <310> appeared; there has been neither presen-
tation nor recognition. Speech, declarations, promising are not this recognition, 
for speech is only an ideal middle; it vanishes as soon as it appears, it is not an 
abiding, real recognition. But the recognition can only be a real one; for each 
single [consciousness] posits himself as totality in the consciousness of the other, 
in such a way that he puts his whole apparent totality, his life, at stake for the 
maintenance of any single detail, [this clause was incorporated in the revision 
(p. 239 line 12)], he affirms himself in a possession, asserts the negative, exclusive 

238 
G. W. F. Hegel 
is strictly a practical one, it is itself actual, the middle of their recogni-
[309] 
tion must itself be actual. Hence they must injure one another. The fact 
that each posits himself as exclusive totality in the singularity of his 
existence must become actual; the offense is necessary, [since] the oth-
er can only make his exclusion of another actual because I disturb him 
in his apparent phenomenal being; only then can he present himself as 
consciousness, [show] that this [is] his being, his singularity indiffer-
ently, that this external [thing] is within himself; in particular each 
must be disturbed in his possession, for in possession there lies the con-
tradiction that something external, a thing, a universal [moment] of the 
earth, should be under the control of a single [man], which is contrary 
to the nature of the thing as an outward universal, for it is the univer-
sal as against the immediate singularity of consciousness. -Through 
the necessary injury, which should lead to recognition, both are to posit 
meaning [of himself] as a totality. The two of them keep this meaning only with 
their death, since they are the negative totality as much for themselves as with 
respect to the other; I can only recognize [myself] as this singular totality in the 
consciousness of the other, so far as I posit myself in his consciousness as of 
such a kind that in my exclusiveness [I] am a tot<>lity of excluding [this clause 
was incorporated (p. 239 line 15)]. I risk my life on it and go to the death; and 
likewise the other can only appear to me as rational totality in so far as he posits 
himself for me in the same way, and I must prove myself to be so to him, and 
must equally have the proof from him. 
Hence this absolute recognition immediately contains an absolute contradiction 
within it; <311> it is only by infinitely sublating itself. [My] singularity as to-
tality shall (soli) come to recognition, it shall be for me as in the consciousness 
of another; every relation of the other to my singularity is itself singular, and 
such relations must occur on account of the necessity for recognition; I prove 
myself to be totality in this singularity, I make the connection [of my possessions 
to me] immediately infinite, and in respect of the other I go out to posit myself 
in him [in two ways]: 
a) as suspending him as totality, [i.e., I go] for his death, since 
(aa) he must recognize me, [he must recognize] that I respect life as little in my-
self as I do in him, [I regard it] as something connected only with singularity; 
({3{3) I must for my own part recognize whether he is a rational essence, one that 
goes to death in its defense and its attack; [and] 
{3) superseding myself likewise as totality, since aa) I must prove myself to him 
as totality. If one or the other stops short of death, he only proves to the other 
that he will accept the loss of his possessions, <312> that he will risk a wound 
but not life itself; then for the other he is immediately not a totality, he is not 
absolutely for himself, he becomes the slave of the other]. 
[Hegel neglected to cancel the following passage at the foot of the page:] 
This recognition therefore, aims to prove to the other that one is a totality of 
singularity, it aims at the intuition of oneself in him and likewise of him in one-

239 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
themselves in the relationship of opposition to one another as negative-
ly absolute singularity [and] totality. In that each effectively excludes 
the other, [and] cancels the possession taken from him in the offense, 
he equally offends the other, he denies something in the other, which 
the latter posited as his; each must affirm what the other denies, as be-
ing in his totality and not something external; and must suspend it in 
the other; and as each affirms his totality as a single [consciousness] 
in this single [point of offense] strictly, it becomes apparent that each 
[310] 
negates the totality of the other; the mutual recognition of the singu-
lar totality of either one becomes a negative relation of the totality, 
because this one is negated as it enters into relation; each [must] posit 
himself as totality in the consciousness of the other, in such a way that 
he puts his whole apparent totality, his life, at stake for the mainte-
nance of any single detail, and each likewise must go for the death of 
the other. I can only recognize [myself] as this singular totality in the 
consciousness of the other, so far as I posit myself in his consciousness 
as of such a kind that in my exclusiveness [I] am a totality of exclud-
ing, [i.e., so far as] I go for his death; when I go for his death, I expose 
myself to death, I risk my own life; I perpetrate the contradiction of 
wanting to affirm the singularity of my being and my property; and 
this affirmation passes over into its contrary, that I offer up everything 
I possess, and the very possibility of all possession and enjoyment, my 
life itself; in that I posit myself as totality of singularity, I suspend my-
self as totality of singularity; I want to be recognized in this [outward] 
extension of my existence, in my being and my possessions, but I trans-
form this will in affirming it, because I cancel this existence and get 
recognition only as rational. as totality in truth, since when I go for the 
self; but in the realization of this aim, the totality of singularity cancels itself. 
[The recognized victor-Hegel's pronoun refers to the totality] maintains his 
property as a whole, and posits the injury of nonrecognition of his exclusiveness 
as infinite. He presents himself as defending every single detail with his whole 
[power]. But he can only present himself as the whole, in as much as he cancels 
his being in the details, in as much as he <surrenders> [the verb is over the page 
and is cancelled-therefore we know that this whole passage was only left stand-
ing through an oversight] hi~ possessions to destruction in defending them <and 
life [too], as the simple appearance which comprehends all sides of the totality 
of singularity within itself; he can therefore only be a totality of singularity, in 
virtue of sacrificing himself as totality of singularity, and the other consciousness 
likewise, by which he wants to be recognized. 
This recognition is absolutely necessary, its purely negative side is > that the 
singular totality etc. (See p. 240 line 11 from bottom.) 

240 
G. W. F. Hegel 
[311] 
death of the other, I myself wager my own life, too, and cancel this 
extension of my existence, the very totality of my singularity. 
This recognition of the singularity of the totality thus brings the 
nothing of death [in its train]. Each must have from the other cogni-
zance of whether he is an absolute consciousness: a) each must put 
himself into such an opposed connection with the other as will bring 
this to light, he must injure him; and each can only know of the other 
whether he is [a] totality in as much as he drives him to the point of 
death, and each proves himself as totality for himself likewise only in 
that he goes to the point of death with himself. If in his own case he 
stops short of death, he only proves to the other that he will accept the 
loss of a part or the whole of his possessions, that he will risk a wound 
but not life itself; then for the other he is immediately not a totality, 
he is not absolutely for himself, he becomes the slave of the other. If 
he stops short of death in the other's case, and suspends the conflict 
before putting him to death, then neither has he proved himself as to-
tality nor has he come to cognizance of the other as such. 
[312] 
This recognition of the singular [consciousness] is thus [an] absolute 
internal contradiction; the recognition is just the being of conscious-
ness as a totality in another consciousness, but as far as it is actually 
achieved, it cancels the other consciousness, and thereby the recogni-
tion is suspended too; it is not realized, but rather ceases to be, just 
when it is. Yet consciousness only is the gaining of recognition from 
another at the same time as it only is as absolute numerical unity, and 
that is what it must be recognized as; but that is to say it must go for 
the other's death, and for its own; and it only is in the actuality of 
death. 
This cognition of ours, then, that the recognized totality is only con-
sciousness, so far as it cancels itself, is a cognition of this consciousness 
itself; it makes this reflection of self into self all by itself, that the sin-
gular totality in that it wants to be, to maintain itself as such, sacrifices 
itself absolutely, it cancels itself; and thus it does the contrary of what 
it aims at; it can only be itself as a superseded state; it cannot maintain 
itself as a [simple state of] being, but only as one that is posited as 
superseded; and it posits itself herewith as a superseded state and can 
only gain recognition in the status, [as] this immediate self-identical 
one; it is a self-cancelling [consciousness] and it is a recognized [con-
sciousness], one which is in the other consciousness as it is in itself, 
thus it is absolutely universal consciousness. This being of the super-
sededness of the single totality is the totality as absolutely universal, 
(.313] 
or as absolute spirit; it is the spirit, as absolutely real consciousness; 

241 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
the singular consciousness intuits itself as an ideal, superseded, con-
sciousness, and it [is] no longer singular; for it is itself rather this su-
persession of itself, and it is only recognized, it is only universal, as 
this superseded state; the totality as a singularity is posited in itself as 
a merely possible state, not as being for itself; in its subsistence it is 
just such as to be ever ready for death, it has made renunciation of it-
self-it is certainly as singular totality, as family and in possession and 
enjoyment, but in such a way that this relation is itself an ideal one, 
and proves itself in its self-sacrifice. The being of consciousness which 
qua singular totality is as one that has made renunciation of itself 
intuits itself in another consciousness even in its renunciation, it is 
immediately itself for itself as another consciousness, or it is in other 
consciousness just as this other consciousness of itself, i.e., as the con-
sciousness of itself as superseded; in this way it is recognized; in every 
other consciousness it is what it immediately is for itself, [and] in that 
it is l for itself] a cancelled consciousness in another, its singularity is 
thereby absolutely saved; I am absolute totality in that the conscious-
ness of the other as a totality of singularity is in me only as cancelled; 
but likewise my own totality of singularity is one that is cancelled in 
others;47 singularity is absolute singularity, it is INFINITY, the immedi-
ate contrary of itself, the essence of spirit, which is to have infinity 
within itself in an infinite way, so that the antithesis immediately can-
cels itself. These three forms of being, cancelling, and being as super-
[314] 
seded being are posited absolutely as one. The singular totality is, for 
the other singular totalities are posited only as superseded; it posits 
itself thus in the cancelled consciousness of the others/8 it gains recog-
nition; in these consciousnesses its own totality is cancelled likewise, 
and so far as it realizes itself in the recognizing, it is superseded; and 
in the recognition it is for itself as a superseded being; it is cognizant 
of itself as superseded, for it, too, only is QUA RECOGNIZED, as unrec-
ognized, as not another consciousness than it is itself, it is not at all; 
its getting recognized is its existence, and it is in this existence only as 
a superseded [consciousness]. This absolute consciousness is thus a 
state of supersession of the consciousnesses [that share it] as singular; 
a superseded being which is at the same time the eternal movement of 
the one coming to itself in another, and coming to be other within it-
47. The first version continued: "and I am not singularity. These three forms 
of being, cancelling, and being as superseded being etc." (See line 23.) 
48. The first version continued: "it must gain reality, recognition, and there are 
the single totalities, the consciousness of the others; in these consciousnesses, 
etc.," (at index 48). 

242 
G. W. F. Hegel 
self; it is universal, subsisting consciousness; it is not [the] mere form 
of the singulars without substance, but the singulars are no more; it is 
absolute substance, it is the spirit of a people, for which consciousness 
qua singular is itself only [the] form that of itself immediately becomes 
another, the side of spirit's motion, the absolute ethical life; the single 
[agent] as member of a people is an ethical essence, whose essence is 
the living substance of the universal ethical life; he is this essence as 
singular, as an ideal form; the form of a being, only qua cancelled; the 
[315] 
[reai] being of ethical life in its living manifoldness is the customs of 
the people. [Margin: No composition, no [social] contract, no tacit or 
stated original contract; [to the effect that] the single [person] gives up 
part of his freedom, [he surrenders] the whole of it rather, his singular 
freedom is only his stubbornness, his death]. 
[C. REAL EXISTENCE : THE P E 0 P L E) 49 
The absolute spirit of a people is the absolutely universal element, the 
aether which has absorbed all the single consciousnesses within itself, 
the absolute, simple, living, unique substance; it must likewise be the 
active substance; and it must oppose itself as consciousness and be the 
appearing middle of the opposites, that in which they are one and 
equally that within which they are opposed;50 that against which they 
are active, and their nullifying one whose activity against them is their 
own activity, just as their activity against it is the activity of the spirit; 
the spirit of the people must eternally come to be the WORK, that is 
to say, it only is as an eternal coming-to-be spirit. It is achieved as the 
work when activity is posited in it, which is forthwith against it; and 
the activity against it is directly the cancelling of itself. This becoming 
other than itself consists in its connecting itself as passive with itself 
as active; as active people it is generally conscious of itself, and passes 
over into the product or to the self-identical; and since this common 
49. There is no heading in the manuscript. Hegel merely began a new para-
graph. But he has just made clear that "the people" is the real existence of con-
sciousness. And here, as we shall see, he does repeat the moments of "formal 
existence." 
50. The first version continued: "their dead one that nullifies them, outside of 
which they are as self-connecting; the spirit of the people must eternally come 
to be the work, or as an eternal coming-to-be spirit. As absolute consciousness it 
is only so far as it becomes another, and in this other-becoming is immediately 
itself. This becoming other than itself etc." [See line 4 from bottom]. 

243 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
work of all is their work as conscious beings in principle, they come 
[316] 
to be themselves outside of themselves in it, but this outward [being] 
is their deed, it is only what they have made it, it is themselves as ac-
tive but superseded; and in this outwardness of themselves, in their 
being as superseded, as middle, they intuit themselves as one people;51 
and this their work is their own spirit itself because it is theirs. They 
beget it, but they reverence it as something that is on its own account; 
and it is for itself, since the activity through which they beget it is the 
cancelling of themselves, [and] this cancelling of themselves at which 
they aim, is the univeral spirit in being for itself. 
Its life is expiration and inspiration; its going apart from one another 
[is when] it comes forth as active against itself as passive; it becomes 
one, a unity of active and passive, [as] the work, but in this work the 
passive and active [opposition] is itself superseded; it is the absolutely 
universal, it is only work because there is the antithesis of active and 
passive, but because the active as such is opposed to [i.e., is in balance 
with] the passive, active and passive cease to be an antithesis, and 
there is only the absolutely universal. The antithesis [is] just the abso-
lute vanishing of itself. It must have truth, that the single [agents each] 
posit their s~ngular totality as an ideal one, not a common deceit of 
them all against the whole. The ethical work of the people is the being-
alive of the universal spirit; as spirit it is their ideal union, as work it is 
their middle, the cycle of [men] cutting themselves off from the work 
as a dead [thing], and positing themselves as singular agents, but pos-
iting it as universal work, and so immediately just cancelling them-
selves in it again, and being themselves only a superseded activity, a 
cancelled singularity. 
The absolute coming into being of this Idea of the spirit out of its 
[317] 
inorganic nature as the ethical spirit is the necessity of its action in the 
totality of its work.52 As absolute ethical spirit it is essentially as the 
infinite negative, the superseding of nature, in which it has only be-
come an other, the positing of nature as itself, and then the absolute 
enjoyment of itself, in as much as it has taken nature back into itself. 
The first [moment] is its negative work, its being directed against 
the appearance of that which is other than it is itself, in other words its 
51. The first version continued: "Reason in general exists only in their work; 
it comes to be only in their product, and it intuits itself immediately as another 
and as itself. The ethical work of the people, etc." (See line 21.) 
52. This sentence arrived at its final shape only after some travail. In the first 
version Hegel wrote: "The absolute organization <ot ethical life> of the ethical 
spirit is the necessity of its work; it realizes itself in the totality of its work." 

244 
G. W. F. Hegel 
inorganic nature. The inorganic nature of the ethical spirit, however, 
is not that which we call"nature" generally-it is not Nature as other-
being of spirit; i.e., [it is not "nature"] as a moment that subsists in 
the totality of moments; in consciousness generally this "nature" has 
been posited as a superseded [moment], in language, by memory, and 
by the tool;53 and this status of being posited as suspended, the status 
of nature as spirit in its negativity is the absolute totality of conscious-
ness as singularity, that is, it is the family, taken in its reality as pos-
sessor of the family goods. This totality is the negative positedness of 
[318] 
nature and [it is] the spirit itself, but differing [from itself], relating 
itself to an opposite, and [having as] its totality the realizing of this 
different [being], [i.e.,] consciousness. 54 But it is this totality that mus~ 
be freed from its differentiation [literally "different connection"], its 
existence in nature, and must become an absolutely positive, absolutely 
universal spirit; and the family as such, the reality of singularity, is 
the inorganic nature of the spirit which must posit [itself] as super-
seded [moment] and elevated [itself] to the level of the universal. We 
deal first with how it subsists as marked with the character of univer-
sality.55 
[a) The Speech of a Peopler6 
The preceding levels are in principle ideal, they exist for the first time 
in a people; speech only is as the speech of a people, and understanding 
and Reason likewise. Only as the work of a people is speech the ideal 
existence of the spirit, in which it expresses what it is in its essence 
and its being; speech is a universal [mode of expression], recognized 
in itself, and resounding in the same way in the consciousness of all; 
every speaking consciousness comes immediately to be another con-
sciousness in it. 57 In respect of its content too, speech comes to be true 
53. In other words nature exists for human ethical consciousness as a mass of 
theoretical concepts and real utilities, or obstacles, not as the living body of the 
divine life (which is its status as a subsisting moment of absolute spirit as Hegel 
envisaged it in 1804). 
54. In the first version Hegel wrote here "spirit." 
55. In the first version this sentence read: "It [the universal] lets it [the totality 
of the family] subsist, but marks it with the character of universality." 
56. The manuscript has just: "1." But the next section begins: "B. Die Arbeit 
und der Besitz ... " (the subdivision of that begins with "I.") So it is best to fol-
low Hoffmeister and supply "A. Die Sprache eines Yolks" here. 
57. Because each of us understands what others say, and we speak understand-
ably to them. 

245 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
speech for the first time in a people, for now it expresses what each 
one means; barbarians do not know how to say what they mean; they 
only half say it, or they say the direct opposite of what they want to 
say; for [ethical nature, which is] what memory, the process of com-
ing to speech, first makes ideal, is only present in a people. Only in a 
people is it already posited as superseded, present as ideal, universal 
consciousness. Speech is, of its essence, nature present for itself; pos-
ited as ideal; and it is, as it were, mere form, it is a mere speaking, an 
externality; it is not a producing, but the mere form for making ex-
ternal what has already been produced, in the way it must be said; 
[the] formal [aspect] of pure activity, the immediate coming of inward 
being to its contrary, its coming to be outward. The formation of the 
world to readiness for speaking58 is present implicitly. As the coming-
to-be of understanding and Reason [in the singular consciousness] it 
[319] 
falls within education; [speech] is present for the evolving conscious-
ness as [an] ideal world,59 or as its inorganic nature, and hence the 
evolving consciousness does not have to wrench itself free from nature 
[as such], but rather it must find the reality for the ideality of its own 
nature; it must seek out the meaning for speech that is in being; being 
also is [there] for it; it remains, so to speak, just the formal activity 
of relating these [terms] which are already [there] to one another. 
In this way, then, speech is reconstructed in a people, in that al-
though it is the ideal nullification of the external, it is itself an outward 
[being] that must be nullified, superseded, in order to become mean-
ingful language, i.e., to become what it implicitly is according to its 
concept; thus language is in the people, as a dead other than itself, and 
becomes totality when it is cancelled as another, and comes to fruition 
in its concept. 
b) Labor and Possession 
likewise come to be immediately something other in the [life of] the 
58. Hegel wrote: "Die Bildung der Welt zur Sprechen" (as if he was in two 
minds between "zur Sprache" and "zum Sprechen"). But the way he continues 
shows that he has had in mind the fact that language is there in the world as a 
potential that is available to be realized by the consciousness that learns to 
speak. So I have retained Hegel's substantive here (agreeing with Hoffmeister 
against Diising and Kimmerle), although we must understand Sprache as the 
referent for sie in the following sentence. 
59. For the child in the family this just means the achieved consciousness of 
his parents. But they were just the channel for the achieved cultural world of the 
Volk. 

246 
G. W. F. Hegel 
people than they are in their concept; labor is, on its own account, con-
cerned with the need of the singular being as such, just as possession 
strictly pertains to the one single [holder]; labor (and possession too) 
becomes here a universal [factor] even in its very singularity. 
I. The labor that is concerned with the need of a single [agent] becomes 
in [public life] a) the labor of a single [agent], but /3) even [though it] 
is only motivated by his need it is a universal. 
a) There is now present the requirement of laboring as such; [labor-
[320] 
ing] demands to be recognized, it assumes the form of universality; it 
is a universal mode, a rule of all labor, something that subsists on its 
own account, that appears as an external [structure], as inorganic na-
ture, and something that must be learned; but this universal [structure] 
is for labor the true essence; and natural awkwardness must be con-
quered in the learning of the universal [skill]; labor is not an instinct, 
but a [form of] rationality that makes itself universal in the people, and 
is therefore opposed to the singularity of the individual, which must be 
conquered; and laboring is precisely for this reason present not as an 
instinct but in the mode of the spirit, because it has become something 
other than the subjective activity of the single agent; it is a universal 
routine, and it becomes the skill of the single [artisan] through this 
process of learning; through its process of othering itself it returns to 
itself. 
</3> The reverse way: of extraction from the universal.60 
The recognition of labor and skill <passes> through the cycle in 
the universal [element], the cycle which it has in the single [conscious-
ness] through [the process of] learning. Against the universal skill the 
single agent posits himself as a particular, he separates himself from 
[the universal level of skill] and makes himself more skilful than the 
others [in the craft], he discovers more useful tools; but whatever is 
truly universal in his particular skill is the discovery of something uni-
versal, and the others learn it; they cancel its particularity, and it be-
comes directly a universal good. 
[321] 
The tool as such holds off his material nullification from man; but 
60. The subhead <f3> (along with the main verb of the sentence) is restored 
from the cancelled opening of this paragraph, which read: "<B. The tool becomes 
the machine, because in his nullification of nature man posits his own Reason as 
a superseded moment, he holds it away from himself. In general> the recognition 
of labor and skill <passes> etc." (The new heading comes from a marginal addi-
tion at this point.) 

247 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
there remains a formal nullification in its use; it is still his activity that 
is directed on a dead [material], and indeed his activity is essentially 
the putting [of the object] to death, ripping it out of its living context, 
and setting it up as something to be nullified as whatever it was be-
fore; in the MACHINE man supersedes just this formal activity of his 
own, and lets it do all the work for him. But this deceit that he prac-
tices against nature, and through which he abides stably within its sin-
gularity, takes its revenge upon him; what he gains from nature, the 
more he subdues it, the lower he sinks himself. When he lets nature be 
worked over by a variety of machines, he does not cancel the necessity 
for his own laboring but only postpones it, and makes it more distant 
from nature; and his living labor is not directed on nature as alive, but 
this negative vitality evaporates from it, and the laboring that remains 
to man becomes itself more machinelike; man diminishes labor only for 
the whole, not for the single [laborer]; for him it is increased rather; 
for the more machinelike labor becomes, the less it is worth, and the 
more one must work in that mode. 
y) In other words his labor, qua laboring of a single [laborer] for his 
own needs, is at the same time a universal and ideal [factor of public 
life]; he satisfies his needs by it certainly, but not with the determinate 
thing that he worked on; in order that that may satisfy his needs, it 
must rather become something other than it is; man no longer works 
up what he uses himself, or he uses no longer what he has worked up 
[3Z2] 
himself; that becomes only the possibility of his satisfaction instead of 
the actual satisfaction of his needs; his labor becomes a formally ab-
stract universal, a singular [factor]; he limits himself to labor for one 
of his needs, and exchanges it for whatever is necessary for his other 
needs. His labor is for need [in general], it is for the abstraction of a 
need as universally suffered, not for his need; and the satisfaction of 
the totality of his needs is a labor of everyone. Between the range of 
needs of the single [agent], and his activity on their account, there en-
ters the labor of the whole people, and the labor of any one is in respect 
of its contents, a universal labor for the needs of all, so as to be appro-
priate for the satisfaction of all of his needs; in other words it has a 
value; his labor, and his possessions, are not [just] what they are for 
him, but what they are for everyone; the satisfaction of needs is a uni-
versal dependence of everyone upon one another; for everyone all 
security and certainty that his labor as a single [agent] is directly ade-
quate to his needs disappears; as a singular complex of needs he be-
comes a universal. Through the division of labor the skill of anyone 

248 
G. W. F. Hegel 
for the labor to be done is immediately greater; all the relations of 
nature to the singular circumstances of man come more fully under 
his command, comfort increases. This universality, into which private 
[323] 
need, and labor, and its aptitude to satisfy need are all elevated, is a 
formal one; the consciousness of it is not an absoluteness in which 
these connections are nullified; it is directed toward the cancelling of 
this privacy, the freeing of the laboring [agent] from his dependence 
on nature; need and labor are elevated into the form of consciousness; 
they are simplified, but their simplicity is formally universal abstract 
simplicity, it is the lying-apart of the concrete [order of nature], which 
in this external separateness becomes an empirical infinite of singu-
larities /n and while man subjects nature to himself in this formal, and 
false, way, the individual only increases his dependence on it: a) the 
division of labor increases the mass of manufactured [objects]; eigh-
teen men work in an English pin factory (Smith, p. 8).62 Each has a 
specific part of the work to do and only that. A single man would per-
haps not make 20, could not even make one; those eighteen jobs di-
vided among ten men produce 4000 per day. But from the work of 
these ten in a group of eighteen there would [come] 48000. But in the 
same ratio that the number produced rises, the value of the labor falls; 
{3) the labor becomes that much deader, it becomes machine work, the 
skill of the single laborer is infinitely limited, and the consciousness of 
the factory laborer is impoverished to the last extreme of dullness; 
[324] 
(y) and the coherence of the singular kind of labor with the whole in-
finite mass of needs is quite unsurveyable, and a [matter of] blind de-
pendence, so that some far-off operation often suddenly cuts off the 
labor of a whole class of men who were satisfying their needs by it, 
and makes it superfluous and useless; just as iJ) the assimilation of 
nature becomes greater comfort through the insertion of the intermedi-
ate links, so too these stages of the assimilation are infinitely divisible, 
61. The passage from 'This universality ... infinite of singularities" was added 
in the revised draft. 
62. This is Hegel's first absolutely certain reference to the Wealth of Nations 
(but compare my query in note 43 to the System of Ethical Life). He refers to 
the Basel edition of the English text, 1791. He owned this edition at the time of 
his death, but it is not known when he acquired it. We know that he was using 
it here because of the page reference and because, although the figures reported 
from Smith's text are muddled, they are not muddled in Carve's way (see the 
note in N.K.A. VI, 384-85). Smith records that the ten-man factory could produce 
about twelve pounds of pins (4000+ pins per pound) per man in a day. Hegel 
read him as asserting that the whole group produced "about a pound of pins in 
a day." 

249 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
and the multitude of conveniences makes them just as absolutely in-
convenient once again. 
This manifold laboring at needs as things must likewise realize their 
concept, their abstraction; their universal concept must become a thing 
like them, but one which, qua universal, represents all needs; money 
is this materially existing concept, the form of unity, or of the possi-
bility of all things needed. 
Need and labor, elevated into this universality, then form on their 
own account a monstrous system of community and mutual interde-
pendence in a great people; a life of the dead body, that moves itself 
within itself, one which ebbs and flows in its motion blindly, like the 
elements, and which requires continual strict dominance and taming 
like a wild beast. 
y. This activity of laboring and need, as the movement of the living 
dead, has likewise its resting side in possession. Like labor, possession 
becomes within the whole of a people a universal factor in its privacy; 
(325] 
it remains the possession of this private [person], but only in so far as 
it is posited as his by the universal consciousness, or in so far as in the 
universal consciousness everyone else likewise possesses what is his; 
that is to say, possession becomes property. Its exclusiveness becomes 
such that all [owners] communally exclude every other likewise, and 
in the determinate possession [of any one] all equally have their pos-
sessions; or that the possession of the private [person] is the posses-
sion of all [i.e., it instantiates the right of property]. In possession there 
is the contradiction that a thing is universal as a thing, and yet it is to 
be the possession of just one single [agent]; this contradiction is can-
celled by consciousness in that the thing is implicitly posited as the 
contrary of itself; qua recognized, it is the private possession, yet at the 
same time it is universal because in this private possession all [owners] 
have their goods; the security of my possession is the security of every-
one's possessions; in my property all hold their property, my posses-
sion has acquired the form of consciousness, it is determined [as] my 
possession, but as property it is not related to me alone, but univer-
sally. 
As at the preceding level labor and need have been absolutely par-
celled out, so property is parcelled out at this level; the parcelling out 
is the positing of the concrete in the universal, the distinctions that it 
has within itself, as identity of opposites,63 fall apart, and come to be 
63. Or possibly "as opposed to the identity [of the abstract universal]" (Hegel's 
shorthand will permit either expansion). 

250 
G. W. F. Hegel 
on their own account as abstractions. The totality of singularity, which 
was whole throughout the extension of its existing in whatever it 
[326] 
gained the mastery of in each singular case, only is as a superseded 
state within the whole people, and the private [being] of need and 
possession falls back into the nature of its privacy; consciousness as 
totality of the singular [life] was the union of itself and its externality, 
its possession; in that the two terms [now] fall outside one another, 
the private [person] ceases to have that [sense of] honor which staked 
its whole essence on every single detail. In this parcelling out what is 
related to the totality as an organization, or as self-constituting, what 
now gets called his person, falls directly apart from that which appears 
to him externally as real thing (als Sache), whereas for the sense of 
honor the distinction is not present; it posits itself as a whole in every 
relation [and] every possession. 
[The rest of the manuscript is lost. The page is full but not 
the last line, so this is presumably the end of a paragraph. Hegel 
is just beginning to develop his theory of private right, contract, 
and distributive justice. Presumably the values of absolute spirit 
-the cultural worlds of Art, Religion, and Philosophy would 
follow when his account of political life-only just begun here-
was complete. The fragment of ist nur die Form (printed in Ap-
pendix 1) may belong to that part of the present "system."] 

Appendix 1 
THE FRAGMENT 11IST NUR DIE FORM ..• " 
[This fragment belongs-by the objective criterion of the hand-
writing-to the same period as the "system" of which the third 
part is here translated. It would fit in neatly enough in the final 
stages of that system. But the only external evidence that it was 
part of the system is the fact that it is now bound up in the same 
volume of posthumous papers. This probably reflects nothing 
more than the judgment of some earlier student who was not 
even as well placed to form an objective opinion as modern 
students are. We are bound, therefore, to ask ourselves whether 
there are other contexts into which the fragment would fit equally 
well; and it must be conceded that there are. It may, for instance 
belong to the philosophiae universae delineatio of Summer 1803 
(see the introduction, pp. 189-90). The philosophiae systema 
universum of Summer 1804 is a less probable alternative, both 
because of the handwriting, and because it is more probable that 
that lecture course was not actually delivered.] 
.... is just the form, the semblance of the absolute independence of 
[330] 
the absolute present, and what matters is what the stuff is to which it 
[the form?] gives this semblance; [what matters is] whether the stuff 
is absolute in itself.l But this stuff we know: 
a) the universal as an inward [essence] must remain essentially in-
ward, without [outward] effect [or: expression in work], it is Love; 
1. "Stuff" is a strange word for the Divine Being or the absolute substance. But 
it becomes much less strange if we apply it to the history of man's experience of 
God. This fragment seems to be part of such a history. Rosenkranz reports that 
Hegel presented the immanent dialectic of the Absolute, in one course at Jena, as 
the "development of the career (Lebenslauf) of God" (Hegels Leben, p. 192). His 
date for the lecture on the transition from Nature to Spirit, in which Hegel de-
veloped this theme (1806), can scarcely be right, since we have the complete text 
of Hegel's Realphilosophie for this period, and such an introduction would not 
fit into it very well. It would certainly have fitted better into either of the Sum-
mer systems mentioned in the headnote. (On Stoff see M. J. Petry, Hegel's Phil-
osophy of Subjective Spirit, I, cxli-cxlii.) 

252 
Appendix 1 
and when it is shaped, it is Love toward what is therefore as a woman 
[the Virgin]. 
{3) The activity itself, the living causal action [or: working], these 
heavenly beautiful and energetic characters, both masculine and femi-
nine individualities, can only be a romantic realm of adventure, with 
singular deeds and confusion of detail. 
y) But the shapes in which these living singular [agents] intuit them-
selves as absolute consciousness, the founders of religions, are essen-
tially actual existing [agents] in history, not absolutely free shapes 
[like the gods and heroes of myth]; the heroes of these religions, how-
ever, are of the kind who represent the absolute grief in suffering and 
martyrdom of the most lurid type; and instead of a beautiful self-ful-
filling appearance, theirs is in the highest degree unfulfilled and ugly. 
8) Finally there is the relation of that first consciousness, the private 
one, to the Absolute Consciousness, which would be a living relation, 
[331] 
[i.e.,] that a people, as consciousness in the form of singularity brought 
forth a universal work, in which they intuited their absolute conscious-
ness as shape and themselves likewise as suspended therein, as it is 
their work, or they are alive in it. But this absolute consciousness, since 
it only exists as concept, has no presence (Gegenwart) in the singular 
consciousness as such, it does not become a self-fulfilling, here-and-
now vital, work; and it is an absolute beyond, in the face of which the 
individual consciousness can only nullify itself, not live and move in 
Him. The stirring of individuality before this absolute self-enjoyment 
is therefore no Epic but a Comedy, a divine comedy, however, in which 
the action of man immediately annihilates itself, only his nullity has 
absolute certainty, his consciousness is only a dream of a conscious-
ness; his character is eternally a wholly powerless past, over which the 
man who attends on this stage show can only dissolve in tears.2 
The art which gives presence to that love, those romantic deeds, this 
historic shaping, and this nullification of consciousness cannot through 
its form remove the essential [quality] of such content, the fact that it 
has no presence, but has only absolute yearning. The content in which 
the absolute consciousness appears must free itself from its yearning, 
from its singularity that has a beyond in the past and the future, and 
2. It would seem that Hegel's serious study of Dante did not extend beyond the 
Inferno. Compare Natural Law (trans. Knox and Acton), pp. 105-Q6; and Faith 
and Knowledge, p. 146. 

253 
Appendix 1 
wrest the world-spirit forth in the form of universality; the mere con-
cept of absolute self-enjoyment must [be] elevated out of the reality in 
which it has submerged itself as concept, and as it [gives] itself the 
form of concept, it reconstructs the reality of its existence and becomes 
absolute universality. After [ .... ] 
[The sheet is full. Thus we can be certain that 
it was part of a continuing manuscript.] 

Appendix 2 
THE REPORT OF ROSENKRANZ ABOUT HEGEL's 
PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRIT IN THE EARLY JENA PERIOD 
[The following reports and fragments can be plausibly referred 
to the years 1801-spring 1805 on internal grounds. A few of 
the manuscripts here referred to have now been discovered-see 
the notes. Objective dating of the rest of this material is not 
possible. The dates given by Rosenkranz himself cannot be relied 
on. The pagination indicated is that of Hegels Leben, Berlin, 
1844. These reports were also reprinted in Hoffmeister's 
Dokumente [Stuttgart, 1936]. 
[179] 
Nor did he lack favorite metaphors, such as the one that occurs 
so often, where the transparency of cognition appears as the aether of 
the spirit.1 And there were favorite concepts for him, too, which he 
developed with characteristic energy and with that transcendent pa-
thos which took mighty hold even on what was striving against his 
thought. Here especially belongs the portrayal (oft-repeated, with fas-
cination) of Greek mythology and of the ethical spirit of a people, 
whose work costs its individual members such a bitter effort, but which 
[180] 
is for itself a serene play in its deep seriousness because of the freedom 
of its activity. [Hegel] was then inexhaustible in creating new images, 
pregnant expressions, ever more precise definitions of concepts. 
He spoke once of genius, of the inventive spirit, with direct refer-
ence to fine art, but also in a more general sense :2 "Mnemosyne or the 
absolute Muse, Art, undertakes to set forth the aspects and shapes of 
1. Hegel's references to the aether in its spiritual aspect are not ~imply meta-
phorical before 1805/6 (and perhaps not after that date either!). Rosenkranz is 
here referring to a manuscript of 1803, which has just been recovered. 
2. The fragmentary manuscript from which the following quotation was taken 
has now been found. From the handwriting it appears to belong to 1803 (see 
N.K.A. VIII. 355-56). The reader should note that the fragment "ist nur die 
Form ... " would fit neatly into the context of a direct continuation of the dis-
cussion from which this quotation was taken. (The analogy with the elements 
here makes a link with Hegel's "Philosophy of Spirit" in 1803/4; and what he 
says about !he duty of the artist at a point of revolutionary transition illumines 
the relation between his first philosophy of Spirit and the System of Ethical Life.) 

255 
Appendix 2 
the spirit visibly and audibly for intuition. This Muse is itself the uni-
versal speaking consciousness of the people. The art work of mythol-
ogy is propagated in the living tradition. Even as the races (Geschlech-
ter) advance in the liberation of their consciousness, so it advances 
and purifies itself and ripens. This work of art is as much a universal 
possession as it is the work of everyone. Every generation hands it on 
to the one that follows beautified, or [in other words] it has labored 
further on the liberation of absolute consciousness. Those who are 
called geniuses have acquired a certain type of special skill, by which 
they make the universal shapes of the people into their work just as 
others do other things [of universal value]. What they produce is not 
their discovery, but a discovery by the people as a whole. It is the find-
ing that the people has found its essence. What belongs to the artist as 
this man here is his formal activity, his particular skill in this mode of 
exposition, and it is precisely to this that he has been educated in the 
universal skill. He is like a man who finds himself among a gang of 
laborers building an arch of stone, for which the scaffolding is invis-
ibly present as Idea. Everyone puts a stone in place, the artist too. It 
happens by chance that he is the last, and when he puts his stone in 
place, the arch can carry its own weight. He sees that because he has 
put this stone in place the whole work makes an arch, he says so and 
he counts as its discoverer. Or when laborers are digging for a spring, 
the one who happens to take out the last dod has the same work to do 
as the rest-and for him the spring gushes forth. -With a political 
revolution it is the same. We can think of the people as buried under 
the earth over which there is a lake. Each believes he works just for 
himself and for the maintenance of the whole when he takes a bit of 
stone away from above and makes use of it for his own purposes and 
for the general underworld edifice. The tension of the air, the universal 
element, begins to change. It makes men thirsty for water. They are 
[181] 
uncomfortable, but they do not know what they lack, and in order to 
do something for it they dig ever higher with the intent of improving 
their subterranean condition. The skin of earth becomes transparent. 
One of them looks at it and cries: "Water." He wrenches the last dod 
out of the way, and the lake rushes in and drinks them up even as it 
gives them drink. -So too, the work of art is the work of all. There is 
one who completes it and brings it to the light of day, because he is the 
last to work on it and he is the darling of Mnemosyne- If in our time 
the living world certainly is not molding the work of art within itself, 
the artist must transpose his imagination into a world that is dead and 
gone; he must dream a world for himself, but then the character of the 

256 
Appendix 2 
dreaming state, of not being alive, of being dead and gone, is ineradi-
cably stamped on it." 
The lectures printed after Hegel's death give an adequate impression 
of some of these pedagogical or propaedeutic expositions-e.g., his 
general remarks about the singular agent's illusion of setting himself 
against the universal necessity, his taking his relation to it as some-
thing accidental and not seeing the action of necessity repeated in that 
relation; or about the resolution of the opposition between the slum-
bering, instinctive consciousness and the awakened critical conscious-
ness, through the movement of the world itself, with the objectivity of 
which genuine philosophy cannot find itself in contradiction; or about 
the independence of philosophy, which no more needs another science 
for its founding than it needs an alien instrument for it, and so on. It is 
superfluous, therefore, to quote anything from them here, even though 
many discussions of this kind appear worthy of quotation because of 
the completeness of their exposition. 
Nonetheless we cannot refrain from mentioning in particular one of 
these introductions to a lecture course on the whole system [of specu-
lative Philosophy], because it contains a very decided polemic against 
the degenerations of the nature philosophy of Schelling which began 
at the time to inundate the literature of philosophy.3 It contains, in ad-
dition, important declarations about [philosophical] terminology gen-
erally-to wit, that as far as possible it should be wholly brought back 
to the mother tongue.4 Hegel speaks first of how we make the study 
of philosophy more difficult, partly because we make demands on it 
[182] 
that ought not to be made, and partly because we terrify ourselves 
with pictures of the demands that philosophy makes on us and which 
are too hard for us to meet. The truth should present itself to us in 
religion, of course, but for our culture faith is altogether a thing of the 
past; Reason, with its demand that we should not believe, but know 
what the truth is, has grown strong, that we should not merely have 
intuitive consciousness of the truth, but should comprehend it. The 
truth of his individuality, which the path of his existence traces pre-
cisely for him, the single individual is well aware of, but the conscious-
ness of the universal life he expects from philosophy. Here his hope 
seems to be disappointed when instead of the fullness of life there ap-
3. No such polemic is likely to have occurred before Schelling left Jena in 1803. 
Winter 1803/4, Winter 1804/5, and Summer 1805 are all likely times for this 
course because or the coincidence pointed out in the next note. 
4. We know from his letter to J. H. Voss of May 1805 (excerpted in Kaufmann, 
Hegel, pp. 315-16) that Hegel was much concerned about this at that date. 

257 
Appendix 2 
pear concepts, and in contrast to the riches contained in the world of 
immediate experience the poorest abstractions are offered. But the con-
cept is itself the mediator between itself and life, in that it teaches us 
how to find life in it and the concept in life. But, of course, only science 
itself can convince us of this. 
"There is, indeed, a dark halfway-house between feeling and scien-
tific knowledge, a speculative feeling or the Idea, which cannot free 
itself from imagination and feeling and yet is no longer just imagina-
tion and feeling. I mean mysticism, or rather the Oriental attempt to 
present the Idea, just as much as Jacob Boehme's. The oriental spirit is 
exalted above mere beauty or limited shape. It is the infinite, the shape-
less which it struggles to grasp in its fanciful images, but it is always 
driven beyond the image by the infinite, it continually cancels its 
image once more and seeks itself in a new one, which it likewise allows 
to disappear again. It is therefore just a splendid rhetoric which ever 
confesses the impotence of the means (namely, the images) to present 
the essence:-the modern mysticism [i.e., Boehme] is of a darker cast 
and a more sorrowful kind. It steps into the depths of the essence with 
common sensuous ideas (Vorstellungen) and fights to make itself mas-
ter of it and bring it before its consciousness. But the essence will not 
let itself be grasped in the form of a common sensuous idea. Any rep-
resentation of this kind that it is grasped in is inadequate. It is only 
made to fit the essence by violence, and must equally violently be torn 
[183] 
[away from it?]; it presents only the battle of an inward [essence], that 
is fermenting within itself, and cannot advance into the clear light of 
day, feels its incapacity with sorrow, and rolls about in fits and con-
vulsions that can come to no proper issue. 
The clear element is the universal, the concept, which [is] as deep as 
it is extensive in its revelation that leaves nothing veiled. 
For the fixation of concepts there is a means at hand which achieves 
its end, on the one side, but can also become more dangerous than the 
evil of being without concepts even, namely, philosophical terminol-
ogy, the vocabulary established for this purpose from foreign lan-
guages, [specifically] Latin and Greek. I do not know, for example, 
what there is to the idea that the expression 'quantitativer Unterschied' 
is more definite than 'Grossenunterschied.' Properly speaking, it be-
longs to the highest cultural development of the people to say every-
thing in their own language. The concepts that we mark with foreign 
words seem to us to be themselves something foreign and not to belong 
to us immediately as our very own. The elements of things appear to 
us not to be the present concepts with which we are environed and 

258 
Appendix 2 
have to deal with all the time and in which the most ordinary man ex-
presses himself. Being, Not-Being, One, Many, Quality, Size and so on, 
are pure essences of this kind with which we keep house all the time 
in ordinary life. Such forms as these appear to us to be not worthy 
enough, as it were, for the grasping of those high other-worldly things, 
the Idea, the Absolute in them; and something foreign is more apt for 
it, since the Absolute, the supersensible world itself, is foreign to the 
common round of daily life in which we employ those concepts. But 
that which is in itself must just not have this foreignness for us, and 
we must not give it this foreign look by using a foreign terminology, 
but must count ourselves really convinced that the spirit itself is alive 
everywhere and that it expresses its forms in our own spontaneous 
natural language. They come up in the speech of everyday, mingled 
and wrapped in crude concrete [particulars], for example, in 'the tree 
is green.' 'Tree' and 'green' are what controls our representation. We 
do not in ordinary life reflect on the 'is,' we do not set this pure being 
[184] 
in relief, make it our object, as philosophy does. But this being is here 
present and expressed. It is, of course, necessary to have recourse to 
foreign terminology if we cannot find the determinate characteristics 
of the concept before us in our own language. It is not customary for 
us to do violence to language and to mold new forms out of old words. 
Our thought is still not properly at home in our language, it does not 
dominate the language, as it should, and we cherish in this regard, a 
blind reverence for what is brought from abroad. 
But this foreign terminology, which is used partly in a futile and 
partly in a perverse way, becomes a great evil because it reduces con-
cepts which are implicitly movement to something stable and fixated, 
so that the spirit and life of the thing itself disappears and philosophy 
degenerates into an empty formalism, which is very easily supplied for 
social chat; yet to those who do not understand the terminology it 
seems very difficult and deep. That is precisely what is seductive in a 
terminology of thi.; kind, that it is in fact very easy to master it. It is all 
the easier to speak in it, because if I have no sense of personal shame, I 
can permit myself to utter every possible nonsense and triviality when 
I am talking to people in a language that they do not understand. 
In the study of philosophy you must not, therefore, take this kind of 
terminology for the essence, you should have no reverence for it. Ten 
or twenty years ago it seemed very hard to work one's way into the 
Kantian terminology and use expressions such as 'synthetic judgments 
a priori,' 'synthetic unity of apperception,' 'transcendent,' 'transcenden-
tal,' etc. But such a tidal wave of words rushes over us and is gone as 

259 
Appendix 2 
rapidly as it comes. The majority get on top of the language, and the 
secret comes to the light of day that very ordinary thoughts lurk be-
hind the bogeyman masks of such expressions. I remark on this prin-
cipally because of the present aspects of philosophy and especially be-
cause of the philosophy of nature, which has made mischief with the 
terminology of Schelling. Schelling has certainly uttered good sense 
and philosophical thoughts in these forms, but he has done so precisely 
because he showed himself to be free in fact from this terminology, 
[185] 
since in almost every successive presentation of his philosophy he has 
used a new one. Yet so far as there is public discussion of this philoso-
phy now, it is really only the superficial aspect of his thought that is 
concealed beneath it. I cannot lead you into the depths of this philoso-
phy, as we see it in so many writings, for [in them] it has no depth; 
and I tell you this, so that you will not let yourselves be imposed on, 
as if behind these abstruse, weighty words there must be a sense hid-
den. -All that can be of interest here is to observe the astonishment 
that it creates in the ignorant mass [of the literate public]. But in fact 
one can learn this current formalism in half an hour. Instead of saying 
that something is 'long' for example, one says that it 'tends to length 
and this length is magnetism'; or instead of saying it is 'broad,' that it 
'tends to be breadth, and that this is electricity'; instead of 'thick, bod-
ily' 'it tends to the third dimension'; instead of 'pointed,' 'it is the pole 
of contraction'; instead of 'the fish is long,' 'it stands under the schema 
of magnetism' and so on and so forth."5 
"I give you prior notice that in the philosophical system which I am 
going to lecture on you will find none of this deluge of formalism. And 
though I speak now as I have done, about this terminology and the 
current epidemic use of it, I know well enough that Schelling's Ideas 
must be very clearly distingiushed from the use that his school makes 
of them, and I honor Schelling's genuine service to philosophy just as 
much as I despise this formalism; and since I am well acquainted with 
Schelling's philosophy, I know that its genuine Idea, as it has again 
awakened in our time, is independent of this formalism." 
In such introductions as this, therefore, Hegel was fighting not 
against Schelling himself, towards whom, indeed, he maintained his 
.5. This passage should be compared with what Marx and Engels said about the 
tradition of German idealism generally in the German Ideology (for example, 
Basic Writings, ed., Feuer, p. 261). It should be noted that, like Hegel, they them-
selves took the project of a philosophy of nature very seriously; and it seems safe 
to assume that, when they were writing the German Ideology, they had already 
read Rosenkranz's biography of Hegel. 

260 
Appendix 2 
original friendship with unbreakable firmness, but rather against the 
devastation of thought which his school had begun to wreak. Hegel 
also attacked romanticism, which was seeking to establish itself in 
philosophy at that time. He protests in the most explicit way against 
[186] 
the idea that by its very nature philosophy existed only for the few 
elect, that it required a special genius and a peculiar organization [of 
the mind]. "We must note briefly that philosophy as the science of 
Reason is by its very nature meant for everyone because of its univer-
sal mode of being. Not everyone achieves it, but that is not to the 
point, any more than it is to the point that not every man gets to 
be a prince. The disturbing thing about some men being set over others 
only lies in this, that it might be assumed that they were distinct by 
nature and were essentially of another kind."6 
With incorruptible sobriety he analyzed the religious enthusiasm 
which was forever promising revelations of the eternal and the holy, 
but never achieved the definiteness of cognition. He rejected the appeal 
of these insipid enthusiasts to Plato, from Plato's own work, since 
Plato ascribes prophecy not to self-possessed men, but to those who 
are asleep, when the power of consciousness is fettered; or to the sick 
and the possessed, the enthusiast who does not know what he is doing, 
so that the meaning of the words he throws out in divinely inspired 
madness must first be interpreted by the self-possessed man, according 
to his Reason; and the Demiurge, too, mindful of the injunction of the 
Father to make the tribe of mortal men in the best way possible, laid 
up the power of prophecy in the liver, so that our bad side might in 
some way be in contact with the truth [Timaeus 71d-e]. 
Hegel compared this overheated essential being, who wants to re-
place the good sense he lacks by vehement assurances about the deeper 
significance of his words, with the feebleness of modern drama, in 
which similarly the "outstretched, waving arms, the raging face, the 
eyes staring fixedly up to heaven, the sucking lips and chewing jaws 
must give the meagre words their first real impact." 
Because he presented philosophy in the element of free universality 
according to logical method, as the inner organization of Reason, be-
cause he demanded of the philosophy student [or: philosophizing 
mind] that by abstraction from all given determinacy he [it] makes him-
self [itself] into a self-conscious void that stands directly opposed to 
the whole fullness of the universe; and because he also treated phil-
6. This, too, is part of a polemic against the aristocratic conception of philoso-
phy fostered by Schelling (who himself used the analogy of princely birth). 

261 
Appendix 2 
osophy of Nature logically, he soon had in Jena the prejudice arising 
against him from the side of the romantics that he did not appreciate 
[187] 
the poetry of nature. Since he went beyond Schelling in this respect, 
that he did not just coordinate the Spirit with Nature, but rather pos-
ited it as the absolute universal, he did, indeed, get to the point of 
speaking not merely of the liberation of the spirit from its bondage to 
nature, but even of contempt for nature. But this ethical aspect of na-
ture is quite a different thing from its scientific aspect. Hegel said: "In 
fact, the single spirit can hold fast to itself, as force of character, and 
assert its individuality, let nature be what she will. His negative atti-
tude toward nature, where nature is already something other than 
spirit, despises nature's power, and in this contempt he keeps her at a 
distance and himself free from her. And actually the single spirit is 
only as great and as free as his contempt of nature is great."7 
Experiencing already even then the prejudice against him, as if he 
meant this contempt in a theoretical, not just in a practical sense, Hegel 
declared himself by alluding to a passage in Goethe's Faust: "Nature 
is a whole for the living intuition, or if one wants to call it that, the 
poetic intuition. The manifold [phenomena] of nature pass before him 
as a series of living [shapes], and he recognizes in bush, in air, and in 
water his brothers. For this poetic intuition of nature it is, to be sure, 
an absolute living whole. But this vitality is in its [phenomenal] shap-
ing an individuality. The living things are inwardly identical, but they 
have an absolute externality of being as against one another. Each one 
is on its own account, and their motion against one another is abso-
lutely contingent. In this instantiated (vereinzelte) vitality everyone 
plays its part with equal right against the others, and, because the in-
finity of its singularity is its destruction, its singularity is not in itself 
justified. The intuition of it is a sensible grief. The ethical individuali-
ties step outside of nature. For them it is only a side issue, an instru-
ment. Where it is more than that, where ethical beings (Wesen) strive 
to keep themselves low enough, so to speak, to enjoy it, -in idyllic 
poetry-they themselves then fall into that debasing sensibility and 
into a limited range of life whose impoverishment can only be interest-
ing in a formal way, as a presentation."8 
Hegel took considerable care about all the misunderstandings which 
[188] 
are bound to arise from the speculative mode of presentation because 
7. This comes from the manuscript of 1803. It seems likely that Rosenkranz is 
answering complaints made against the (probably later) manuscript (which we do 
not have) with quotations from the earlier one (which we have now recovered). 
8. This also comes from the manuscript of 1803. 

262 
Appendix 2 
of the way in which it conflicts with the point of view of common 
sense, which calls itself the "reasonable" view, of course. Nature, for 
example, is the negative moment in the totality of the spirit, the mo-
ment that is opposed both to the simple Idea and to Spirit that is for 
itself. Nature is the other-being of the Idea, which gets superseded in 
the spirit and by the spirit through its freedom as that which thinks 
the Idea in its ideality as spirit's own self. Now this negativity has been 
represented both by the Gnostics and by Schelling as a going-forth of 
the Idea from itself or as a falling of the Idea away from itself. But 
Hegel points out that one can only bring what is correct in these verbal 
pictures to the light of present awareness if one already knows in gen-
eral what is right in them; but that it is misguided to want to possess 
the truth of the matter in these forms already, since they only express 
it as a happening, an indifference of connection [i.e., a contingent rela-
tion which need not exist], whereas the concept posits [its] negation 
essentially-only as a moment, but as absolutely necessary. 
In this way Hegel sought as far as possible to overcome the original 
[primitive] difficulty of his system, striving to make it a more perfect 
systematic circle by simplifying everything, to make it more compre-
hensible by examples and by references to the nearest present. Least 
changed was the basic pattern of the Logic and Metaphysics. We can, 
however, see the greatest efforts in his introductions to justify the 
undertaking [of philosophical logic] in general. It is quite remark-
able, thinks Hegel, that modern philosophy despises logic and yet all 
the same logic is required by it generally; while, of course, those who 
still pay homage to the old forms of logic are just as discontented, yet 
neither party has generated any new logic. "Fichte's Science of Knowl-
edge like the Transcendental Idealism of Schelling are both of them 
nothing else but attempts to expound Logic or speculative philosophy 
purely on its own account. Fichte, admittedly, took the great, but one-
sided standpoint of consciousness, of the Ego, of the subject, as his 
starting-point, and this has made a free and complete detailed treat-
ment [of Logic] impossible for him. Schelling starts from there too, 
certainly, but he suspends this [subjective] standpoint in the sequel. 
[189] 
But as far as speculative philosophy itself is concerned, it appears that 
the very consciousness was not present in these essays, that precisely 
this and nothing else was at issue. In his later views of philosophy 
Schelling sets up the speculative Idea quite generally, without develop-
ment in itself [as Logic], and passes on straight away to the shape that 
it has qua Philosophy of Nature."9 
9. This passage does not occur in the newly discovered fragments. Neverthe-

263 
Appendix 2 
In one of the introductions to what he called speculative philosophy 
in the stricter sense, he referred directly to the time when philosophy 
in general appears, to wit, that it comes forth in the epochs of transi-
tion, in which the old ethical form of the peoples is wholly overcome 
by a new one. To be sure, this happens more rapidly with smaller peo-
ples than it does with great ones, and especially with the colossal peo-
ples of the modern period. Here Hegel became absorbed for a minute 
in the portraying of the great man (which he himself was so great at) 
before making his way back again to philosophy via Alexander the 
Great's education at the hands of Aristotle-a route which was for him 
a stereotype: "These collected (besonnenen) natures have nothing to 
do but speak the word, and the peoples will hang upon them. The great 
spirits than can do this must, in order to be able to do it, be cleansed 
of all the peculiarities of the preceding shape [of ethical life]. If they 
want to bring the work to completion in its totality, they must also 
have grasped it in their whole totality. They take hold of it, perhaps, 
only at one end and bring it forward. But since nature wills the whole, 
it casts them down from the peak upon which they have placed them-
selves and puts others in their place; and if these, too, are one-sided, 
there is a sequence of singular agents, until the whole work is com-
pleted. But if it was the deed of one man, then he must have cognized 
the whole and thereby cleansed himself of all limitation. The terrors of 
the objective world, along with all the fetters of ethical actuality, and 
with them, too, all alien crutches for standing in this [ethical] world, 
and all reliance upon a firm bond within it-all these must have fallen 
away from him, i.e., he must have been formed (gebildet) in the school 
of philosophy. Starting from here he can rouse the still slumbering 
shape of a new ethical world to waking, and go forth into battle boldly 
against the old forms of the world-spirit, just as Jacob wrestled with 
God, secure [in his own mind] that the forms which he can destroy are 
a senile shape [of the divine], and the new forms are a new divine reve-
lation. He can regard the whole complex of present human affairs as 
[190] 
raw material (einen Stoff) for his appropriation. From it his great indi-
viduality forms (bildet) for itself its body. It is a raw material which is 
less I think it can be securely assigned to 1801 because Fichte and Schelling are 
here treated side by side as speculative philosophers (as in the Difference essay). 
Fichte has not yet been demoted lo the rank of a philosopher of subjective re-
flection (as in Faith and Knowledge). Since R~senkranz goes on immediately to 
summarize and quote from the "Logic and Metaphysics" of 1801 as distinct from 
the "introduction" he has been quoting, I infer that the present passage comes 
from the "Introduction to Philosophy" of the same year. 

264 
Appendix 2 
itself alive, and which forms [by its own activity] the organs both inert 
and vital of this great [new] shape. Thus it was-to cite the supreme 
example of a man who wove his own individuality into the web of 
destiny and gave it a new freedom-thus it was that Alexander of 
Macedon passed out from the school of Aristotle to become the con-
queror of the world." 
[The quotation continues with an outline of the structure of 
Hegel's "Logic" as he proposed to expound it in the Winter term 
of 1801/2. This is omitted here as irrelevant.10 We pick up the 
text of Rosenkranz once more, where he passes on to discuss 
the development of Hegel's "Metaphysics":] 
[192] 
In his lectures on metaphysics11 Hegel strove especially to make the 
transition to the "real philosophy" [the theory of Nature and Spirit] 
ever clearer. He did this at that period in a wholly speculative theolog-
ical context. As late as the Summer of 180612 in his lecture course on 
"Real Philosophy" he called the simple Idea the night of the divine 
mystery, from whose undisturbed density, nature and conscious spirit 
were let go free into their independent subsistence. With the still half-
theosophical conception of the Absolute Idea which he had at that 
period Hegel would have contented much better all those who now-
adays do not know how they are supposed to unite the concept of the 
Absolute Idea with that of the Absolute Spirit or the finitude of human 
10. The passage omitted here is cited-with only one minor omission-in my 
introduction to Faith and Knowledge, pp. 9-11. Rosenkranz quoted the whole 
passage-accurately, and with only one or two very small cuts-from the manu-
script of 1801. The fragments of the manuscript which he removed for his own 
use have been recovered (see N.K.A. V). 
11. Rosenkranz could hardly have spoken of any manuscript that he had as a 
"Vortrag der Metaphysik" if Hegel wrote it later than 1805, because the division 
between Logic and Metaphysics disappears altogether from his writings after that 
year. But what Rosenkranz says here does not refer to the manuscript of 1804/5 
which we still have (for he believed that the manuscript belonged to 1800). Hence 
it must refer to an earlier manuscript. 
12. What basis Rosenkranz had for this date we can only surmise. He did not 
know the date of the "Real Philosophy" of 1805/6-which he assigns positively 
to 1804/5. But he did have communications (both written and verb:1l) from stu-
dents who took Hegel's courses at Jena. For Summer 1806 G. A. Gabler was a 
possible source. (Summer 1806 was probably the last term that Hegel lectured at 
Jena; and for his lectures on Philosophia naturae et mentis he mainly used the 
manuscript of Winter 1805-which we have. Our manuscript contains nothing 
that deserves the name "introduction"-yet some kind of initial survey Hegel 
must certainly have delivered.) 

265 
Appendix 2 
self-consciousness with the absoluteness of the spirit in his theory. He 
even called the immanent dialectic of the Absolute the career of God 
(Lebenslauf Gottes). The most important thing was that he entirely 
dissolved the deadness of the concept of God as a fixed point with 
equally fixed properties. "The intuition of God as himself is the eternal 
creation of the Universe, in which every point as a relative totality for 
itself has its own special career. This scattering (Auseinandergehen) 
of the real, this getting-posited of the manifold, is the goodness of 
God. But the singular also cancels itself as singular and thereby shows 
its universality. This act is the cognition of the intuition, the absolute 
turning point, justice of God, which brings back the negative side as 
absolute power over the real and thereby inverts it out of its being-
[193] 
for-self in unity with all other things. In so far as God, qua eternally 
self-identical self-consciousness, is not immediately immersed in this 
double process of the Universe as both resting and becoming simul-
taneously, so far, that is, as his recreation of the created absolutely 
keeps the character of ideality, he is eternal wisdom and blessedness. 
Every relative totality, even the least of them, is blessed in its life-
career. Its relativity certainly breaks off this blessed self-sufficiency 
(lnsichsein); but even the judgment seat to which the single being is 
brought cannot give an abstract verdict, since the singular being is 
limited. God, as judge of the world, must break his own heart, because 
he is the absolutely universal totality. He cannot judge the single be-
ings, he can only have mercy on them." Hegel still loved, even yet, as 
we already saw above, in his first exposition of metaphysics,l3 to pre-
sent the creation of the universe as the utterance of the absolute Word, 
and the return of the universe into itself as the understanding of the 
Word, so that nature and history become the medium between the 
speaking and the understanding of the Word-a medium which itself 
vanishes qua other-being. 
[The comments on the philosophy of nature and the philosophy 
of spirit which follow are all based on the manuscript of 1805.] 
13. Rosenkranz is not referring to his exposition of the "metaphysics" of the 
manuscript of 1804, which he took to be Hegel's Frankfurt system to the "Divine 
Triangle" manuscript which he thought of as earlier still. (See Hegel'' Leben, pp. 
102-3.) 

A NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION 
The translation has been made from the magnificent critical edition prepared by 
Klaus Dusing and Heinz Kimmerle (G.W.F. Hegel, Gesammelte Werke, Band 6: 
]enaer Systementwurfe I, Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1975). The first edition of the 
text was that of Johannes Hoffmeister (]enenser Realphilosophie I, Leipzig: F. 
Meiner, 1932) and the only other translation known to me is the French version 
of Guy Planty-Bonjour, which was made from this edition (Hegen, Premiere 
Philosophie de l' esprit, Paris, P.U.F., 1969). Hoffmeister's treatment of the text 
was wrongheaded and unsatisfactory in a number of important ways. But I have 
occasionally followed him (on points that are all carefully recorded in my notes) 
and I have profited much from the work of Planty-Bonjour (in ways that are 
generally impossible to record in detail). Sir Malcolm Knox has saved me from 
a number of errors; and I have also received valuable advice and help on several 
points from Klaus Dusing, Heinz Kimmerle and Michael Petry. 
My text generally renders the final state of Hegel's manuscript. But I have 
given a translation of all significant cancelled material in the footnotes. Editorial 
additions are in square brackets throughout, while material cancelled by Hegel 
himself is always given in angled brackets. The reader should note, however, 
that the critical apparatus here is far from complete, and it is probably imper-
fect even within its intended limits. For a truly exact and exhaustive survey of 
the state of the manuscripts one must always refer to the edition of Dusing and 
Kimmerle. 
I have been trying for several years to decide what distinctions Hegel intends 
by the spelling distinctions formal/formell, ideal!ideell, real/reel!. When I made 
the translation, I had virtually given up the struggle because it seemed that even 
if the intended distinctions could be identified there was no convenient way of 
rendering them. Michael Petry persuaded me, rather late in the day, that the 
distinctions must, in any case, be acknowledged. So I decided that I should, at 
least, provide a register of the different occurrences; and the process of making 
the register finally led me to some conclusions about the meaning of the terms, 
which makes it virtually necessary to distinguish them. I apologize to the in-
terested reader for the trouble that he must take to mark all of these words in 
accordance with this list. But he will be able to decide as he does so, whether 
my conclusions are correct; and if he agrees with me, he will certainly agree that 
the effort is not wasted. (The First Philosophy of Spirit is a rather short text, 
and two of the forms occur only once each; so I have provided a full register 
for the System of Ethical Life for purposes of comparison.) 

268 
A Note On The Translation 
formal (speculative term): theoretically 
or inwardly formal, pertaining 
to the living form or essence, 
as distinct from the matter. 
(As applied to the ideal realm, 
formal means abstractly in-
tellectual). 
System of Ethical Life (page, line): 
104,14; 112,4; 116,2,8,32; 120,29; 
124,15,24,27; 126,5,14; 127,13; 
132,1,10; 133,10; 134,9;139,15; 
148,7,31; 151,34,35; 154,8; 159,17, 
22,37; 161,30; 164,40; 166,1; 
167,1. 
First Philosophy of Spirit: 
210,16; 211,7,26; 212,26; 217,8,35; 
218,5,note 24(line 1); 219,3,38; 
220,8,9,11,14; 221,21; 223,3 [der 
Form nach],23(25); 225,4; 226,19; 
227,3,10,13; 233,28; 245,11,20; 
247,1,5,25. 
forme!! (empirical term): practically 
or outwardly formal, pertaining 
to the visible or imposed form, 
as distinct from the content. 
(As applied to the ideal realm 
forme!! refers to required form-
alities-e.g. conventionally 
agreed formulas, protocol, etc.). 
System of Ethical Life (page, line): 
102,3(twice); 103,6; 107,16; 111,34; 
112,3; 113,7; 114,10; 115,13; 
116,13,19,23; 118,25-26; 122,13; 
123,15(both),28; 124,14,28; 125,6, 
26; 126,26,27,33; 129,16; 131,27; 
137,7; 141,12-13; 144,5; 146,6; 
151,25; 152,13; 154,17; 157,10,16; 
159,24; 160,38; 162,1,10,31; 163,1; 
164,2; 165,13,31; 166,15; 167,6; 
164,2; 165,13,31; 166,15; 167,6; 
169,22; 172,7,16,24,29[abstractly]; 
173,21-22; 176,8,14. 
First Philosophy of Spirit: 225,9. 
ideal (speculative term) : belonging to 
the "ideal series," practically 
or concretely ideal, whatever is 
established as a foundation or 
a standard by and for free 
Reason, logically necessary, a 
priori. Thus space and time are 
ideal forms (221) and the work 
of the Volk is its ideal union 
(243). System of Ethical Life 
(page, line): 
106,23; 110,6; 120,3; 121,5,17, 
19, 27(both); 132,23; 146,22; 
158,39. 
First Philosophy of Spirit: 
211,12,14,25,29; 213,16; 215, 
12,30; 218,8; 221,13,25,28; 
228,27; 229,12; 231,18; 234, 
25,27; 237,39; 243,22; 244,20, 
22; 247,19. 
idee!! (empirical term): theoretically 
or abstractly ideal, belonging to 
personal consciousness, or estab-
lished by social convention, 
hence contingent, changeable; 
or deprived of practical effect. 
Thus names are idee! (221 
etc.) and the family committ-
ment is idee!! gesetzt for those 
who commit themselves to the 
work of the Volk (243). 
System of Ethical Life (page, line): 
105,12,17,19; 106,20; 107,1,8,13, 
17,24,27; 110,27,41; 111,9; 113,30, 
36; 114,3,22,29,32,38; 116,21,22 
(both), 23,24(both); 117,13,17; 
118,21; 119,12,28,33; 120,11; 
121,25; 123,11(both); 125,27; 130, 
11,14,22,41; 131,5,11,17,22,28; 
32,17,20,27,34; 133,4; 135,7,41; 
136,2; 137,26; 138,39; 139,25; 
141,23; 143,19; 144,34,35; 145,2; 
153,40; 154,36; 159,26,29,36; 163, 
11; 164,27,28,34,40; 165,4,7; 166, 
18,25; 170,28,41; 173, 25; 175,18; 
176,19. 
First Philosophy of Spirit: 
206,9; 209,20; 213,5,28; 217,1,2,4, 
12,25; 218,9,23; 220,30; 221,29,32; 
222,1; 223,3,26; 224,8["just impli-
citly"=nur idee! an sich],32; 
225,5,9; 226,20; 227,12; 230,4,19; 
231,25; 234,13,14,15,19,21,29,30; 

236,25; 237,2,12; 241,1,8; 242,8; 
243,20; 245,5,6,8,16,23. 
real (speculative term): belonging to 
the "real series," theoretically 
real, hence unchangeable. 
Physically necessary (in the 
given context). 
System of Ethical Life (page, line): 
104,28["more objectively"= 
realer]; 107,17,26; 108,2,5,30; 111, 
3; 112,5,6,10["absolutely real"],ll 
[realisiert], 20,24,33; 113,5; 119, 
28,32; 120,4 [realisiert] ,17,20,21; 
121,12; 129,30; 130,14; 131,28; 
132,19; 135,4,7,12; 138,10; 139,23, 
32; 141,31; 147,11; 150,37,38; 151, 
17; 153,18,20; 155,10[reality],21; 
157,3,38; 158,38; 165,9; 175,19. 
First Philosophy of Spirit: 
210, note 11(line 5); 211,11,14,27; 
213,22; 225,5; 227,17; 232,33; 233, 
24; 234,27,29; 237,40(both); 240,41. 
reel! (empirical term): practically real, 
269 
A Note On The Translation 
but hence subject to practical 
control-e.g. needs. Demon-
strably existent and effective, 
but transient or changeable. 
(The genotype is real, the 
phenotype reel!). Reel! almost 
dbappears in the First Philo-
sophy of Spirit being supplanted 
by the verb existiren and its 
cognates. 
System of Ethical Life (page, line): 
106,17,26; 107,5,14; 110,27; 111,33; 
112,10["real in his own eyes"], 
13,14; 113,35,38; 115,6; 120,1,12; 
121,10,13,25; 123,10; 130,7,17,22, 
41; 131,1,19; 132,7; 134,21; 136,1, 
28,38; 142,2[unrealized], 19; 
144,18; 147,15,17; 151,6; 152,7,17, 
19; 154,3,12,29; 155,1[reality]; 
157,25; 159,3; 164,33,39; 165,5,6,7, 
14; 166,10,21; 167,21; 169,1; 171,1; 
175,18; 176,14. 
First Philosophy of Spirit: 216,5. 

All works referred to in Hegel's text 
or in the introductions and notes are 
listed here (and identified as fully 
as possible) except classical and medi-
eval authors (e.g., Aristotle, Dante), 
where the reference can be found 
in any good modern edition. 
Avineri, Shlomo. Hegel's Theory of 
the Modern State. 
Cambridge: The University Press, 
1972. 
Collingwood, Robin George. The Prin-
ciples of Art. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1936. 
--· The New Leviathan. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1942. 
Eschenmayer, Karl August (177Q-
1852). Siitze aus der Naturmeta-
physik. Tiibingen: Cotta, 1797. 
Fichte, Johann Gottleb (1762-1814). 
Grundlage der gesammten Wissen-
schaftslehre. Leipzig: Gabler, 
1794. Reprinted in W erke I. 
--· Science of Knowledge. Trans-
lated by Peter Heath and John 
Lachs. New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts, 1970. 
--· Grundlage des Naturrechts. 2 
vols. Jena and Leipzig: Gabler, 
1796, 1797. 
--· The Science of Rights. Trans-
lated by A. E. Kroeger. London, 
1889. Reprinted by Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, 1970. 
--· Siimmtliche Werke. Edited by I. 
H. Fichte. 8 vols. Berlin: Veit, 
1845-46. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Haering, Theodor Lorenz. Hegel: sein 
Wollen aund sein Werk. 2 vols. 
Leipzig Teubner, 1929, 1938. Re-
printed Aalen: Scientia Verlag, 
1963. 
Harris, Henry Silton. Hegel's Develop-
ment I: Toward the Sunlight 
(1770-1801). Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1972. 
Haym, Rudolf (1821-1901). Hegel und 
seine Zeit. Berlin: Gaertner, 1857. 
Reprinted Hildesheim: G. Olms, 
1962. 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-
1831). Briefe von und an Hegel. 
Edited by Johannes Hoffmeister 
and Rolf Flechsig. 4 vols. Ham-
burg: F. Meiner, 1961. 
--· Differenz des Fichte'schen und 
Schelling'schen Systems der 
Philosophie. Jena: Seidler, 1801. 
Reprinted in Gesammelte Werke 
IV, 1-92. 
--· Difference between the Systems 
of Fichte and Schelling. Trans-
lated by H. S. Harris and Walter 
Cerf. Albany: State University of 
New York Press, 1977. 
--· Enzyklopiidie der philosophi-
schen Wissenschaften. Edited by 
L. von Henning, K. L. Michelet 
and L. Baumann. Werke VII, 
1832 ff. Berlin: Duncker and 
Humbolt, 1840, 1842, 1845. Re-
printed as System der Philo-
sophie in "Jubilee Edition" edited 
by H. Glockner. Stuttgart: From-

mann, 1927-30. 
--· Logic. Translated from the 
Encyclopedia of the Philosophi-
cal Sciences by William Wallace. 
Second edition, Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1892. Reprinted 1974. 
--·Philosophy of Nature. Translated 
from the Encyclopaedia of the 
Philosophical Sciences by A. V. 
Miller. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1970. 
--· Philosophy of Mind. Translated 
from the Encyclopaedia of Phi-
losophical Sciences by W. 
Wallace and A. Miller. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1971. 
--·Philosophy of Nature. Edited 
and translated (from Encyclopedia 
of Philosophical Sciences) with 
an introduction and explanatory 
notes by M. J. Petry. 3 vols. 
London: Allen and Unwin, 1970. 
--· Philosophy of Subjective Spirit. 
Edited and translated (from En-
cyclopaedia of Philosophical 
Sciences) with an introduction 
and explanatory notes by M. 
]. Petry. 3 vols. Dordrecht and 
Boston: D. Reidel, 1978. 
----· Gesammelte Werke. Edited by 
the Rheinisch-Westfaelischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1968 ff. 
[=N.K.A] 
--· "Giauben und Wissen", Kriti-
sches Journal der Philosophie, 
Vol. II, no. 1. Tiibingen, 1802. 
reprinted in Gesammelte Werke 
IV, 313-414. 
----· Faith and Knowledg. Edited and 
translated by W. Cerf and H. S. 
Harris. Albany: State University 
of New York Press, 1977. 
-- -· Grundlinien der Philosophie des 
Rechts. Edited by J. Hoffmeister. 
Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1955. 
--· Philosophy of Right. Translated 
271 
Bibliography 
with notes by T. M. Knox. Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press, 1942. 
__ .]enenser Realphilosophie I. 
Edited by Hoffmeister. Leipzig: 
F. Meiner, 1932. 
--· La Premiere Philosophie de 
!'Esprit. Traduit et presente par 
G. Planty-Bonjour. Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1969. 
--· "Logik, Metaphysik, Naturphilo-
sophie" (1804-5), in ]enaer 
Systementwurfe II (Gesammelte 
Werke VII). Edited by R. -P. 
Horstmann and J. H. Trede. 
Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1971. 
--· "Naturphilosophie und Philo-
sophie des Geistes" (1805-6), in 
]enaer Systementwurfe III 
(Gesammelte Werke VIII). Edited 
by R. -P. Horstmann with the as-
sistance of J. H. Trede. Hamburg: 
F. Meiner, 1976. 
--· Phiinomenologie des Geistes. 
Edited by Johannes Hoffmeister. 
Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1952. 
--· Phenomenology of Spirit. Trans-
lated by A. V. Miller (with In-
troduction and Analysis by J. N. 
Findlay). Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1977. 
--· Schriften zur Politik und 
Rechtsphilosophie. Edited by G. 
Lasson. Second edition, Leipzig: 
F. Meiner, 1923. 
--· Political Writings. Translated by 
T. M. Knox with an Introductory 
Essay by Z. A. Pelczynski. Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press, 1964. 
--· "System der Sittlichkeit". Edited 
by G. Lasson in Schriften zur 
Politik und Rechtsphilosophie 
(1923). Reprinted separately, Ham-
burg: F. Meiner, 1967. 
--· Systeme de Ia Vie Ethique. 
Traduit et presente par J. 
Taminiaux. Paris: Payot, 1976. 
--· "Das System der spekulativen 

272 
Bibliography 
Philosophie" in ]enaer Systement-
wurfe I (Gesammelte Werke VI). 
Edited by K. Diising and H. Kim-
merle. Hamburg: F. Meiner, 1975. 
--· System der Wissenschaft: Erster 
Teil, die Phiinomenologie des 
Geistes. Bamberg and Wiirzburg: 
Goebhardt, 1807. 
--· Theologische ]ugendschriften. 
Edited by Hermann Nohl. Tiibin-
gen: Mohr, 1907. Reprinted 1968. 
--· Early Theological Writings. 
Translated by T. M. Knox with 
an Introduction and fragments 
translated by Richard Kroner. 
Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1948. Reprinted Philadel-
phia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1971. 
--· "Tiibingen Fragment" (1793). 
Edited by H. Noh! in Theolo-
gische ]ugendschriften, pp. 3-29. 
Translated in H. S. Harris, 
Toward the Sunlight, pp. 481-507. 
--· "Two Fragments on Love" 
(translated by C. Hamlin and H. 
S. Harris), Clio VIII, 1978/9. 
[German text in H. Noh! (ed.) 
Theologische ]ugendschriften, pp. 
374-78; these are the fragments 
referred to on p. 92, note 48 
above.] 
--·"Ueber die wissenschaftlichen 
Behandlungsarten des Natur-
rechts", Kritisches Journal der 
Philosophie II, 1802-3 (reprinted 
in Gesammelte Werke IV, 417-85). 
--·Natural Law. Translated by T. 
M. Knox with an Introduction by 
H. B. Acton. Philadelphia: Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Press, 
1975. 
--·"Die Verfassung Deutschlands" 
in Schriften zur Politik und 
Rechtsphilosophie. Edited by G. 
Lasson. Leipzig: F. Meiner, 1923. 
[Translated in Hegel's Political 
Writings.] 
--· Vorlesungen uber die Philo-
sophie der Weltgeschichte. 
Edited by J. Hoffmeister and G. 
Lasson. 4 vols. in 2. Hamburg: 
F. Meiner, 1955, 1968. 
--· The Philosophy of History, 
Translated by J. Sibree. New 
York: Dover, 1956. 
--· Lectures on the Philosophy of 
World History: Introduction. 
Translated by H. B. Nisbet with 
an Introduction by D. Forbes. 
Cambridge: The University Press, 
1975. 
Hegel in Berichten seiner Zeitgenos-
sen. Edited by G. Nicolin. Ham-
burg: F. Meiner, 1970. [Gabler's 
account of Hegel at Jena is re-
port 92.] 
Hegel-Studien. Bonn: Bouvier, 1961 ff. 
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich (1743-1819). 
aber die Lehre des Spinoza in 
Briefen an den Herrn Moses Men-
delssohn. Neue vermehrete 
Ausgabe. Breslau: Loewe, 1789. 
Reprinted in Werke IV, 1. 
--· Werke. 6 vols. Leipzig: Fleisch-
er, 1812-25. Reprinted Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell-
schaft, 1968. 
Kant, Immanuel (1772-1804). Ge-
sammelte Schriften. Edited by the 
Royal Prussian Academy of 
Sciences. 24 vols. Berlin: Reimer, 
191Q-1966. [Akad.] 
--· Critik der reinen Vernunft. 
Riga: Hartknoch, 1781 [=A]; 
second edition improved through-
out, 1787 [=B]; the two editions 
collated by R. Schmidt, Hamburg: 
F. Meiner, 1930. 
--· Critik der praktischen Vernunft. 
Riga: Hartknoch, 1788. Reprinted 
in Akad. V. 
--· Critik der Urteilskraft. Berlin 
and Libau: Lagarde and Fried-
erich, 1790. Second edition, 1793 
(reprinted in Akad. V). 

- -· Critique of Pure Reason. Trans-
lated from R. Schmidt's collation 
of editions A and B by N. Kemp 
Smith. London: Macmillan, 1933. 
[The pagination of both A and 
B is indicated in the margin.] 
---· Critique of Practical Reason. 
Translated by L. W. Beck. 
Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1949. (Paper: New York: 
Library of Liberal Arts, 1956). 
[The pagination of Akad. V is 
indicated in the margin.] 
~-· Critique of Teleological Judge-
ment. Translated by J. C. 
Meredith. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1928. Incorporated in the 
complete Critique of Judgement, 
translated by J. C. Meredith, Ox-
ford, 1957. [The pagination of 
Akad. V is indicated in the 
margin.] 
--· Metaphysik der Sitten (1797). 
Reprinted in Akad. VI, 203--493. 
--· The Metaphysical Elements of 
Justice. Translated by John Ladd. 
Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill (Li-
brary of Liberal Arts), 1965. 
[Abridged version of "Doctrine of 
Right" from Metaphysik der 
Sitten.] 
Kimmerle, Heinz. "Dokumente zu 
Hegels Jenaer Dozententatigkeit 
(1801-1807)". Hegel-Studien IV 
1967, 21-100. 
--· "Zur Chronologie von Hegels 
Jenaer Schriften". Hegel-Studien 
IV, 1967, 125-176. 
Kritisches Journal der Philosophie. 
Edited by F. W. J. Schelling and 
G. W. F. Hegel. 2 vols. Tiibingen: 
Cotta, 1802-1803. [Reprinted in 
toto in Hegel, Gesammelte Werke 
IV, 113-500.] 
Marx, Karl and Engels, Friedrich. 
Basic Writings on Politics and 
Philosophy. Edited by L. S. Feuer. 
Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday 
273 
Bibliography 
Anchor Books, 1959. 
Plutarch. Lives. The Dryden Plutarch 
revised by A. H. Clough. 4 vols. 
London: Dent (Everymans Li-
brary), 1910. 
Rosenkranz, Karl (1805-1879). Georg 
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegels Leben. 
Berlin, 1844. Reprinted Darmstadt: 
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell-
schaft, 1963. 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph 
(1775-1854). "Darstellung meines 
Systems der Philosophie" in 
Zeitschrift fur spekulative Physik 
II, Heft 2. Jena and Leipzig: 
Gabler, 1801. Reprinted in Werke 
IV, 105-212. 
---· "Einleitung" for the Entwurf 
eines Systems der Naturphiloso-
phie. Jena and Leipzig: Gabler, 
1799. Reprinted in Werke III, 269-
326. 
--· "Fernere Darstellungen aus dem 
System der Philosophie" in Neue 
Zeitschrift fur spekulative Physik 
I, Heft 1, 1802. Reprinted in 
Werke IV, 333-510. 
--· Ideen zu einer Philosophie der 
Natur. Leipzig: Breitkopf and 
Hartel, 1797. Second edition Land-
shut, 1803, Reprinted in Werke 
II, 1-343. 
__ , "Ueber das absolute Identitats-
System" in Kritisches Journal der 
Philosophie I, Heft 1. Tiibingen, 
1802. Reprinted in Hegel, Gesam-
melte Werke IV, 129-73. 
--· "Philosophie der Kunst" (1802-
3). Werke V, 357-736. 
--· Samtliche Werke. Edited by 
K.F.A. Schelling. 14 vols. Stuttgart 
and Augsburg: Cotta, 1856-61. 
[The pagination of this edition is 
preserved in the photoreprinted 
Ausgewahlte Werke, 8 vols., 
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche 
Buchgesellschaft, 1966-1968.] 
--· System des Transcendentalen 

274 
Bibliography 
Idealismus. Tiibingen: Cotta, 1800. 
Reprinted in Werke III, 329-634. 
--· System of Transcendental Ideal-
ism. Translated by Peter Heath 
with an Introduction by Michael 
Vater. Charlottesville: University 
of Virginia Press, 1978. [The 
pagination of the Werke III is 
indicated at the top of the page.] 
--·Von der Weltseele. Hamburg: 
Perthes, 1798. Reprinted in Werke 
II, 345-583. 
Schleiermacher, Friedrich Ernst Daniel 
(1768-1834). Ueber die Religion: 
Reden an die Gebildeten unter 
ihren Verachtern. Berlin, 1799. 
[Abridged translation; On Re-
ligion: Speeches to its Cultured 
Despisers, edited by John Oman, 
New York: Ungar, 1955.] 
Smith, Adam (1723-1790). An Inquiry 
into the Nature and Causes of 
the Wealth of Nations (1776). 
Basel, 1791. 
_ --· Untersuchung uber die Natur 
und die Ursachen des National-
reichtums. Aus dem Englischen 
der vierten Ausgabe neu iiber-
setzt von Chr. Garve. Frankfurt 
and Leipzig, 1796. [Apparently 
not used by Hegel.] 
Spinoza, Benedict de (1632-1677). 
Opera Omnia. Edited by H.E.G. 
Paulus. 2 vols. J ena: Akademische 
Buchhandlung, 1802-3. 
--·Chief Works. Translated by 
R.H.M. Elwes. 2 vols. New York: 
Dover, 1951. 
Tilliette, Xavier. Schelling: Une Phi-
losophie en Devenir. 2 vols. Paris: 
Vrin, 1970. 

Hegel: System of Ethical Life and 
First Philosophy of Spirit 
ABRAHAM: exclusiveness of, 56 
Absolute: construction of , 8; and 
Potenzen, 15-20, 24-25, 56, 90 n., 
151, 153; and nature, 44, 129; formal 
in individual, 151; consciousness, 
207-8 n., 209, 210, 212-13, 226, 241-
42, 251-53, 255; as supersensible, 
258. See also God; Idea; Identity; 
spirit 
abstraction: abstract totality and con-
crete unity, 121, 168-69; abstract 
unity and concrete totality, 142; 
ideal abstraction in thought, 121, 
124, 149, 227; real abstraction in 
practice, 117-18, 247; intelligence as 
principle of, 117, 120 
ACHILLES: shield of, 37; wrath of, 50, 
54 
ADAM: 203 n., 221-22 
AESCHYLUS: Oresteia, 94 
aether: spiritual, 151, 179, 181-82, 193, 
198, 202-3, 206, 212, 216, 217, 222, 
254; physical, 203 n., 216, 217; de-
fined, 205 n.; Volk-spirit as, 242 
AGAMEMNON: 60 
age, old: significance of, 7Q-71, 158-
60 
ALCIBIADES: 60 
ALEXANDER (of Macedon): paradig-
matic, 83, 263, 264 
animal: labor with, 28-29, 108-9; voice 
of, 35, 115-16, 217, 222; defined, 
108; level of life, 207, 208 n., 213; 
in man, 208 n., 225, 229 
antithesis (Gegensatz): body/spirit, 6, 
63, 114-16, 143, 159-60; necessity/ 
INDEX 
freedom, 8, 18, 122, 123, 185-86; 
subject/object, 9, 17, 29, 34, 104, 
114-15,147,220-21,223-26,229-
31, real/ideal, 11, 17-19, 20, 81, 107, 
112,113,119-20,123, 132,234; 
finite/infinite, 11, 18-19, 21, 162; 
concept/intuition, 12 (see concept); 
particular/universal, 13, 22, 29, 100, 
102, 109-10, 117, 127, 154, 164, 165, 
207; God/Nature, 18, 19, 83-84, 
181-86; nature/spirit, 19, 213, 243-
44; nature/ethical life, 19, 56, 159, 
244; difference/identity, 24-25, 61, 
104, 164, 176; possible/actual, 31-
33, 122; person/possession, 42, 126, 
155, 236-40, 249-50; joy/grief, 65-
66, 147; organic/inorganic, 68, 70, 
108-9, 156-58, 243-44; internal! 
external, 72, 101-2, 132, 211; ruler/ 
ruled, 79, lOin, 160, 174; one/many, 
101-102, 143; male/female, 110, 211, 
232; simple/infinite, 113-14, 213-14, 
225-28, 24Q-41; singular/universal, 
113,116,123, 144,194,207-8n; 
electricity as, 120; of persons, 126-
27, 236-40; positive/negative, 129, 
146; dialectical, 129-30; of clans, 
142; relative and absolute, 144-47, 
185-86; of peoples, 164; unity/ 
multiplicity, 208-10; form/matter, 
210-11; active/passive, 212-13, 229-
31,234, 243; theory/practice, 218-20; 
life/death, 228, 239-40; all/nothing, 
260 
ARISTIDES: 67 
APELLES: 61, 94 

276 
Index 
aristocracy: tribal, 55-56; critique of, 
79, 80, 176-77; sublated in free state, 
174-75 
ARISTOTLE: form/matter in, 28; 
Nicomachean Ethics, 67; theory of 
constitutions, 79; and Potenz theory, 
91; mentioned, 94; mind in, 194; 
and Alexander, 263-64 
art: as divine service, 9, 63-64, 82; in 
Schelling, 16, 18; flower of feeling, 
35, 116; in Absolute Triad, 82, 180; 
Christian, 84-85, 184, 252-53; epic 
and comedy, 252-53; genius and 
revolution, 254-56; modern drama, 
260; idyllic poetry, 261 
assassination: see murder 
Athena: identity of Athens, 60, 81; 
her wisdom, 72 
Athens: democracy at, 72, 80, 177; 
law of liturgies, 76, 171 n. 
See also Athena; THESEUS 
atomism: physical and spiritual, 84, 
177 
Aufhebung: of need in enjoyment, 
103-4; of object in labor, 105-7; of 
family-relation in Bildung, 111; of 
possession in property, 121; self-
sublation of labor, 117; negation of 
negation, 130-31, 135; of relation in 
freedom, 142-43; of difference in 
identity, 156; of identity in differ-
ence, 176; of singularity in Volk, 
209, 210 n., 212-13, 243, 250; of 
externality in tool, 211; of opposition 
in consciousness, 212, 213, 224-25; 
of image in name, 221; of name in 
concept, 226; of desire in labor, 230; 
of desire in love, 231-32; of parents 
in child, 232-33; of nature in 
culture, 233-34; of nature in spirit, 
243-44; of private in absolute con-
sciousness, 252 
AVINERI, Shlomo: 95, 99, 204n 
baby: see child 
barbarism: of North and East, 48-49, 
133-34; and civilization, 54, 55; of 
intellect, 75, 76-77, 171; and bond-
age, 93 n, 136; despotic, 162, 177; 
speech of, 196, 245 
BARDILI, C.G. 9 
battle: life and death struggle, 46, 
47, 5Q-54, 56 ,132-33, 136; single 
combat, 51-52, 53; and transition to 
Sittlichkeit, 57, 67; ordeal by, 77-78, 
141-142, 147; sublates guilt, 132-33, 
138-39, 14Q-41; for honor, 137-39, 
140-41; of obedience, 179; against 
fate, 180. See also war 
Be griff: see concept 
Bildung: sublation of labor, 28-29, 
109-11; human fulfilment, 29-31; 
foundation of ethical life, 58-61, 67, 
147; as historic tradition, 65; and 
discipline, 78, 176; of world for 
speech, 245; philosophical, 263-64. 
See also discipline; education 
BOEHME, Jakob: mysticism of, 257 
bondage (Knechtschaft): as natural 
status, 4Q-42, 125-26, 197; instituted 
by violence, 46, 50, 53-54, 136, 240; 
transitional, 56, 198; as contractual 
status, 69, 155-56; serfdom, 93n, 
156; ethical, 146; economic, 154, 
17Q-171; of spirit in nature, 195-96, 
213,215n,216 
"boredom of the world": 84, 181 
bourgeoisie: virtue of, 69, 76, 150, 
153-54, 155, 171; judicial function, 
77, 174; governing function, 80. See 
also class 
BRIAREUS: Volk as, 66,146 
BRISEIS: 50 
BULlS: 60 
burial: significance of, 46-47 
BUTLER, Joseph: commonsense 
identity, 193 
CADMUS: 203n 
cancel(lation): see Aufhebung 
CAPULETS: 51 
Catholicism: universal consecration, 
84, 183-185; life and art in, 251-
253 
causality: in Kant, 12, 14, 9ln; in 
labor, 107; right as, 120, 136; mas-

tery as, 125, 126; of freedom, 130 
child: paradigm of 'feeling', 23, 112; 
and parents, 29-30, 42, 43-44, no-
ll, 127, 128-29, 233-35; identity of 
natural life, 31-32, 42, 57, 59, 112, 
232n; rationality of family, 32-33, 
43-44, 113, 128-29, 233-35; as per-
son, 40, 42; rearing as goal, 78 
Christianity: and Greek religion, 83-
85; evolution of, 182-86, 251-53, 
264-65. See also grief (infinite) 
civil society: in natural ethics, 56, 69; 
corporations in, 200 
class(es) (Stiinde): H's theory of, 11-
12, 67-71, 75, 76, 79-80, 150-58, 
199-200; political Estates, 71, 95; 
absolute, 70-71, 152-53, 157-59, 
162; governing, 76, 80; universal, 
171; struggle of, 198 
cognition (erkennen): joins real and 
ideal series, 18, 91; negative, 129-
31; of economy, 167-68; of spirit, 
213, 214; practical, 240; aether of, 
254 (see a ether); of God, 265 
COLLINGWOOD, R.G.: theory of 
consciousness, 203n 
colonization: theory of, 72, 73, 74, 78-
79, 167; means of recognition, 164, 
176 
color: Potenzen of, 45, 13Q-131, 192, 
223, 225-227 
combat, single: see battle 
commerce: as motion of concept, 39, 
124; objective recognition in, 58-59; 
market as power, 74-75, 167-68; 
taxation of, 76, 173; class of, 154, 
170 
communication: rational, 29, 30; 
spoken and written, 34-35; 
animal, 35 
concept (Begriff): and intuition, H's 
use, 10, 12, 14-15, 73-74, 81-82, 
90n, 10o-1, 108 etc.; nature as, 2Q-
21; movement of, 21-22, 91n, 102; 
as truly particular, 22, 100, 194, 
206-29; dominance of, 26, 36-37; 
rest and motion of 27, 38, 39, 70, 
102, 156; in nature, 28-29; formal 
277 
Index 
and actual, 32-33, 34-35, 91-92, 102-
3, 116-29; as real negative, 47, 48, 
49, 56, 58, 132, 134; as intelligence, 
59, 109-116, 117, 120, 142-143, 189-
190. See also universal 
conscience: inward vengeance, 47-48, 
132-33; sublated in honor, 141 
consciousness (Bewusstsein): political 
and religious, 70-71, 84-85; theory 
of, 92; empirical and absolute, 143, 
144-46, 212, 252-53; absolute, 179, 
195, 203 n., 207 n., 208-10, 212-13, 
255; as concept of spirit, 190, 
206-26; evolution of, 191, 193, 233-
34; communal medium, 192-95, 
203n., in bonds and free, 195-98; 
formal existence in speech, 218-28; 
instinctive and critical, 256; philoso-
phical, 260 
consecration: see sacred 
Constitution: ambiguity of heading, 
11, 62; object of intuition, 59-61; 
as resting concept, 70, 146-57; 
forms of, 79, 176-77; evolution of, 
174-75 
construction: philosophical method, 8, 
9, 205n; constructed line, 20, 56-57, 
73, 9ln; prophetic use, 86-87; spirit 
as reconstruction, 103, 159, 245 
contempt: for nature, 182, 197, 261 
contract: formal reality of spirit, 38-
39, 58, 122-24; sublated in firmly, 
42-43, 127-28; bourgeois principle, 
69, 155-56; slavery and marriage 
not, 43, 128; not political principle, 
242 
contraction: and expansion, 189-191, 
259 
courage: absolute virtue, 66-67, 69, 
147-48, 178; of peasants, 150; of 
nobility, 152, 153; formal virtue, 
179; and havoc, 198; philosophic, 
179,263 
craftsman(ship): self-expression in 
labor, 33-34, 37, 196, 199; recogni-
tion of, 92, 113; labor subsumed 
under intuition, 107-8; rationality 
of, 246,255 

278 
Index 
crime: as negative, 45; justice for, 77, 
132, 175; negative of formal right, 
118-19,135 
Critical Journal: 3, 5, 88, 94 
Crucifixion, the: 80, 84, 177; sig-
nificance of Cross, 182-84 
DANTE: 252n 
DAVID (King of Israel) : 35 
death: natural, 35, 44, 116; violent, 
45-46, 47-49; in natural justice, 50, 
52-53; noble, 66, 67, 149, 178, 197; 
of God, 83-85 (see grief, infinite); 
negative absolute, 48-49, 56, 58, 
179, 201; accepted, 197, 233-34; 
voluntary, 228; for honor, 236-38n, 
239-40; of Nature, 261 
democracy: direct, 72, 80, 177; 
representative, 72, 79-80, 163, 177 
DESCARTES: 194 
desire: Potenz of feeling, 19, 23-25, 
189; and need, 23, 30-33; sexual, 
29, 110 (see sex); defines its object, 
104-6; human, defined, 229-30 
DEUCALION: 203 n 
dialectic(al): negation of negation, 129-
30; illusions, 195 
Difference Essay: 7, 8, 88 n; resump-
tion of whole in, 9, 63-64,82, 204 n; 
"system" in, 89, 90, 202 n; critique 
of Fichte, 86, 96, 263 n; Idea in, 93, 
95; single intelligence in, 189-90 
discipline (Zucht): system of, 78, 
166-67, 176; inversion of natural 
practice, 145 
"Divine Triangle": 265 n. 
domestication: of animals, 28, 108-9 
domination: see lordship 
drive: in natural ethics, 21-22, 31-33, 
102-3; "instinctive" labor, 246 
DOSING, Karl: editing, 206n, 210n, 
212n,215-216n,221n,245n 
duty: in reflective theory, 65, 66; de-
termined by "station", 66; in war, 
149. See Sittlichkeit 
Earth: animate, 19, 27; life-process, 
189, 190, 203n. See also elements 
economy: in natural ethics, 11; gov-
ernmental control of, 72, 74-76, 
164, 167-73; as system, 74-76, 154, 
156, 167-73, 199-200, 247-49. See 
also commerce; need 
education (Erziehung): conceptual 
labor, 29, 111, and Bildung, 56; 
governmental concern, 72-74, 78, 
167; and discipline, 78, 176; and 
war, 147; conscious relation, 196-
97, 204n; process defined, 233-34, 
245. See also Bildung; discipline 
Eigensinn: of individual, 227-28; free-
dom of, 242 
elders: see priesthood 
electricity: in Schelling, 18, 259; 
analogous with exchange, 38, 92, 
120 
elements: as divine, 177; H's theory, 
203 n.; earth as divisible and 
atomic, 206, 208 n., 227; as media 
of consciousness, 215-16, 217, 218 n, 
222. See also aether; Earth 
Empire: Roman, 48, 71, 84, 181; 
German, 71-72, 80, 86; emperor, 
Roman and Christian, 84, 184 
Encyclopaedia: 4, 88 n 
ENGELS, Friedrich: German Ideology, 
259 n 
enjoyment: physical, 25-26, 104-5, 
109; none in labor, 26, 106; 
spiritual, 28, 31, 58, 106-7, 109, 143; 
endless dialectic of, 169-70; 
Heavenly, 253. See also satisfaction 
EPICURUS: religion of, 80, 83-84, 177 
equality: civil status, 77; formal con-
cept, 117, 121, 125, 133; of peril, 
138, 140-42 
equity: see justice 
ESCHENMAYER, K.A.: 15,90 
essence (Wesen): inward, 21, 22, 25, 
44, 59, 78, 93, 101-3, 107, 126, 132; 
floating above, 21, 22, 25, 49, 55, 59, 
78, 93, 101-3, 116-17; as light, 102; 
consciousness as, 224; ethical sub-
stance as, 242 
Estates: see class(es) 
ETEOCLES: so, 54 
ethics: see Sittlichkeit N 
EURIPIDES: 60 

exchange: as motion of concept, 38-39, 
120-22; alienation of property, 119-
20; contract and barter, 154-55. See 
also commerce 
executive: actual government always, 
72, 73-74, 165 
Faith and Knowledge: 94, 96, 202 n, 
252 n, 264 n; intuition of Volk in, 
60; infinite grief in, 65, 85; critique 
of Fichte in, 86, 263 n; critical logic 
in, 88 n 
family: totality of natural ethics, 11, 
21, 29, 51, 110-11,235-36, 244; 
and society, 36; recognition in, 42-
43, 57, 142; sublates relations, 42-44, 
126-29; as personal identity, 52-53, 
139-40; royal, 58; bourgeois con-
cern, 69, 155-56; as natural con-
sciousness, 195-97, 211, 216; union 
of love, 231-35 
fate: Frankfurt concept maintained, 
82-83, 180 
feeling: first Potenz of nature, 22-25, 
35; unconscious, 23,24-25, 34; 
formal and real concept, 24, 104; 
totality of, 30, 110, 112; natural 
and ethical, 103-5; expression of, 
114, 115; as inward essence, 166, 
169; and science, 257 
FICHTE, Johann Gottlieb: 9; his 
problem, 8; Ego in, 59, 262; 
criticism of, 65, 66, 77, 86, 95, 200; 
ephorate in, 71, 162; H's course on, 
88; Science of Knowledge, 89 n, 
91 n, 262; moral world order, 203 n 
finite: see infinite; antithesis 
firearms: ethical significance of, 66, 149 
First Philosophy of Spirit: struggle in, 
56; economics in, 75, 95; compared 
with System of Ethical Life, 89 n. 
190-92; conclusion of, 178-79 n, 
200; value of, 201-202; editing 
problems, 206-24 nn, 226-239 nn, 
241-246 nn, 248-250 nn, lacuna in, 
235 
fixation: of negative, 46, 52, 53, 55, 
106, 129-31; conceptual, 114-15, 
279 
Index 
223-26, 257-59; of legal status, 116, 
118, 150; as untruth, 147; of con-
sciousness, 227-28 
form: abstract, 24, 32, 36, 38-40, 74, 
116-29; speech as, 34, 115, 218-28, 
245; legal, 77; of spirit, 39, 40; 
concrete, 40, 43, 129, 150-51; of 
virtue, 67, 68, 148; of indifference, 
133-34, 137-38, 140-41, 151, 174; 
practical inversion of, 130-31; in 
government, 161-62, 164-67, 176; 
consciousness as, 206-228. See also 
the note on p. 267 
formalism: attack on, 258-59 
free(dom): and necessity, 8, 18 (see 
antithesis); personal, 40, 124-25; as 
formal negative, 45, 130, 131; ethi-
cal, 46, 67, 240-41; constitution, 
79, 174, 176-77; and reconcilation, 
83; Idea of, 85; as causal, 130; 
religious, 179-80; of Eigensinn, 
227-28, 242; illusory, 256 
future: as "beyond", 252-53 
GABLER, G.A.: 88 n, 264 n 
GARVE, Christian: 95, 248 n 
GENGHIZ KHAN: 133 
gesture: 34, 114 
German Constitution: 3, 72, 80, 93, 95; 
hopefulness of, 87; dating, 87n 
Gnosticism: criticism of, 262 
God: and Universe, 16, 18, 19; 
Judgment of, 47, 48, 53, 54, 57, 77, 
140, 265; of Volk, 60, 144, 179-80; 
death of, 65-66, 80, 83-85, 146, 
181-83; history of, 81, 179-80, 183-
84, 191, 251 n, 265; Greek gods, 83, 
252; incarnation of, 147, 151, 163, 
177, 182-83, 189; service of, 158-
59, 252; Resurrection of, 183, 190; 
as world mind, 194-95, 203 n; and 
aether, 205 n, as mystery, 264; in-
tuited in Creation, 265 
GOEBHARDT, J.A.: H's publisher, 89n 
GOETHE, J.W. von: quoted, 102 n, 
Faust, 261 
Good Friday: speculative and histori-
cal, 65, 85 

280 
Index 
government: motion of Idea, 11, 62; 
function of nobility, 68-71, 153; 
separation of powers in, 70, 164-
67; defined, 70, 156-57; the abso-
lute, 70-72, 157-63, 174; the 
universal, 72-79, 163-67; self-
government, 77, 79-80, 174; free, 
79, 176-77 
"Greek ideal": recalled, 60-61; 
adaptation of, 75-76; influence of, 
85-86. See also Athens; THESEUS 
grief: infinite, 65 (see God, death of); 
finite, sublated in courage, 66, 147; 
for death of Nature, 261 
guilt: dialectic of, 47-48, 132-33 
HAERING, T.L.: Hegel, 99,102 n 
hallucination: purely theoretical con-
sciousness, 219 
HARRIS, H.S.: Toward the Sunlight, 
89, 92,95, 96 
havoc: natural and human, 35-36, 
116; dialectic of, 48-49, 50-51, 52, 
133-34; no recognition in, 49, 134; 
negative of ethical life, 55, 136; 
educational potential of, 198 
HA YM, Rudolf: on H's lectures, 83, 
178 n, 182, 185, 186; on H's mss., 
87 n, 89 n 
Hegel-Studien: 87-89nn 
HELEN (of Troy): 54 
hero: tragic, 59, 60-61; religious, 252; 
historic, fall of, 263. See also 
THESEUS 
HJ:RODOTUS: 94 
HOFFMEISTER, Johannes: edition, 
206 n, 213 n, 214 n, 215-216 n, 
244 n, 245 n 
holy: see sacred 
HOMER: 58; God in, 80, 83, 177; 
honors craftsmanship, 113 
honesty: see justice 
honor: principle of natural justice, 
49-50, 52-54, 137-39, 197-98; per-
sonal and national, 69, 149, 155; 
sublates guilt, 140-41; sublated by 
justice, 155; identity of person and 
things, 236-40; disappearance of, 
250 
hope: principle of, 87 
HUME, David: missing shade of blue, 
192 
hypocrisy: inner and outer, 67, 69, 75, 
148-49; overcome in religion, 82 
Idea (Idee): science of, 6, 8-9, 81, 
90 n., 189-190; of Sittlichkeit, 10, 
58, 61, 99-101, 144-145, 159; in 
Kant, 14; rest and motion of, 61-
62, 145; triad of, 82; of freedom, 
85; as government, 160-61, 162, 
163; of reconciliation, 180; totality, 
243; theosophical, 264-65. See also 
Absolute; Identity 
idealism: critical, 8; dogmatic, 192, 
193-94; reflective, 224-26. See also 
philosophy 
ideality: beginning of, 38, 120; 
theoretical and practical, 45, 130-
31; of enjoyment, 106-7, 169-70; 
abstract, 116-17, 119-23; conscious-
ness as, 210-11, 213-17; of sensa-
tion, 218-19; of intuition, 221-23. 
See also the note on p. 267 
Identity: Absolute, 8, 31, 82, 111; of 
intuition and concept, 10, 61, 99-
101; and Potenzen, 15-17, 19-20; 
and difference, 24-25 (see anti-
thesis), of need and enjoyment, 
30-31; of family personality, 32, 
126-29; of self and other, 57-58; 
of joy and grief, 66; reconstruction 
of, 74, 83-85, 99-100; of man and 
God, 84, 182-83; of ruler and ruled, 
101 n., 174; formal (contract), 123; 
of Volk, 143, 145 
Identity Philosophy: of H and Shel-
ling, 7-8,12, 14-17, 89, 90-91, 93; 
'Universe' in, 16, 189-90; and 
Spinoza, 21; as self-formation of 
Reason, 32; and Greek ideal, 60-
61; eternal focus, 63-65, 75, 86, 143; 
finite mind in, 189-90, 191, 193; 
survival of terminology, 201 
indifference: point of, 8, 16-17, 18, 93, 
193; child as, 25, 31-32, 112; Wut 

as, 56, 134; Volk as, 61, 144-46; 
family as, 127-29; form of, 133-34, 
(see form); virtue as, 147; old age 
as, 158-60 
individual: as labor unit, 37, 117, 247-
48; defined by recognition, 118; 
organ of Volk, 146, 209; shape of 
infinite, 151; consciousness, 225-
28. See also person; singularity in-
jury: unavoidable, 235-36, 237 n., 
238. See also crime; murder; theft 
infinity: formal, 11, 36, 38, 116, 119-
21, 174; and finite, 18 (see anti-
thesis); grief, 65 (see God, death 
of); concrete, 143, 144, 146, 151; of 
consciousness, 144, 146, 206-17; as 
becoming, 205-06; divisibility, 206; 
of space and time, 219-20 
intelligence: see concept; Reason; 
thought 
intuition: H's use, 10, 12, 13-15, 10Q-
1; of individual agent, 20, 21, 29-
36, 102; as truly universal, 22, 100, 
143; as feeling, 22-25; animal as, 
28-29; of life as task, 37, 117; of 
Volk, 58-61, 62-63, 144-45, 243; 
intellectual. 59, 143, 147; of self in 
other, 110, 111 
JACOBI, F.H.: Letters on Spinoza, 94 
JESUS: significance of, 84, 182 
JOB: 200 
Judaism: infinite grief in, 84, 181-82 
judiciary: moment of concept, 72, 73; 
ideal subsuming power, 165, 166-67 
justice: natural, 47, 49-50, 52, 55, 
132; of God, 47 (see God, judgment 
of); definition, 67, 68, 149-50; 
system of, 72, 74, 76-78, 173-75; 
bourgeois, 67, 69, 75, 152; as equity, 
77, 149, 175; of revenge, 80; of 
battle, 138; living, 174 
KANT, Immanuel: influence of, 8, 12, 
258-59; Critique of Judgment, 13-
15, 90 n.; intuitive understanding in, 
13-14, 91; Categorical Imperative, 
59, 65, 66; Critiques, 88 n., on mar-
281 
Index 
riage, 128; separation of powers in, 
165; and Greeks compared, 194-
95 
KIMMERLE, Heinz: date of H's mss., 
87 n, 93n; editing, 206 n., 210 n., 
212 n., 215-216 n. 221 n., 245 n. 
KNOX, T.M.: translations, 89, 92-96 
labor (Arbeit): Potenz of natural 
ethics, 11, 19, 211, 216, 217, 218; 
negation of thing and feeling, 23, 
106-7, 112-13, 23Q-31; levels of, 
25-29, 107-10, 245-49; middle of 
feeling, 3Q-32; mechanical, 27, 33, 
34, 37, 75-76, 107-8, 117, 148-49, 
171, 199-200, 247; living, 27-31, 
150, 156; rational, 33-34, 109-11; 
division of, 37, 117-18, 154, 199-
200, 246-49; of nobility, 68-69, 
152-53; conquers need, 104; death 
as absolute, 179; free and slave, 
196 
language: see speech 
LASSON, George: editing of Ethical 
Life, 90 n, 92 n, 177 n; quoted, 
100 n 
law: above level of feeling, 26, 107; 
substance of ethical life, 59-60; 
civil and criminal, 77-78, 174-75; 
Roman, 84; indifference of virtue, 
147; as middle, 158. See also right 
Lectures on World His tory: 95 
LEIBNIZ, G.W.: influence of, 91 n. 
legislative: in absolute government, 71, 
161-62; in reflective theory, 72, 73; 
bicameral, 80; universal power, 165 
lex talionis: 47,50 
life: H's concept of, 19; levels of, 27-
29, 107-10, 207, 208 n.; compre-
hension of feeling, 31-32; essence 
and right of person, 40, 124-25; 
violence against, 46, 52, 131; in 
the Volk, 66, 147, 152; harmony of, 
82-83, 102 n, 146-47; as identity, 
143, 243; transition to spirit, 189, 
190; mediated by philosophy, 256-
58 
LOCKE, John: 9, 194 

282 
Index 
logic: H's courses on, 4, 5, 8-9, 205 n. 
262; place in system, 6, 63, 81, 205; 
speculative and critical, 8, 9, 88 n. 
Logic, Metaphysics, and Philosophy of 
Nature (1804/5): aether in, 203 n. 
lordship (H errschaft): natural, 40-41, 
125; ethical, 41, 126; in family, 42, 
127; ideal and real, 211, 217, 221-
22. See also bondage 
love: natural and spiritual, 29, 57-58, 
92-93, 110, 231-32; Divine, 251-52 
machine: significance of, 37, 117-18, 
246-47; society as, 86 
Macht: of life, 40-42, 125-26, 129 
magnetism: in Schelling, 18, 259; an-
alogous with labor, 38, 120 
mania (Wut): 49, 53, 56, 134 
marriage: union not contract, 43, 127-
28, 232-33 
MARX, Karl: anticipated, 75, 95, 199-
200, 204 n; German Ideology, 259 n 
MARY (Virgin): 96, 184, 252 
memory: Potenz of consciousness, 211, 
216, 217; beginning of speech, 218, 
221, 222, 244 
metaphysics: in Jena system, 4, 5, 8-9, 
88 n., 262, 264-65 
MICHELET, K.L.: on aether, 203 n. 
middle: tool as, 33, 112-13; money 
as, 38, 124; battle as, 52-53, 54, 56, 
57, 140-42; natural and ethical, 57; 
Jesus as, 84; child as, 111-12; 
speech as, 113-14, 218-28; sign as, 
114-15, 220-21; contract as, 123; 
law as, 158; nature as, 159, 265; 
government as, 173; consciousness 
as, 214-16, 223-26; labor as, 230-
31; Werk as, 243; philosophy as, 
257 
mien: 34, 35, 114; ideality of child, 
115 
Mnemosyne: 221, 254, 255 
monarchy: despotic, 71, 162; free, 79, 
80, 176-77, 179 
money: medium of commerce, 38, 39, 
154; real universal, 39, 124, 249 
MONT AGUES: 51 
morality: see virtue 
murder: paradigm of negation, 45-46, 
51, 139; and assassination, 50, 51, 
138; and death penalty, 131, 140 
Muse: of Volk, 254-56 
mysticism: Oriental and German, 257 
myth: stand point of, 195, 254-55 
names: error of nominalism, 193; ideal 
realm of, 221-27. See also sign 
NAPOLEON: Code, 198, 199 
nation: honor of, 69,149, 155; law 
of nations, 77; basis of reconstruc-
tion, 86; religion of, 184, 185. See 
also Volk 
natural law (Naturrecht): H's lectures, 
4-7, 87-89 nn., 189; and morality, 
146-47 
Natural Law: 3, 88 n. 202 n., 252 n. 
nature: philosophy of, 6-9, 81, 189-
90, 202 n., 256, 259, 261, 263; in 
Schelling, 17-19, 90 n.; and ethical 
life, 19; ethics of, 20 (see Sittlich-
keit); as concept, 21, 22, 44, 101, 
129; organic and inorganic, 28, 243-
44; and convention, 32-33; tool of 
Reason, 32-33, 159; state of, 44; 
religion of, 83-85; levels of, 108-9, 
151, 261; and spirit, 213-15, 217, 
227, 244, 245; definition, 244, 262 
necessity (N otwendigkeit): Schelling 
on, 18; temporal web of, 185-86, 256 
need (Bediirfnis): and satisfaction, 23-
25; as life potential, 30-33; met by 
family, 42, 127; and Not, 46; system 
of, 73, 74-76, 77, 154, 156, 167-73; 
socially generated, 75, 168, 170; of 
philosophy, 94 n (see philosophy); 
defined, 104-'-5; universalization of, 
117-18, 120-21, 247-48; and natural 
bondage, 126; sublated in Yolk-con-
sciousness, 144; of nobility, 152-53; 
as government concern, 164; of 
public life, 171 
negative: labor as, 23 (see labor); 
natural, 35-36, 44, 129; Potenz of, 
44-54, 55; ethical discipline as, 44-
46, 146, 147, 151; crime as, 45, 

118-19; fixation of, 46 (see fix-
ation); havoc as, 47-49; mechanical, 
119; dialectical, 129-130; punish-
ment as, 130; thought as, 13Q-31, 
179, 223, 227; consciousness as, 
213-15, 227-28; spirit as, 243-50 
nobility: theory of, 12, 19; function of, 
68, 152-53; and peasants, 70, 77, 
94 n., 156, 174; membership, 71; 
needs of, 74, 76, 153, 158, 172; 
criticism of, 79, 176-77; as absolute 
class, 152, 158; and monarch, 179 
nominalism: see names 
Not: extreme of need, 35, 41, 46, 47, 
92, 116; ethical function, 44; war 
as, 148; equity allows for, 149 
obedience: not bondage, 41, 126; in 
natural ethics, 41, 42, 58, 126; 
disobedient, 95 n. 179; spiritual, 
263 
object(ivity): of thought, 9; of 
purpose, 25-26, 146; subject-ob-
jectivity, 100 n. 144; living, 108; 
bodily, 114-15; and equity, 149. 
See also antithesis, body/spirit and 
subject/ object 
OEDIPUS: 60 
oppression: defined, 138 
organism: constitutive ideal, 7, 14, 86, 
169; society as, 17, 146, 15Q-52, 
160-62, 176, 243-44; in Schelling, 
18, 19,91 n.; nature as, 19; classes 
as, 68, 70, 152, 174; family as, 
139-140; government as, 156-61, 
164-67; spirit as, 209-11, 213, 214, 
243-44 
particular: see antithesis 
Passion: see God, death of 
past: as "beyond", 252-53 
peace: significance of, 54, 56, 66-67, 
142, 153 
peasantry: theory of, 12, 19; distrust-
fully trustful, 67, 69, 156; without 
wisdom, 69, 94, 162; brave, 69-70, 
156; taxation of, 76, 172-73; judicial 
process for, 77, 174 
PERICLES: 60 
283 
Index 
person(ality): abstract concept, 36-
37, 39-40, 124; Knecht as, 41-42, 
125, 126; honor of, 49-50, 52-53, 
55, 137-39; family as, 52-53, 127, 
139-40; legal status, 77, 174; and 
property, identity of, 135-39, 236-
40; burgher as, 154, 250 
PETRY, M.J.: on Stoff, 251 
Phenomenology of Spirit: as textbook, 
4, 89 n; religion in, 10; struggle 
in, 56, 58, 196, 198, 204 n; 
Schelling on, 90 n; Antigone in, 
93 n; noble service in, 94 n. 95 n. 
Terror in, 95 n; Enlightenment in, 
95 n; and Jena mss., 201-2; con-
sciousness in, 202 n, 203 n 
PHIDIAS: 61 
philosophiae universae delineatio 
(1803): first "Encyclopaedia", 5-6, 
189, 190; conclusion of, 178-79 n, 
200-1, 202 n. possible fragment of, 
251 
philosophy: theoretical and practical, 
5, 6, 8, 190; of nature, 6 (see 
nature); of Identity, 7-8 (see 
Identity Philosophy); critical, 8, 9, 
65, 66; as speculation, 8, 9, 63-64, 
81-82,84-87,143,178,179, 198; 
need of, 63-65, 94, 198, 204 n. 263-
64; Christian, 81-85,179-86, 189; 
and art, 82; and revolution, 85-87, 
185-86, 256-57; complement of war, 
179; language of, 256-59; democrat-
ic, 260 
Philosophy of Nature: aether in, 
203 n. 205 n 
Philosophy of Nature and Spirit 
(1805/6): 264; tyranny in, 198; 
classes in, 199 
Philosophy of Right: 86-87, 88 n, 
100 n 
plant: labor on, 27-29, 108; defined, 
108, 208 n, 215 n; uses of, 109 
PLATO: 67; on speech and writing, 
35; Republic paradigmatic, 62, 68, 
70, 79-80, 85, 199; the Cave, 64; 
influence of Laws, 70; peasantry in, 

284 
Index 
94 n; logical collection in, 199; 
Timaeus on prophecy, 260 
PLUTARCH: Aristides, 94 
polis: foundation of Sittlichkeit, 55; 
and nation, 85-86 
POL YNICES: 50, 54 
possession(s): analysed, 25-27, 106-7; 
realized in property, 38, 119-20, 245-
47, 249-50; Knecht as, 42; ideal 
tie, 49, 135; of family, 235-40, 244; 
contradiction in, 238, 249 
Potenz(en): H's use of, 12, 15, 92 n.; 
Schelling's use, 15-20, 24-25, 9Q-
91 n, 103 n; of practice, 23, 28, 103-
5, 210-211; natural ethics as, 31; 
finite/infinite, 36, 116; freedom as, 
46, 129-42; family and polis, 56; 
organization of, 57; in absolute 
ethical life, 61-62; social classes as, 
68, 151-52; separation of powers 
through,73, 157,161,162, 165-67; 
of religion, 83-84, 18Q-81; relative 
totality, 142, 265; of theory, 192, 
21Q-11 
presence: absolute, 251-52 
price: empirical value, 38, 121; 
fluctuation of, 74, 167-169 
priesthood: absolute estate, 56; mem-
bership, 7Q-71, 79-80, 158-60 
privacy: recognition of, 60, 69, 154, 
249-50 
property: conceptual place of, 11, 37, 
118, 118; more than possession, 26, 
249-50; realized in exchange, 121; 
of family, 42, 127, 216, 217; crime 
against, 135-36; basic to justice-
system, 154-55 
prophecy: H as prophet, 86-87; H on 
prophecy, 260 
Protestantism: principle of, 81, 84-85, 
94, 96, 184-85; national emphasis, 
184 
Prussia: machine-state, 86 
punishment: retributive, 48, 50, 52, 
130, 131, 132-33; and damages, 77-
78, 175 
PYRRHA: 203 n 
realism: and idealism, 192, 224-26 
reality: body and spirit, 6, 61, 159-60, 
181, 185, 189; finite, 11, 36, 101 n; 
infinite as totality, 16-17, 61, 101, 
15Q-51, 189; real series, 17-19,24, 
91 n, 120; real pole, 19-20; sub-
sists in formal treatment, 24, 102 n, 
104, 116, 117, 123, 130. See also 
nature; Sittlichkeit; middle; and the 
note on p. 267 
Reason (Vernunft): theoretical and 
practical, 8-9, 190; Potenz in Schel-
ling, 17-18; as human essence, 25, 
31, 40; self-enjoyment of, 29-31; 
man as tool of, 29, 32-33; as slave 
of passions, 48; as invisible hand, 
69, 154; self-actualizing, 87, 101 n. 
191; realized in middles, 112-13 (see 
middle); as single intelligence, 117, 
121-26, 129; consciousness as form 
of, 211; Werk of Volk, 244-45; 
revolutionary demand, 256 
reciprocity: Kantian category, 12, 
91 n.; and reconciliation, 46, 82-83; 
ethical, 46-47, 52, 132-33, 136-37, 
139-40 
recognition: "dumb", 35, 115; in 
speech, 35-36, 111; basis of person-
ality, 39-40, 118, 124; differenti-
ated in family, 42-43, 125-29, 231-
35; implicit in theft, 49, 52, 135-37; 
basis of Sittlichkeit, 57-58; creates 
formal universal, 74, 176, 246-249; 
basic to civil justice, 77, 173, 175, 
249-50; battle for, 137-38, 139-41, 
195, 196-98, 236-42 
reconciliation: religious, 46, 66, 82-
85, 93 n., 131, 147, 180, 182; em-
pirical, 184-85 
reflection: Kantian, 14; Schelling's 
use, 17; philosophy of, 65-66; matter 
as introreflection, 227; conscious-
ness as introreflective, 229, 233, 240 
REINHOLD, Karl Leonhard: 9 
relation (Verhiiltnis): H's use, 1o-12, 
22; ethical category, 12, 19, 61; sex 
as, 29 (see sex); parent-child, 29 
(see child); relative identity, 29-30, 
39; lordship and bondage, 4Q-42, 
46,125-26,136,155-56;husband 

and wife, 43; and indifference, 61; 
State and Church, 81; reciproci-
ty, 46-47 (see recipro-
city); absolute (intuition/concept), 
lOQ-1, 252-253; of classes, 152-
163; of soul and body, 159-60 
religion: absolute experience, 6, 9, 
63-65, 81-85, 179; intuition of 
Volk as, 60, 71-72, 81; of infinite 
grief, 65-66 (see God, death of); 
arm of government, 71-72, 158-60, 
163, 177; natural, 80, 81, 177, 181; 
tradition in, 82, 180; Potenzen of, 
83-84, 180-81; rebirth of, 84-85, 
185; reconciliation in, 82 (see re-
conciliation); philosophical, 181, 
185,256 
resumption: of whole, religion as, 6, 
81, 84-85, 179, 201; as absolute re-
lation, 101-2; of totality in speech, 
116 
revenge: see vengeance 
revolution: French, 86; and art, 255; 
philosophy and, 263-264 
right (Recht): of property, 38-42, 49-
50, 77, 173-74; personal, 39-40, 41, 
77, 135-36; to life, 40, 46, 50; and 
wrong, 58; and justice, 67, 149; 
origin in surplus labor, 120; un-
known to peasantry, 150 
romanticism: criticized, 260-261 
ROSENKRANZ, Karl: on H's lectures, 
3, 81, 83, 85, 202-4; on System of 
Ethical Life, 3, 10; and H's mss., 
87-90, 95-96; reports translated, 
178-86, 254-66; "conclusion" frag-
ment, 20o-1, 202 n, 203 n 
Sabbath: of the world, 185 
sacred(ness): constitution as, 60, 71, 
72, 143, 163; consecration of nature, 
83, 84, 182, 183-85, 261; marriage 
as, 143, 232; of age, 158-60 
sacrifice: significance in religion, 82; 
of God, 84; of personal interest, 
147, 158, 179; Idea of religion, 180 
satisfaction: goal of feeling, 23-25, 
3Q-31, 103; and enjoyment, 31; 
in law, 77, 175 
285 
Index 
SCHELLING, F.W.J.: and H, 4, 7, 87 n, 
88 n, 89 n., 90 n., 94, 202 n; Ex-
position of My System, 15, 91; 
Potenz theory, 15-20, 9Q-91; "On 
the Absolute Identity-System", 15; 
Philosophy of Art, quoted, 16-17; 
Further Expositions, 17; real series 
in, 24; dynamic series, 18, 92, 120; 
Ideas for a Philosophy of Nature, 
90 n, 91 n; On the World Soul, 
90 n; "Introduction to Nature 
Philosophy", 90 n; criticized, 256-
62; school of, 259-60; Transcenden-
tal Idealism, 262 
SCHLEIERMACHER, F.D.E.: Ad-
dresses, 81, 94, 179; critique, 202 
sensation: content of thought, 45, 13D-
31; intuition of speech, 218-19; 
evolution of, 223, 225-26 
sex: natural and ethical relation, 29, 
32, 43, 110, 127-29, 211, 231-32; 
identity of family, 32, 42-43, 57; 
ground of authority, 42-43, 91 n, 
93-94 n, 127 
SHAKESPEARE: Macbeth, 47, 93; 
Romeo and Juliet, 51 
shape (Gestalt): of Idea as Volk, 142-
43, 185; of classes, 151, 153; of 
government, 160, 163; of God, 163, 
181, 252; of world spirit, 186, 
264-65; shaping of consciousness, 
209, 211; created by art, 254-55 
sign: corporeal, 34-35, 92, 114-15; 
ideality of tool, 115; formal middle, 
220; and same, 222. See also speech 
sin: consciousness of, 84, 180 
singularity: H's use, 10; principle of 
natural ethics, 44-45, 54, 117, 121-
26, 129; formal not true principle, 
129, 151; sacrifice of, 147, 158, 179; 
bourgeois principle, 154; of con-
sciousness, 206-17; in space and 
time, 218-19, 223 
Sitten: as discipline, 78, 176; as fetters, 
146,263 
Sittlichkeit: H's concept, 6, 9, 10-11, 
99-100; and religion, 6, 9-10, 63-
64, 80-81, 93 n; resting and moving, 
11, 21, 61-62, 72-74, 147, 156-57, 

286 
Index 
163-64; and nature, 19, 211, 243-
44; relative or natural, 19, 22-44, 
73, 93, 102-29; absolute or free, 51, 
54-80, 142-77; transition, 57-58, 
129-30; and barbarism, 134, 136; of 
individuals, 146-51; of classes, 
152-56 
slave(s): as person, 41, 125-26; no 
contract with, 43, 128; not a class, 
53-54, 68, 93, 152. See also bondage 
SMITH, Adam: Wealth of Nations, 
74, 75, 95, 248 
sociology of knowledge: H's relation 
to, 64 
SOPHOCLES: 60; Antigone, 93 
space: in Schelling, 18; reality of 
singularity, 218-19, 223; as univer-
sal, 219-20 
speculation: see philosophy 
speech: reality of spirit, 34, 35, 113-
16, 222, 244; formal concept of, 34, 
92 n.; medium of Bildung, 58, 60; 
first Potenz of consciousness, 193, 
213, 216, 217; barbarian, 196; cult-
ured, 199, 244-45; as actual concept, 
218-28; origin in voice, 222; native, 
importance of, 256-58; formalism of 
alien, 258-59 
SPERCHIAS: 60 
SPINOZA, Benedict: influence of, 8, 
17, 21; Ethics, 89 n. 
spirit: in H's system, 6, 7; and nature, 
19, 56; formal reality in contract, 
39, 123; actually in Sittlichkeit, 63, 
146, 242-250; of family, 139-40; 
of Vo!k, 144; concept of, 206; birth 
of, 240-41; and Idea, problem, 264-
65 
"Spirit of Christianity": 96 
Stoff: spiritual, 251-52, 263-64 
struggle: see battle 
subject(ive): and object, 9 (see anti-
thesis); thought, 10, 149; negated 
in labor, 33; expressed in labor, 33; 
subject-objectivity, 100 n., 144; as 
intelligence, 109-10, 113; as sub-
stance, 114; as self-moving, 118; as 
life, 124 
subjugation: of thief and barbarian, 
50,136 
substance: and accident, 12; ethical, 
12, 72; subject as, 112, 114; goal 
of logic, 205; consciousness as, 
242; Vo1k-spirit as, 242 
subsumption: H's use, 10, 12, 18-19, 
20-22; in Kant, 13; in Schelling, 
17-19, 91; as consumption, 26, 107; 
as transformation, 26, 107; reciproc-
ity of, lOQ-1, 111, 136, 165-66; as 
domination, 101 n, 126, 164 
sun: solar system, 190, 203 n 
supersession: see Aufhebung 
surplus: product of labor, 37-38, 118, 
120; universalized as money, 124; 
basis of mastery, 126; dialectic of, 
167-69 
suspension: see Aufhebung 
system: evolution of H's, 6-10; 
four-part, 6, 7, 10, 63-64, 81, 89, 
189, 201, 202 n.; triadic, 6, 7, 10, 
88-89; four-part, abandoned, 7, 62, 
64; circularity of, 178, 262 
"System fragment" (1800) : 89 n 
System of Ethical Life: date, 3, 87 n. 
character of ms., 3-10; "conclu-
sion" of, 10, 202 n. structure of, 
10-12, 189-90, 197; meets need of 
time, 64; hypothetical completion 
of, 80; connection with religion 
lectures, 83-84, 178; tensions in, 
85-87; use in lectures, 89 n; and 
Phenomenology, 90 n, 198; method 
of, 191, 193; importance of, 201-
2; education in, 204 n 
System of Speculative Philosophy: 
triadic, 10, 88-89, 205-6 
T AMERLANE: 133 
taxation: bourgeois institution, 69, 150, 
155; economic control by, 75; 
method of, 76, 171-72 
theft: paradigm of property violation, 
49-50, 135-37 
THEMISTOCLES: 198 
THESEUS: achievement of, 54, 56, 
80, 198 

THUCYDIDES: influence of, 85 
thought: infinite Potenz, 36; negates 
sensation, 45, 13Q-31; as recogni-
tion, 124; medium of bourgeois 
virtue, 149; memory as origin of, 221 
TILLIETTE, Xavier: Schelling, 90 n 
time: Schelling, 18; ideality of singu-
lar being, 218-219, 223; as universal, 
219-20 
tool: totality of first Potenz, 19, 23, 
25-26; man as, 29, 32, 112-13; 
reality of Reason, 33, 35, 113; and 
machine, 37, 118, 246-47; and 
child, 58, 115; middle of intelligence 
and being, 112-13; speech as, 114; 
nature as, 159-60; Potenz of con-
sciousness, 211, 215 n. 216, 217; 
middle for consciousness, 228-31, 
244 
totality: balance of subsumptions, 12; 
in Schelling, 16-17; relative and 
absolute, 19-20; family as, 42-44, 
127-29; constitution as, 59-61, 144-
45; of government, 74, 78, 176; 
reality as, 189; science as, 190; of 
consciousness, 209 
tragedy: justice of, 47; recognition in, 
58 
Trinity: speculative doctrine, 84, 96, 
184 
trust: relation of feeling, 39, 122, 123; 
ambivalent virtue, 67, 69, 94, 150; 
requires economic stability, 75, 168, 
171; in animals, 108 
truth: as the whole, 151, 243 
"Tiibingen fragment": 93, 95 
understanding (Verstand): in Kant, 
13; intuitive, 13-14, 91; of bar-
barians, 48, 133; of parents, 129; 
distinguishes honesty from trust, 
150; reflective, 195; as achieved 
universality, 223, 226, 233-34; 
Werk of Volk, 244, 245 
unity: concrete usage in Schelling, 17; 
abstract usage in Hegel, 142. See 
also antithesis 
universal(ity): H's use, 10, 22, 24, 
287 
Index 
10Q-1; analytic, 13; synthetic, 13; 
male as, 29, 110; empirical, 43, 93, 
127; government, 72-79, 163-176; 
dominance of, 116-24; abstract, 
118, 142, 155; concrete, 146, 160, 
163; resting and moving, 163-64; 
of consciousness, 206-17 
Universe: and God, 16, 18, 19; of 
nature and of spirit, 179; creation 
of, 265; index for dating, 189, 201, 
202 n 
utility: as real value, 38, 120, 121; 
of nobility, 153 
value: defined, 38, 121; realized in 
money, 39, 42; in national market, 
154; satisfaction universalized, 
247-49 
vengeance: as natural justice, 47, 52-
53, 132; religion of, 80; as ethical 
reciprocity, 139-40; sublated in 
justice, 154 
village: community of natural ethics, 
55 
virtue: as resting Idea, 62; H's theory 
of, 66-70, 75, 94, 146-52; inward 
and outward, 67; and morality, 146-
47, 148-49; and vice, 148 
Volk: ethical substance, 12, 61, 62-
63; intuition of, 21, 58-61, 63, 81, 
101, 144-45, 146, 179, 189; and 
horde, 48; transition to, 55-56, 
241-42; life in, 68-69, 147, 152; 
as given not made, 71, 163; 
history of, 82; Jews as, 84; as 
totality, 101; defined, 144-145; as 
spirit, 146, 209, 211, 213, 254; 
as particular, 164; as self-intuition 
of God, 179; freedom of, 185; 
speech of, 195-196, 199, 244-45 
war: in natural ethics, 51-54, 55-56; 
in free ethical life, 51, 53-54, 57; 
ethical significance, 66-67; tribal 
and national, 66, 149; function of 
nobility, 68, 152, 175; peasants 
participate, 69-70; as moment of 
policy, 74, 77, 164; and justice, 

288 
Index 
74, 77-78; occasion for bondage, 
137, 138, 141; sublation of right, 
141; totality of punishment, 175; 
training for, 176 
wealth: and poverty, dialectic, 75-76, 
169, 17o-71, 247-49 
wisdom: Plato's justice as, 68; none 
in natural ethics, 68, 150, 162; 
noble virtue, 69; absent in other 
classes, 69, 154, 162; function to 
govern, 70, 160; comes with age, 
71, 160; of Christianity, 183-84; 
of God, 265 
word: human, totality of speech, 115-
16; divine, utterance and hearing of, 
265 
work (Arbeit): see labor 
work (Werk): of Volk, 242-50, 252; 
of art, 255 
Wurtemburg: H's 1797 pamphlet on, 
72 
XERXES: 60 
yearning: Protestant principle, 85, 184, 
185; Christian generally, 252-53 

An English translation (if G. W F Hegel s 
~ystem der Sittlichkeit and of Philosophie des Geistes 
prepared and edzted by H .5 Harris & T M. Knox 
The first translation into English and the first Jetatled 
interpretation of Hegel's 5ystem der Wttlichkeit (18112 -3) 
and of Philosophie des Geistes, the two earliest o;urviving 
versions of Hegel's social theory. Hegel 's central LJncept of 
the spirit evolved in these two works. An W page interpreta 
tion by Harris precedes the translation" 
''This edition by H."> Harris and ">ir Malcolm Knox continue.: 
the high quality of early Hegel texts recently published in 
English. Together with the recent translations by H. S. Hacrio: 
and Walter Ct"rf, Faith and Knowledge and The Difference 
Between the \' tems of Fichte and Schelling (also published 
bv · ' Y Pre ), this volumt provides kev texts for the 
histori llrt • •+ tructionandearlyevolurionofllegeliandoc 
trine 
The 
· Jlum 
belong in the libraries of all colleges 
and universitit where 19th-century philosophy, especiallv 
German Jdeahsm, tS senouslv studied . 
Hi~hlv recom-
mendc l · · 
(,boice. 
''This book tsan 1 
• client contribution to greater and com-
plete under andmg of He11e1. The editors and translators have 
done I 1 + 
raking work in translatmg and stmplifymg Hegel's 
difficult style 
The I 10k ts mtc'~l sting and worthy of study 
foritsel forth He • •· 
I N of finite governments and their 
rdanon to the unh rse whtch exerrs an uncon~cious influ-
ence;: ovt:r m.tn." -
Luntempurary Philosoph.Y 
H "· Harri~ 1~ pcme~~uf' uf philu~uphy and humaniucs ar 
Glendon Collt:gc, York University ~ir Malcolm Knox is prin-
cipal of the Un.vccsity uf St Andrew~ in Scotland. 

