
Studies in Continental Thought 
John SaJJis, EDITOR 
CONSULTING EDITORS 
Robert Bernasconi 
William L. McBride 
Rudolf Bernet 
J. N. Mohanty 
John D. Caputo 
Mary Rawlinson 
David Carr 
Tom Rockmore 
Edward S. Casey 
Calvin 0. Schrag 
Hubert L. Dreyfus 
tReiner Schurmann 
Don Ihde 
Charles E. Scott 
David Farrell Krell 
Thomas Sheehan 
Lenore Langsdorf 
Robert Sokolowski 
Alphonso Lingis 
Bruce W. Wilshire 
David Wood 

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel 
Lectures on Logic 
Berlin, 1831 
Transcribed by 
Karl Hegel 
Translated by 
Clark Butler 
Indiana University Press 
Bloomington and Indianapolis 

Publication of this book is made possible in part with the assistance of a Challenge 
Grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities, a federal agency that supports 
research, education, and public programming in the humanities. 
This book is a publication of 
Indiana University Press 
601 North Morton Street 
Bloomington, IN 47404-3797 USA 
http://iupress.indiana.edu 
Telephone orders 800-842-6796 
Fax orders 
812-855-7931 
Orders bye-mail iuporder@indiana.edu 
Published in German as Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel's Vorlesungen iiber die Logik 
(1831). Transcript by Karl Hegel. Edited by Udo Rameil with Hans-Christian Lucas. 
Q 2001 by Felix Meiner Verlag, Hamburg. 
English edition C 2008 by Indiana University Press. 
All rights reserved 
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical. including photocopying and recording, or by any infor-
mation storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the pub-
lisher. The Association of American University Presses' Resolution on Permissions 
constitutes the only exception to this prohibition. 
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American 
National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence of Paper for Printed 
Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984. 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Hegel. Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 1770-1831. 
[Vorlesungen iiber die Logik. English] 
Lectures on logic: Berlin, 1831 I Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel; 
transcribed by Karl Hegel; translated by Clark Butler. 
p. cm. -
(Studies in Continental thought) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-0-253-35167-8 (cloth: alk. paper) !. Logic I. Butler, Clark, date 11. Title. 
B2944.V652E5 2008 
160-dc22 
I 2 3 4 5 13 
12 
11 
10 09 08 
2007048893 

Contents 
Translator's Introduction 
Introduction to the Lectures on Logic 
Preliminary General Concept of Our Subject Matter 
A. 
The First Position [of Thought] toward Objectivity 
B. 
The Second Position of Thought toward Objectivity 
B.l. Empiricism 
B.Il. The Critical Philosophy 
[B.II.]a. The theoretical faculty 
[B.II.b.] Practical reason 
[B.Il.c. The reflective power of judgment] 
C. 
The Third Position [of Thought] toward Objectivity 
[More Exact Concept and] Division of the [Science of] Logic 
[I. Being] 
Il. [Essence] 
Ill. The Self-Concept 
I.A. Quality 
l.A.a. Being 
BEING 
I. Being 
l.A.b. Determinate Being [Dasein] 
l.A.c. Being for Itself 
l.B. 
Quantity 
l.C. 
Measure 
EssENCE 
II. Essence 
II.A. Essence as the Ground of Existence 
Il.A.a. The Show of the Essence of Being 
II.A.a.a. Identity 
II.A.a.f3. Difference 
II.A.a.y. Ground 
II.A.b. Existence 
II.A.c. The Thing 
Il.B. Appearance 
[II.B.a.] The World of Appearance 
[II.B.b. Form and Content] 
[ll.B .c: Correlation] 
[I.) The whole and its parts 
[2. Force and its expression) 
[3. The inner and the outer) 
V 
vii 
19 
26 
26 
30 
32 
53 
55 
59 
72 
75 
80 
81 
85 
86 
86 
95 
114 
117 
124 
129 
132 
132 
132 
134 
140 
143 
143 
147 
148 
148 
149 
149 
150 
153 

Contents 
vi 
1I.C. Actuality 
155 
[Moments of Actuality as an Efficacious Process: Contingency 
and Mere Possibility versus the Real Possibility, Pre-Conditions, 
and Necessity of a Matter at Hand] 
157 
[1I.C.a. The Matter at Hand] 
159 
[II.C.b. The Moments of Necessity] 
161 
[1.] Conditions 
162 
[2.] The matter at hand 
162 
3. The activity [of a matter at hand actualizing itself] 
162 
[II.C.c. The Forms of Necessity] 
164 
[I. The correlation of substantiality] 
165 
[2. The correlation of causality] 
167 
[3. The correlation of reciprocal interaction] 
169 
THE SELF-CONCEPT 
Ill. The Self-Concept 
Subdivisions [of the Logic of the Self-Concept] 
III.A. The Subjective Self-Concept 
III.A.l. The Self-Concept as Such 
III.A.2. Judgment 
[III.A.2.a. Qualitative judgment] 
III.A.2.f3. Reflective judgment 
III.A.2.y. Necessary judgment 
III.A.2.b. Conceptual judgment 
III.A.3. The Syllogisms 
III.A.3.a. The qualitative syllogism 
III.A.3.f3. The reflective syllogism 
III.A.3.y. The necessary syllogism 
III.B. The Object 
III.B.a. Mechanism 
III.B.b. Chemism 
III.B.c. Teleology 
III.C. The Idea 
III.C.a. Life 
[III.C.a.l. The soul] 
[III.C.a.2. The bodily organism] 
[III.C.a.3. The species] 
III.C.b. Recognizance [Erkennen] 
III.C.b.l. Recognizance as such 
[The analytical method] 
[The synthetic method] 
[Definition] 
[Classification] 
[Proof] 
III.C.b.2. The will 
III.C.c. The Absolute Idea 
177 
178 
179 
179 
182 
186 
187 
188 
190 
191 
193 
198 
199 
200 
201 
205 
207 
212 
214 
214 
215 
217 
218 
220 
220 
221 
223 
223 
224 
225 
227 

Translator's Introduction 
This introductory discussion concerns the context and state of the text 
along with a small number of general rules adopted in its translation. 
The first three sections, which address the text and its context in rela-
tion to Hegel's other works and to the history of philosophy, are in-
tended even for beginning students of the logic.1 The last three sec-
tions address more especially Hegel scholars, since they seek to justify 
my decisions regarding certain translation issues on which such schol-
ars have not always agreed. Throughout all six sections a recurrent 
theme will be the complex relationship between Hegel and his near 
contemporary Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi (1743-1819). 
1. The Text 
This book has its source in lectures by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel 
(1770-1831). His name appears as the author on the title page of the 
German edition. But, like many posthumous works, this is not a book 
expressly intended by the author. He delivered lectures, but did not in-
tend their publication as a book. But the lectures did constitute a poten-
tial book by Hegel, which his son Karl Hegel (1813-1901) penned as a 
manuscript, and which has become actual due to the German editors-
chiefly Udo Rameil, with the collaboration of Hans-Christian Lucas-
and the support of the Hegel Archiv in Germany. 2 
The first thing beginning readers must keep in mind is that Hegel's 
works on the science of logic are not in any sense treatises on formal 
logic. This is true despite the fact that Hegel first turned to write his Sci-
ence of Logic3 after the publication of his Phenomenology of Spirit, 4 upon re-
ceiving a request from the Royal Bavarian Ministry of Education to 
write a formal logic text for use in the kingdom's secondary schools.' To 
be sure, his science of logic treats the concepts of judgments, syllogisms, 
definition, and proof in its third and last part on the self-concept, but 
vii 

Lectures on Logic 
viii 
this does not make the Science or Lectures a logic textbook. The Lectures 
are far more a treatise in rational theology in which the author aban-
dons himself to the life and internal self-development of the divine logos 
at work since the true Parmenidean onset of the history of philosophy. 6 
And this is so even though Hegel understood that the science of logic 
could be used non-theologically as a study of the universal and neces-
sary thought determinations or categories of thinking.7 
At first glance the Lectures on Logic seem to be Hegel's commen-
tary on the first book of the third edition of his Encyclopaedia of the 
Philosophical Sciences. 8 They thus suggest self-interpretation, self-.expli-
cation, but this impression is not the whole truth. The Lectures should 
not be taken merely as a kind of commentary since they are a self-
contained exposition that can be understood even without reading 
the Encyclopaedia. Nonetheless, they contain periodic explicit refer-
ences to selected paragraphs of that work. 
Often the German manuscript of the Lectures begins a paragraph 
with a number in parentheses from the 1830 Encyclopaedia (e.g., §19), 
but many of the German paragraphs do not begin this way. If the Ger-
man edition of the lectures omits a paragraph number at the begin-
ning of a new paragraph, the present edition sometimes identifies a 
slightly later Encyclopaedia paragraph-in which Hegel typically intro-
duces a new technical term or transition-in brackets within the para-
graph of the lectures in which the term or transition is introduced, not 
at the start of the paragraph. 
2. Interpolation in the Text 
A further general comment on the translation has to do with interpola-
tions in this text which was never intended for publication, and which 
indeed was first published only very recently. The editors of the first col-
lected works of Hegel did not draw on Karl Hegel's transcript of these 
lectures in constituting the published additions (Zusiitze) in the Encyclo-
paedia's logic.9 Thus not even brief excerpts of it appeared in print in the 
nineteenth century. The manuscript was in private hands until a few 
decades ago when its owners transferred it to the Hegel Archiv for ex-
pert review. 10 The German editors took nearly two decades to decipher 
the script and edit the text, which was published late in 2001. The man-
uscript contained a fairly large number of brief omissions which could 
only be filled in by interpolation, though Udo Rameil notes that most of 
his interpolations were quite obvious and resolved no ambiguity 
controversially. 
The present translation contains interpolations beyond those in the 
Rameil edition. Rameil puts his interpolations in brackets, and they 

Translator's Introduction 
ix 
may be consulted in the German edition. Bracketed interpolations in 
this edition are my own. Interpolations in the text were needed to pro-
duce a text that could serve as more than Karl Hegel's personal manu-
script, and Rameil largely provided these basic interpolations. Further 
interpolations, which I have sought to provide, were needed to produce 
a readable text for those who are not Hegel scholars. I have sought to 
limit these interpolations to those that are necessitated by the text and 
needed for a smooth reading. I have sought to exclude from my interpo-
lations and footnotes any interpretive comment that would seek to re-
solve in a controversial manner any real ambiguity left in Karl Hegel's 
transcript. 
In producing a book such as this, editors and translators face a choice 
between letting the ambiguity and incompleteness of Karl's words 
stand, or filling in what is missing through their contextual awareness 
of the Hegelian opus as a whole. Hegel scholars typically prefer the first 
solution, which allows them to complete the text with their own con-
textual knowledge. But beginners who hope to use this volume as an 
initiation to Hegel's logic will tend to prefer the second solution. By 
bracketing interpolations beyond those of the German edition, this 
translation seeks to address both audiences. Hegel scholars remain free 
to judge these additions. 
However, in some cases I have added words without placing them in 
brackets as explicit interpolations. For instance, I have rendered the text 
gender-inclusive in this way. I have also done so when a few extra words 
help the reader keep in mind what Hegel has referred to and is still re-
ferring to in the text. Thus, when Hegel introduces "essence" in the logic 
of essence, he makes it clear that he means "the abstract inner essence 
of immediate being." Afterward, Karl Hegel's abbreviated transcript 
may simply mention "the essence," but I have sometimes reminded the 
reader of Hegel's meaning by making it repeatedly explicit that he is still 
talking about the abstract essence of being. 
Footnotes to this translation occasionally cite classical texts in the 
history of philosophy to which Hegel refers, or provide possible alter-
native wordings of the translation. Suggestions as to how to resolve 
possible basic philosophical ambiguities of the text in different ways-
as implied, for example, by the fact that some reputable Hegel scholars 
read the science of logic as theistic while others do not-may be re-
served for commentary elsewhere. 
One hope behind this translation has been that for some it may, for 
the first time, make the science of logic not only readable but teachable, 
whereas it has often proven inscrutable even to many professional phi-
losophers. Since the science of logic for Hegel is an ideal reconstruction 
of the real history of philosophy, its understandability for philosophers 
who are not specialized Hegel scholars will be assisted by recalling clas-

Lectures on Logic 
X 
sical philosophers and their particular ways of identifying reality that 
come to be reconstructed on the level of pure thought in Hegel's logic: 
e.g., Parmenides, Heraclitus, 11 Plato, Aristotle, Plotinus, Anselm, Des-
cartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Locke, Hume, Kant, Fichte, Schelling, and Ja-
cobi. Some idea of these different historical philosophers, if held in 
mind, makes the development of pure imageless thought in the logic 
easier to follow. Students who have not yet studied the whole prior his-
tory of philosophy will need to form a general representation of each of 
these historical philosophical positions in order to enjoy a similarly fa-
cilitated comprehension of Hegel's science of logic. 
These lectures, with the help of rudimentary knowledge of key clas-
sical philosophers, are the most readable introduction Hegel himself 
provides to his logic. But they do not replace his Science of Logic, which 
has some sections (e.g., on reflection) that do not even appear in the 
Lectures. 12 The Encyclopaedia outline of the logic may be viewed as a guide 
to the subsequent lectures and, as we have noted, the lectures were 
keyed to that outline. The Karl Hegel transcript does not key them to the 
Science of Logic, and this translation does not attempt to do so either. The 
Encyclopaedia previews in outline the lectures, which then illuminate 
the Encyclopaedia. As often happens when a thinker is present with his 
listeners, Hegel expresses himself more clearly in his lectures than in 
either the Science of Logic or the Encyclopaedia. The Science of Logic was 
largely written at night during the first years of Hegel's marriage, as he 
was a gymnasium rector during the day, with a view to earning an 
eventual university professorship. 
The Hegelian authenticity of the lectures does not seem to have 
been disturbed by Karl Hegel's transmission. This is due to the intelli-
gence of the young man, and to his desire to assimilate his father's 
logic accurately. His transcript was surely not verbatim. Karl could 
only recreate what he had heard and taken down in notes according 
to the spirit, not always the exact letter. But of two known transcripts 
of the 1831 logic lectures, Karl's is recognized as far superior in qual-
ity.13 Still, it would be false to claim that his transcript records only 
Hegel's words or all his words. The claim that this is a new, previously 
unpublished book by Hegel is implied by the appearance of his name 
on the title page of the German edition-a convention we have main-
tained in the present edition. Yet ambiguity remains. Scholarly cor-
rectness obliged the German editors to add a disclaimer that quite 
technically the volume, as a reconstruction of the lectures after the 
fact, is "the product of another author, namely, the transcriber." 14 Karl 
Hegel was not a tape recorder. The Science of Logic will always have 
greater authority. But these lectures may very likely be read as the best 
available preparation for and help in reading the larger Logic. 

Translator's Introduction 
xi 
3. The Science of Logic and the History of Philosophy 
Research into parallels between passages in the Lectures, the Encyclopae-
dia, and other works and lectures by Hegel will be rewarding even 
though the Lectures can be read on their own. The editor of the German 
edition has, in his notes, done most of the work of tracing such parallels. 
Yet readers of the English edition can fruitfully, and without great diffi-
culty, do much of this work for themselves. It largely suffices to keep 
within arm's reach copies of Part One of the 1830 Encyclopaedia of the 
Philosophical Sciences, the Science of Logic, and the Lectures on the History of 
PhilosophyY Consultation of the Lectures on the History of Philosophy is as 
important as consultation of the first two volumes, which are exposi-
tions of the science of logic itself. The reason is that Hegel believes the 
history of philosophy to be the unfolding of the logic empirically, amid 
the contingent events and personalities of empirical history. 16 
Despite Hegel's warnings that prefaces to a science are what is least in 
importance, 17 the paradoxical length and, at times, brilliance of his own 
prefaces and introductions have led most anthologizers to privilege 
them, especially given the difficulty of excerpting Hegelian systematic 
science. In the Lectures on Logic, the systematic exposition is of course 
what is most important. The introductory essay on Kant and the follow-
ing one on Jacobi have importance as intellectual history, and as a com-
mentary on the philosophical landscape of Hegel's time. However, they 
are also an internal self-introduction to Hegel's science of logic itself. If, 
according to Hegel as he is commonly interpreted, there are no thought 
determinations outside the complete circle of such terms in the science 
of logic,l8 any introduction to this science must be internal to it. It must 
be the science of logic itself awakening to self-consciousness. 
The introduction to the Lectures records the self-discovery of the sci-
ence of logic in the history of philosophy in four stages. First there is 
classical metaphysics from Parmenides (born 515 Be) to Christian Wolff 
(1659-1754). This position starts by taking what is immediately given, in 
abstraction of the larger context to which it is relative, to be an absolute 
or non-relative whole. Parmenides started it by identifying what Hegel 
calls "the absolute" as mere indeterminate being. Its last great represen-
tative for Hegel is the seventeenth-century philosopher Leibniz. 
Second there is the skeptical critique of classical metaphysics, high-
lighting the fact that what is immediately given is what it is only through 
its relation to what is other than it. This critique of classical metaphysics 
was most systematically developed by Immanuel Kant (1724-1804). 
Clearly in Hegel's view the progress of the history of philosophy was ac-
celerating in the modern world, since Kant and the last two stages of 
this history which follow it date from the eighteenth century. 

Lectures on Logic 
xii 
The third stage is an attempt to reject the skeptical critique of clas-
sical metaphysics and to retreat back into the position of classical 
metaphysics before Kant. This results in a dogmatic reassertion that 
what is immediately present is absolute or not relative to what is other 
than itself. This position was represented in Hegel's own time by Ja-
cobi. Parmenides and Kant are of course in the front rank of world-re-
nowned philosophers. But it is remarkable that Hegel elevates his con-
temporary, Jacobi, to such a position in his overall concept of the 
history of philosophy. 
Forsaking any attempt to think and know God, Jacobi in a broadly 
romantic sense took the immediate feeling (Ahnung) of God, what Fried-
rich Ernst Daniel Schleiermacher (1768-1834) would call a feeling of 
absolute dependence on the Infinite, to be a universal fact of conscious-
ness regardless of the cultural context. 19 Clearly this was not a return to 
Parmenides' identification of "the absolute" with an objective abstract 
Being, an object of thought in which consciousness loses itself. Indeed, 
Jacobi makes something subjective, a fact of subjective consciousness, 
out to be absolute. The feeling of dependence on God is not itself the ab-
solute, but it is immediately given to all human consciousness. 
Jacobi must deny the validity of the entire history of classical meta-
physics, of its attempt to know God by hard thinking, in order to ac-
knowledge the alleged absolute immediate fact of contact with God by 
feeling. So his return to the position of taking what is immediate to be 
absolute is not a return to classical metaphysics-the attempt to know 
God by logical argument. In trying to go back before Kant, Jacobi in the 
end cannot entirely evade Kant. He concurs with Kant's skeptical de-
nial of our ability to know God. 
The last of the four stages followed by this history of philosophy is 
Hegel's own stage of embracing the Kantian critique of classical meta-
physics and then advancing beyond it rather than seeking to fall back 
to a prior standpoint. Hegel reconstructs the metaphysics of what is 
immediate by including what is other than it, its mediation. He holds 
neither God nor consciousness to be merely immediate or directly 
given. Whatever is immediate is abstract in relation to a larger whole. 
Only a larger whole to which it is relative can be truly absolute. Thus 
to take what is immediately given merely by itself to be absolute is to 
falsely make it out to be absolute. In Hegel's typical way of expressing 
himself, we say that what is immediate is self-mediated by its other 
which is ultimately none other than an expansion of itself. 
Both the introduction and systematic exposition of Lectures on Logic 
will be more understandable to those with some prior knowledge of 
the history of philosophy. Hegel held that his logic reconstructed the 
history of philosophy on the level of pure thought. Students approach-
ing these lectures will, as I have said, have an advantage if they have 

Translator's Introduction 
xiii 
some familiarity with the history of philosophy from ancient times to 
Hegel's own time. Yet understanding the lectures does not require the 
reader to be an Aristotle or Kant scholar. Hegel assumes that modern 
readers carry around within themselves a distilled but tacit common 
understanding of each great philosopher. Aristotle's perspective as a 
cultural deposit or residue inhabits some corner of the mind of each 
contemporary reader with a solid education in general culture. 
In editing the German edition of the Lectures on Logic, Udo Rameil 
has acted on behalf of HegeL heeding Hegel's presumed intention of 
reaching a wider audience. Hegel published only four books in his 
lifetime, 20 making a strategic decision to disseminate his philosophy 
orally through lecture courses to both followers and a wider public.21 
This decision was made with the realization that certain students 
would take notes and reconstruct the lectures as fully as possible while 
their recollection was still fresh. 22 The practice was and to some degree 
still is common in European universities. These reconstructions would 
be intended for the personal use of the student, but the transcripts 
would also sometimes be shared with others. Hegel accommodated 
himself to the circulation of these transcripts, without personally en-
dorsing any of them. He did not personally endorse the transcript con-
tained in this volume, even though it was made by his own son. 
Yet this transcript is unusual in a number of respects that suggest it 
may have more authority than others. The transcriber, Hegel's son Kart 
would have a fairly distinguished academic career himself as a univer-
sity historian. 23 He was a philosophy student in 1830-1831 at Berlin 
University where his father taught. He still lived at home with his father 
when he took this course on logic in the summer of 1831, the last course 
Hegel was to teach before his death. Karl had by then already embraced 
his father's philosophy. Though he would never specialize in the science 
of logic, he understood that it was the basis of the entire Hegelian sys-
tem. He took class notes, and afterward reconstructed the lectures for 
himself, with the aim of appropriating their content for himself as the 
foundation for his further study of Hegel's philosophy of history. We 
may surmise that he did not wait for his father's death in November of 
that year to begin his reconstruction. His version of the lectures was not 
undertaken in memory of his father, but in an attempt to internalize his 
father's thought. It is likely that Karl worked out his prose version of the 
lectures at least in occasional direct communication with his father in 
the months before the latter's unanticipated death. It would be surpris-
ing if Hegel was unaware of Karl's project. He may have looked over his 
son's transcript and even have occasionally discussed it with him. In-
deed, the transcript seems a bit too good to come from an unassisted 
eighteen-year-old. But we have no evidence that the philosopher ever 
saw the transcript as leading to the publication of a book. 

Lectures on Logic 
xiv 
Hegel's terse outline version of his logic in the Encyclopaedia contrasts 
with the expansive but often difficult exposition in his earlier Science of 
Logic ( 1812-1816). His decision to communicate his philosophy orally by 
lectures implied an understanding that its propagation would occur 
within an oral tradition among his students, but also allowed that some 
of these students could and would publish books. He did not request 
that any transcripts of his lectures not be published. He only said that he 
could not vouchsafe for the evenness of their quality. 
In the present translation, "the science of logic" is often abbreviated 
as simply "the logic." I often reinstate the word "science" because Hegel 
viewed his logic as science in the strictest sense. The growing prestige of 
the positive sciences later in the nineteenth century caused Hegelians 
some embarrassment over the word. Some Hegel scholars today still 
hope to escape that embarrassment by downplaying the "science" in the 
science of logic. But as a translator faithful to Hegel's intentions, I have 
concluded that the scientific purpose of these lectures cannot be hon-
estly downplayed. The reader will have to judge whether Hegel, as some 
have suspected, 24 was a scientific charlatan. To the extent that these 
lectures prove readable, they will tend to show that Hegel has not re-
sorted to obscurantism to hide the alleged fact that he had no science. 
To the extent that they still fail to be reader-friendly, readers will have 
some reason to suppose the contrary. We cannot treat the matter here 
in a translator's introduction, but this volume may help to reopen the 
question as to whether there is a Hegelian science of logic. 
4. Jacobi and Hegel's Prepositional Mode of Discourse 
Having characterized the text as a whole and its context in both Hegel's 
life and the history of philosophy, we now go inside the text to take up 
particular translation issues. First a general comment. The translation 
of canonical philosophers cannot entirely escape the method of rational 
interpretation. We must translate Hegel's words (1) so that they are in-
telligible in English and (2) so that they express, consistent with the 
German text lexically and syntactically, a maximum of surprising in-
sight discovered in the text as worthy of a canonical philosopher, without 
importing extraneous thought into the text. Even if these lectures rep-
resent an easier point of access to Hegel's science of logic, their sense is 
not always obvious. In completing the translation I have had to weigh 
various interpretive hypotheses which remain open to discussion. I 
have sought to abandon myself to the life of the text and to rethink it 
accurately, and I have been most encouraged by the efforts of well-
trained and careful readers of the manuscript who have helped me cor-
rect numerous passages where I originally fell short. 

Translator's Introduction 
XV 
Passing on to a few technical issues in the translation of particular 
terms, I first want to recall an important terminological connection be-
tween Hegel and Jacobi. Hegel was greatly influenced by Jacobi's "prep-
ositional" mode of discourse, which serves to highlight relations. Prepo-
sitions such as "in," "within," "outside," "beside," "upon," "before," 
"after," "for," and "by" all express relations. The classical subject-predi-
cate discourse of Aristotle did not similarly stress relational thinking, 
since for him relational predicates were accidental. For Hegel the abso-
lute articulates itself in essential dynamic relations between its mo-
ments, i.e., prepositionally. 
The translator must wonder whether prepositional discourse can 
replace subject-predicate discourse as easily in English as it does in 
German. Jacobi's prepositional discourse reflects the German lan-
guage, in which separable prepositional prefixes to verbs are both ac-
cented in pronunciation and highlighted by being thrown all by them-
selves to the end of the clause. If we say that lordship and bondage hebt 
sich im Stoicismus auf-which literally translated is to say that it raises 
itself beyond itself into Stoicism up there-the upward direction of the 
movement clearly becomes essential. In translating the lectures on 
logic I have opted to preserve in the English, as much as possible, 
Hegel's prepositional idioms: upon itself (an sich), for another (fur An-
deres), upon itself (an ihm), outside itself (ausser sich), within itself (in 
sich), for itself (fur sich), upon and for itself (an und fur sich), at home 
with oneself (bei sich). Thus where "fur si eh sein" could be translated as 
"being on its own account," I have preferred "being for itself." 
The decision to retain the prepositional mode in the translation keeps 
the English closer to the German original, and helps express Hegel's 
stand against non-relational subject-predicate thinking. Prepositions 
are integral to the grammatical essence of German, but not to that of 
English. That is part of what Hegel considered the speculative genius of 
the German language.25 Yet the German influence brought to bear on 
this translation will not, I believe, be destructive of its readability. The 
assumption is that English, with a little help, can be taught to speak 
speculative philosophy. 
A recurrent preposition for Hegel, "an," is already found in Kant's "Ding 
an sich," commonly translated as "thing in itself." My preferred translation 
of "an" in the Hegelian context is not traditional. "An und filr sich" trans-
lated as "in and for itself" is well established in French-Sartre's "en soi et 
pour soi" -as well as in English. "In and for itself" is so well established that 
a translator may be inclined to prefer the translation tradition even if it is 
not faithful to Hegel's original meaning. But when a choice seems neces-
sary between an author's intentions and the meaning assigned to an au-
thor by the consecrated history of the text's reception in translation, I have 
preferred fidelity to authorial intentions. So I owe the reader an explana-

Lectures on Logic 
xvi 
tion as to why I view "being in and for itself" as a familiar, even reassuring, 
but ultimately inaccurate way of glossing over the meaning of "Anundfur-
sichsein," which is better translated as "being upon and in itself." 
In Hegel's distinct usage, the preposition "an" connotes the potential-
ity for receiving some further actual form. Putting the translation tradi-
tion aside, I translate "Das Kind ist an sich aufgewachsen" as "The child is 
already upon itself an adult." This means that it is already essentially an 
adult for those who place it in a class with other children whom they 
have seen actually grow up. The reflective thinking of persons who 
have seen this can place or posit upon a newborn child an adulthood 
which is not yet directly observable in it. 
The science of logic aims, we have mentioned, at pure imageless 
thinking. 26 It may seem odd, given this opposition in the science of 
logic to pictorial representation (Vorstellung), that ·an" can have a spa-
tial connotation. That Frankfurt is upon the river Main, for example, 
can be intuited in perceptual space and then represented in imagina-
tion. Frankfurt-am-Main is Frankfurt at or upon the Main. It is not 
Frankfurt in the river! What is upon something lies upon its surface. 
As for adulthood, it is no more in the child than Frankfurt is in the 
Main. The difference between the two relations is that Frankfurt and 
the Main coexist spatially at the same time, while the adulthood tempo-
rally succeeds the child at a later time. Associated with this is the fact that 
·an" in "Frankfurt am Main" is the ·an" of location which takes the dative 
case in German, while ·an" in "Das Kind an sich" is the •an" of direction-
ality which takes the accusative case. When we say that the child is upon 
itself an adult, we mean that the child is directed to the actualization of 
its essential potentiality in being succeeded by the adult it becomes. Hegel 
does not uphold preformism, the view that there is an actual little adult 
hiding in every child, awaiting its chance to come out in the open. 
Actual adulthood and childishness are incompatible and cannot co-
exist in the same subject, whether in perception or in imagination. Being 
Frankfurt and being the Main are also incompatible in the same subject. 
A city is a city and not a river. But the Main is simultaneously found in 
something adjacent, while an adult is found as a successor subject to the 
child. Being the Main does not eventually displace Frankfurt in the way 
in which adulthood displaces childhood. We imagine an adult when we 
perceive a child, but eventually we perceive an adult in place of the 
child. 
A further advantage to translating ·an sich" by "upon itself" rather 
than "in itself" stems from Hegel's separate use of "in sich." The German 
"insich" could well be translated as "in itself,• though I have used "within 
itself." A second point is that "in," as well as ·an," has a spatial connota-
tion. Yet Hegel intends no literal physical space connotation of either 
German preposition. His use of the prepositions projects only thought 

Translator's Introduction 
xvii 
space. (Such thought space is also projected by contemporary symbolic 
logic when we say that a conjunction contains two conjuncts.) 
Yet Kant's "Ding an sich" may still be translated as "thing in itself" to 
capture his distinct intent. The thing in itself for Kant is walled off 
from any relation to other things, from anything in the way of what 
Hegel calls the thing's being for the other. Hegel passed from Kant's 
understanding of "Ansichsein" in "Ding an sich" to his own understand-
ing of "Ansichsein" issuing in "Anundfursichsein." and in the transition 
"Ansichsein" shifted in meaning. Moreover, the shift brought the mean-
ing of "an" closer to its meaning in ordinary German. 
5. Hegel's Logic, Jacobi, and the Specter of Panlogicism 
A second comment on a particular translation issue remains to be made. 
I often prefer to translate "Bestimmtheit" ("determinateness") as "deter-
mination," "Existenz" as "the existent." and "Korperlichkeit" ("corporeal-
ity") as "the body."27 Hegel himself admitted the year before these lec-
tures, in his review of Karl Friedrich Goschel (1784-1861), that his style 
of writing tended to mislead readers into supposing that he was in effect 
the panlogicist who many since have supposed him to be. 28 He con-
veyed the idea that the absolute is nothing but a bloodless ballet of un-
earthly logical categories. This gave the impression that only corporeality 
had true existence, not individual bodies, or that only existence was a 
true entity, but not individual existents. 
Hegel confessed to Goschel that this practice was polemically moti-
vated by his stand against the romanticism of Jacobi and of Jacobi's de-
spised followers-e.g .. Schleiermacher, or even worse Fries-who de-
nied the possibility of any true conceptual grasp of reality. The absolute, 
for these romantics. could only be intimated by feeling. Hegel wanted to 
reinstate a conceptual grasp of reality, and overcompensated stylisti-
cally by suggesting that reality was nothing but concepts, essences. or 
universals. His actual position is that the system of conceptual catego-
ries indeed grasps, but never exhausts, the absolute. The potential for 
ever-new, longer editions of his Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences 
is proof that his systematic philosophy, while true in general, remains a 
living system by continually expanding to embrace more of the absolute 
in its self-particularization. 
In this translation I have heeded Hegel's professed true intent, and 
have thus corrected his panlogicist writing style that has left so many 
readers puzzled, and that has put so many off Hegel. These lectures on 
logic give us good reason for supposing that Hegel, far from being a pan-
logicist, was in fact a nominalist29 who held that universals existed only 
for us as concepts abstracted from singular individual entities: 

Lectures on Logic 
xviii 
[I]f I say "red," the predicate expresses a universal characteristic that 
at once belongs to blood and various other objects. Yet what I have be-
fore me is only a singular red, this determinate red thing. Yet this 
same red also assumes the character of universality which at once be-
longs to me [insofar as I have abstracted it from what is singularly red]. 
But one is no more able to single out color in general in contrast to any 
singular color than to refer to the animal in general as opposed to re-
ferring to this dog or this elephant. The elephant in general. the dog in 
general. the species does not objectively exist. The genus is something 
still more general. which once again falls to me as subject.'0 
My correction of a traditional interpretation of Hegel's philosophy, 
which is well grounded in Hegel's own statement. has led me, in an at-
tempt to communicate his meaning in a less off-putting way, to correct 
a mode of expression which he himself criticized in 1830, but which 
still remained an ingrained habit of his in the 1831 lectures. 
6. Three More Translation Decisions 
To briefly mention another practice adopted in this translation, I trans-
late "der Begriff' as "the self-concept," not simply as "the concept" which 
is the more usual English translation. This is to make more explicit 
Hegel's thought that the concept grasps itself in its object. Your concept 
of the other is your own self-concept in and through the other. We are 
translating a text, but more fundamentally we are translating intelligi-
ble thought expressed in German into the same intelligible thought ex-
pressed as well as possible in English. I take "der Begriff' as elliptical. 
A second translation issue concerns the term "Materien" in relation to 
"Eigenshaften.'''1 The noun "Eigenschaften" is translated as "properties" 
understood as exemplified universal determinations, while a "Bestim-
mung" is a determination that may or may not be exemplified. To refer 
to the universal determination of being watery as a property is thus also 
to implicitly refer to a matter which has that property. This is to draw on 
the established sense of "a matter" where it means "a material substance 
of a particular kind or for a particular purpose, e.g., 'a vegetable mat-
ter.'"'2 A living organism has the property of being watery, but another 
way of saying this is to say that, since being Hp is exemplified by 97 
percent of the organism, the organism possesses "a chemical matter" 
whose property is to be watery. A rose as perceived has the sensory 
quality of being red as one of its properties, but another way of saying 
this is to say that it contains as one of its matters a visual surface that 
has the sensory color property of being red. Hegel says that a thing's 
property is a matter," meaning, I take it, that its property is what it is 

Translator's Introduction 
xix 
only in and through some matter (Materie) that exhibits the property. I 
have followed an established translation tradition by rendering "Mate-
rie" as "matter," but I do not think we need be puzzled. Though a matter 
can be an atomic matter, we need to understand He gel as using the term 
to refer to something much broader. There are chemical matters or "ma-
terial substances of a particular kind" like Hp, but a visually green 
surface may be a directly perceived matter in a painting. So when we 
speak of "a matter" we do not necessarily mean a matter in a physicalis-
tic sense, since we may speak of the sensory manifold as a sensed mat-
ter. We may also use the noun "matter" in the plural. 
The final translation decision needing explanation concerns the dis-
tinction between Erkennen and Wissen. It is clear that Wissen is higher 
than Erkennen, which is finite knowledge as understood by Kant and 
Jacobi. "Erkennen" as explicated by Hegel beyond its Kantian context 
comes close to "wiedererkennen," meaning the activity of re-cognizing 
familiar categories (e.g., cause and effect) of the logic in the external 
world, without yet attaining a Hegelian self-conscious re-cognition of 
the world as the sensory realization and particularization of these cate-
gories. Erkennen falls short of true knowing (Wissen). It is thus a finite 
knowing, which is for itself limited by the world it knows. 
Das absolutes Erkennen, absolute knowing, is a subject self-consciously 
recognizing itself throughout the objective world. It is infinite knowing, 
which does mean the same as "Wissen." Mere "Erkennen" then means 
the finite reconnoitering or reconnaissance of familiar markers in alien 
territory. It means knowing or cognizing as un-self-conscious re-cog-
nizing.34 Yet it harbors a drive, first theoretical and then practicaL to at-
tain coincidence between subject and object. but a drive that has not yet 
attained fulfillment in Wissen or true knowledge. Knowing as re-cog-
nizing does cognize logical forms anew in the outer world-forms al-
ready cognized in the logical determinations of our own pure thought. 
But the thinking subject cannot be forced into complete conformity 
with the world through theoretical striving, and the world cannot be 
forced into complete conformity with the subject through practical striv-
ing. For coercion establishes domination or lordship over whatever is 
coerced. True knowing rather raises the reciprocity of love, the basis of 
any true relationship with the world, to the level of pure thought. 35 
7. Acknowledgments 
I conclude this introduction with an expression of appreciation for 
those who have assisted me along the way. My first debt chronologi-
cally is to Professor Peter Hodgson, who years before the publication of 
the German edition of the lectures invited me to take responsibility 

Lectures on Logic 
XX 
for the English translation at a time when the University of California 
Press was contemplating publication of a series of Hegel's lectures. I 
also want to thank Felix Meiner Verlag in Hamburg for providing me 
with a copy of the German text before its publication in 2001. When I 
turned to Indiana University Press, I found support and encourage-
ment from sponsoring editor Dee Mortensen and her assistant Laura 
MacLeod. With proper regard for the importance of this translation, 
the Press enlisted the critical judgment of three scholars. They all 
made significant contributions to the improvement of the published 
version of the English translation. I often profited from their advice, 
though I bear responsibility for the final result. They are John Bur-
bidge, John Russon, and David Dusenbury. All three commented me-
ticulously on drafts of the translation. Finally, in a few key cases where 
I deviated from the translation tradition I was fortunate enough to 
have been able to confer with a native German-speaking philosopher, 
Professor Bernd Buldt of the Indiana University-Purdue University 
Fort Wayne Philosophy Department. 
Notes 
1. My Introduction to the Study of the Logic of Hegel keyed to the present Lectures 
on Logic is available for interested students on line from the National Social Science 
Press (http://www.nsspress.com). 
2. Georg Wilhelm Fried rich Hegel, Vorlesungen uber die Logik (Berlin 1831). in 
Vorlesungen. Ausgewiihlte Nachschriften und Manuskripte. nachgeschrieben von Kar/ 
Hegel. ed. Udo Rameil and Hans-Christian Lucas (Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag. 
2001), vol. 10. 
3. G. W. F. HegeL The Science of Logic. trans. A. V. Miller (Atlantic High-
lands, N.J.: Humanities Press. 1969). 
4. G. W. F. HegeL Phenomenology of Spirit. trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 1977). 
5. G. W. F. HegeL Hege/: The Letters. trans. Clark Butler and Christiane Seiler, 
with commentary by Clark Butler (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1984), 
p. 258. 
6. "We may give logical determinations out to be ... definitions of God." 
See below, p. 87. 
7. The science of logic. "when thus thought out into its purity, will have 
within itself the capacity to determine itself, that is to give itself a content. and that 
a necessarily explicated content-in the form of a system of determinations of 
thought.· HegeL Science of Logic. p. 63. 
8. G. W. F. He geL Logic: Part One of the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sci-
ences (1830). trans. William Wal!ace. with foreword by J. N. Findlay (Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press. 1975); Philosophy of Nature: Part Two of the Encyclopaedia of the 
Philosophical Sciences (1830). trans A. V. Miller (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2004 ); Philosophy of Spirit: Part Three of the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences 

Translator's Introduction 
xxi 
(1830), trans. William Wallace and A. V. Miller, with introduction and commen-
tary by Michael In wood (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007). 
9. Udo Rameil, "Einleitung: Hegels Logik Vorlesungen im Sommersemester 
1831," in Hegei, Vorlesungen iiber die Logik, p. xvi. 
10. Udo RameiL .Zur Konstitution des Textes, • in He gel, Vorlesungen iiber die 
Logik, p. 231. 
11. Hegel distinguishes between the empirical order in the history of philos-
ophy, in which Heraclitus precedes Parmenides, and the logical order, in which 
Parmenides precedes Heraclitus. See Clark Butler, .Empirical vs. Rational Order 
in the History of Philosophy; Owl ofMinerva, vol. 26, no. 1 (1994), pp. 31-37. 
12. For what anecdotal interest it may have, I published a commentary on 
the Science of Logic in 1996 before having read the 1831 Lectures on Logic. See Clark 
Butler, Hegel's Logic: Between Dialectic and History (Evanston: Northwestern Univer-
sity Press, 1996). Upon translating the Lectures I found them to be less developed 
in places than the Science of Logic, but did not find them to introduce new logical 
categories or to constitute a revision in any significant way of his understanding 
in the original Science of Logic. 
13. Hegei, Vorlesungen iiber die Logik, pp. xlix-1. 
14. Hegel, Vorlesungen iiber die Logik, p. xviii. 
15. G. W. F. Hegel, Lectures on the History of Philosophy, trans. E. S. Haldane 
and F. H. Simson (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1968), 3 vols. 
16. Hegei, Logic, §86, addition. Karl Hegel refers to paragraphs in the 1830 
edition throughout in parentheses without page numbers. I follow him by refer-
encing such paragraphs in brackets without page numbers. The problem with giv-
ing page numbers is that there are many editions which readers may use. I do not 
want to suggest that annotations are, for example, tied merely to the Wallace 
translation as introduced by J. N. Findlay. There is an earlier English edition in 
which page numbers are different. There is also another widely circulating trans-
lation in English by H. S. Harris et al. Furthermore, these lectures are likely to 
travel around the world in English rather than German, and international readers 
may refer to translations of the Encyclopaedia in even other languages, including of 
course the German. Since there are many bracketed references to paragraph 
numbers in the present translation I prefer, following Karl's usual practice, not to 
burden all of them with page numbers and thus link them to a single edition of 
Hegel's Logic. 
17. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, p. l. 
18. Hegel claims that the science of logic systematically treats "the determi-
nations of thought" (Science of Logic. pp. 63-64, my italics). The system of the de-
terminations of pure thought may be implicitly complete in any act of thinking. It 
then is explicit in the Science of Logic as a text only if the final thought determina-
tion or logical category-what He gel calls "the absolute idea" -never proves inco-
herent. The category of Substance proved incoherent in Spinoza's Ethics. But Spi-
noza himself could not know that the absolute under his description of being the 
Substance was incoherent. Analogously, only some successor to Hegel would 
know that some further thought determination beyond the logical absolute idea 
does not merely particularize that idea empirically in the philosophy of nature 
and spirit, but rather constitutes a new and more coherent logical category. But 

Lectures on Logic 
xxii 
this important question of interpretation cannot be pursued here in a translator's 
introduction. I have discussed it elsewhere. See Butler, Hegel's Logic, pp. 288-292. 
19. Regarding the popular ·romantic" philosophy of feeling stemming from 
Jacobi and continuing in Jakob Friedrich Fries (1772-1843), Wilhelm Martin Leb-
erecht de Wette (1780-1849), Friedrich August Gottreu Tholuck (1799-1877), but 
first and foremost in F. E. D. Schleiermacher, see Hegel, The Letters, pp. 254-258, 
537-544; and G. W. F. Hegel, •Review of K. F. Goschel's Aphorisms," trans. Clark 
Butler, in Miscellaneous Writings of G. W F. Hegel, ed. Jon Stewart (Evanston: North-
western University Press, 2000), pp. 401-429. Hegel, though disagreeing with Ja-
cobi, was much more indulgent with the grand old man than with Jacobi's younger 
followers, who were rivals to Hegel himself. He writes in a letter, ·Beyond personal 
pain, Jacobi's death has ... overtaken me .... We feel ever more abandoned as, one 
by one, these old branches which we have beheld with admiration from youth on 
die. He was one of those who formed a turning point in the spiritual development 
not only of individuals but of the age, who were pillars of the world in which we 
represent our existence" (Hegel, The Letters, p. 443; cf. pp. 304, 318, 32L 331, 358-
359, 364, 431). But Hegel shows contempt for Fries's metaphysical appeal to a mere 
empirical fact of consciousness in an 1811 letter (Hegel, The Letters, pp. 257-258). 
Regarding Schleiermacher, Hegel traced the Schleiermachian mere feeling of abso-
lute dependence on God very early to Jacobi's false reduction of reason to feeling. 
See G. W. F. HegeL Glauben und Wissen, in Aufsiitze aus dem kritischen Journal der Philo-
sophie, Siimmtliche Werke, ed. Hermann Glockner (Stuttgart: Friedrich Frommann 
Verlag, 1965), pp. 388-389. 
20. Phenomenology of Spirit (1807), The Science of Logic (1812-1816 ), Encyclopaedia 
of the Philosophical Sciences (1817, 1827, 1830), and Philosophy of Right (Die Rechtsphilo-
sophie, 1821). 
21. Hegel, The Letters, p. 475. 
22. ·1 do not know how to satisfy your wish to obtain a copy of a notebook 
of my lectures on the science of religion. You will more easily obtain this through 
connections with students among whom such notebooks are circulating, though 
they do so without my knowledge and-according to the few I have had occasion 
to see-not always exactly to my satisfaction." Hegel, The Letters, p. 543. 
23. •Karl Hegel was born on June 7, 1813, in Nuremberg and died on Decem-
ber 5, 1901, in Erlangen. He was the eldest son of the philosopher Georg Wilhelm 
Friedrich Hegel and of his wife Maria Helena Susanna von Tucher. After finishing 
his schooling and university studies in Berlin and Heidelberg and returning from 
an extended voyage in Italy (1838-1839) he at once found employment in the Prus-
sian school system. In 1841 he became professor of history in Rostock. In the years 
of the 1848-1849 Revolution he was politically active as Editor in Chief of the new 
Mecklenburgischen Zeitung. In 1856 he took a newly created teaching chair in history 
at the University of Erlangen. Here Karl, married to Susanna Maria von Tucher, be-
came the 'first true historian in the modern style' (T. Kolde). With his History of the 
Constitution of Italy (1847) he suddenly came to know fame, and with his further re-
search works and the publication of his twenty-seven volume Chronicles of German 
Cities he entered the first rank of German historians and became the internationally 
highly respected 'Hegel of German Cities' (R. Fester)." Helmut Neuhaus, •Karl 
Hegel und Erlangen." Faculty of History, University of Erlangen, 5 December 2001. 

Translator's Introduction 
xxiii 
Online at http://www.geschichte.uni-erlangen.de/aktuelles/hegel.shtml (accessed 
9 September 2007, my translation). 
24. Arthur Schopenhauer, Parerga and Paralipomena, trans. E. F. J. Payne 
(London: Oxford University Press, 1974), vol. 1, pp. 96, 144-145. 
25. Hegel, Science of Logic, p. 32. 
26. "The system of logic is the realm of shadows, the world of simple essenti-
alities freed from all sensuous concreteness. • Hegel, Science of Logic, p. 58. 
27. Thus to translate "determinate being· as "determinateness having being• 
(Bestimmtheit zuniichst als seiende-p. 97 below) is like translating •a human being• 
as "humanity as being• in preference to "humanity as being instantiated. • It is to 
refer to an individual human being by referring only to universals. 
28. "Review of K. F. Goschel's Aphorisms: in Hegel, Miscellaneous Writings, pp. 
420-421. 
29. A fuller but still brief case for a nominalist interpretation of Hegel that is 
consistent with his texts appears in Clark Butler, "Hermeneutic Hegelianism: 
Idealistic Studies, vol. 14, no. 2 (1985), pp. 121-135. 
30. See below, p. 2. 
31. See below, p. 144. 
32. Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary, s.v. Matter, 2c. Online at http://mwl. 
merriam-webster.com/dictionary/matter (accessed 9 September 2007). 
33. See below, p. 145. 
34. See below, pp. 213-214. 
35. See below, pp. 172, 177. 


Lectures on Logic 


Introduction to the Lectures on Logic 
Preliminary General Concept of Our Subject Matter 
(§19) 1 We shall first consider here the attitudes adopted by thinking to-
ward its object in general. The science of logic has as its subject matter, 
thinking, the pure idea. Thinking is the ground within which the logical 
idea, what thought in truth is, appears. Every science has its own subject 
matter. As far as the subject matter of logic is concerned, it is at first sight 
like the subject matter of any other science, much as botany has as its 
subject matter plants, and so on. Yet the subject matter of logic is higher 
than that of any other science. Thinking is higher than space and time. 
It is by thinking that we separate ourselves off from the animals. Just as 
heaven is higher than earth, so thinking is higher than our vegetative 
nature. Thinking is not simply one object alongside others. (§20) Think-
ing does not arise alongside the mental activities of sensation, will, and 
so on, but is rather ever present within them and is all-embracing. Yet as 
a subject matter it is nonetheless difficult. Unlike botany, physics, or 
mineralogy, logic has nothing to do with sensory intuition. The activity 
of tasting or feeling is sensory, while thinking soars above of any sensory 
object. With the onset of thinking, all mere seeing and hearing must pass 
away. In thinking we surrender our firm hold on all the representations 
of sensory objects with which we are familiar. All such representations 
must be put aside as we take up the pure element of thinking. 
Geometry unlike thinking contemplates objects in space. It does not 
focus on space itself. It considers something spatial-though as geometri-
cians we do have space itself within the scope of our view, right there be-
fore our very eyes. But something sensory about space still remains [as 
that from which geometrical objects in space are abstracted]. The an-
cients held that geometry was an introduction to philosophy. For in ge-
ometry one has to do, not directly with sensations, nor with any interest 
1. That is, starting from §19 in the Encyclopaedia. See G. W. F. Hegel. Logic: Part 
One of the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences (1830), trans. William Wallace, 
with foreword by J. N. Findlay (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975), p. 25ff. 
l 

Lectures on Logic (4-5) 
2 
of inclination, but with lifeless products of abstraction from sensation. 
The mind is much exercised in holding fast to such simple objects. 
The subject matter of logic, however, is still more abstract than that 
of geometry, and is indeed known for its difficulty. We are not used to 
moving about in such rarified stratospheres and must acclimate our-
selves to them. We must hold on tight and persist as we steer our poor 
vessel off into the vicinity of such abstractions. What is involved here 
is the strain of negation, of putting all sensation off to the side and of 
keeping our own bright ideas to ourselves. In doing so we must truly 
strain. Only then will we come to behold the true subject matter of 
logic, which in this regard is most certainly a difficult subject. We lack 
any way of bodily laying hold of it. It is as if the very ground of our or-
dinary consciousness had fallen away beneath us. Yet what is difficult 
when one is not yet used to the matter becomes easy with practice. 
What comes first in our approach to logic is the historical side, what 
kind of origin logic has had -logic and along with it metaphysics, for the 
two sciences coincide. The origin of logic is no different from that of any 
other science. Determinations come forth in the conscious mind that, in 
logic but not in geometry, have not been extracted from the senses, and 
that belong rather to the thinking subject. If we take the simplest of 
sensory judgments-for example, the rose is red-what lies before con-
sciousness is in appearance totally sensory. Yet the is in this judgment is 
already something of a different and non-sensory nature. There is noth-
ing sensory about being, it is already something quite different. 
Further, the rose and what is red, as we find them before us in sensa-
tion, are one, while it is I who introduce difference or division between 
them. What lies ready at hand is simple and undivided. It is I who differ-
entiate and divide-I am the source of judging [urteilen] and of the act of 
dividing [ein Teilen]. This judgment belongs to me as to the one who ap-
prehends [what is simple by introducing division]. But what is more, if I 
say "red," the predicate expresses a universal characteristic that at once 
belongs to blood and various other objects. Yet what I have before me is 
only a singular red, this determinately red thing. Yet this same red also 
assumes the character of universality which at once belongs to me [inso-
far as I have abstracted it from what is singularly red]. 
But one is no more able to single out color in general in contrast to 
any singular color than to refer to the animal in general as opposed to 
referring to this dog or this elephant. The elephant in generaL the dog 
in general, the species does not objectively exist. The genus is some-
thing still more general, which once again falls to me as subject. If I 
speak of cause and effect, saying for example "The house is toppled by 
water," what I see by my senses is the water and afterwards the toppling 
of the house. Yet the determination of the one as cause and the other as 
effect is not a sensory determination, but is a determination belonging 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (5-6) 
3 
to me. Only the successive happenings in time are sensory. Careful in-
spection shows that, along with sensory objects and interwoven with 
them, logical forms arise that are quite alien to them, that are not sen-
sory objects. Such forms have been as extensively classified as the spe-
cies forms of plants and animals, and they moreover have been classi-
fied for themselves rather than for any external purpose. The complete 
classification of these forms is logic and, along with it, metaphysics. 
Only at the very end of scientific education do we reach the point of 
observing these logical forms. For the sensory realm is more stimulating 
to us. Reason in its theoretical form lies in assimilating to ourselves what-
ever is external. in procuring for ourselves the content of objects. As 
human beings we start out in poverty and wish to enrich ourselves with 
the whole content of the world, with a drive to win for ourselves all the 
abundance that can be found in the world itself. If we say "white" we lay 
hold of the content of something that appears in ever different objects. 
Our cognitive drive is to make external objects our own. As human be-
ings we are the activation of thinking. I am this very activation. Thinking 
expands by its inner instinctive tendency into everything objective. Yet 
at first we lack all awareness of thinking, it has not yet become an object 
for us. Just the reverse is true of sensory objects, which are what first ap-
pear to us as objective, and which we then assimilate into our own sub-
jectivity. By the [pre-conscious] instinct of thinking we ourselves have 
introduced the form of universality in the proposition "The rose is red." 
We still know nothing consciously of the universality present in this 
proposition. Universality does not lie immediately in my consciousness, 
it is not yet an object for me. Yet we ourselves are thinking, and what we 
must now do is to make it objective to ourselves, to posit it out here for our 
consciousness as an object, just as conversely we transpose sensory ob-
jects into ourselves from the outside. The strain of reflection here is greater 
than in observing a sensory content that is already itself an object. 
The thought forms have been observed and classified, especially 
those of the logic of the self -concept [Beg riff]. Aristotle has already clas-
sified for us the logical forms belonging to subjective logic[. i.e., the logic 
of the self-concept as distinct from the objective logic of being and es-
sence]. Logic has thus gained currency as a science that has reached 
completion, and until now we have on the whole added nothing essen-
tial to it since Aristotle. The essential foundation of logic also belongs to 
Aristotle, and this is what today circulates as the usual school logic. Yet 
it has fallen into contempt, on the one hand quite justifiably but on the 
other quite without justification. Aristotle proceeded from observation, 
summoning forth the entire universe in a parade before his mind 
[ Geist]. 2 He went through the general principles [of nature]. he gave 
2. Geist will be translated as "mind" when the reference is limited to the intel-

Lectures on Logic (6-7) 
4 
consideration to the plants and animals. The physiology of the ani-
mals-regarding their walking, their waking, their sleeping-as well as 
the human mind and spirit-regarding sensation, seeing, hearing, 
memory, fantasy, the nature of the state and of the will: in all this he 
went observingly to work, speculatively treating everything he ob-
served. He laid down experience as the foundation, and then passed 
over from it to the thinking concept. He observed and classified the 
forms of thought in the same manner as he classified the species forms 
of nature. But he went no further than that. He thus never reached the 
forms of rational thinking or of the self-concept as such. The Aristote-
lian forms are rather those of the understanding [Verstand]. Not even in 
his reflective ponderings did he go after these forms of rational think-
ing. And even if he had done so he would not, in his time, have been 
able to give birth to the speculative self-concept. 
We must all familiarize ourselves with such forms of the understand-
ing as Aristotle brings forth-they are forms of thinking, abstract forms 
and one-sided laws. Yet if they are to be of service to true thinking, we 
must not interpret them so separately from one another, [as Aristotle 
does,] since they would then be only forms of untruth, finite forms. 
They would then be only so many different sides of concrete truths, and 
so would be one-sided. We must tear them out of their one-sidedness 
and bring them into their interconnection. It is because of such one-sid-
edness that logic has fallen into contempt, and with good reason. 
The form of identity considered abstractly for itself, for example, is 
an empty abstraction, but in connection with difference it is most im-
portant and most essential. It will be said "Everything is identical with 
itself," "A =A." Or, to express the law of identity negatively as the law 
of non-contradiction, "Nothing can be in contradiction with itself." 
That is a fundamental law of thought. If we apply this law immedi-
ately in the realm of singularity-"This plant is this plant, this animal 
is this animal"-it is a completely one-sided determination; [when 
taken] formally identity is abstract. Yet difference must also exist 
within identity. One says that all finite things pass away, that their 
very essence is to cease to be. Self-negation is their nature. We say 
"What is finite is," but this law already contains a contradiction inso-
far as we apply being to what is finite. Finite things consist precisely 
in being contradictory. "Nothing contradicts itself" is thus a poor ex-
cuse for a law of logic. Every irrational action is upon itself contradic-
tory, bad states go under because they are contradictory. One can even 
say "God is contradictory," since he embraces self-negation. I feel need, 
which negates my self-concept. The feeling of non-being in need is a 
lect of an individual or of the species. It will be translated as •spirit" when it refers 
to objective or absolute spirit, or when a contrast to nature is intended. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (7-8) 
5 
drive. Activity always proceeds from need. God embraces activity, and 
activity posits alteration, it posits something that is within itself other 
than itself, something imbued with power. In all activity there is dif-
ference and at once self-identity, for I am identical with myself in what is 
different from myself. This difference [of determinations belonging to 
what is self-identical] is found everywhere in consciousness, for I have 
consciousness of something other than myself, and in that other I am 
nonetheless at once identical with myself. Hence identity, difference, 
and contradiction are in everything. So just as I can say ·Everything 
is identical" I can equally say "Everything is contradictory." 
Spirit as mind can withstand self-contradiction, while natural things 
fall to the ground through their self-contradictions, in that something 
other than each such thing develops upon it. In heaven and on earth, in 
spirit and in nature, nothing can be found to be merely abstractly self-
identical. As an example, consider the syllogism • All men are mortal, 
Cassius is [a) man, and therefore Cassius is mortal." This syllogism is al-
lowed to pass as valid, but it is defective: "all men" means ·each and 
every single man," and "All men are mortal" is presented as an empiri-
cal proposition as in "All metals are electrical conductors." The terms 
"all men" and "all metals" presuppose empirical awareness of each and 
every individual. Thus I must have already known it to be true of Cas-
sius that he is mortal in order to be able to assert "All men are mortal"! 
Logic considers forms alone. True forms require true content. Form 
determines content, for the essential form of every content is the idea 
at the end of the science of logic. The absolute form, the self-concept, 
the idea, is the true content. If forms reveal themselves to be purely 
formal and untrue in their content, they are one-sided forms. The law 
of mere self-identity is thus defective, which is why logic in the form 
of school wisdom is an object of contempt. False categories like this do 
not arise in concrete thinking and life, and have no greater validity in 
logic and philosophy. Though absolutely indispensable, they are in 
themselves defective. Still, one must be able to give an account of 
them, as to why they are false and absolutely indispensable. We, too, 
in our science of logic shall lay hold of these familiar forms. But we 
shall come to know them only as moments of the true form. This true 
form can be a fully rational logic only insofar as it is a logic in which 
thinking has won the dignity of being the basis of truth. In the remark 
to § 19, the idea is said to be the totality of determinations. The true 
science of logic is difficult because it does violence to the understand-
ing. It comprises what is speculative and yet at once embraces what is 
the easiest of all. Ease lies in simplicity. Because we are thinking be-
ings, thinking pervades everything of which we are aware. Yet logic 
poses a difficulty in other respect, in that its all-pervasive determina-
tions are so very well known that it is not considered worth the trou-

Lectures on Logic (8-9) 
6 
ble to occupy oneself with them. If we truly investigate what these de-
terminations are, we strain to hold them fast each for itself. In addition, 
once we examine them carefully, they turn out to be quite different 
from what we initially allowed them to be. Everyone, to be sure, natu-
rally has hold of some logic. We think immediately, and to think we 
have no need to study logic. We even brag about having no need of 
such study. Yet thinking is already a worthy subject to come to know. 
We thereby learn the extent to which what we think is true. 
Given the utility of logic, we become masters of natural logic by think-
ing. Yet thinking and having thoughts are different. The object of our 
study in these lectures is to gain knowledge of thinking, to know what 
we as thinking beings are. A human being is spirit [ Geist], and to come to 
know what lies therein is our highest achievement. Whatever a human 
being is, we are truly human only insofar as we know who we are. A 
human being bears within him- or herself a right to such knowledge, but 
the actual possession of what is one's right is still something else. 
There is no unnatural artificial logic, it is said, but conscious logic with-
out a doubt can exist. We receive pure thoughts into our heads, thoughts 
which are true. We learn how to hold fast to what is universal. and it is 
by doing so we receive our education and learn how to lift out what is 
essential. Considerations of utility must not be scorned. We must come 
to know what is true for itself rather than for external ends, it is said. Yet 
the other side of the matter is again utility. God sacrificed himself on 
the cross within the natural world for the sake of the world of individ-
ual human beings. Thus what upon and for itself is most excellent also 
proves to be most useful. 
(§20) We come to approach our subject still more closely as we now 
consider thinking, which belongs to consciousness. We human beings 
think, the animals do not. Thinking is called a mental power, a faculty. 
Embracing feeling, representation, imagination, the faculty of thinking 
taken as a whole is known as theoretical mind. Beyond theoretical mind 
lies the will, the faculty of desire. Thinking at once falls to intelligence, 
to which representation and intuition also belong. Thinking is said to be 
but one mental faculty, one activity-one among others. Each power is 
taken to be independent, and the soul is imagined to be what holds such 
and such faculties within itself. The soul is taken to be a kind of external 
medium [Umgebung] in which every faculty independently operates for 
itself on its own account. When such representations are used we speak 
of mental powers, and relate them to one another through determining 
each to be tacked on as also present. What we have here is an only ex-
ternal compounding. Our immediate consciousness is held within [the 
limits of] such categories. 
We also represent mind as a one in which everything is contained. If 
we inquire into the relation between these activities, it must be said that 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (9-10) 
7 
to be human is to think. But what is thinking, what does it do? It is 
nothing apart from what is universal. Thinking produces the universal, 
and it is by doing so that thinking is thinking. If it is said [with Kant] 
that thinking forms concepts or brings manifold representations into 
unity, such a statement is superficial to the extent that every represen-
tation, every sensation, is already both one and upon itself a manifold. 
The earmark of thinking is rather the form of the universal which it 
produces. This earmark first makes its appearance in assertions and defi-
nitions, and it requires for itself proofs. We cannot simply appeal to repre-
sentation in establishing what is said here of thinking. What is to be 
said here is only the introduction or preliminary to the science of logic. 
What we adduce here is more properly historical, affording only a rep-
resentation of the science. In the science itself it will be seen that the 
universal for itself, on its own account, is necessary, that the other forms 
revert back to it, that it is what is true. The universal is the product of 
thinking, but [in this preliminary exposition] the universal form is 
taken up merely empirically. We represent thinking to ourselves as an 
activity. As an activity thinking is the universal in its activation. The uni-
versal is the form by which something is thought. Thinking is active, 
and the result of its deed is what is thought, regardless of the content by 
which thinking is affected, on which thinking imposes universality. 
The subject, the thinking subject, is the I. That the I is essentially the 
thinking subject may at once take us by surprise. We represent to our-
selves the I as proliferating in particular determinations, in this range of 
knowledge, we represent it as this wholly concrete I. Yet what exists out 
there for us to take up [as its abstract essence free of any particular con-
tent] is merely the I, the thinking subject. 
Thinking, having concepts, seems far removed from us, but it is in 
fact what is closest at hand. In thinking I remain absolutely at home 
with myself. I am myself this thinking. This close proximity of think-
ing, this immediate oneness of thinking and myself, also impresses it-
self on us. We represent thinking to ourselves as separable from the I, 
but it is in fact what is most present in it. If we say "I go," "I am suffer-
ing," "I am pleased," the I remains ever present in these determinations 
[Bestimmtheiten] of my state, of my interest or will. I can thus be deter-
minate in multiple ways. Now I feel, now I don't, I now instead will, and 
so it goes. Yet in all these determinations I remain as the common 
thread to it all. Put differently, I accompany all these representations[, as 
Kant has it]. "Accompany," however, does not say enough: I am entirely 
invested in these representations. 
Yet I am not merely the common thread among all these determina-
tions. A determination held in common is a bad form of the universal 
by which diverse things are compared as similar. Comparison is an ex-
ternal reflection on things that does not belong to the things them-

Lectures on Logic (10-12) 
8 
selves. So the I is not merely common to all things by comparison, but 
is rather absolutely these things all at once and all taken in only once. 
Yet I am also, in my self-abstraction from things, merely universal, and 
as such I am on the contrary free of every one of these things. The mere 
I is not only intuiting, feeling, and so on, but is also at once none of 
these. If feeling, intuition, belonged to my very nature, I could not be 
without it. The I stands in its freedom above all of these things. I posit 
myself absolutely as simple self-reference. The I is a pure thought space, 
which like sensory space can be filled in an infinitely various manner. 
The I is thus perfectly simple, bearing reference only to itself, and free-
dom of thought lies precisely in this simple self-reference. Thinking in 
its determinateness is the [concrete] universal, but I can also abstract 
from everything. The I in this self-abstraction is completely empty, 
which is what among the East Indians has passed for what is most high. 
In this emptiness I am this completely unitary individual, I negate ev-
erything and exclude all. Just so is infinite singularity present in the I, 
which once again also contains absolutely concrete determinateness. 
But in saying "I," in invoking this absolutely singular being of mine, I 
say directly the opposite of singularity. For everyone says "I" in refer-
ence to him- or herself. The word "I" which I say means everyone. The 
I, in this its singularity, is at once completely universal. 
I am the thinking subject. The I illustrates the self-concept by exist-
ing throughout for itself alone, merely on its own account. Thinking is 
the universal taken as active. The universal is first what is abstract. By 
a "concept" we usually understands a determinate representation of the 
imagination. But in the science of logic the concept is something com-
pletely different, of which the I provides an example. This singular sub-
ject is immediately united with the I. Only as this singular thinking 
subject does thinking lay hold of truth, and its product is whatever is 
thought, the universal. The I is thus most contradictory, being com-
pletely universal and at once perfect singularity. From where we now 
stand [before the onset of the science of logic], the claim that I and 
thinking are completely identical can only be based on an appeal to 
representation. Logic is the science of truth. What is purely abstract is 
totally lacking in truth, and singularity considered abstractly merely for 
itself is untrue. 
On the distinction between sensory objects, representations, and thoughts. 
In common parlance "representation" and "thought" are interchanged 
promiscuously. But the difference is a matter of high importance. Re-
ligion is on the whole held within representations, while science thinks 
representations. First comes what is sensory, and it will be said that 
what is sensory falls to the senses. But how are the senses determined? 
How is what is sensory so constituted that it lies within senses? A sen-
sory object is determined as immediately singular. I have a singular 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (12-13) 
9 
sensory intuition only at this determinate time, at this moment, abso-
lutely situated in time and space, and this intuition is immediately de-
terminate. The simple character of whatever is sensory, as likewise the 
simple thought determination of what is sensory, is singular in its im-
mediacy. I. like any sensory object, am also singular, but the singular-
ity of the I. unlike that of a sense object, is mediated by universality. I 
am singular only insofar as I am mediated by universality, just as the 
I is universality only as mediated by singularity. The I exhibits singu-
larity raised to the level of pure universality. What is sensory, by con-
trast, shows only abstract singularity. But a human being as a person, 
as an agent of action and willing, is what, from its beginning as sen-
sory, has raised itself, within the I. to the level of universality. 
The object of sensory intuition is a manifold that is richer than mere 
sensation. But the manifold activity of combining that results in the in-
tuiting of such an object is itself singular. The manifold character of 
the determinations is separate from them. In intuition we have the 
object of intuition in a single one, and the combination of singular deter-
minations likewise always occurs in a singular manner. Representing 
the object of intuition is something still further. In sensation the ob-
ject, assuming it is an external object, exists in interconnection with 
our own corporeal nature and external being. Representation, unlike 
sensory intuition, is taken up for itself, without the immediate refer-
ence of such intuition to one's body in its given external environs. For 
I can have an image of an object without standing immediately in front 
of it, without physical contact with it. The representation resides es-
sentially within me. The I as the simple universal is the self bearing ref-
erence solely to itself. Thus if a manifold of intuition lies within me as 
a simple being, that manifold sensory material comes to be simplified 
by me. Insofar as this material enters into me, it must enter the I re-
duced to a point, and this point affects the sensory material with its 
own simplicity. We find this already to be the case with images. In the 
external intuition of objects I myself am more externalized than I am 
with the representations of imagination. The image of an object is al-
ways more indeterminate than the sensory intuition of it. Within rep-
resentation individual points are no longer as determinate as they 
were within external intuition. Further, the image lies within me, 
within the universal space of representation belonging to universal 
time, something I carry around within me [while changing my loca-
tion in sensory space]. Representations are more simplified than ob-
jects of sensory intuition. Their form is simplicity itself, universality 
itself. Representation is thus more spiritual than a sensory object. Two 
things to be distinguished in representation are its form and content. 
Its content is twofold: sensory content and thought content. Quite 
generally, the form of representation resides within me. Representa-

Lectures on Logic (13-14) 
10 
tion, and thinking even more so, epitomizes. They are compendium-
like. For example, I represent to myself a battle which, within sensory 
intuition, is completely infinite, is of the most infinitely manifold 
character. But the representation of being a battle is totally compen-
dium-like. The battle in its existence, as immediately represented, is not 
as simple as it is in [subsequent] representation. 
To cite another example, I know blue as a particular color by sight. 
But as completely simple as my representation of blue is, the color blue 
exists amid an infinite swarm of other objects. If I leave everything 
other than blue aside, blue cannot exist merely for itself, in an isolated 
state, without contrast to other objects. Here we become active in 
analysis and composition. This activity of analysis and composition 
begins in representation as an activity of simplifying and generalizing 
what is particular. Here our own conscious activity of negating or ab-
stracting finds its onset. Here we find the activity of representing [by 
images] generally. A representation is isolated and is simple [relative 
to what it represents] within its isolation. A representation may stem 
from without, from the senses, or it may stem from the mind [ Geist], 
but is it not yet the self-concept even if it may still be labeled as a 
thought. I unite separated determinations of an object, e.g., of a flower, 
in my representation, in my image of it. What we have is the unifying 
of a manifold. Such unifying acts of representation proliferate. There 
are many acts of uniting. Philosophy lies merely in sheer acts of unify-
ing manifolds. But at this stage, in representation before the onset of 
philosophy, external determinations come to be bound together con-
junctively by an "also." As belonging to a subject they come to be re-
counted one after the other, but the subject itself is, as it were, the 
rigid self-same point to which they all belong. Our representations of 
the properties do not bind themselves to one another on their own. 
Rather, they remain isolated over against one another. They come to 
be bound together only externally, in a third thing. The chief charac-
teristic of representation is that the references which two things bear 
to each other in representation lie within a third thing. The under-
standing posits essential referential relations, referring to terms such 
as cause and effect, but has no insight into the necessity of the rela-
tion. Religion is full of representations, but again it lacks insight by a 
self-same subject into the necessary relation of the determinations as 
one after another they come to be recounted. Any insight into such 
necessity is lost on representation as such. Thinking is simply some-
thing else than representing. To thinking as such belongs whatever is 
universal. The forms merely lying upon our representations are the 
very content of thinking. Thinking is their activation. Thinking has to 
do merely with the forms as such. The question arises as to the worth 
of these forms. Thinking [is, in its product,] purely universal. Repre-

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (14-15) 
ll 
sentations are given as determinate and in isolation alongside one an-
other. Thoughts are as universal as representations, and yet a referen-
tial relation enters into thoughts. The mutual reference of cause and 
effect is a thought. Through the positing of the one the other is also 
already posited. So likewise with the whole and its parts. These deter-
minations necessarily bear reference to each other. The two determi-
nations, holding forth in their independence even while bearing refer-
ence to each other, distinguish the understanding from the self-concept. 
Thinking is what is universaJ.l Sensory intuitions and feelings are sin-
gular. Yet a determination such as singularity at once exhibits univer-
sality. For all things are singular, singularity is shared by them all.4 
Singularity is thus not separated from universality. Thought is itself 
and yet reaches out into what is other than itself. 
Language belongs to us as human beings, and so bears the mark of 
thought. Thus language prevents us from saying what we can only in-
tend saying. What is within me-what I alone hold as merely my opin-
ion-is peculiar to me, belonging only to me. If I say MThat is my opin-
ion• I think others do not share the same opinion. For my opinion 
[Meinung] is only mine [mein]. From this Plato distinguished5 M~a or 
opinion from i:mm:iJflTJ or knowledge. Yet when I openly speak my 
opinion what I utter can only be universal. If I say M This point here! • 
this point is at once all points, everywhere in the world. If I say M now!· 
now is every moment of time. If I speak, say, or will "this!" as some-
thing totally singular, it is everything, for everything is a singular 
this. Whatever is singular becomes, as soon as we utter it linguisti-
cally, something universal. We help ourselves out with names, but 
nothing could be more arbitrary. The name lacks any [necessary] ref-
erence to the person named. When I say "I" I mean this absolutely 
singular individual. but what I thereby succeed in referring to is rather 
every individual. It is said of feeling that it is something ineffable, that 
it is throughout merely something peculiarly mine. But of all state-
ments that is the most meaningless and lacking in truth. I determine 
what is singular, this or that, by universal determinations which can 
each be shared with other things. What is singular and what is uni-
versal are thus quite inseparable, and here lies the nature of whatever 
is concrete. There is nothing true in what is singular as such, just as 
there is nothing true in the universal as such, since both are only 
empty abstractions. As we think and philosophize abstractions no 
3. That is, to think is universalize, to generalize, the singular or particular de-
termination into a universal as the product of thinking. 
4. That is, all things are singular, but when thought or predication attributes 
singularity to them it makes them into something universal. 
5. Compare to Plato, Meno 98a; Republic VI. 509d-5lle; Republic VII, 
533d-534a. 

Lectures on Logic ( 15-16) 
12 
doubt arise, but it is precisely the job of [the science of speculative] 
logic to come to know the true nature of abstractions, to come to know 
that whatever is abstract is thereby empty of truth. 
(§21) We now come to thinking, to what it in general is. We have al-
ready called it the activation of the universal. Thinking [in its reflec-
tion on an object] belongs to the conscious mind. We speak, in con-
nection with thinking, of reflection, of thinking something over. We 
at once harbor representations of law [Recht] or of the state, we think 
about it, and by thinking something over we believe we fathom its es-
sence, what is essential or true in it. This prejudice of the ancient 
world[, namely the prejudice that by reflecting on something we get 
to its essence, which is the first position of thought toward its object,] 
has now become shaky, as in more modern times everything else has 
been attacked and even overturned [by the second, skeptical position 
of thought toward its object]. Among the ancients it was never doubted 
that by thinking something over we come to know it. Philosophy, it 
has been said, comes to know things from the ground up. But the po-
sition that has now [in the third place] become current is that we hold 
to be true what, on the contrary, immediately reveals itself, what arises 
without further reflection. [This is the third position of thought po-
lemically reasserting immediate truth against skeptical Kantian at-
tacks.] But we have said that thinking has a product, which is none 
other than the thought which it thinks, the universal. This means that 
the universal is actually present within the matter at hand, it is the 
universal inhering within the matter itself, its inner universal. But 
with this position of thought toward its object we revert to the an-
cients: one arrives at the true matter at hand only by an activity of 
thinking it over and of producing the universal. 
(§22) The further determination of thought [beyond ancient meta-
physics, is the second position of thought toward its object in Kant's 
critical philosophy, which goes beyond the ancient naive optimism 
about finding the universal ready at hand]. It consists in holding that 
thinking effects an alteration in the object of thought over against its 
sensory show. Relative to what by that sensory show we first supposed, 
this show comes to be altered by reflection [Nachdenken]. Genera and 
species are uncovered, all of them something universal. The law of fall-
ing bodies, of movement, is something universal. What we have di-
rectly before our eyes is by contrast immediate. Subsumption under the 
species alters what is immediate. We strip away what is sensory, and lift 
out the universal. The forces of nature are likewise universal. The alter-
ation underway here we call abstracting. It seems absurd, if what we 
want is knowledge of external objects, to alter these external objects by 
our very [abstractive] activity upon them. Quite absurd to want to come 
to know things as they are [in themselves] and yet alter them, thus re-

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic ( 16-17) 
l3 
ceiving things into our knowledge only as altered. The alteration con-
sists in the fact that we separate off what is singular or externaL and 
hold the truth of the thing to lie in what is universal rather than in what 
is singular or exten1al. Quite oddly, for Kant it is by altering things that 
we are persuaded we secure their inner truth. 
(§23) The true nature of things arises in our consciousness by way of 
thought. I receive the object into myself, but the true nature of the ob-
ject is a product of my mind [ Geist]. As a thinking subject I am present 
in the object, and precisely herein lies my free relation to the object. On 
the one hand, I entirely forget myself to occupy myself merely with the 
nature of the thing. But, on the other hand, the true nature of the thing 
is produced merely by the activity of my own thinking. That is the con-
nection between the nature of the thing and my own essence. 
uTo think for oneself" is a redundant phrase. For no matter what 
one thinks, one is thinking for oneself, just as one eats for oneself or 
drinks for oneself. But the phrase #thinking for oneself" has also been 
used in reference to so-called original persons who have come up with 
something no one else has ever produced. Originality is highly rated, 
but from originality what is to be derived is only peculiarity [Besonder-
heit]. 6 What is true is universal upon and for itself. What is peculiar, if 
it is only peculiar, is of negligible importance. Homer affords an intu-
ition of things as they must be, but the poet himself in his idiosyncrasy 
does not intrude. Whenever something is solid, its peculiarity van-
ishes. People speak of the arrogance of philosophy and knowledge: 
man has eaten of the prohibited tree of the knowledge of good and 
evil. This separation [of oneself from the rest of creation in the conceit 
of having exclusive self-knowledge] is, to be sure, the root of sin. What 
preceded this separation was only a state of unconsciousness, of obliv-
ion. Man alone can fall into evil. What he ought to be he must first 
make himself be by overcoming evil. This separation is indeed the 
root of evil. 
In knowing I come to be for myself. Insofar as I am I, I am completely 
free. I can become evil in that I can abstract from what is just, from what 
is ethical [sittlich], and set myself in opposition it. I can abstract from ev-
erything, so that I am left with no essential content. That I so posit myself 
is abstract conceit, and everything for me is then conceit. I am this self-
conceit, but only insofar as I remain stuck in self-abstraction. Knowing 
encounters this opposition, but the same activity which passes this self-
separating judgment, which introduces this division, also holds court 
over it, over the same division. Knowing then once again enters to heal 
the division. Which means: a human being has eaten from the tree of the 
6. Besonderheit is normally "particularity: but with a negative connotation it 
becomes "peculiarity." 

Lectures on Logic (17-18) 
14 
knowledge of good and evil, and only thereby has become human. A 
human being was persuaded that, in eating it, he would be the equal of 
God-the height of conceit. Subsequent confirmation of this was attrib-
uted to God: "Man has become like one of us." 
A human being is spirit; consciousness, and with human knowledge 
[Wissen] he is at once the knowledge of the opposition between the 
human knower and the natural created world which, apart from us, is 
devoid of knowledge. Insofar as this opposition brings in the will, it is 
the opposition of good and evil. Reconciliation, when it occurs without 
opposition, is natural reconciliation. The animal becomes what it ought 
be, and it does not stray from the natural law of its being. A human 
being, however, comes to be good by virtue of his freedom, by his free 
will. But this opposition [of good and evil] contains their reconciliation. 
The form which reconciliation takes here lies in what we have already 
pointed out. By thinking objects I arrive at their truth. In thinking ob-
jects I am free insofar as I think them, and thus at once have hold of 
their content. Here I abandon my prior self-conceit and enter into the 
matter at hand by thinking the object, and such thinking then itself be-
longs to the matter at hand. The above opposition is here raised up be-
yond itself, and reconciliation is thus at hand. Arrogance lies in holding 
on to something peculiar to oneself. Modesty consists in receiving for 
oneself the matter itself which lies before oneself. True modesty consists 
in not insisting on what is one's own, in not insisting on one's peculiar-
ity, in not remaining stuck in one's own idiosyncratic ideas, but instead 
in willing only the matter itself. As we look only at the matter itself, 
nothing peculiar is present. 
Feeble-minded modesty holds itself clear of the matter itself, and 
such modesty directly passes into arrogance again. Conscious of its 
own merit, modesty then forgets to forget itself, while when we hold 
ourselves within the matter itself we forget our peculiarity. In know-
ing we are free, we remain firmly lodged in thinking. In philosophy 
we have to do with the matter itself, and with the surrender of self-
conceit. Aristotle held that we ought to make ourselves worthy of 
knowing the matter at hand.7 This matter, this substance, God, truth, 
has being upon and for itself. 8 We must make ourselves worthy of rais-
ing ourselves up to the level of that matter. We make ourselves worthy 
when we leave our peculiarities behind. We enjoy dignity by taking 
up residence in the content of knowledge, in what is substantial, and 
such dignity is quite the contrary of arrogance. 
7. Compare to Aristotle, Metaphysics 1.2, 982a4ff.. 982bl9-32. 
8. Anundfursichsein has usually been translated as "being in and for itself." My 
preference for "being upon and for itself" is explained in the translator's 
introduction. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (18-19) 
15 
(§24) Thoughts understood as what is thought may be called objec-
tive. This seems to be a contradiction, since thinking thought is subjec-
tive. But the terms "subjective" and "objective" are used in very differ-
ent ways. When I say that thinking is "subjective" [in the positive 
sense]. I mean by "thinking" my freedom, my universality. But we 
also say [negatively] that something is only subjective, such as an 
opinion, an assurance, where one means peculiarity by "subjectivity." 
Pure subjectivity is the 1,9 this single one in its pure universality. On 
the one hand, thoughts are subjective, but are objective only insofar as 
I [as subject] have hold of them [as objects]. On the other hand, objec-
tive thought occurs where the content of the thought is the very mat-
ter at hand itself-it means that this matter is objective on its own ac-
count. This matter is also what matters to me. This objectivity is 
invoked spiritually as well as non-spiritually, since what is spiritual 
has in appearance something unessential about it [which conceals the 
matter at hand which I must come to know]. 
Logic, it can now be seen, coincides with metaphysics. However, the 
matter at hand is chiefly thoughts. But one understands by "logic" think-
ing only insofar as it is subjective form, while by "metaphysics" one un-
derstands an applied thinking, a thinking which extends over the objects 
held in representation. Metaphysics thinkingly contemplates God, the 
soul (rational psychology), and the world (cosmology). It is therefore a 
thinking of objects. We may indeed call it applied logic, though it is very 
different from the applied logic of the usual textbooks. The distinction 
between thinking and its objects falls by the wayside, for we now have 
objective thoughts, i.e., thoughts which themselves are the matter at 
hand. One thinks the matter, one does not think about it, but we are rather 
lodged within it, in the matter itself. Objective thoughts are thoughts 
which constitute the content itself, they are what is substantial. Logic is 
thus content, and with that it coincides with metaphysics. 
Among the forms of logic the self-concept, judgment, and syllogism 
[Schluss] are likewise apprehended. It seems that these forms belong to 
the conscious mind, and in one respect that is right. For one says "I form 
for myself a concept of some matter." The same thing that I have in my 
consciousness of the matter truly belongs to that matter itself, it is its 
substance. This implies that the self-concept has a certain content, but 
that this content is also to be the content of the matter itself. The predi-
cates that arise in judgment are not added to the matter; rather the mat-
ter at hand has these predicative determinations upon itself. In judg-
ment I distinguish between subject and predicate, and this division is 
something subjective, it is [subjective] form. But this division occurs in 
the judgment of finite things. The object has the property, but is also 
9. Das I eh will be translated as "the I,· not as "the ego. • 

Lectures on Logic (19-20) 
16 
separable from that property. Things are thus their own judgment in 
the realm of the finite, for their properties are separable from them. 
Anaxagoras was the first to say that nous rules the world, 10 not per-
sonal thinking, but rather the activation of the universal, determinate 
development toward ends, realizing its goals. If one says "God by his 
wisdom rules the world," God is thereby in the world, not outside it. 
We will see that things themselves are concepts, judgments, and syl-
logisms-these are forms of nous, of universality. The animal is some-
thing universal, but without realizing it, it is universal only for the 
human mind. The laws of spirit are universal essentialities, and the 
essentialities of what itself is objective. 
(§25) The entire interest of philosophy revolves around the fact that I 
have a concept of this object because I know what is universal in it, which 
is what is abiding. Individual animals die off, the universal species re-
mains. To be sure, the universal is present in what appears to the senses 
as something singular, but the species present in the individual remains 
and preserves itself despite the death of the individual. When we say 
"There is an object present, the very matter itself," it is we who speak who 
are the subject. The opposition established here between subject and ob-
ject is of the greatest interest to philosophy. Contained within this oppo-
sition is the determination of truth. Yet we must distinguish philosophical 
truth from ordinary truth. Ordinary truth lies in the fact that our [sub-
jective] representations agree with an object, that representation has the 
same content as the object. In representation, the content of the object 
becomes more general than it is in the object itself, but the essential con-
tent nonetheless remains. Our representation ought to correspond to the 
content, and that is truth in the ordinary sense. In other words, truth is 
something I possess [in my subjective representations]. The question as 
to whether the objects themselves have truth-which is truly of philo-
sophical interest-does not even arise. If we express ourselves more pre-
cisely, all we can say is that the representations are correct. 
The rule by which the representation is judged [in theoretical judg-
ment] is the object with which it agrees or does not agree. The object 
Jays down the law to which pliable thinking, in its representation, 
adapts. But in practical life we have one unbending aim, one obliga-
tion [Sollen], one plan. When we build a house, it is we who establish 
the rule[, i.e., the blueprint by which matters are measured]. Things 
are not themselves the rule, but rather must conform to our chosen 
representations. Matters are correct when we make them adapt to our 
chosen rule, to our representation. 
10. Anaxagoras, Diels fragment 12, in Selections from Early Greek Philosophy, ed. 
Milton Nahm (New York: Appleton-Century Crofts, 1964). For Plato on no us see 
Phaedo 97b; for Aristotle on nous see Metaphysics 1.3, 984b8. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (21-22) 
17 
At the same time as we pursue diverse interests like house building, as 
human beings we ought to regulate our practice by the [moral] law. The 
doings and strivings of human beings do not lay down this law, and so in 
morality matters are quite the contrary of what occurs in the pursuit of 
such diverse interests. Here an ambivalence enters. The moral law must 
be true in itself, and our practice must correspond to it. We can thus say 
of an action, morally speaking, that it conforms to its aim, which is what 
makes it a true action. And so we effect a transfer of truth over [from our 
subjective representations, e.g., in choosing to build a house,] to what is 
objective, and rightfully so, since whatever is objective in our action 
ought to correspond to the moral law. We have, to the one side, our own 
objectivity, our own immediate being with its impulses, and it is by sub-
jecting them to moral education that we are to become what we ought to 
be. Off to the other side, there is another objectivity[, the moral law,] 
which relates itself to the objectivity of our impulses. 
We now generally have hold of both something objective[. i.e., im-
pulse] and something subjective, i.e., thought. [By the ordinary con-
cept of truth,] the external object provides the rule in theoretical pur-
suits, while what is mental [das Geistige] lays down the rule in practical 
pursuits. Truth in this second higher sense also has two sides: one the 
one hand, what is objectively real. and, on the other hand, its self-
concept as such. In the case of truth in the ordinary sense, the only 
question is whether we have hold of it. In the case of higher truth, the 
other to which the house or my action is to conform is its self-concept, 
and the question is whether the objective reality conforms with its 
self-concept, whether it is what it should be. Truth occurs when a real 
object [whether an external object or an action] conforms to its self-
concept. What is bad is then something untrue, since it is opposed to 
the concept of what it ought to be. An action which fails to conform to 
its purpose is a bad action and fails to be a true action, where before 
[in the truth of something real] the thought was objective under the 
determination of being the self-concept. 
The ideal occurs where the thought and nothing but the thought is 
realized. What is ugly is only an accident of one or another sort, as when 
the self-concept of being human does not alone pervade a human being 
but exists alongside illness, grief, passion, and so on. In whatever is 
beautiful, reality completely determines itself beginning from within 
and then moving outward. 
We shall come to know such higher truth more closely in the idea, 
where the self-concept is at once reaiity. What is true is the idea. In the 
idea there are two determinations: thought and reality, thought and the 
object or being. Abstractly viewed, we have an opposition of thinking 
and being, and the idea is the unity of the two. There are thus two sides, 
and the only question is the relation between the two. It is a question of 

Lectures on Logic (21-23) 
18 
their unity, of the kind of unity that is found here. That is the great ques-
tion of philosophy, which has principally occupied the interest of our age. 
If thought determinations are finite, they are untrue. Truth generally is 
whatever is infinite. Truth is found wherever reality corresponds to the 
self-concept. Thus the self-concept has hold, in reality, of nothing beyond 
what is its very own. That the two are other to each other is mere show. 
The self-concept intuits itself in reality, it is for itself in what is reaL it is 
other than itself but is at once one and the same as itself in the other. 
I have a plan for a house as soon as I record whatever I wish to do, but 
this plan is fully contained only in the house itself by which the plan is 
carried out. Infinity lies in such a correspondence between the plan and 
its execution. The self-concept in this correspondence lies beyond itself, it 
is no longer merely for itself but finds itself within an other, in diverse ap-
pearances. And yet even in this beyond the self-concept is at home with 
itself and has thus returned within itself. If I relate myself to something 
other than myself, I am finite. My sight comes to an end in the object 
seen, and in visual sight I thus comport myself as a finite being. But in 
thinking I comport myself as an infinite being, since I remain through-
out by myself in my object. If what is real corresponds to its concept it is 
infinite, and that is affirmative infinity. Insofar as thought determinations 
are finite they do not conform to truth, which is infinite. 
The plain relation of what is real to its self-concept is either finite or 
infinite. If what is real is other than its self-concept, the relation is fi-
nite, and the determination of thought by which we apprehend what is 
real is itself only finite. But this finitude of thought determinations may 
be taken in two ways. By the first way, they are, as thought determina-
tions, something merely subjective and in their object they meet with 
their end [End] which makes them finite, which stands over against 
them as a negation of them. By the second way, finitude[, instead of 
being an external limitation on the thought determination,] enters into 
the thought determination itself. Thought determinations bear finitude 
upon themselves when one such determination finds its limit [Grenze] 
in another thought determination [rather than in its object]. The con-
tent of a thought determination can have its limit in another thought 
determination, much as a cause has its limit in the effect, much as a 
volume of space has a limit [in an adjacent volume]. 
We have, then, thinking and being, the self-concept and the object. 
We have said that truth lies in what is objective, which gives us both the 
self-concept and its object. A higher matter for our consideration than the 
object as distinguished from the thinking of it is the relationship of the think-
ing to its object. In considering how we think, we note that we first think 
in a totally naive manner. Thinking is present in all my representations 
because I myself am present in them. We then naively assume that by 
thinking we learn what the truth of a matter is. The first mode of philoso-

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (23-24) 
19 
phizing was this naive mode. The truth of the matter came to be taken up 
in thought quite immediately [without distinguishing our thinking of 
it]. The presupposition was simply that we arrive at the truth by thinking. 
In this first mode of philosophizing, the opposition between thinking 
and objectivity has not yet been thought. Such was the path followed by 
ancient philosophy. The ancients did not make explicit that thinking is 
different from the matter itself, from the object thought. 
According to the second position [or mode of philosophizing], 
thinking and the object are considered to be different, so that we sim-
ply fail to reach the object through thinking. Rather, we at once take 
up the object quite as it is in itself, without thinking it. If it is said that 
the subject must conform to the object, the mode of philosophizing is 
empiricism. But if it is said [with Kant] that thinking is a development 
of forms internal to thinking itself while the object itself remains ex-
ternal to the forms [without the forms conforming to them,] quite an-
other separation occurs between thinking and the object. 
The third mode of philosophizing is a return to the first path of the 
ancients, but now with a reflective consciousness of our own thinking, 
and of the alleged fact that thinking in general, the subject, is immedi-
ately connected with its object. The subject does not exist without im-
mediate knowledge of the object, and it is only by thus knowing the ob-
ject that consciousness attains to truth. But according to this immediate 
knowledge [in Jacobi]. both determinations-the subject with its im-
mediate object-are limited to a single object, to God. In immediate 
knowledge thinking and God as the object thought are inseparable. 
These positions of thought we must now go through one by one. What 
holds interest in our present time revolves around these relationships. 
A. The First Position [of Thought] toward Objectivity 
(§26) Spirit has been thought. What spirit is in and for itself has been al-
leged to be known only to thought. The world, what it is in its essence 
when it is abstracted from external sense perceptions, also came to be 
contemplated thinkingly. There was in antiquity confidence that think-
ing could not fall into error once it strode forth for itself and on its own 
account. On the whole this was the procedure through all the [empiri-
cal] sciences, even in natural history and the doctrine of nature. Kinds, 
species or laws, powers were contemplated in these sciences, and were 
brought together by reflection. The content of thought was supposed to 
correspond to appearance. This content was to be the essential content 
of what exists. But what exists upon itself has its inessential side. Yet 
what exists is not left in its immediacy, but comes to be grasped in its 
universality. Thinking is thus present in all the sciences. 

Lectures on Logic (24-25) 
20 
As innocently as one proceeds today in the empirical sciences, phi-
losophy in antiquity has proceeded just as innocently with its objects. 
We shall see [in section B.II, below,] the nature of what Kant in his 
critical philosophy called experience. Philosophy in antiquity differenti-
ated itself from the other sciences, from the empirical sciences in partic-
ular, only through its objects. The objects of the empirical sciences are 
finite. Philosophy also had its objects, whether they were found in our 
consciousness or were apprehended by sense perception. Yet these ob-
jects were each to be the whole, they were each to be the same universal 
all-encompassing object. The absolute object is God, over against which 
the world passes as something accidental. Yet the question comes back 
again as to whether the world, by virtue of its matter, is eternal. Beyond 
that, the world is space, a complex of infinitely numerous things. The 
world is only these disparate existing singular things. In philosophy the 
world is viewed as the whole and becomes the universal object. Another 
object of philosophy is the soul. It was obvious [to classical metaphysics] 
that the soul was an object of an entirely different order than the world. 
Such are the objects which philosophy has elected for itself, and through 
them philosophy distinguished itself from the other sciences. 
(§27) Philosophical thinking can either be authentic speculative 
thinking or it can be a thinking that holds itself within finite determi-
nations, either a thinking of what is true or a thinking of what is finite. 
In the latter case it is a thinking that lacks all truth because it is deter-
mined by what is other than it itself, because it does not go back into it-
self but goes beyond itself to what is other than it. We shall first consider 
thinking with respect to this second, finite, defident side. Philosophizing, 
which has the totality for its object, has comported itself in a finite man-
ner. The objects and thought determinations that the other sciences 
have are finite, but philosophy is to have totalities for its objects. If the 
thought determinations of philosophy are not absolute, they fail to cor-
respond to their object. The consideration of infinite objects according 
to finite thought determinations is the philosophy of the understand-
ing. The understanding insists on finite thought determinations, so that 
philosophy becomes merely the understanding's view of reason's ob-
jects. [Classical] metaphysics received its complete development prior to 
the [Kantian] critical philosophy. The earlier philosophies were merely 
fragmentary, with much of what is speculative mixed in with the rest. 
But metaphysics, and Wolff's metaphysics in particular, has developed 
finite thought determinations. This philosophy has now passed away, 
but the thinking determined by it is still present. Our most immediate 
reflection contains only categories of finitude. Laws, forces are all 
thought forms, but the question is whether these thought forms are to 
be taken up in their finitude or in their truth. Naive thinking can be true, 
it can be speculative, but [in classical metaphysics from antiquity on] it 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (25-26) 
21 
has been so uncritically. It has had no consciousness of the thought 
forms which it has used and by which it has fallen into contradictions, 
so that it has since been remarked that this is not the way in which we 
reach the truth. The predicates which are given to objects are thought 
determinations. From §33 and from the following [paragraphs] on, the 
thought forms of metaphysics are pointed out. We can leave them aside 
here. If we wished to go into them in a more detailed manner, we would 
have to go into the entirety of metaphysics. 
The first general branch of metaphysics is ontology [§33), 'tO ov, the 
metaphysics of what is. The ontological determinations of essence, 
being, unity, manyness, substance, and phenomenon on the whole 
make up the Aristotelian categories. In his Metaphysics Aristotle goes 
through the same categories, the categories concerning whatever is [a 
Kan:yoQi'tat m:Qi. 'tWV ov'twv]. The special, more concrete branches of 
metaphysics have treated, first of all, the soul[, i.e., rational psychology, 
§34], but merely according to the thought of it, without empirical 
psychology in which what we know from sensory experiences about 
the activity of the soul is taught. Spirit is the organization of all our 
doings. Its activities belong to it as such. By the ·soul" one under-
stands rather a thing, ens. We inquire into the seat of the soul. As 
something bodily, spirit steps into what is spatial. The third branch of 
metaphysics has treated the world, cosmology [§35), the theory of na-
ture, natural history, and so on. Along with this branch the determi-
nation of the freedom of the soul is also treated. In cosmology the 
world has been treated only by abstract thoughts. Yet the world can be 
considered in its truth only as nature, by which the world is nothing 
abstract but is rather something actual, an essential being. But if we 
wish to consider the world, we must take it up through its activities 
and external expressions. The philosophical approach to the world is 
the consideration of it in its necessity. What is concrete ... 
[A text fragment is missing here in the German transcript.] 
... then [we have] rational theology [which is the fourth branch of 
metaphysics, §36], reaching as far as the light of reason. Proofs have 
been given that God exists and abstract determinations[, i.e., divine 
attributes,] have likewise been apprehended as belonging to God 
alone. 
(§28) In §28 [of the 1830 Encyclopaedia] it is pointed out that in meta-
physical reasoning our procedure will first be to have a subject [of pred-
ication]. In knowledge, its predicates will then be enunciated. It is to be 
seen which predicates belong to the object which serves as the subject 
of predication. Predicates imply universal determinations. It is presup-
posed here that, if we wish to know an object, we must think it. Reflec-
tion brings forth thoughts, and the present naive metaphysics presup-
poses these thoughts-they become the content, the essence of the 

Lectures on Logic (26-27) 
22 
matter itself. There is as yet no mistrust, no doubt, but instead only 
sound human conviction. What is deficient in this naive procedure is 
that, though its thoughts generally contain truth, it is a further unan-
swered question as to how these thoughts are internally determined, 
how thinking develops in a more exact manner. In this naive proce-
dure, such thought determinations have been taken as valid predicates 
in isolation from one another, as containing truth in their mutual isola-
tion. For example, is the world finite or is it infinite? One or the other 
comes to be taken as a predicate that expresses something that is for it-
self true on its own account. Or, to cite another example, we may say 
"The soul is simple." Is a thought such as simplicity a determination 
which is true for itself on its own account? That is the further unan-
swered question [in classical metaphysics]. The one or the whole is a true 
determination taken in this way for itself-it has been taken up in a 
completely naive fashion. What was looked into here was only whether 
such predicates belong to the objects [rather than whether the thought 
determinations contained in the predicates were in themselves true]. 
That is the first mode of reflection, and on the whole we are right in 
adopting this mode: it is a question of this or that determination cor-
rectly belonging or not belonging to the object. The question is whether 
a judgment of this kind is correct: "Matter is composite," "The world is 
finite," "God is necessary being," and so on. But the further question is 
whether such predicates are true on their own account. Plato already 
said that it is necessary to contemplate the objects themselves, and that 
in doing so one goes beyond the objects in their sensory form. We can 
cite countless philosophical theories, but nothing is said thereby as to 
whether the content given in the predicates is in itself true. This exter-
nal consideration of the correctness of theories is left behind in a philo-
sophical consideration of the truth of the content. When this content is 
considered for itself on its own account, it is considered thinkingly. If I 
say "God is the cause of the world" the truth[, i.e., correctness] of what 
I say will be granted, but in saying it the true relation of cause and effect 
is not exhaustively determined. For a cause by itself expresses only a fi-
nite and at once untrue relation. Should we speak of what is true in 
causality, we must leave to the side such untrue relations. Awareness of 
this is obtained through the science of logic. 
There is nothing bad in determinations like force. Rather, we simply 
mean that these determinations belong to the subject of which they are 
predicated. But, once again, we must look into these determinations 
themselves to see if they are themselves true, and this leads us to a cri-
tique of such thought determinations. Everywhere I go I bring with me 
my determinations of thought, and bring them forward even without 
being conscious of them. I do so quite instinctively, until I am brought 
to the point of attending to them. But with that I come up with a con-

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (27-29) 
23 
tradiction. In mastering the situation, I thus come inwardly to know 
these thought determinations as I become fully acquainted with them. 
Judgments like "The paper is white" are quite correct,ll but their predi-
cates lack truth. The thought determinations must be investigated to see 
if they are true. 
( §29) Such ·predicates are of limited content. If we want to call in 
representations to bear witness to the limitations of our predicates, such 
representations are abundant when we speak, for example, of God or 
Spirit. What we find is that those simple predicates are not adequate to 
that abundance of representations. If I say, for example, "Spirit is sim-
ple," we have the totally empty determination of simplicity. Simplicity 
is inactive, lifelessly abstract, as when we say "Space is simple." We thus 
find the predicate "simple" to be inadequate to represent God. That 
"God exists" is the very least that can be validly said of him. This sort of 
predication has contributed to discrediting such naive metaphysics. If 
we apply to nature abstract predicates such as [appear in the judgment] 
"Nature makes no jumps, but rather advances by degrees," very little is 
said in comparison with the great abundance of nature itself. Predicates 
like "just," "good," to be sure express an affirmation, but they are also 
limited determinations. God is such and such, but with that what he is 
is not exhausted. Beyond that is the fact that these predicates contradict 
one another. If we proceed merely on the basis of God's justice, we pro-
ceed against his goodness. Or if we proceed on the basis of his goodness, 
we proceed against his justice. God is further all-powerful. If I pursue a 
determinate aim merely of my own, I proceed against divine power, 
since over against divine power any aim of my own must remain inde-
terminate. Yet if I say that God in his wisdom has created free beings, I 
at once say that he has created [the real possibility of] evil. Here again a 
contradiction arises. Such predicates at once show themselves to be of 
limited content. The Orientals[, e.g, the Hindus,] give their God infi-
nitely many names, each expressing a particular determination or rela-
tion to the world. But "infinitely many" is once again something inexis-
tent. These predicates belong to but one subject. They stand in community 
only through that subject, which is their bond. Beyond their respective 
determinations, they coincide in this subject. If I say of God "He is eter-
nal, good, wise," these three determinations are not connected with 
one another by themselves. Were they to be connected in this way, his 
goodness would have to inhere in his justice, and so forth. But these are 
accidental predicates of that subject. By contrast, when we say of a 
human being that he or she "has bowels," "has nerves," or "has m us-
11. "The paper is white" is correct in getting at a fact, but the question remains 
as to whether the statement gets at it under a fully coherent predicative thought 
determination. 

Lectures on Logic (29-30) 
24 
des," we have the feeling of speaking of one and the same thing in its 
function and activity. These predicates are not so very much merely side 
by side as to have their connection only in the subject of which they are 
predicated. Rather, they are directly connected with one another. The 
one cannot be without the other, since each is the same total living 
being. They are connected with one another among themselves. But in 
the case of non-organic things, we see an external relation of one thing 
to another. Gold has its different properties, and in the most minute 
particle of gold these properties remains the same. It has its properties, 
and the properties in this set are found over and over again side by side 
[in different particles of gold]. No matter how small the particle of gold, 
the set of its inseparable properties remains ever present. Yet we have 
no insight into any necessity of their inseparability, we merely have 
faith in it. But when we also say of spirit that it is willing and that it is 
also thinking, the properties of spirit are similarly enumerated side by 
side like those of gold. 
(§30) Such are the objects of [special] metaphysics: the world, the 
soul, and God, each a totality. Spirit, too, is a totality within itself, a 
whole which is at once an infinite realm. These are the objects of rea-
son. The representations we have of them lay the foundation in this 
naive metaphysics. Such representations are the standard by which we 
judge whether the predicates apply or not. The representations of God 
and of the soul are merely presupposed. A representation is something 
subjective. The present age has a different representation of God, as also 
of justice, from that of any prior age. But it should be spelled out just 
what justice by its thought determination is, just what God is, and so on. 
Often etymology can be called into service. We often say that all human 
beings have one representation of God or justice, but this does not pre-
vent anybody from having another representation. Thus all science has 
a contingent presupposition, just as the geometer begins by posnilating 
this contingent representation of a point or of a line. 
(§31) These representations of metaphysical objects at once appear to 
afford us a firm grasp. God, spirit, and the world are something deter-
minately fixed within me by a particular representation. We could not 
philosophize if we did not have, as a foundation, such a fixed represen-
tation. But the question is whether any such representation has itself a 
fixed foundation. This supposition comes into question as soon as we 
ask "What is God?" We give predicates to God, and our representation 
of God at first receives a fixed determination through this predication. 
But the nature of the objects of metaphysics is only now to be spelled 
out. When I ask "What is God" or "What is spirit?" the very sense of the 
question is that the given representation is not enough for me, that I am 
not satisfied by it. No matter what is, its thought determination must 
first be indicated to me. In judgment, it is not until the predicate arrives 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (30-31) 
25 
that the nature of the subject is spelled out. If I say "God is eternal," 
"God is omnipotenV my representation of God is extended beyond 
what is given in the subject. Going beyond merely what is given in the 
subject, I contradict what I first presupposed in invoking the subject. 
The representation contained in the subject does not suffice for me, and 
so I carry it out further. It is not until the predicate arrives that we ac-
quire knowledge of the subject from which we began. The absolute is 
often understood as merely abstract. But what the absolute is, or what 
God is, comes to be expressed through thoughts and their further deter-
mination. So it comes to be said in the science of logic that God is being, 
and then further on that he is essence, that he is the self-concept, that 
he is the idea. This is the form we give to our logic. We may thus make 
God into the subject, but the subject is what God is only if what we posit 
in the predicates comes to be the case. That is the matter before us, and 
whether it is called "God" or "the absolute" is of no consequence. By its 
subject-predicate form judgment is one-sided and hence false. If I say 
"God is eternal" I succeed in getting at something, but "eternal" fails to 
express the nature of God, and to that extent my statement does not get 
it right. God is an entirely different sort of concrete being from what is 
expressed by any such limited predicate. In philosophizing we have to 
put all imaginative representation to the side. Representations consti-
tute something fixed in our consciousness. If we were to try to rid our-
selves of all fixed representation [and not just put them to the side], we 
would nonetheless again have a representation, namely, the representa-
tion of finding ourselves floating atop something quite bottomless. 
(§32) Classical metaphysics became dogmatic. Skepticism has set it-
self over against such dogmatism. Skepticism has considered the repre-
sentations of our ordinary consciousness, of our ordinary assertions, as 
it has likewise considered assertions which refer to metaphysical ob-
jects. Skepticism attacks all such assertions and shows them each to 
contain. a contradiction: dogmatism philosophizes by exhibiting a state-
ment [Satz] that immediately licenses the opposite statement. "The 
world is infinite" and "The world is finite" are examples. Dogmatism 
pronounces one of the two opposed statements to be true. Stoicism, for 
example, has pronounced the truth to be thought, where its opposite is 
what is sensory. The metaphysical dogmatism opposite to Stoicism has 
thus said that the principle behind every human disposition and action 
is sensation. Dogmatism asserts that one of the two statements is true-
one is true, the other false. Either the principle of all truth is thinking 
or it is sensation. The two principles are different, and either the one or 
the other is valid. It is around such opposed metaphysical dogmas that 
all controversy in philosophy has turned. The supposition of the under-
standing [Verstand] is that if the one is true, the other is false. That is the 
finite [contradictory] faith of the understanding. For it has been found 

Lectures on Logic (31-32) 
26 
that both statements can be proven, and with such proofs consciousness 
has found itself in contradiction. This contradiction has called forth mis-
trust and doubt about thinking, and a disavowal of metaphysics gener-
ally. This disavowal lies at the basis of the second position of thinking 
[in relation to objectivity]. For such abstract predicates [as thought and 
sensation] do not correspond to the concrete content of that living total-
ity. Those predicates are dead, purely simple, and empty of all self-move-
ment. Spirit, however, is within itself living self-movement, while the 
rigidity of all such abstractions resists such movement. 
B. The Second Position of Thought toward Objectivity 
The history of philosophy beholds the transition to this second position 
more closely [than we do here]. This position harbors a mistrust of 
thinking, the conviction that it is impossible for thinking to get at the 
truth. It thus separates thinking off from the truth, and indeed off from 
objectivity in general. This separation comes in two versions: empiricism 
and the Kantian critical philosophy. Empiricism asserts that one gets to 
the truth only through sense experience as such. Our thinking must 
orient itself around sense experience, so that thinking is sidelined. The 
critical philosophy considers more closely than empiricism what Hexpe-
rience" means. It contemplates what is perceived in opposition to think-
ing. It sets the two determinately over against each other, and tries to 
show by thinking itself, by its own doing, that thinking is incompetent 
to apprehend the truth. The uniting of thinking and experiencing for 
Kant yields appearance, whereas thinking [by itself] makes totalities 
like the world, the soul, [and God] into its proper objects. But in so 
doing thinking no longer has experience of anything, as it falls into a 
labyrinth of representations and contradictions. This is the second posi-
tion, which on the whole is the principal standpoint of our time. With 
this second standpoint is connected a third standpoint, that of immedi-
acy [as in, e.g., Jacobi]. According to this third standpoint, thinking 
serves only to bring true knowledge into a state of confusion and thus is 
generally incompetent. 
B.I. Empiricism 
Empiricism is of the greatest antiquity. The skeptics, in particular, called 
themselves empiricists. They were quite conscious of having to do only 
with appearances. Yet true empiricism is modern empiricism, which 
comes to us from England (Locke). We are all natural born empiricists. 
We all perceive by our senses, we all rely on sense perception. From 
[metaphysical] thinking we all return in relief back again to empiri-
cism, which proceeds polemically, ferreting out what is true in our ex-

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (32-34) 
27 
periences. The contradictions in which metaphysics lost its way have 
precipitated this return to sense perception. The onset of mistrust in a 
priori [knowledge] resulted in this pure empiricism. The devil, miracles, 
magic, and superstition were allegedly all mixed in [with metaphysics]. 
Those caught up in superstition have indeed set out from thoughts of a 
general nature. Superstition has indeed made use of [metaphysical] 
thinking to vindicate itself. The desire which now asserted itself was to 
consider nature and its laws merely for themselves, and from this the 
grand principle of empiricism has proceeded. One can also get to empir-
icism starting from the spiritual side. As magic and witchcraft embrace 
a capricious side of our humanity, so there has been a quite different ar-
bitrariness prescribed in the political rule under which human beings 
live out their lives. Empiricism called again into question the issue of the 
divine right of kings at a time when it was previously said that the mo-
narchical principle was above all criticism. It is against this monarchical 
tyranny of accident and arbitrariness that empiricism asserts itself. We 
have entered into the same inquiry with respect to what the peoples of 
the world have allowed to pass as [international customary] law, and as 
internal state law. In empiricism the need arose to give validity to the 
wealth of our representations over against [metaphysical and political] 
abstractions. However, the endless extension of [empirically based] dis-
putation has made us to realize that by empiricism we just might end up 
demolishing everything. We have it in our power to make everything 
totter, 12 and here has arisen the need for a firm hold on something. 
What I am to believe I must myself have seen or perceived with my 
own eyes, or at the very least others must have perceived it. Thus it 
must reveal itself to me to be present [in what is perceived]. Nature 
has been made the [metaphysical object] of much reasoning, and what 
is present in nature has been inferred from abstract principles. In op-
position to this, empiricism [§37] said that whatever is present in sen-
sory objects must be perceived, that it is perception which gives cre-
dence and which supplies the content of belief. Here lies the principle 
of subjective freedom [in individual judgment). Philosophy, like em-
piricism, knows only what is. What is true for philosophy is also ac-
tual, and at the same time only what is rational is truly actual. What-
ever is bad in its existence [without being bad in concept] is null. 
Philosophy is concerned with what is, and has this in common with 
empiricism. It is far easier to say what ought to be than to say what is. 
If truth is to lie in what is, to state the truth is more difficult than to 
say what ought to be. We begin by passing judgment on something [by 
the standard of what it ought be]. What is false in a thing is thus 
quickly found, but it is more difficult to discern the genuine article. 
12. Hegel appears to allude to the Reign of Terror in the French Revolution. 

Lectures on Logic (34-35) 
28 
(§38) Empiricism and metaphysics share experience in common. Ac-
cording to representations which it itself presupposes, metaphysics like-
wise has its ground in experience. It proceeds from representations 
[grounded in experience]. But we must distinguish the sense perception 
[on which empiricism is based] from experience [in Kant]. A perception is 
but a single representation. In general. nothing singular qualifies as an 
experience. Perception is feeling, internal or external intuition. Experi-
ence belongs to the form of general representations and statements. 
Empirical science, the science of experience, distinguishes species. 
The laws of nature and of spirit belong to experience. Experience [of 
this sort] is something universal. Its triumph lies in recognizing the 
universal in the singular. The forces of nature are something transi-
tory and singular [in their various expressions], but in experience 
they come to be apprehended as universal. The universal comes to be 
fixed [in the mind], and the apprehension of it is thinking. When one 
has apprehended the universal in an event, one has at once accorded 
to the event its legitimate rights. So [the essence of] what we call uex-
perience lies in universality. This notwithstanding, universality in 
the form assumed in experience is not supposed [by empiricism] to 
have validity for itself on its own account. The validity of experience 
[according to empiricism] is not to be based on thinking or the uni-
versal. The fact that an electrical force exists in general. for example, 
is not to be based on the fact that the force develops [as a category of 
logic] in this particular way. For its universal content would then be 
discovered and proven merely by thinking. In empiricism the two 
sides of universality and particularity are so positioned as to deny that 
the particular has the universal for its basis. Rather, the believability 
of the universal content is to rest solely on perception. It will be said 
[by empiricists] that thinking has no place here, so that experience 
and thinking come to be set in opposition. But in order to discover 
something universal one must already believe in its existence. Kepler 
started out with the belief that reason, the universal. had to exist in 
the planetary system. Experience enjoys certainty by the immediacy 
of its existence with the object. The object is such and such, and I, the 
subject, know it certainly to be so. Something external. an object of 
my experience, has being; and in that it falls within me, it is identical 
with me. A consistent empiricism, which throughout Jays something 
sensory down as its foundation, leads to a denial of everything super-
natural. Naturalism, materialism proceeds from what is sensory. 
In the Kantian philosophy what is singular has been isolated from 
form, which has been cast into relief. Regarding the two forms of uni-
versality and necessity, it has been established that they are nowhere to 
be found in ordinary sensory perception. We have absolutely no such 
perception, for example, of the all. We so limit Nthe all" as to say that 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (35-36) 
29 
what is meant by it is only all things of which we know. But someone 
who says "All men are mortal" is not merely saying that all men we 
know of are mortal. What is meant is rather that man is mortal. We 
call this an induction, but it can never be complete. So we see that we 
cannot obtain universality by perception. As for necessity, it is the to-
tality back into which the system of essences returns. All universality, 
when cast into relief, belongs to the self-concept. In perception as such 
we have no necessity, but have only what is side by side in space, and 
before and after in time. What is singular, however, is not isolated, but 
is connected [with what is beyond it]. Yet the interconnection in per-
ception is purely sensory. It is not necessary. In space, everything has 
its place side by side [with other things]. Thus, in inner space, we have 
a multiplicity of representations all side by side. And so it is also with 
time. First something is, and afterward it is no more. We get close here 
to cause and effect. But what presents itself to perception is merely: 
now this is, but afterward something else is. However, that the succes-
sion hangs together as cause and effect is not given in perception. The 
interconnection of cause and effect lies outside time. For something is 
a cause only insofar as it has an effect. They are inseparably bound up 
with each other. Their unity lies outside time. In sensory appearance, 
to be sure, the one comes after the other, but this appearance is al-
ready foreign to the interconnection of cause and effect. 
So universality and necessity are not found in sense perception [§39]. 
From their absence in perception the conclusion has been drawn by 
empiricism that they have no truth, but are only a matter of habit, of my 
own distinct nature, of what is necessary to me, a necessity always lim-
ited to me. What is in question is thus only subjective necessity. Univer-
sality is thus only a purported universality. Laws of jurisprudence thus 
appear to be accidental. Hume came to this view. A follower of Locke, 
he drew the right conclusion as to the Lockean substance that we fail to 
perceive. We perceive neither cause nor effect. Law and custom are sup-
posed have validity for themselves. They are supposed to be universal, 
but universality is given a different interpretation by the skeptics. Law 
and custom are supposed to belong to the nature of spirit. But these 
skeptics then said that Jaw and custom [to be valid] must show them-
selves to be present everywhere, so that any place where they are not 
found represents a miscarriage of law and custom. If we consider exis-
tence empirically, we do not see by experience that freedom, for ex-
ample, is a universal property of human beings. But with that the [uni-
versal] right to property is attacked. It is said that property is only a 
habit introduced at some time or other. In religion there occurs the very 
same manner of proceeding. There are lots of religions. When experi-
ence is called to bear witness as to the constitution of religion, it teaches 
nothing determinate in the matter. Neither in religion nor in the matter 

Lectures on Logic (36-37) 
30 
of free will is anything fixed by experience. This is the system of philos-
ophy that passes for [modern] skepticism. It has assumed that experi-
ence is the foundation of all that is true. An important conclusion that 
follows is that all violence and lawlessness are grounded in experience, 
in what is factual. Humean skepticism is opposed to fixed principles. He 
made perceiving into the foundation. Ancient skepticism rather taught, 
against the Humean view, that perception is mere appearance. Things 
are and at once are not, for they are variable. The ancient skeptics ex-
hibited appearance in the place of being, and in this respect modern 
skepticism is quite the opposite. 
What we call "necessity" becomes, in the empiricist system, nothing 
but subjective necessity. But within empiricist perceiving, which wants 
to have nothing but contempt for thinking, thinking nonetheless enters 
as sense perception becomes experience [in Kant]. Species, laws-they 
are all universal. Composition [or aggregation] is also a universal cate-
gory, but is the worst of all categories. For composite things remain qui-
etly outside one another, and lack the unity which any living being 
must have. Thus empiricism, in an entirely unconscious manner, con-
ceals the [logical] categories and yet makes use of them, but without 
knowing what it is doing or even wanting to know. Philosophy has for 
its object nothing other than what is. But the experience of empiricism 
prefers the very worst of thought determinations. This is the reflection 
[on empiricism] made by the Kantian philosophy. 
B.II. The Critical Philosophy 
Kant starts out from Humean skepticism. He notes that universality 
and necessity do not exist in sense perception or sensory conscious-
ness, and so must be found elsewhere. It is presupposed in the critical 
philosophy that these determinations of universality and necessity are 
present. They are not to be found in sense perception, but they are there. 
So goes the critical philosophy. These determinations must then be 
found in thinking. Thinking is their source. Whatever we know we 
ourselves have affixed [to sense perception]. This is the philosophy 
that brought forth a revolution in Germany, the philosophy that 
changed the standpoint [of all German philosophy], and from it all 
further development has proceeded. This philosophy remains the basis 
of philosophizing today, so that the result of the Kantian philosophy 
has thoroughly penetrated education. 
With this advance what is called "thinking for oneself" is associ-
ated, consisting in the fact that every individual wants to produce 
something peculiar to himself. It has thus come to pass, and continues 
to occur, that ever since this Kantian philosophy has penetrated Ger-
man education each individual wants to produce something new for 
himself. Yet what one produces that is allegedly "new" is typically 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (38-39) 
31 
something very old that falls beneath the critical philosophy. Often 
philosophical systems that are chronologically later than Kant contain 
nothing more than the Kantian philosophy itself, and what they con-
tain that goes Nfurther" [than Kant] is still for the most part a return 
to the old metaphysics. 
The great merit of the Kantian philosophy is to have directly called 
our attention to the fact that use of categories by thinking proceeds 
without ever even being noticed. It is important to take cognizance of 
this Kantian standpoint, especially in order to realize that everything 
that gives itself out to be something beyond Kant is nothing but the 
Kantian philosophy itself accompanied quite inconsistently by neglect 
of the critical use of thought determinations. 
(§40) Within our knowledge there is a sensory content, and a gen-
eral relation to such content. The Kantian philosophy asserts that uni-
versality and necessity are as much a fact as sensory perception, and it 
is this fact that the Kantian philosophy seeks to explain. Hume ex-
plained universality and necessity as habit. In the Kantian philosophy, 
however, they are explained differently. Our own consciousness is ac-
tive in bringing forth these determinations. All our determinations-
such as ground and consequent, cause and effect-are determinations 
of universality. In the Kantian philosophy these determinations are 
taken to have their source in the I. They belong to the spontaneity of 
thinking. Not to the caprice of the I in particular, but to the spontaneity 
of the I in general. They are, in other words, something of one's own 
doing, something that determines the sensory material. 
I have before me a sensory perception, in fact many such percep-
tions. One sensory perception I call ground, another effect. It may occur 
to us that the fact that I posit these sensory perceptions and no others 
must ultimately be due to some outside cause. But these determinations 
of cause and effect have their source in my own activity. The fact that I 
apply these and no other determinations must have its ground outside 
the sense perceptions themselves. This system of philosophy is known 
as subjective idealism. If I say NHere are substances, subsisting essences," 
the truth of my statement is purely ideal. something belonging to me, to 
my thinking. There is nothing real in this statement that could be set in 
opposition to idealism. According to subjective idealism I am the one 
doing this. To use the Fichtean term, I am the source. 
It seems as if I could Nposit" at will, as if I one-sidedly produced for my-
self my own world. In just such a manner is subjective idealism under-
stood. Yet my activity is [externally] caused to determine the world to be 
thus and not otherwise, or as Fichte tells us, there arises [in the world] a 
resistance [Anstoss]. I become conscious of this my own determining, of 
my positing of these relations, in a material whose ground lies outside 
me, in what has being in itself However, I know nothing of this external 

Lectures on Logic (39-40) 
32 
ground and resistance. I only know of what is sensory, and of my own 
thought determinations. Outside them, however, there is a beyond that I 
do not know, and that offers resistance to me. That of which I do know is 
purely my own production, but that through which my production [of 
what I know] occurs is the unknown, it is what is in itself 
Within what is called experience, sensory [content] and thought deter-
minations come to be distinguished. Upon seeing an electrical phenome-
non I say it is an expression of a force. The force is a thought determina-
tion, it is what is objective in the sensory content. Beyond this thought 
determination is something completely singular [and non-universal]. 
like the expanse in which the electrical spark becomes visible to me. This 
singular localized expanse in sense experience is subjective. What is ob-
jective is the universal force. Thought determinations, Nconcepts of the 
understanding" as they are called, contain whatever is objective. 
(§41) It is said that this objectivity of a force once again falls to the 
side of subjectivity. The [objective] principle of my will is my own 
[subjective] practical reason. To this extent the [objective] concepts of 
the understanding are [also] subjective. What is objective, however, is 
whatever is universal and necessary, and yet even this is lodged in my 
own subjectivity. To be Nobjective" means first of all to be only what is 
universaL true, ethically customary [sittlich]. and so on. 
What is objective are the concepts of the understanding, though 
they are at once in another sense subjective. These concepts have been 
subjected to criticism. Stirring instinctively within us, they must be 
held fast. and we must come to know them. It is in these concepts that 
we place the greatest worth. However, they prove illusory until we 
have exact knowledge of them. Kant's critical philosophy seeks to un-
cover this knowledge. Experience has, asKant says, [two] components 
(the expression is poorly chosen): what is sensory and what is univer-
sal or objective, with the latter belonging once again to the thinking 
subject. 
(§42) Three stages are to be distinguished: a. theoretical [reason]. b. 
practical reason, and c. the reflective power of judgment. 
[B.II.]a. The theoretical faculty 
[1.] Knowledge in general. We have here something sensory and what 
is thought. Whatever is sensory immediately belongs to feeling in general. 
I feel something to be hard. The determination of hardness affects me. 
Or rather my eye is affected, and so it also goes with taste and smell. It 
is quite the same with inner feelings, revenge, anger, inclination. With 
the inner feelings there is no need to draw attention to the fact that we 
are dealing with sensation just as much as when we deal with external 
sensations. Such affections make up what is subjective .. 
[2.] A second stage [in knowledge] is intuition. Whatever is con-

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (40-41) 
33 
tained in my feeling I intuit. What I intuit is external to me, and it 
moreover consists in things that are external to one another, and in that 
respect the object of intuition is spatial. What I intuit is also in time as 
well as space, since my feelings come one after another. This successive-
ness is not immediate as I am affected by sensation, but holds separately 
from it. Hardness affects me, and what is hard is then something spatial. 
Spatiality and temporality do not belong to the sensory content. They 
make up what Kant calls the form of whatever is sensory, the form of in-
tuiting. He says they are a priori forms of intuiting. It is an active intuit-
ing that introduces them. Or, to put it otherwise, what we are affected 
with by sensation comes to be tossed into the forms of space and time, 
but their being tossed into these forms is our doing. 
Of whatever is hard it will be said that it is outside me. In intuiting I al-
ready turn inward, since I posit this content of what is hard as external to 
me. A metaphysical question then arises as to whether space and time are 
outside as well as within me, but we leave this question to the side. Space 
and time are for Kant to be forms of intuition. Space and time bear upon 
themselves the very universality of forms of intuition. They are left to be 
filled with content no matter how that content may be determined. Space 
is universal continuity, the quiescent [state of] things side by side. Time 
is also continuous. That is one side of the matter. We know our feeling to 
be immediately in space and time. This immediate universality of space 
and time is supposed to be an a priori form. 
[3.] Standing over against these spatial and temporal forms of intu-
ition are the categories or concepts of the understanding[, the third stage of 
knowledge]. The forms of space and time exhibit abstract manifoldness 
itself. Space lies in the fact of things being outside one another. Time is 
simply a thing's continuous passage beyond itself. This manifoldness 
has being merely for me as a completely simple non-manifold being. It 
is into this simple being of the I that the manifold of feeling and of space 
and time are tossed. I am thus what is simple, a self-identical I. I am this 
being that relates itself only to itself. This being of mine is at once the 
simple being of consciousness. It follows from this, since the manifold 
must enter into me as simple, that the manifold will be forced together, 
compressed. The manifold undergoes simplification, and this activity of 
simplifying it is thinking. What is simple within my consciousness is 
the concept, the thought determination in general, the category. To simplify 
is to bring things belonging to a manifold into relation with one an-
other. To relate the many means to bind them in a one. And that is sim-
ply a story of my own doing, which is called •original binding." The 
binding is •original" because it is unconscious. 
I am this simple being. Simplicity here means relation, a bond. This 
relation is determined in manifold ways. Different manners of simplifi-
cation arise. The determinate manners of simplification are the catego-

Lectures on Logic (41-42) 
34 
ries, the thought determinations, the concepts of the understanding. It 
is of infinite importance to be alert to this, and awareness of it belongs 
to the most common of educations. The determinate ground of concepts 
of the understanding lies in the fact that cause and effect, for example, 
are inseparable, the one coming after the other in time. If I say "This is 
the cause and that the effect" I posit the indivisible unity of both. This 
inseparability [of cause and effect insofar as neither can be without the 
other] is, when positively expressed, their identity. The ground for this 
is the original identity of the I, which is originally identical with itself. 
The I gives itself out to be the source of the categories. As the I un-
consciously acts on the sensory material, it is this totally simple being. 
That material comes to be viewed as an object that I have projected 
beyond myself. If I say "elephant," "cause and effect," and so on, I give 
expression to this sensory material in objective form. The activity of 
relating thus has two sides-the I and whatever is objective. As I con-
template mind, I think of it as engaged in representing, in thinking. I 
grasp the determinations of mind in one or the other of these two 
ways, either from the perspective of the representing thinking self or 
with regard to its object. To consider mind as conscious is something 
quite different from viewing it merely as the thinking I [in general]. If 
I consider my mind as conscious I am conscious of an object. Con-
sciousness lies in the fact that it is a conscious relation of me, of my ac-
tivity, to something else, to the object. 
The different relations that I entertain with objects are the Kantian 
categories. There are, as stated, two things here, my activity and the 
fact that the objects as such have being for me [in my consciousness]. 
The Kantian exposition describes the course of knowing, but it at once 
takes in the different relations of thinking, and of mind as conscious. 
In other words, his exposition comes to include mind as conscious. 
What we call "concepts of the understanding" were construed by Ar-
istotle as if they derived from what is objective [rather than from my 
activity]. According to Aristotle a category is what is said of whatever 
is. [With Aristotle] we imagine whatever is to be external, but it is al-
ready [unconsciously] a thought. The determinations of whatever is 
that follow are further determinations of thought. Here in Kant's criti-
cal philosophy, however, thought comes to be represented [con-
sciously] as a relation to what appears as objective. 
We must on the whole hold to the claim that knowing is a thinking in 
its determination of feeling, of intuiting. Categories are thought determi-
nations, and are manifold. The I is totally simple, entirely lacking in de-
terminations. It is taken in a totally abstract fashion, in its indeterminate-
ness. The categories, however, are determinate thoughts, determinate 
modes of activity, but we have [within ourselves] the indeterminate I 
understood as the source of whatever is determinate. Yet the question 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (42-44) 
35 
now becomes: how do I pass from the indeterminate to the determinate? 
How does this transition make its way from the universal to the particu-
lar? To ask "How does the animal [in general] come to determine itself as 
a totally particular animal?" is to ask that very same sort of question. It is 
just so with the I. This question is of infinite importance. 
In the Kantian philosophy the answer to this question could not be 
easier. Kant in fact passes over the question, since the determinations of 
thinking are taken empirically from the different forms of judgment as 
they present themselves in [ classical]logic. To judge is, to be sure, to de-
termine. The determinate manner of judging is determinate thinking. 
Yet what Kant found ready at hand [in the table of judgments] was 
taken purely from observation. The Fichtean philosophy proceeds from 
the I. as in actual fact the Kantian philosophy does also. Yet the Fich-
tean philosophy does so deductively, so that the necessity [of the transi-
tions] by which thinking goes through the series of determinations is 
exhibited. Fichte's philosophy rises to the immense challenge of coming 
to know the necessity of the progression. Kant brought his categories 
together externally. The Kantian philosophy also demands proofs, but it 
leaves proofs already by the wayside in its first beginnings. 
One speaks of transcendental [deduction]. Thought determinations 
come forth in consciousness, bearing their respective names. The artifi-
cial terminology that in fact comes forth in the Kantian philosophy is of 
course dispensable. We find in Kant the transcendental unity of con-
sciousness. What is transcendent is whatever goes beyond consciousness, 
beyond, for example, the understanding in its determinateness. Thus 
mathematics is transcendent if it goes beyond pure mathematics in its 
immediate form, where objects are left in the realm of the finite. Tran-
scendent mathematics goes beyond the understanding, as for example 
when the circle, the curved line, is observed to consist in infinitely 
many straight lines, which are at once infinitely short in length. Yet 
however these short lines may be represented, as straight lines they re-
main essentially different from the curved lines [that define a circle]. 
What is transcendent is thus totally contradictory. 
In metaphysics what is "transcendent" is what goes beyond the fi-
nite, as when, in [dogmatic] metaphysics, reason passes onto infinite 
objects about which it can say nothing. What is "transcendental:' as 
the term was used by Schelling in calling a branch of his philosophy 
"transcendental idealism," is rather what can in fact be reached by 
transcending the finite. The possibility of transcending the finite is 
provided by the I itself in the unity of consciousness. The Kantian 
philosophy passes on to a [transcendental] infinite. The source of this 
[transcendental. objective] infinite lies in the I. pure unity, a [subjec-
tive] infinite, a pure equality of self with self in which all difference is 
absent, hence which comes to an end in no limit. in no relation to an 

Lectures on Logic (44-45) 
36 
other. The I. directed to apprehending something objective that is at 
once infinite, is thus the true source of that infinite [as an objectified 
expression of itself]. If what is objective is now to be apprehended as 
the infinite, it is allegedly demonstrable that nothing remains in it to 
require a further ground. This is what was meant by Kant when he 
called his philosophy Ntranscendental." Designating his philosophy in 
this way has the purported result that one ought not to attempt tran-
scendence by going after [unknowable] objects of reason. For the [in-
finite) I is the source from which such transcending [of the finite], in 
order to reach the infinite, springs. 
(§43) The categories belong to thinking as such. Mere sense per-
ception is raised to the level of what Kant calls experience by the catego-
ries, which make up what is objective in experience. Regarding the 
categories taken for themselves, the criticism comes to be made that 
such concepts belong to the subject, but that within the subject itself 
they require some material content in order to have any value, so that 
consciousness may be filled with some content. When the categories 
are taken merely for themselves, thinking and its determinations be-
come empty. The categories are objective, but what is objective in them 
belongs to thinking, and so has objectivity only within the subject. It 
will be readily recognized that whatever is Nobjective" in this sense 
belongs to thinking. Such idealism lies in asserting that whatever is 
objective, since it is found in our consciousness, is ideal. 
Yet whatever constitutes what is real in experience is only a deter-
mination of feeling, and is at once admitted to be itself subjective. This 
yields subjective idealism. We can thus say that whatever is real proceeds 
within the limits of such [subjective] knowing. The chief question is 
whether such Nknowing" is true knowledge. The answer to this ques-
tion [in the critical philosophy] is that experience, in such subjective 
knowing, does not provide us with the truth. We do not know, in such 
knowing, what is insofar as it lies both upon and for itself. Rather, we 
have only subjective knowledge. Whether the categories exhibit upon 
themselves truth is not investigated by Kant. In the Kantian philoso-
phy thinking cannot get to the truth, since the thought determina-
tions are only finite. What is known by them is purely finite. In the 
science of logic we shall be leaving the [Kantian] opposition of objec-
tivity and subjectivity entirely to the side. It remains the firm convic-
tion of humankind that by thinking the truth can be known. To be 
sure, such thinking [as lays hold of truth] is itself subjective, but it also 
penetrates to the very heart of the matter, insofar as thinking does not 
stay put and behave in a finite mode. 
( §44) The categories [according to Kant] cannot be determinations of 
the absolute. Yet the absolute ought to be known. To really know [erken-
nen) is to scientifically know [wissen] something as it is in its own deter-

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (45-46) 
37 
minateness, according to the necessary connections it has upon itself, 
according to the necessity of those interconnections. It is in this that de-
terminate scientific knowing consists. By the [Kantian] categories we 
fail to apprehend the absolute, but there are two interpretations to this 
failure. Either the absolute cannot be apprehended in thought through 
anything finite, or-as comes to be conceded by some[, e.g., Jacobi,] in 
connection with Kant-sense perception falls within thinking. The ab-
solute, however, is simply not the sort of thing that can come to be per-
ceived [by the senses], and this is why the Kantian categories [which 
apply only to sense perception] do not suffice to apprehend it. Beyond 
the subject there remains, in total abstraction from it, the object simply 
as such, since what we know about it are in part only feelings and in 
part categories, which are all determinate and which all belong to the 
subject. The indeterminate being which remains yonder is the thing in 
itself, which allegedly cannot be known. How this other is constituted 
[in itself] is unknown, for how it is constituted [for me] is my doing. 
Let us agree with Kant that, over against the subject, there stands an 
other. Yet nothing is in fact easier than to know what the thing in itself is. 
It is something objective, it is not the I, it is something different from 
me, but in all this it remains empty of all determination in itself, it is to-
tally abstract. Moreover, this abstract thing is totally universal, where 
whatever is universal is understood to be a product of thinking. This 
worthless residue [caput mortuum] of a thing in itself is thus a creation of 
my own reflection, something still left over after all determinate objec-
tivity has been subtracted from it. The thing in itself is the universal, it 
is what is abstract. We may say that it cannot be known. For to really 
know is to know [wissen] an object scientifically according to its own 
determinate content. If the thing in itself is to be indeterminate, if it is 
to lack all determinate content for me, I can know it no more than I can 
see color on a totally white wall. We shall see later that what lies in the 
background of what is beyond the finite, what lies beyond the finite, is 
itself determinate. But there is nothing in the thing in itself for human 
reason to ferret out. It is untruth; it is not the truth we seek. This is what 
emerges at the present stage in the Kantian philosophy, in which every-
thing is laid out as subjective. Yonder is something in itself, a beyond, 
something totally empty. We shall show how empirical knowledge fails 
to be true, not because it is subjective, but because of quite another rea-
son. For its categories are merely categories of what is finite. 
(§45) The [Kantian] categories are finite thought determinations. 
They require material, and are in themselves empty. It is with this re-
quirement of a material stuff that their finitude is posited. These catego-
ries make up what is generally called [in the critical philosophy] Nthe 
understanding." Here a definite distinction between the understanding 
and reason arises. Reason is the capacity for [our relation to] the infinite, for 

Lectures on Logic (46-47) 
38 
the unconditioned. (Whatever is finite relates itself to something else 
and is thereby conditioned.) This view of reason is, on the whole, cor-
rect. Put negatively, reason lies in thinking what is non-finite. It has the 
infinite for its object. It is activity, indeed infinite activity, and its object 
is likewise the infinite. 
What is the "the infinite"? The "unconditioned," the "non-determined." 
It is whatever is identical with itself, whatever is equal to itself. What-
ever is simple is in this sense [abstractly] "infinite," since it is related 
to nothing other than itself. What is infinite in this abstract sense re-
lates itself to nothing that is other than itself. This [self-]identity is the 
original unity of consciousness. This self-identical being comes to be 
cast in relief [in Kant's critical philosophy]. It is said that this self-
identical abstractly infinite being is no longer contained in determi-
nate categories, that it no longer has any sensory material for its ob-
ject. Rather, thinking wills for itself an infinite object. it makes itself 
into this object. into the end. For this object is to be equal to itself, to 
be the infinite and not to be anything determinate. This self-identity 
is in truth affirmation, and is at once an abstract negation, in which 
all determinateness is negated. This standpoint, which [in the critical 
philosophy] goes by the name of "reason; must now be held fast. 
What is unconditioned is taken [by reason] to be what is essential or 
truly absolute. Empirical knowledge, from its side, is valid only for ap-
pearances. The content of experience fails to be adequate to the L to 
abstract self-identity, since empirical knowledge is always determi-
nate. The thing in itself is made [by reason] into the object. 
(§46) Yet a need to know the thing in itself asserts itself. As soon as the 
thing in itself becomes determinate through the categories we think it in 
a determinate manner. The categories are subjective. The thing in itself, 
however, is once and for all external to the categories, placed beyond and 
outside them. Should I wish to determine it, that determination belongs 
to me. The determination does not belong out there to the thing in itself. 
The above contradiction arising in the attempt to know the thing in it-
self may now be seen in a more precise application. Representation has 
hold of objects, not merely the thing in itself, but more determinate uni-
versal objects such as the souL the world, and God. The question for 
knowledge is now: what are these objects in themselves, in their truth? 
We have empirical knowledge of the activities of the souL we have sen-
sory perception of the soul. But what is the soul in itself? We have already 
seen that [an answer to] this question is rendered impossible by the pre-
supposition that what is in itself is indeterminate. Yet we have here [in the 
soul. the world, and God] determinate objects, and with that determina-
tion is present. This is a totally abstract contradiction. One wants to know 
something as it is in itself. but that is a contradictory demand, for what is 
in itself is indeterminate. This contradiction pervades the entire exposi-

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (47-48) 
39 
tion. To be sure the contradiction does not come to be stated this ab-
stractly, but it is still at the basis of the whole exposition. 
(§47) The consideration of the world [in the critical philosophy] is of 
special importance-consideration of the antinomies. But let us first at-
tend to the soul. The soul has been taken up by metaphysics under ratio-
nal psychology. It was first pointed out, in rational psychology, that I al-
ready find myself as conscious in my own consciousness. This conscious 
being, which I find myself to be, I transform into thought determina-
tions. Such is the procedure of the former [dogmatic] metaphysics. But 
now the critical philosophy asserts, regarding this metaphysics, that ex-
perience itself affords thought determinations. Yet we have no right to 
translate or transform this experiencing into [pure] thoughts. By the 
soul we understand a thing which is really mind in an embodied form. 13 
Human beings and the animals have souls. Yet human beings also have 
mind, but mind assuming the form of natural life is the soul. The soul 
is subject to natural conditions. Mind, however, is not in nature, but is 
the activity of self-abstraction from nature. The soul is mind in its im-
mediate being. 
In consciousness I find myself. it is claimed [§47], in these four em-
pirically given forms. [l.] I find myself as the determining subject. I am 
the ground, I am the concrete one who wills, who is active. 2. I also find 
myself as something singular, something abstractly simple. This simple I 
is the foundation of all my manifold determinations. 3. I also find my-
self in experience as self-identically one and the same in every manifold 
of which I am conscious. I have, prior to any given time, done that, said 
that, sensed that. All this belongs to me. I am one and the same in all 
such manifolds. I behave as seer, as thinker, as one who represents. I am 
always one and the same-just so do I find myself. 4. I find myself to be 
a thinking being distinguishing myself from the natural things outside 
me. Already my own body is outside me, outside my abstract self. These 
are the four points to which the I refers-this I which all by itself singly 
sets itself over against its bodily being as also over against external sen-
sory things. To be sure, we can know these four determinations from 
sense perception. Classical metaphysics, however, has not stood still 
with these forms as forms of sense perception, but has rather trans-
formed them into categories. Upon closer examination, the subject falls 
under the category of singularity, etc. Singularity is a metaphysical cat-
egory, but we may leave this aside and first take singularity as given in 
sense experiences. From such empirical knowledge one is to infer pure 
thought determinations that subsist for themselves, and that is what the 
former metaphysics did. 
[l.] The first principle [of rational psychology] is that the soul is a sub-
13. In this Kantian context, Geist is translated as "mind: not as •spirit." 

Lectures on Logic (48-49) 
40 
stance that corresponds to what I find in experience. I know myself to be 
an active subject. 2. The soul is a simple substance, it is singular, the ab-
stract relating of self to self. 3. I am one and the same in all manifolds. I 
am numerically [self-]identical. numerically one, having remained the 
same throughout. 4. The soul differentiates itself, isolates itself within it-
self, but at once stands in relation to what is spatial. All that has remained 
more or less unchanged [throughout dogmatic rational psychology]. 
It is unjustified, Kant now says, to substitute these four just cited 
metaphysical categories in the place of the proceeding four empirical 
determinations. Precisely this was already Hume's observation as re-
gards empiricism in general. namely, that categories are not really en-
countered in sense perception, and to this extent the critical philosophy 
holds no further special interest. Yet to the critical philosophy goes the 
merit of having freed [speculative] philosophy from the metaphysical 
use of the categories of the understanding regarding the soul-from the 
categories of simplicity, immateriality, and so forth. Whatever is simple is 
dead, not self-moving, whereas spirit14 is full of rich content. infinitely 
active. Abstractions like simplicity applied to the soul fail to contain the 
fullness of spirit. Spirit is essentially whatever is active. This activity es-
sentially falls on the empirical side, and yet the different activities must 
be taken in their interconnection. Spirit is within itself a system. Its 
manifold activities must be brought back to unity, but this unity must 
not be the merely abstract unity of simplicity. 
This simplicity has been connected with the immortality of the soul. It 
has been said that only what is composite is exposed to destruction. 
What is composite can fall apart, as when I dissolve a musical piece into 
individual notes from which the harmony of the whole is absent. What 
is simple, however, cannot be destroyed. Kant, on the other hand, ap-
pealed to an [empirically] present simplicity, a simplicity subject to 
modification. For·example, degree (temperature) is a simple determina-
tion, but is subject to the greatest variation. Red is simple, but can be-
come more or less intense. It is always this same simple red. Accord-
ingly, asKant tells us, if the soul or consciousness is laid out as something 
simple that is no proof of the immortality of the soul. Consciousness can 
be subject to variations [in intensity] and can sink into unconscious-
ness, as in sleep. The sensation we have of the remaining stubs of [am-
putated] members still qualifies as consciousness, but in degree is only 
one step removed from consciousness at its very weakest. Such simplic-
ity is a good counter-example to the [classical metaphysical] category of 
simplicity. The real interest of the immortality of the soul goes quite be-
yond merely abstract simplicity. Spirit is more concrete in its simplicity. 
14. The switch from "mind" to "spirit" for Geist is to indicate that Hegel is shift-
ing to a critique of Kant based on his own perspective. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (50-51) 
41 
The main point is that such abstract metaphysical categories are one-
sided, and are insufficient to grasp anything true, precisely because 
there is no truth to them. Such simplicity is an abstraction without 
activity-a one-sided and untrue determination. 
(§48) At this point Kant's critical philosophy takes an interesting 
turn. If reason now takes the world to be its object and moreover 
wishes to know it, it knows it only by the fact that it thinks it. Yet. in 
this thinking, reason falls into contradictions. For the thought deter-
minations [when taken as determinations of the world as a whole] 
contradict one another. These determinations, however, remain abso-
lutely necessary [to the world insofar as it is thought as a whole]. Kant 
might well have viewed rational psychology in the same manner [in 
which he viewed rational cosmology]. for it is important to show how 
the abstract determinations of the understanding fall into contradic-
tion, how in fact they negate themselves. Kant called the contradic-
tions that arise as we think the world antinomies. The contradictions 
consist for him in opposite assertions about one and the same object. 
From such opposite assertions Kant concludes that the content of the 
world in thought cannot belong to the world as it is in itself, that the 
world insofar as it has this content is mere appearance. He thus pre-
supposes that the world in itself is free of contradiction. Yet the human 
mind can fall into contradiction. Contradictions do in fact belong to it. 
Yet mind, spirit, is infinitely higher than the world, so that if contra-
diction should be considered a defect. i.e., something beneath the level 
of spirit, spirit must nonetheless bear its own responsibility for it. In 
the realm of spirit the categories themselves bring with them contra-
diction. The categories are upon themselves defective. Kant traced the 
defectiveness of categories to the fact that they are subjective, that 
they fail to reach the thing in itself. However, here [in the science of 
logic] the opposition of categories is no longer apprehended as a sub-
jective opposition to being in itself. This opposition is instead appre-
hended so that the categories stand over against one another [rather 
than over against being in itself], and indeed so that each category con-
tradicts itself Here we first enter into the quick of the matter. This in-
sight into [self-]contradiction marks an essential advance. Such an in-
sight is lacking in [dogmatic] metaphysics. 
Kant proceeds by unmasking statements with respect to the world 
[as a whole]. He exhibits different sides of the matter at hand, and 
shows the contradictions that arise when one thinks these different 
sides of the matter. He has brought forward four antinomies. Yet such 
contradiction is not limited to these four items. For, as the ancient 
skeptics already showed, contradiction can be exhibited in everything. 
Contradiction is to be seen in every logical category. It is upon them-
selves that the categories each come to the end of their rope, meet up 

Lectures on Logic (51-52) 
42 
with their finitude. They each meet with a negation by which they are 
cancelled and raised to a higher level. 
We cannot go into any closer detail regarding the antinomies. We 
point out only the following: the world is in space and time. It at once 
impresses itself on thinking that either the world has had a beginning 
[in space and time] and will have an end or it is infinite in space and 
time. Further [for things to exist in] space consists in [their being] ab-
stractly outside one another. Matter consists of the many, and thus 
consists in [many beings] outside of one another. Yet now one may ask 
whether matter is divisible to infinity or not. If not, we get to the 
atoms. If matter is infinitely divisible, everything material that we 
come up with is composite. As often as I divide a material object, the 
simple one is [again] negated in that object, so that the thought deter-
mination of composition is taken as foundational. 
We can also ask whether space consists of spatial points, and time of 
temporal points? In each case the same pair of opposite replies arises. 
We can further ask whether there is freedom in the world. Persons exist 
who make an absolute beginning, who are absolutely free, and so on. 
Yet Kant says that both sides[. i.e., free will and universal causality,] are 
necessary. Just so does the world as much have a beginning as it has no 
beginning. It can as easily be proven that matter is divisible to infinity 
as that its ultimate principle is the atom. Kant carries out his proofs in 
his own way. He says these are no courtroom Nproofs" by which, through 
circumstantial grounds, one would lend only plausibility to a conclu-
sion. The proofs here are not the kind of sophistry in which a ground 
exists that dissipates when posited over against another ground. A proof 
within one antinomy quite generally contains nothing illusory, but 
rather is party to a necessary opposition. 
Yet Kant's proofs here are contorted apagogical [indirect] proofs. The 
one [opposed] determination is as necessary as the other. We say of 
space and time that they contain points. We willy-nilly suppose limits 
in space, and a limit in time is also a point. Like the now, the point is, 
as a limit, completely simple. So there are limits in space. That is the 
one assertion. The other assertion is that the [ever present] now is 
limitless, that it is continuity. I have in space a point, hence the nega-
tion of continuity. The point is in space, and yet is itself at once some-
thing spatial. For it is connected [as, e.g., near or far] with other points 
in space. The point constitutes no absolute [non-spatial] abyss in space. 
The skeptics said that the point is a false representation, that it is noth-
ing. To be sure, the point is only something supposed by the under-
standing. No one can show a point to anyone, though it is in space, 
and therefore is spatial. It is by the inability to exhibit points that the 
skeptics highlighted contradiction in geometrical definitions. The 
point is diff!rence, it makes for a border, but it is at once no difference, 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (52-53) 
43 
no border at all. Extension cannot be separated from points, since 
once extension is separated from them they make no sense at all. 
The same is true with the now. As soon as I say "now" it is no more, 
it has become something other than itself, a flowing line. The same is 
true of the beginning of the world. A beginning is a limit in time. To 
be sure I can posit a limit, as when I say "a hundred years from now," 
and so on. Yet time absolutely hangs together as a continuity. We also 
suppose limits in space. The end [to which something comes in space] 
is a limit, but space is limitless. The two opposed [thought] determina-
tions are necessary to each other, 15 and that is an important thought 
determination in its own right. Every opposed determination lifts it-
self into its other, into the determination opposite to it. Every concept 
is something concrete that contains within itself diverse determina-
tions, and thus contains an antinomy. 
The ancient Eleatic dialectic concerned itself in particular with matter, 
space, and time regardless of whether they are limited or not limited. 
Space and time are continuities, but continuities in which there are al-
ways differences. The two determinations[. limitless continuity and dis-
crete line segments,] are inseparable, which is a contradiction. Yet we 
know that spatiality and matter exist, whereas a contradiction cannot 
exist, or so says the critical philosophy. Purportedly this contradiction 
falls within our subjective thinking. Here we run up against the funda-
mental law according to which what is contradictory not only cannot be 
but likewise cannot even be thought. 
Yet what is allegedly impossible here, namely, thinking contradic-
tion, is exactly what turns out to be the case. We think contradictory 
[determinations] as lying within one [being]. Mutually exclusive de-
terminations are present in one being. Discreteness and continuity 
belong to space, to time, to matter. Insofar as such opposite determi-
nations belong to one and the same thing, contradictions indeed exist. 
But such contradiction falls only within thought, Kant tells us, not 
within the world. The world cannot contradict itself. 
Yet how can we contradict ourselves? Would not our self-contradic-
tion refute any claim of mind, spirit, to being higher than nature? In any 
case, self-contradiction is not resolved by the fact that it is in the mind. 
The self-contradiction is still in the mind, and it would be of far greater 
interest to really resolve it there in the mind than in nature. The true res-
olution of contradiction in the mind is the dialectical moment. The con-
15. For HegeL this is to distance himself from the classical metaphysics which 
Kant critiqued, in which opposed determinations, e.g., the discreteness and con-
tinuity of the world, are established in separate classical metaphysical proofs. 

Lectures on Logic (53-54) 
44 
tradiction consists in ever resolving itself [dialectically ].16 but at once in 
always arising anewY 
Every drive, every longing, every [act of] willing by the mind is a 
contradiction. I have a need, I am in need. That is negation and at once 
a contradiction. Everything I do is directed to resolving that contradic-
tion, to reestablishing peace of mind. The satisfaction of need is the resolu-
tion of the contradiction. 18 What is dead contains no contradiction. But 
the critical philosophy contains no resolution of this contradiction. 
(§49) The third object of reason is God, who should be known and 
thought. Proofs of the existence of God have been offered. As human 
beings we have faith in God. We think, and we think our relation to 
God. We want to know the necessity [of this relation). Human beings 
want to ground their faith. Whatever could be known through the 
natural light of reason was allegedly taught by natural theology. Yet 
natural theology did not get very far, since in thinking our relation to 
God it assumed the standpoint of the understanding. Here is how think-
ing [guided by the understanding) has proceeded. We represent God 
to ourselves, but cannot say that God is perceived or intuited. And so 
must it rather first be proven that he exists. 
The standard used in judging a representation [merely as such] is 
that it not contradict itself. It will thus first be proven, therefore, that 
our representation of God is not upon itself contradictory. In represen-
tation God passes for being what is most high, but height is but an ex-
pression of quantity. God passes, further. [in the usual ontological argu-
ment] for the most perfect being, a being without defect, containing no 
negation within itself. So there is no contradiction in him. Rather, since 
contradiction is absent, in God there is only harmony with itself, pure 
reality, no limitation. That is what the understanding makes of God. 
God is pure reality, i.e., limitless and at once indeterminate. Yet Hbeing 
indeterminate# is nothing but abstract [self-]identity. God is the highest 
essence. Yet if that is where we remain stuck, his essence is but a matter 
of indeterminateness. 
Finite things each have a finite essence. The [divine] essence of es-
16. That contradiction consists in ever resolving itself may imply that thought 
cannot rest with a contradiction in an indirect proof context. Hegel's claim that 
we can think a contradiction could be taken to mean, not that we can simultane-
ously think something to be both A and not A, but rather that in trying to think 
of something as both we end up only thinking of it alternately as A or not A. 
17. Again, there is ambiguity here. That contradiction always arises anew may 
mean that past contradictions are repeated, or that every new resolution of past 
contradiction leaves something out in its new identification of what is inclusively 
absolute, so that something relative is said to be non-relative or absolute. 
18. This may be taken to say that to be conscious of need is to place one's es-
sence in a satisfaction contradicted by one's existence. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (54-55) 
45 
sences is totally abstract, a worthless residue [caput mortuum]. Yet nat-
ural theology goes on nonetheless to say that this essence includes ev-
erything. The essence is to be concrete, to include everything, but that 
turns out to mean that it includes everything only in its [infinite] 
truth. For if it included finitude as such it would include negation. For 
negation is finitude. 
Beyond that, God has attributes. He is good, all-powerful, wise. Yet 
that is already a limitation [in God]. The decrees of divine justice are 
lifted through divine goodness, through grace. Abstract justice consists 
in the fact that whatever is finite [das Endliche] comes to an end [ein 
Ende]. What is finite deservedly goes under. Merciful goodness is the 
contrary [of abstract justice], since it upholds what is finite even 
though it ought to go under. Those divine attributes are already in 
themselves diverse. Each is a particular attribute. What is more, they 
limit one another. In order to put these divine attributes at a distance 
[from God in himself], since God is supposed to be what is most real 
[and thus free of contradiction], it is said[, e.g., by Leibniz] that we 
must take such attributes only in the eminent sense, e.g., not as human 
justice, but as totally real justice. Yet such justice then becomes totally 
abstract. When these determinations of justice and goodness are taken 
determinately, each is what it is. The eminent sense of "justice" is the 
nebulous sense, indeterminate sense. This criticism [of natural theol-
ogy] was never stated by Kant. Being stands opposed to possibility. 
God is a thought object, and ought not to be something merely subjec-
tive. He ought to have independent being for himself on his own ac-
count. The issue comes down to one of thinking and being. What is to 
be effected is the unification of both. But in this second Kantian posi-
tion of thinking [in relation to] to objectivity presently under consid-
eration, it is the separation of the two that is laid out. 
(§50) There are two paths to unification. Thought as pure thought is 
the thought of God. One can pass over from being to thinking or from 
thinking to being, and this gives two paths for the unification of being 
and thinking. [In natural theology] the beginning is first made with 
being. There are two sorts of proof of God's existence: on the one 
hand, the cosmological and teleological proofs, and, on the other 
hand, in the third place, the proof highlighting the second type of 
unification, transition from thinking to being, i.e., the ontological 
proof. These proofs are now widely rejected and are clearly defective. 
Yet it is easier to know that something is defective than to know what 
is true. However, when we recognize the defect with any definiteness 
we also come to recognize therein what is true. Here [in the introduc-
tion to the science of logic] it is only possible to stress what is most im-
portant. For the science of logic in all its branches is nothing but the 
process of the above transitions, the transition from objectivity to sub-

Lectures on Logic (55-56) 
46 
jectivity and back again to objectivity. The transitions themselves es-
sentially fall within the science of logic itself. 
A Further Remark [on §50]. Sound common sense will never allow 
any transition from what is empirical to thinking to succeed. If we start 
with being, the world stretches out before our eyes, and from the world 
thinking would make a transition to God, to pure thought. to the fact 
that God comes to be taken up beyond the world, over on the side of 
thought. This transition comes to be made thinkingly, and constitutes a 
conclusion. So from the world God is inferred. These arguments have 
come to be criticized. We have an intuitive acquaintance with the world. 
The world assumes in our consciousness the shape of an aggregate of 
contingent determinations. Further, we so determine the world as to 
recognize purposes in it with regard to living beings, since a living being 
needs air, water, food to survive. 
Yet the satisfaction of such needs is not at once posited along with 
the positing of a living being. These necessities belong to the living 
being, to the very concept of such a being, to its very nature, but they 
do not exist merely through the existence of that nature, they are [in 
their contingent existence] independent of that concept or nature. Yet 
these independent existents [of air, food, etc.] go together [with a liv-
ing being's own survival]. The world is so constituted that human be-
ings, animals, and plants in fact do survive in it. That is the teleologi-
cal relationship. A living being requires the necessities of life, and life 
necessities (in order to be such necessities) need living beings, but nei-
ther has necessary being through the other. Therefore there must be a 
third element. Ordinary common sense thus raises itself up to [recog-
nize] a higher divine essence that has instituted [this relation of the 
world to the satisfaction of need]. This is the usual teleological proof 
attempted by commonsense. The proofs of God's existence are nothing 
but descriptions of common sense trying to raise itself up beyond from 
the world, or thoughtful pointers for doing so. 
From finite being infinite being is inferred. Yet it is said that there is no 
bridge between the finite and the infinite, that there is rather an abyss 
between them. From either of the two it will be said that it is impossible 
to infer the other. We might say that there is a leap in going from the fi-
nite to absolute existence. That is the main criticism that the Kantian 
philosophy gives: in the Kantian philosophy it is observed that one climbs 
up to God in the theistic proofs from our empirical representation of the 
world. Starting out from the world, one then concludes that an absolute 
divine essence is upon and for itself necessary. Against this inference it is 
alleged [by Kant] that we are not entitled to grant that absolute essence 
to which we move. For what we have before us is but a collection of finite 
beings. Reason thus becomes transcendent, advancing on ground where 
there is no longer any solid sensory perception beneath it. It leaves all 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (56-57) 
47 
solid ground behind. There is no pure thought to be found in sensory 
perceptions. But something else is made out of such perceptions than 
what they in fact are. Yet, according to the theistic proofs, it is only by 
transforming sense perceptions into thoughts that we get at the truth. 
The critical philosophy asserts that whatever is made out of sense percep-
tions [while leaving them behind] is not proven by them. [In the theistic 
proofs] truth always lies in what is thought insofar as it differs from ob-
jects of sense perception. Yet merely for itself [apart from objects of sense 
perception], what is thought lacks all validity. 
The world leaves us unsatisfied. Nothing temporal satisfies. For what-
ever is temporal is mutable, contingent, and absolutely dependent. 
Thought demands a fixed point, and in this world there is none. So we 
climb out of this contingent [sphere] to thought, to a necessity which is 
what it is not only upon but also for itself. Here is the climbing in ques-
tion, this passage beyond the world. Human beings will simply not allow 
themselves to be robbed of this ascent, [allow] this passage beyond the 
world to be taken away from them by the Kantian critical philosophy. Let 
the critical philosophy bring whatever objections it will against this as-
cent. To think God is to pass beyond the world. To apprehend this act of 
passing beyond the world is still something else. The apprehension of it is 
to be attained by what are known as proofs of God's existence. But it is 
furthermore a fact that, in such expositions of passage beyond the world, 
the passage itself, as it actually exists in the mind, is not given an entirely 
correct exposition. The form under which the passage is brought is not 
correctly laid out. The understanding infers the one thing from the other, 
where both exist. It is said: "This line is equal to a second line, and the 
second is equal to a third," and one then concludes regarding the first and 
third lines that they are also equal. Just this sort of deductive inference is 
what is expressed by the theistic proofs. It is a matter of saying that, be-
cause the contingent world exists, God therefore also exists. But this 
obliges us to concede being to the contingent world in our proof. 
We thus have two beings, the finite and the infinite. Insofar as we 
leave behind the world as it is, it is said (as Jacobi also says) that the fi-
nite world lays the foundation (bottom of page 59). 19 God's existence is 
19. If the term •foundation" is understood epistemologically in the theistic 
proofs, Hegel may be taken as inferring in this paragraph that the term must also 
be understood ontologically, that to avoid circularity the world must have a being 
independent of God's being. But in his science of logic the contradictory indepen-
dent being of the world is unmasked as a passing moment within the infinite di-
vine being. The German text's reference top. 59 in the 1830 Encyclopaedia is to a 
passage in §50 which reads, in the Wallace translation: "the world, which [in the 
theistic proofs) might have seemed to be the means of reaching God, is explained 
to be a nullity. Unless the being of the world is nullified. the point d'appui for the 
exaltation [of God) is lost. ... It is the affirmative aspect of this relation [between 

Lectures on Logic (57) 
48 
portrayed in the theistic proofs as being justified by the sensory world, 
and as dependent in its justification upon it. Such is the position, twisted 
all out of shape, which we encounter [in the cosmological and teleologi-
cal arguments]. For in fact it is God that is the absolute ground. To be 
sure, [in the science of logic] the matter will eventually lay itself out in 
this sense. What will be said in the sequel is that raising [the finite rela-
tive ground into the absolute ground] corrects the false stance [of 
grounding God in the presupposed being of the sensory world]. So we 
start out from the being of the world of accidents in the theistic argu-
ments and infer another world. We ourselves say, however, that God is 
the true being, the ground of all. The relationship between the finite 
and infinite worlds is thus immediately inverted in the science of logic. 
In this [new] transition [from God to the finite world] the false, twisted 
show of the [first] transition [from the world to God] thus vanishes. If 
we start out from the world of accidents and infer [another world], our 
manner of proceeding can be expressed as follows: because the contin-
gent world is, God is. Yet that means that the contingent world by itself, 
the world that has fallen to our lot, the world as it appears, a world that 
is upon and for itself null, in no way belongs to true being. This world is 
a being that is as much non-being as being. We thus quite simply state 
that its being is purely and wholly one-sided, and that its value in no 
way exceeds that of non-being. 
Whatever is necessary must be. In lifting [the finite world up into 
infinite being] the self-negation of the finite world is essential, but this 
self-negation does not appear in the classical theistic proofs. Insofar as 
this contingent world is, we have in this world only its affirmative side 
of being and not its self-negation, and that is what is one-sided in the 
classical proofs. The real conclusion to be drawn is that what is contin-
gent does not have its ground in itself, but has it solely in something 
else. The mere fact of its being there [Dasein] is but a nullity, and this 
nullity presupposes another being, a necessary being. 20 
The transition [beyond this world] is thus not from something affir-
mative to something equally affirmative, but rather is a transition from 
something upon and for itself null. That is the true sense of this transi-
tion, which contains the negation of its starting point. In Spinozism the 
same misunderstanding arises. It is said that Spinozism embodies both 
pantheism and atheism. According to Spinoza there is but one sub-
the world and God], as supposed to subsist between two things, either of which is 
as much as the other, which Jacobi mainly has in his eye when he attacks the 
demonstrations of the understanding." 
20. Hegel's meaning may become clearer if restated in the language of contem-
porary formal logic to say that the world's independent being is not a premise but 
a self-negating indirect-proof assumption. See Clark Butler, •Hegel and Indirect 
Proof," TheMonist, vol. 75, no. 3 (1991), pp. 422-437. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (57-59) 
49 
stance, and everything worldly is purely accidental. Truth is substan-
tial. Of course that will not be enough for us, since God is a substantial 
subject, the substantial spirit, substance as spirit. We imagine that Spi-
noza confuses God with a finite natural object, since he says that the 
substance of the world is God. On the one hand, that statement is quite 
correct, since God is present in the world-God is omnipresent in the 
world. But if what is worldly contains what is substantial, God is made 
out to be finite. But the same false conclusion, that God is finite, can be 
extracted from the proposition that he is omnipresent, since he is thus 
also present in whatever is finite. 21 The same one-sidedness of thinking 
here recurs. If we say God is outside us, that he is outside the world, and 
that he lets the world subsist as a real and actual world, we to be sure 
end up with a finite God. Yet the sense of Spinozism is that whatever is 
worldly is mere appearance out there for our sensory perception, but 
such perception is not true thinking. If God is in the world, his power is 
also in it: God is what negates the finite. In God what is finite falls to the 
ground, but what falls to the ground passes into its ground, and in its 
ground it is raised up again. This worldly being as being outside one an-
other is merely negated, and thought in its one-sidedness is also raised 
up in this unity of the finite and the infinite. 
In Spinoza's system, God alone is. What is other than God is a being 
that at once is not a being, and so is show. Thus it cannot be said that 
Spinozism is atheism.lt is rather the exact contrary of atheism, namely, 
acosmism. The world is no true being, there is no world. Rather, God 
and God alone is. It is not to their credit that people say that Spinozism 
is atheism. In the unity of God with the world, the world is thought of 
as not true being. Those who say that Spinozism is atheism find it less 
off-putting to say that God has no being than to say that the world is 
not. They rigidly continue to insist that the world has a reality, that a 
finite being is a true absolute being. 
[So beyond the form of the theistic proofs] the critical philosophy is 
concerned, in the second place, with the content of their starting point. 
Here the question concerns our starting point. From the contingent world 
we either proceed in the [ cosmological] theistic proof to necessary being 
upon and for itself. Or we proceed [in the teleological proof] from adapta-
tion to an end in the arrangements of nature. The world is an aggregate 
of contingent existents. Yet adaptation to an end also occurs in the world, 
and is laid out in individual detail. Raising the finite up to the infinite 
therefore has the sense of laying hold of activity as activity directed to 
universal ends. But here the critical philosophy remarks that, although 
21. Note that to say God is omnipresent is to say that he is in part present in 
what is finite, but not completely present in it unless we take Hegel to mean that 
at depth level the infinite is the ground of the finite. 

Lectures on Logic (59-60) 
50 
we do note adaptation to an end in the world, we also note much that is 
not adapted to any end. If, for example, we posit a living being to be an 
end, over against it stands an infinitely great extent of non-adaptation to 
any end. In other words, countless living beings evincing life in seed per-
ish without ever having attained their end! The entire misery of the world 
is likewise a non-adaptation to the end of self-preservation and of the 
good. Such is the testimony of experience. Yet the true conclusion of the 
[teleological] argument will nonetheless refer us to a divine essence that 
is active by the [providential] pursuit of an end. But what is contained in 
this true conclusion is different from what was contained in the [as-
sumed] starting point of the subsistent being of the world, which is now 
laid to rest. The raising of the finite into the infinite now acquires a quite 
different sense: it is the raising of the finite up into thinking, which goes 
after what is universal. 
However, this content according to which God is upon and for him-
self necessary being, that he is the cause, that he directs everything 
according to ends, does not yet correspond to what we [in Christian-
ity] represent to ourselves as "God." Further determinations are nec-
essary to complete the representation we have. From the side of our 
experience [of God] these theistic determinations remain incomplete. 
In point of content there is a limitation in these determinations [of 
God in the classical theistic arguments], a defect. We would really 
have to make up for the defect by asserting a world of spirits, of an ab-
solute, infinite spirit. Thus truth, spirit scattered as endlessly as light is 
scattered throughout all heavenly bodies. would be the true starting 
point, while the raising [of the finite to the infinite] would then be 
the truth of these countless spirits which, as many, are at once each fi-
nite and limited. This truth is the one and absolute spirit. One would 
thus already have had spirit as the starting point, but only as limited 
spirit. However, this true transition [from finite spirit to absolute 
spirit] finds a place in philosophy. The truth of ends in the finite sphere 
is the absolute final end. As active, as end, this raising up [of the finite 
into the infinite] thus begins with the finite but goes on to the univer-
sal insofar as this universal strips away the initial forms of mere fini-
tude and thus becomes [manifest in] immediate being. 
(§51) The other path is the reverse, the so-called ontological proof the 
beginning is made with the thought of God, with a subsequent transi-
tion to his being. In the first path being is common to both sides[, i.e., 
the contingent world and God]. What is stripped away in this being [as 
not belonging to God] is only its limitation, its finitude. What we have 
now, however, is the more abstract contrast. not of being to being, but 
of thinking to being. I have an abstract concept in my head, and now 
the question is whether it contains any truth. Being is the worst of ab-
stractions. Thinking is also an abstraction, since it lies only within a 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (60-61) 
51 
subject of thinking. It is in the thinking subject that thinking is actual. 
What is actual is thinking by the subject. But given the abstraction of 
both thinking and being, there is much that can be said back and forth. 
The representation of God is alleged not only to be a representation, but 
to be a representation of a being that is independent of our thinking. 
This path of the ontological proof was unknown to the ancients, but 
has been introduced by Anselm of Canterbury, by the scholastics. The 
simple criticism raised by Kant is that thinking and being are different. 
From the fact that I have a representation of something finite it does not 
yet follow that it has being. But Kant's observation is quite triviaL and 
was doubtlessly already well known to all philosophers. And, insofar as 
it was already well known, it can be the ground of no new objection to 
the philosophical principle [that the infinite self-concept includes its 
abstract being]. A representation or concept is finite should being stand 
over against it, since it is something particular, meeting up with its end 
in being. As has always been well known, merely given my representa-
tion to myself that I have a hundred thalers in my pocket, it does not 
follow that a hundred thalers are in my pocket. That is no doubt correct. 
just as it is also correct that there is no difference in content[. as con-
trasted to form, between an infinite concrete concept and its abstract 
being]. Kant says that being adds nothing not already contained in the 
[finite] concept. Yet a finite representation, its finite content, loses its 
one-sidedness if being corresponds to it. If I say Na hundred thalers," 
they are a mere abstract representation. It is a further fact. lying beyond 
that abstract representation, that the hundred thalers exist. Thinking 
and being are different [in form, but not in content, within the infinite 
concept]. but insofar as something is known to be merely represented it 
is finite. Yet it is not, in the science of logic, a question of the finite con-
cept, which is already well known to differ from its being,. but of the 
true infinite concept. 
Anselm, Spinoza, Descartes have said that God remains identical 
whether in concept or in being. God is what is most perfect. and only 
what is most complete contains this unity [of the infinite concept and 
its being] in total fullness. It is this unity [in its fullness] that is what is 
most perfect. However, this thought of God also has a defect, which is 
that it is represented as a presupposition [rather than being dialectically 
constructed by the science of logic]. It is said that we represent God to 
ourselves as the most perfect being. Yet this most perfect being is at once 
the self-concept [treated in the third branch of the science of logic]. 
Whatever is most perfect must include being within it. If it did not in-
clude being, we could posit an even more perfect being that would in-
clude it. What is further at issue is to show that the self-concept bears 
upon itself the self-movement by which it raises its own one-sidedness 
up beyond itself [into unity with being]. that the self-concept deter-

Lectures on Logic ( 61-62) 
52 
mines itself as being, and thus that being itself lies in raising up its own 
one-sidedness and passing over into the self-concept. The self-concept 
thus reveals itself to be the truth of being, just as it in turn shows its 
truth to lie in the idea, i.e., in the unity of reality and the self-concept. 
Whatever is bad in the world fails to correspond to the self-concept of 
the world, and so is finite. Yet to be God is to be infinite. 
Being, however, is a poor abstraction. It is the poorest of them alt 
the simple relation of self to self, immediate and immutable. It is pos-
sible to have an equally bad representation of the self-concept, but it 
will still be our belief that being belongs to the self-concept [without 
being formally identical with it]. The self-concept contains the one-
ness of self with self, which is the moment of its immediacy. That mo-
ment also belongs to being, except that the self-concept is not limited 
to the one-sidedness [of the immediacy of being]. With regard to 
Kant's criticism [of the ontological argument], it is essential to hold on 
to what it does and does not accomplish. It fails to be shown in this 
criticism that there is any truth to thinking in itself. Insofar as think-
ing and being are different [in content], thinking is not true. The Kan-
tian critique of our intuition of the world possesses the great interest 
of claiming to exhibit the nullity and finitude present in thinking by 
itself, but it is really only the nullity of the categories [of the under-
standing] that is exhibited. Thinking indeed shows itself to be contra-
dictory, but thinking itself is the resolution of these same contradic-
tions, though this resolution is not shown by the Kantian critique. 
(§52) The result of the critical philosophy is that thinking never gets 
beyond abstract thinking. The form of abstract thinking is abstract identity. 
Thinking for Kant posits itself as something objective, something per-
ceived, determined through and through with sensory material. Yet be-
yond this sensory content, which is known as experience, nothing exists 
but the abstract identity of a thinking that [in the critical philosophy] is 
reason, the unity of the self-consciousness. Thinking, therefore, merely 
unifies the material provided by experience. This application of the self-
identity of thinking is nothing but the ordering of such material. This 
order is a relationship, a unity, an external unity of things. This oneness 
of thinking with itself falls within us, and changes nothing in the things 
themselves that come to be ordered. This oneness concerns in no way the 
content of objects, but establishes a purely external relationship between 
them. Such a systematization of experiences is what reason is supposed 
to be. It is supposed to consist in those very compositions as are found in 
our contemplation of nature. Its business is one of classification. The sen-
sory manifold is to be brought into unity. 
Yet the further this unification of content proceeds, the paltrier its 
content becomes. A further more general universality beyond human-
ity is the animal, still further is the realm of all living beings, while the 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (62-63) 
53 
most abstract unity is then the thing. Reason should lead to ever greater 
unity. Yet the more this unity corresponds to what [in the critical phi-
losophy] is called reason, the emptier it is. This is what Kant's philoso-
phy regards as reason. One may simplify the laws of nature by saying, 
for example, that they are all cases of natural attraction. Planets, like 
the rest. are nothing else but the unification [of different observations 
under the same law of attraction]. Yet the positing of the planets in their 
unity is empty, since everything can be posited in such a unity. It is pre-
cisely particularization, which is what is at stake here, that is lacking. 
One sort of attraction is that by which a stone falls back again to the 
ground, and another sort is that by which plants attract the moisture of 
air. Everything that is living in spirit is likewise [an activity of] attrac-
tion. Learning is appropriation, hence attraction. So attraction is the 
one universal law. Yet precisely for this reason, it is totally empty. Rea-
son as understood in the critical philosophy cannot ever become the or-
ganon of truth. Rather, reason is only the canon, the law, the rule. The 
[Kantian] claim that reason is forthwith incapable of knowledge holds 
fast to the contrast between concept and reality, concept and actuality 
[that Kant makes in his critique of the ontological argument]. All rep-
resenting that lacks actuality is finite thinking just as, likewise, what-
ever being fails to correspond to its concept is finite being. What is true 
is what is actual. and what is actual corresponds to the self-concept. 
[B.II.b.j Practical reason 
(§53) It was especially through Kant that practical reason gained 
access [to current German philosophy]. Practical reason concerns the 
will, which is laid out in contradistinction to intelligence. Yet to will is 
still to think. The will is driven by what is universal. Law [Recht]. ethi-
callife, is the universal. Yet the will as a natural will is a finite, partic-
ular wilL i.e., desire [Begierde]. If what I will is property, legal prop-
erty, I will the universal. since the law is the universal. May practical 
reason lay down objective laws for freedom, for being self-determining! 
This is what distinguishes practical from theoretical reason. The pin-
nacle of what is theoretical. the I. is taken to be empty of determina-
tion. What for Kant is said to follow, should reason try to think the in-
finite, we have already seen. Practical reason is said to determine itself 
objectively, and in such self-determination lies freedom. That reason 
in its practical function can be self-determining is accepted as valid. It 
is commonly accepted as valid because experience shows that to be a 
human being is to be free in this sense, as confirmed by our own inner 
perception. This claim can be allowed, but it is a further fact that the 
Will is the universal. that desire proves to be finite and allows itself to 
be led back to the universal will upon and for itself as its ground. 
The principle according to which I as will am self-determining in 

Lectures on Logic (63-64) 
54 
myself makes a human being conscious that he or she is free, that 
there is no law for one to recognize other than the law one knows be 
a determination of one's own will. The Kantian philosophy won gen-
eral assent to this principle by which the will is within itself absolute. 
In prior [medieval] philosophizing, the vocation of humankind was in 
principle stated to be blessedness, but an ambiguity remained as to 
what blessedness was supposed to be. What it was did not depend on 
me. It was claimed that we ought to have such and such inclinations 
toward blessedness, and so on, and that was how morality was estab-
lished. Our inclinations entered into opposition with one another, and 
the satisfaction of them depended on a divine will external to them. 
Against this view of the human vocation, the one great principle es-
tablished [by Kant] is that man is free. A human being is capable of re-
nouncing everything, and so can never be compelled. Thus a human 
being's highest satisfaction must lie in freedom, and it is to this that we 
cling whenever subjected to external force. Freedom is always within a 
human being's power, and whatever is offered to a human being in 
whatever respect can only be offered in a manner consistent with this 
freedom. A human being must find in whatever is presented a determi-
nation of his or her own will. This principle quite deservedly won wide-
spread assent to the Kantian philosophy. 
If one explores consciousness for something to become the vocation 
of one's life, what one comes up with is variable and accidental. Yet in 
freedom, as the vocation I discover for myself, I find a fixed point of at-
tachment within myself that no one else can overpower. In this free-
dom within me I find absolute satisfaction, a formal satisfaction that 
spirit finds within itself. I am identical with myself, but in this identity 
I am self-determining, and these determinations are the laws of my 
freedom, they are my own self-determinations. This principle is of infi-
nite importance. Yet the truth of the principle comes to be based on ex-
perience, on my consciousness. There are, however, enormously many 
experiences, and many people by the experiences they have know 
nothing at all of freedom. To them it remains to be to be proven that the 
truth is other than what their experiences tell them. 
(§54) However, the question now shifts: I determine myself, and 
with that there enters a content, but what now is the further deter-
mining principle [by which I determine myself]? Or, to put it other-
wise, what is my duty? What is moral, what is the moral law [das 
Recht]? The answer to this question depends on the following develop-
ment: either we lack any criterion of what is moral at all, or that crite-
rion is only that what is to be regarded by us as moral ought to contain 
no contradiction[, which is Kant's criterion in the categorical impera-
tive]. Yet such a criterion is once again abstract self-identity[, A= A], 
so I am once more on abstract ground. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic ( 64-65) 
55 
It is said that one ought to do one's duty merely for the sake of duty. 
But the question is: what is one's duty? What is the law of right and 
wrong [ das Recht], what is the moral law? Here we find [in Kant] ab-
stract self-identity, and over against this abstract identity lies all that is 
particular. It will now be said, for example, that we should return prop-
erty belonging to another person when that property has been entrusted 
to us. If I do not accept this duty and thus return the property, I contra-
dict the initial presupposition that it is the other's property. Yet contra-
dicting that first presupposition by disowning the duty and not return-
ing anything entirely depends on maintaining the presupposition that 
the property in question is even now the other's property. 22 However, 
just how is this further presupposition grounded? And, quite generally, 
how is [the whole institution of] property to be grounded? The alterna-
tive presupposition that no property should exist at all contains no con-
tradiction. So the principle [of the moral law] remains formal. in that 
self-identity is alone to be the criterion of what is moral. is alone to be 
the determining ground [of the obligation to return property]. How-
ever, any particular determination [such as property] is absent from 
mere self-identity, which thus can afford no ground at all. 
[B.II.c. The reflective power of judgment] 
(§55) Kant, proceeding as by sure instinct, introduced [beyond the-
oretical and practical reason] the third side of matters, the reflective 
power of judgment. It is called the intuitive understanding. In everything 
that is theoretical the understanding has been at work [according to 
Kant], but in that sphere the understanding has presupposed experi-
ence. What we have now, in the reflective power of judgment, is an 
understanding that is at once by itself intuitive, a self-realizing con-
cept. This new determination [of the object] is contradictory in that 
the determining is now intuitive[. i.e., produces its own object]. Par-
ticularization, singularization, is given out to be something called 
forth merely by thinking, through the understanding. The self-con-
cept is now self-realizing, bringing forth a reality in correspondence 
with it. This Kant called the power of reflective judgment. in contra-
distinction to the power of subsuming judgment where a rule is laid 
down as the basis and I subsume the particular given object under it. 
The reflective power of judgment is a power that does not merely sub-
sume. Rather, what it encounters is its own law standing over against it-
self[, reflected in the object]. The object is thus to be contemplated in such 
a way that the particular determination proceeds from the understanding 
itself, so that the reality of the determination is made to correspond to the 
understanding. In the power of subsuming judgment, the particular is 
22. That is. only property can be stolen. 

Lectures on Logic (66-67) 
56 
added externally to the rule: it is a subordination of the particular under 
the universal rule. The determination comes to the object, to the particular, 
externally. That is how mechanism universally works. A weight is lifted, 
something is set in motion. That is an external relation-the universal. 
whatever is determining, comes externally to what is determined. 
In the power of reflective judgment, by contrast, the universal pro-
duces the particular out of itself. It does so in fact, according to Kant, in 
the organic realm and in art. In the organic realm, in the circulation of 
blood, for example, a mechanical model has been adopted [cf. William 
Harvey]. Yet a living organism is not driven mechanically [§57]. What-
ever is organic is self-determined. It makes something else of whatever 
impinges on it [Anstoss]. The organs, for example, make foods into blood. 
In any living organism there is an enlivening soul that awaits our 
knowledge of it, soul that is itself self-knowing. The principle of move-
ment proceeds from oneself. Just so with the process of life. The repro-
duction of the members is a living process. The members inwardly de-
termine themselves out of themselves. 
Determining and coming to be determined here cease to be two 
different things. Their unity is the soul. In this way mechanical cir-
cumstances become free, every part is ensouled, in each part the uni-
versal life is present. These limbs, these guts, are the very means of 
life, but the living soul is active in them as well. All members of the 
body are continuously regenerated insofar as they preserve them-
selves. Yet these products are at once productive. Through the parts 
the whole is brought forth. But this whole is the living soul. and is at 
once itself productive. Such activity, such conduct, is "purposive activ-
ity." We have here a determination by ends. The living organism is its 
own end. Forever producing itself, it realizes this end which it itself is. 
Everything is purpose, everything means. The guts are the means, but 
they also contain the end. The distinction between coming to be pro-
duced and producing falls by the wayside, as does the distinction be-
tween end and means, cause and effect. 
Kant saw that the understanding does not suffice for the apprehension 
of living beings, and with that we reach the concept of the intuitive un-
derstanding. [For Kant] the intuitive understanding is the [regulative) 
idea of reason. So in the case of what is organic the [non-intuitive] under-
standing does not suffice [to apprehend it]. The other realm in which 
Kant proved the insufficiency of this understanding is art, the aesthetic 
realm. In a work of art a thought is present. The work of art is the univer-
sal that realizes itself in these [technical] forms, in these features. In 
these forms we see the soul. its character, we see what the artist repre-
sented to himself, but it is the forms themselves that give expression to 
that soul. Here content and form are inseparably united. Matters are dif-
ferent here from what we find in mechanical artifacts, or in architecture. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (67-68) 
57 
The line and angle are forms of the understanding. In the subject, how-
ever, there exists something genial, the capacity for artistic ideas [§56]. 
The artist reflects, and this or that representation makes up the founda-
tion of his work, but thinking for the artist is an exercise of the power of 
imagination. The artist builds his thoughts into something sensory which 
no longer has validity for itself [as sensory], but whose meaning rests 
upon the artist himself. The [artist's] meaning can be no longer some-
thing merely inner, but is out [in the open], entirely invested in the sen-
sory form, in reality. Here is the absolute unity [of content and form]. 
Many, and notably Schiller, have found in the idea of artistic beauty 
a way out of the [Kantian] philosophy of the understanding. Schiller's 
great soul took its fill of philosophical ideas. But Kantian abstractions 
were not enough for him. The good, the true, essentially received for 
him the determination that it be present, and indeed should be present, 
as the beautiful, i.e., that it should have being and should be present in 
reality, in its identity with actuality. To this Schiller gives expression in 
many a work, venting himself accordingly. These, then, are the two 
sensory appearances[, the organic and the artistic,] in which an experi-
ence of the unity of the particular and the universal is present, in which 
the living soul penetrates through and through what is material. The 
greatness of the Kantian philosophy is that through the intuitive under-
standing he reached the idea [as regulative]. Yet he did not yet know 
that the unity of the particular and the universal is not only a truth 
present in these two particular [organic and artistic] appearances, but 
that it is the truth upon and for itself, and that within thought, as the 
idea, it is the one and only truth [§58]. 
That far Kant did not get. To know this would imply that one realizes 
that theoretical and practical reason both exhibit one-sidedness, that 
they are only abstractions, only moments of the truth. Kant said that ar-
tificial products as also natural products are each to be judged a unity. But 
that is our judging, we reflect on them in this way, this is how we appre-
hend them. It is doubtless true that this is how we consider them once we 
are no longer stuck in the mechanical culture of the understanding. But 
the further question is whether viewing matters this way is or is not the 
truth upon and for itself. If we know it to be the truth upon and for itself, 
the subjective standpoint according to which we merely reflect on some-
thing external falls by the wayside. We come to know that the two sides, 
thought and being, do not stand so absolutely over against each other. 
(§59) This unity was then extended even further. The good is to de-
termine me, my will. But the perennial disunity of the two is also rep-
resented. The good as the universal, as the rule, does not have its oppo-
site in my will as the universal will, but rather in nature, in the 
[particular] will that determines by natural instinct. The good as uni-
versal is the opposition of the good and the world in general. If we now 

Lectures on Logic (68-69) 
58 
apprehend the representation of inner unity by which the universal lays 
itself out as realized in the particular, we also apprehend the thought of 
the opposition of the good and the world being lifted. The good then 
functions as the rule for the whole world. Yet if the world has being for 
itself on its own account, it fails to conform to the good. Everything has 
its own laws. But now it is represented to us that this disharmony ought 
to be lifted, that the good should be realized, and that it is God who is 
to bring about the harmony. As much as this unity is present to our 
senses in living beings in the natural world, and as much as it is also 
present in works of art, the same unity is present to thought, in which 
the good rules as the final end of the world over both living beings and 
artworks. The Kantian philosophy also reached this highest form of the 
idea, of the unity of thinking and being, but it then reduced that form 
of the idea to a purely subjective manner of taking things. 
( §60) Thus for Kant "the good" means nothing but our good, the moral 
law of our own practical reason. We have found this moral law, duty, to 
be purely formal. Lying within it is a contradiction. On the one hand, it is 
said that what is true is the unity by which the good realizes itself in the 
world, by which the world is powerless in the face of the good; while on 
the other hand it is said that this harmony is subjective, something merely 
represented, something that only should be, an impotent rule that can 
accomplish nothing. It is said that this unity of the good and the world is 
the truth, but that it is a unity that is not, that only should be-and here 
lies the incongruity. The absolutely final end is absolutely realized in the 
world, and yet is only realized as something that should be, it is only a 
subjective faith. Yet what that means is that the unity is not, that it does 
not exist. But it is still the truth. This unity expresses itself in the form of 
infinite progress. The end is realized, but is not completely realized-
which means that it is not realized. That is the contradiction. 
We have seen this unity of the good with the world exist in subordi· 
nate limited spheres, in the living organism in nature, and in artistic 
beauty. But it then comes to be said that viewing matters this way is 
only a matter of our opinion. In the highest spheres, it is explained, this 
unity is true, but this unity is never a fully present unity-it is forever 
incomplete, so that the opposition between the end and the world never 
goes away. Virtue, the good understood as the good of this particular 
individual in the sphere of finitude, is in ceaseless struggle with the 
self[, i.e., with inclination]. In the realm of finitude, virtue is admit· 
tedly a struggle, admittedly a matter of what merely should be. What 
holds upon and for itself is still something else again. It will be said [in 
the critical philosophy] that the unity of the good and the world is only 
a postulate of practical reason, which is to say that it only should be. 
A contradiction surely arises when all is not "going well" with the 
good. It is said that reason does not know the good to be united with the 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (69-70) 
59 
world. But reason, divine providence, rules the world-in divine provi-
dence no externalities and contingencies are to be seen. The absolute 
final end of the world is not so powerless as to not realize itself. It is true, 
as we said, that we cannot perceive the end's worldly self-realization [by 
the senses], and yet the end is not so impotent as to not realize itself. As 
we look out upon world history [rationally], just so does history look 
back at us. To be sure, there are particular ends and demands[, e.g., of 
justice,] that fail to be satisfied in the course of history. To be sure, one 
can always withdraw[, e.g., from the world's injustice,) into one's own 
subjectivity. Yet it still must be recognized that what is rational is the 
unity of the final end with the world. 
We have considered this second position [of thought toward objectiv-
ity] at greater length because it has completely penetrated the culture of 
the present age and, moreover, in part still holds its place within it. The 
forms and shapes assumed by the Kantian philosophy come at us from 
all sides. As we have explained above, they have their ground in the 
most abstract of oppositions. What is most interesting are the points 
where Kant reaches beyond himself. Yet he no sooner gets beyond him-
self than he reverts back to what we have already explained as untrue. 
C. The Third Position [of Thought] toward Objectivity 
The third position [prior to the science of logic] reverts to the first 
[ancient] position. Like the first, it is immediate knowledge. But is no lon-
ger innocently immediate.23 Its immediate knowledge is now polemical. 
self-reflectively restricting itself to what is totally simple. Immediacy 
also existed in the first position of classical metaphysics, where God, 
soul, and world came to be thought straightaway. Just so does thought 
proceed again here-but this time it does so reflectively, with an aware-
ness of immediacy restricted to one completely simple point. The posi-
tion is polemical. It results from [a reaction to] the critical philosophy, 
except that what is last in the critical philosophy, namely, faith, now 
comes to be singled out for itself on its own account [as first]. What sets 
itself in opposition to faith is the Kantian philosophy itself. 
(§62) This assertion of immediacy includes, however, still a further 
23. If classical metaphysics explicitly absolutizes what is immediate (e.g., Par-
menidean being) with an unconscious and thus innocent negation of its media-
tion by something else (e.g., nothing, becoming ... ); and if metaphysical skepticism 
negates this absolutization of what is immediate as contradictory by highlighting 
such mediation (e.g., Kant), polemical belief reasserts the absolutization of what is 
immediate by refusing the skeptical self-negation of that absolutization (e.g., Ja-
cobi's return to immediate belief polemically directed against Kant's metaphysi-
cal skepticism). 

Lectures on Logic (70-71) 
60 
consideration. We saw in the Kantian antinomies that the thinking of 
the understanding in metaphysics falls into contradiction with itself 
and is therefore incapable of knowing. So now it is similarly claimed 
that the understanding could achieve no knowledge of God [as the 
unconditioned] because its forms are all conditional and limited [§62]. 
Jacobi, in this respect similar to Kant, made this claim. Yet he set him-
self vehemently in opposition to Kantianism in its practical branch, 
which makes its principle out to be duty for duty's sake. The good for 
its own sake, to which Kant holds fast over against what lies in the in-
clinations and in whatever is sensory, stands for Kant in opposition to 
instincts and inclinations. Jacobi polemicized against Kant in this 
matter and located the validity of all that is virtuous and good in the 
individuality of each human being. He generally based himself on 
each individual human being's feeling and customs. 
The Lacedaemonians did not reply to Xerxes, as he exhorted them 
to come over to his side, that their individual sense of moral duty pre-
vented them. They rather replied that doing so would be against their 
ethical customs [Sitte] and habits. They replied that by their ethical 
customs and habits they at once stood together as but a single individ-
ual. The Lacedaemonians had no Kantian morality capable of becom-
ing conscious of itself in duties. Jacobi says that they were ethical pre-
cisely because they did not base themselves like Kant on the opposition 
between inclination and duty. This ethical unity is to be sure an im-
portant side of the matter, but the unity in question here is one of cus-
tom, education, and culture. It is still part of being a conscious human 
being that one is aware of the good and of right in the form of the law 
and duty. Jacobi opposed this one-sidedness [of unity in ethical cus-
tom] to the other one-sidedness of Kant, who made the division within 
a human being between duty and inclination into his foundation. 
Yet in the upshot of his thinking Jacobi agrees with Kant. Only his 
starting point is different. For Kant ends up insisting that thinking dif-
fers from its object. Jacobi agreed, justifying his polemic by saying that 
thinking in the form of knowing is only thinking, proceeding from 
conditions to further conditions. A cause is that by which I understand 
its effect. But the cause is itself conditional and finite. For example, if 
the cause of the lightning is electricity, the question arises as to the 
cause of electricity, and so on. So we endlessly proceed from one thing 
that is conditioned to something else that is equally conditioned. And 
that is what is called "knowledge." Knowing is this procession through 
a series things that are all conditioned. The last item in the series would 
be the unconditioned. But we never "know" it, since we only "know" 
what is conditioned. If we made something other than the uncondi-
tioned into the ground of the unconditioned, the unconditioned would 
cease be unconditioned. Here we have the mediation [of all "knowledge"] 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (71-72) 
61 
of which Jacobi spoke. "Knowing" is thus mediated thinking. But along 
with this comes a representation: reason has a representation of the un-
conditioned which we cannot know. 
So inner scientific knowing [Wissen], if it wants to have knowledge 
[Erkennen] of what is true, must behave in an immediate fashion, and 
that is what has been called faith [or belief, in contrast to what Jacobi calls 
"knowledge"]. The sole presupposition is that "knowing" is a thinking 
which merely follows the path of mediation only by conditioned objects. 
That is the presupposed fact. No other "knowledge" [Erkennen] exists. 
There is no true scientific knowing [Wissen] other than immediate belief. 
But Jacobi leaves this claim at the level of a bare assertion. 
German philosophy has proven very receptive to Jacobi's simple line 
of reasoning. The main point [of criticism to be made against Jacobi] is 
that he does not take up the self-concept of the unity of mediation and 
of immediacy.24 Yet the contrast between mediation and immediacy 
arises within every concept. Being [for Jacobi] is at once completely im-
mediate, and so it remains. [For Jacobi] we gain our assurance from 
immediate knowledge, which gives itself out as a fact of consciousness. But 
if we look carefully at the matter, whatever in truth is completely simple 
lacks all mere immediacy. It affords no immediate knowledge at all. 
Rather, everything that is immediate exists only with and through me-
diation.25 The above "fact of consciousness" is thus totally incorrect. 
The other main point in criticism of Jacobi is that, just as immediacy is 
joined to mediation, mediation is throughout joined to immediacy. 26 It is 
said that to "know" is to proceed from something conditioned to some-
24. Hegel's science of logic, here in the introduction, discovers itself through 
the history of philosophy itself. The first step consists in embracing the self-nega-
tion of classical metaphysics through Kant. Hegel departs from Jacobi's polemical 
refusal of the skeptical critique of classical metaphysics. Second, the Hegelian sci-
ence of logic surrenders the contradictory classical absolutization of what is im-
mediate by including mediation in an expanded concept of what is immediate. 
Jacobi's philosophy of polemical immediate faith attacks Kant from a pre-Kantian 
dogmatic position which is nonetheless no longer innocent of knowing Kant. 
Hegel's science of logic advances to agree with Kant, but also advances beyond 
Kant, reestablishing metaphysics on a post-Kantian basis. His science of logic ne-
gates the classical metaphysical negation of the other. It views what is immediate 
as speculatively reflected in its mediation, as concretely self-identical in and 
through what is other than whatever is immediate. Hegel's extensive treatment of 
Jacobi, whose positive philosophy hardly ranks him in the same class with Kant, 
must be understood in context as a thinly veiled critique of a school of thought 
which was influential into Hegel's Berlin period. This school was represented by 
Schleiermacher on the faculty of Berlin University, where Hegel taught. 
25. To give a possible example, the evening star as immediately given turns out 
to be what it is by the mediation of being the morning star. 
26. To pursue the example in the previous note, the evening star which medi-

Lectures on Logic (72-73) 
62 
thing else that is equally conditioned. But such uknowing" is only finite 
knowing. However, immediacy is also found in such finite knowing. What 
is mediated proceeds only by passing over into immediacy as other than 
it. That is what is one-sided [in Jacobi's view of immediacy and mediation 
as each isolated from the other]. Just asKant fixes on the subjective over 
against objective, Jacobi fixes on immediate oneness. #Knowing" as fi-
nite knowing is a thinking that attaches itself only to what is limited. 
(§63) The affirmative assertion in Jacobi is that truth exists for us, that 
we know of God immediately. Our representation of God and our cer-
tainty with regard to him reside precisely in us. With respect to questions 
of right and ethical customs, he says the same thing, namely that they re-
side in us. Their presence in us he calls ureason." This simple knowing is 
called faith. We speak of looking and seeing [ Schauen], we know what we 
know by looking and seeing. The truth is known, for Jacobi, in the same 
way. The method is very convenient. Every effort of investigation is spared. 
Knowing God can also be called intuiting him [Anschauen]. and the form 
of immediate knowing is again present. As Cicero says, nature has im-
planted in us certain instincts of friendship and love. In much the same 
manner we can also speak of the instinct for knowing God. This is quite 
correct, but the one-sided assertion is then made that reason is but a sim-
ple.foundational knowing devoid of any self-movement. 
We believe in God immediately. To say that I believe this or that usu-
ally means that I have reasons to believe it. But in order to have certain 
knowledge, more than having reasons is required, namely, immediate 
intuition. The object of knowledge lies there before me in immediate 
consciousness. I myself am present in this consciousness in the act of 
sensing, intuiting, and the object thus falls within my sensory con-
sciousness. I in my act of intuiting am identical with the intuited con-
tent. The content is as certain as my own self is. Jacobi says that we be-
lieve that we each have a body, we believe that sensory objects lie before 
us-all that is an immediate certainty. We know it all directly by intu-
ition. The belief here in question is supposed to be immediate knowing 
by reason. Having faith and knowing are usually set over against each 
other in philosophy. But [for Jacobi] what I have faith in I uknow." It is 
only a question of the type of knowing. The contrast between having 
faith and uknowing" is empty for Jacobi. referring only to the fact that 
in faith knowing fails to be mediated. Philosophy [as developed in the 
science of logic] does not oppose Jacobi's assertion that reason, spirit, 
has knowledge of God. It cannot occur to philosophy to wish to contra-
dict the content of such propositions. Human beings, being rationaL do 
harbor within themselves that higher sphere in which resides the know-
ates the morning star is mediated by the immediately given morning star pre-
cisely by not being the morning star as immediately given. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (73-74) 
63 
ing of God. This is straightaway the principle of human freedom [from 
a purely conditioned existence]. 
(§64) So what does immediate scientific knowing know? It knows 
God, the infinite, the unconditioned. Of God we have a representation. 
Furthermore, in the ontological proof the conclusion that God exists 
connects in thought or representation the universal, taken not only 
upon but for itself in being for its other, with being. According to the 
Kantian principle, the thought and being of something are different. 
But in immediate knowing [for JacobL] they are inseparable and thus 
identical. They are so very identical that they cannot be drawn apart. 
What holds for Jacobi here in this matter of thinking and being also 
holds for Descartes, the philosopher who once again introduced genuine 
free philosophizing into the European world. His first proposition is "I 
think, therefore I am." Thinking for Descartes is also the I. But if we leave 
the I out, we have only thinking and being. Now the pure thought [which 
thinking thinks] is God, with which being is bound-the being of God is 
inseparable from the thought of him. Descartes spelled out the connec-
tion by which thinking, intuiting, or whatever we call it, is a simple unity 
within itself, and by which that unity is at once being. Mere being is ab-
stracted here from all the mediation by which the simple unity of being 
with thinking in fact[, i.e., concretely] exists. So thinking and such being 
are inseparable. Moreover, Descartes' proposition "I think, therefore I 
am" is not a deductive argument [Schluss], since the second statement ["I 
am"] contains something beyond what is given in the first ["I think"]. 
But the proposition still contains the inseparability of thinking and being, 
the identity [of thinking and being despite the distinction between them]. 
Descartes[, proceeding beyond the unity of our thinking and our being,] 
also lays out the thought of God as our thought, as our representation, 
and as united with his being. But where he does this in the ontological 
proof he also brings mediation to the fore. What is deficient in his onto-
logical proof, however, is that the inseparability of thinking [the thought 
of God] from being is left as a presupposition. In this respect, his claim 
contains nothing new[, nothing beyond Anselm]. 
(§65) The peculiarity of Jacobi's point of view, we have seen, is that for 
him mediated "knowing" taken in each case in isolation goes through a 
chain of things that are conditioned, so that what is "known" depends on 
"knowing" something else. So what is mediated is not understood as dis-
solving into immediacy. What is peculiar [in Jacobi] is the quite exclusive 
assertion that only immediate knowing contains truth. This, we say, is the 
polemical side of the matter as posited against mediated "knowing." With 
that an exclusive either/or disjunction of mediation and immediacy is 
posited, without any middle term. This is the understanding speaking. 
What is truly rational is neither the one nor the other, but is the both/and, 
the one as well as the other. But let us for now leave this aside. 

Lectures on Logic (74-75) 
64 
Jacobi says that we all have knowledge of God, that this knowledge 
resides within us immediately as a fact of consciousness. [Not being 
philosophers,] most have never traveled up and down the byways of 
metaphysics or proofs. It is surely true that the human understanding 
is conscious of God without ever confronting the mediation of proofs-
just as we eat, drink, and digest without knowledge of anatomy and 
physiology. The other question, however, is whether this immediate 
knowledge does not already essentially contain mediation within it-
self, whether it is immediate only through mediation. Digestion, for 
example, is upon its own showing a process of mediation. I pick up 
food, I prepare it, I swallow it down. That all consists in mediating the 
immediately given food. Something other than digestion stands in re-
lation to digestion. A process of mediation is present there. 
The question now is whether the sort of mediation that exists in 
proofs of the existence of God, in the law [ Recht], in questions of ethical 
custom [Sittlichem], is to be excluded when it comes to our faith in God's 
existence. In Jacobi it is really a question of the same abstractions of 
mediation and immediacy as appear in the science of logic. We shall 
have to look into the logical categories of mediation and immediacy. All 
inquiries lead back to logic. Knowing [as faith] is determined for Jacobi 
as immediate knowing over against finite mediated •knowing." Yet 
both are called knowing. It is a question of their opposition, which lies 
in the determinations of immediacy and mediation. To be mediated is 
to pass through an other-the mediation of something is the canceling 
of itself in favor of its other, immediacy. It turns out that immediacy and 
mediation are unseparated and indeed inseparable. 
We find even in experience that immediate faith contains mediation 
within itself. Some have tried reducing metaphysics to psychology. There 
are many ways of shoving philosophy-the contemplation of the deter-
minations on which philosophy upon and for itself depends-off to the 
side. We know by experience many, many things immediately, but we 
ourselves are conscious of knowing them only by the mediation of our 
immediate knowledge. Mathematicians know immediately what rela-
tionships hold in the triangle, in other words they know them by heart. 
But we know very well that going and passing through proofs have pre-
ceded such immediate knowing. As human beings we have a large 
number of experiences in life by which we know things immediately. 
Such knowledge is an immediately given result mediated by the experi-
ence of life. We know very well that such immediate knowledge is a 
result of life. 
(§66) It follows that the immediacy of knowledge absolutely results 
from mediated knowing. The parents as viewed by the children are 
immediately given. What is immediate is whatever we start out from, 
but then it is just as essentially mediated as it is immediate. I am now 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (76-77) 
65 
immediately in Berlin, but this fact is mediated by the fact that I have 
either traveled here or was born here. HI am" expresses the same im-
mediacy, but then falls back again into mediation. The point is really 
quite trivial and is generally known, although certain individuals who 
are overly educated nevertheless align themselves against it. 
(§67) The immediate knowing of God, of customary ethical life, origi-
nally exists in seed within the human spirit, as a potentiality. This imme-
diate knowing is brought to consciousness only in a mediated way 
through education. The more abstract side of education is the spirit's 
inner [world-historical] development taken in general. It is here a ques-
tion of fact, a matter of experience. In baptism in the Christian religion, 
an essential condition is that what lies upon itself within the child comes 
to develop within him. In Plato this development takes the form of recol-
lection. He says that nothing comes to us by being introduced from the 
outside, everything is only recollection. To state the essence of the matter, 
our souls before their transfer into our bodies enjoyed divine intuition. 
That intuition has now [in this life] become unconscious, but our souls 
recall it once more to themselves in their encounter with the objects of 
this world, which contain something of what they earlier intuited. 
People have spoken of innate ideas [which are found in Plato]. In par-
ticular Locke has polemicized against them. According to him, every-
thing a human being knows comes from experience-the very opposite 
of innate ideas. But the very expression Hinnate ideas" is already mis-
leading. The sense of the expression should be that certain ideas prop-
erly belong to the human spirit. But innate ideas are then refuted by the 
objection that all human beings would accordingly have to have the 
same innate ideas. That would be correct if Hinnate" were understood in 
its natural sense. But what is innate in a human being does not neces-
sarily emerge as a natural development; rather, a human being must 
himself bring forth this development within himself by his own activ-
ity. Whether a human being realizes his or her vocation as a human 
being or fails is a matter of free will. But whether a human being ever 
actively exercises free will is essentially conditioned, since it is mediated 
by the education and culture of his or her time. Just as the fact that one 
has such and such opinions is mediated by one's culture, so whether 
one actively attains to that last and most extreme of abstractions[, 
namely free will,] is also a result of the culture at hand. 
(§68) Whatever we are we are immediately. But our immediate 
being is mediated. But beyond this general relationship of mediation 
and immediacy lies a still closer relationship. The knowing of God and 
of things divine is a fact of human consciousness, and such knowledge 
comes to be stated as our rise above what is sensory. To rise above 
something is to leave it behind and to pass over to something else. In 
so rising, then, we end in faith in what is divine. Since the path of 

Lectures on Logic (77-78) 
66 
faith consists in rising above what is sensory, its path is one of media-
tion: rising above sensory being precedes the result of faith. One gets 
to a second thing only insofar as one starts out from a first. A human 
being exhibits natural knowing [Wissen] and willing, and this begin-
ning is the ground by the mediation of which we pass over into faith 
in God. Faith results from this rise. Sensory knowledge and willing 
come first and then mediate the belief in God. 
(§69) Let us now go into the content of immediate knowledge more 
precisely. Consider the mere content of such knowledge, as in its acqui-
sition by a human being. This acquisition in its existence, as a fact, con-
tains mediation. The fact contains, we have seen, mediation for itself on 
its own account. But when we take this content of mediation for itself, 
we have something abstract. We leave out part of the whole. The con-
tent of immediate knowledge is the representation of God, which is im-
mediately connected with his being. The content of this knowledge is 
said to include the claim that the representation of God essentially in-
cludes this being. God can only be represented as enjoying being, and 
that is the content of this immediate knowledge. The mere thought of 
God by itself is not true, but becomes true only through the determina-
tion of his being. Or, inversely, if being is taken for itself on its own ac-
count, it, too, is nothing true. The thought [of God] is apprehended in 
its truth only as being, while being is true being only as divine being. 
What is already present here is the idea, 21 which stands opposed to 
the determination of immediate knowledge [§70]. The content of the 
immediate knowledge of God and its representation gains its truth 
only from its connection with being, which likewise gets its truth only 
by being connected with God-in other words, being is nothing apart 
from being mediated. Each is only through mediation by its other. The 
truth is only both determinations in their inseparability. 
If we speak of diverse determinations and wish to say merely the 
same thing of them all-namely that their inseparability alone is true-
we of course assert their mediation by one another. But this sort of ab-
stract assertion of mediation is empty of all thought. What our abstract 
assertion in fact says is the opposite of the non-empty proposition we 
are trying to state. If we hold in consciousness only the one side, [only 
the inseparability of the determinations,] the other side of the matter. 
what the diverse determinations themselves each express, is at once 
denied. This one-sidedness is readily taken up by the understanding, 
and the refutation of it emerges in our consideration of even the most 
trivial of particular determinations. Here philosophy has to do battle 
only with the abstractions of the understanding. In §71 and the fol-
27. The idea is treated in the concluding sections of part one of the Encyclopae· 
dia. See Hegel. Logic, pp. 280-96. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (78-79) 
67 
lowing paragraphs, still further general determinations based merely 
on such a foundation of immediacy are set in relief. 
(§71) For Jacobi it is the fact of consciousness that is to pass as the truth. 
If something is a fact of our consciousness, it is so, and we should therefore 
stick with it. That is the principle. The assurance is given that I find such 
and such in my consciousness, and so it is established as a fact. Yet this 
does not imply that what I find in my consciousness is present in my con-
sciousness alone as an idiosyncrasy, as something peculiar to me. Rather, 
what I find in my consciousness is said to belong to the very nature of con-
sciousness, i.e., to the consciousness of all human beings generally. Or, 
more correctly put, it belongs to the self-concept of the consciousness. 
But we immediately notice, in this connection, that such an allegedly 
immediate claim needs to be proven, that it must be derived from the na-
ture of the consciousness. Rid yourself of such mediation and you spare 
yourself the proof. However, anyone surely has the right to reply MBut 
this is not a fact of my consciousness." One proof for the existence of God 
that used to be strutted out was that all the peoples in the world believe 
in God. What immense authority must now be enjoyed by humankind 
for any individual who would have a different conviction! Freedom, 
however, aligns itself against the authority of the greater number. What I 
believe is my own business. This proof was thus abandoned because it 
failed to find any basis in the nature of spirit (Geist] generally. Many indi-
viduals and peoples are known who have no representation of God at all. 
But this appeal to all the world's peoples is nonetheless worth more than 
me appealing to my own individual consciousness. 
( §72) The other consequence [of appealing to the consciousness ofthe 
individual or a people] is that all superstition and worship of false gods 
comes to be explained as true worship. None who pray to the steer or 
monkey base their worship on reason and grounds. But their immediate 
consciousness of the validity of their belief is the same as occurs in all re-
ligions. With that the whole foundation of morality is raised up. The evil 
man finds such and such drives and inclinations within himself, and so 
believes they are right. They are a matter in his opinions which, insofar 
as they are believed, are thus explained to be justified. To be sure, we 
must respect the beliefs of every human being, but what is essentially in 
question is the content of belief. It is said that even among the heathen 
there have been good human beings. That is no doubt true, but the ques-
tion is how right and wrong are grounded in religion. 
In more recent times any arbitrary interest of action is often made 
into its very purpose. Irony extends over everything, as one allows any 
assertion at all to pass as valid merely insofar some individual feels a 
need for it. But I cannot accept this result and allow anything to pass 
as valid if my own empty self-certainty is what is ultimate, and if it 
alone gives its legitimate stamp of approval to everything. That is the 

Lectures on Logic (79-80) 
68 
point of [Jacobi's] immediate knowing: nothing is essentially deter-
mined for me [independently of my arbitrary will]. Even those who 
have not reached awareness of this ultimate ironic principle nonethe-
less have that very irony as their underlying principle. 
( § 73) But those same people, following Jacobi, say that something is 
immediately present in our self-consciousness that irony cannot touch, 
namely that we know immediately that God is. But we have no wish to 
know what he is. Whatever he is, is first introduced by his purpose. But 
knowing a purpose of God, hence knowing what we call a divine attri-
bute, would be a form of knowledge. It would be determinate knowl-
edge. We can lose our way in declamations about truth and God, but we 
do not want to know what such divine attributes are. My subjective ac-
tivity alone remains to give determination to this thing without con-
tent. The Athenians dedicated an altar to the unknown God. The pres-
ent immediate knowledge gets no further than those Athenians. For 
nothing is known of God 
(§74) Immediate knowing seems to have cast away all limitation, 
all mediation, and yet its immediacy is a limited one. Even the infinite 
is limited if it is singled out all by itself, since it has, beyond it, the fi-
nite as its limitation. If I apprehend what is general and what is partic-
ular, each for itself, what is general is still only one of two determina-
tions, so each side in the contrast turns out to be particular. That leads 
to an important reflection, an inversion about which the understand-
ing knows nothing. Because the immediacy is so one-sided, its content 
is finite. What by its content is general is made by this form of imme-
diacy into something abstract. If immediacy is to fall to God, all medi-
ation will be denied of him. God is thus indeterminate, purely equal 
to himself alone, purely abstract. God, apprehended merely as imme-
diate, is merely equal to himself. But if we go on to say that God cre-
ated a world, that world is already something other than him, which 
has being only insofar as it is posited by him. However, even though 
that world in time comes to be raised up [in the Incarnation] beyond 
this otherness, the world as other than God nevertheless has been 
posited, and that is a limit [upon God's mere immediacy]. God must 
be grasped as mediating himself merely with himself in his other, de-
termining himself with himself. God is known only as spirit. Immedi-
acy by itself makes the universal a mere abstraction. Philosophy has to 
refute mere abstraction-what is abstract has no truth to it. All media-
tion is left out in [abstract] being. But it is not the nature of the finite 
merely to be by itself. What is finite necessarily has a relation with 
something else outside it. A living human being is also conditioned, 
bearing reference to an other, and so is also mediated. Spirit [as con-
sciousness] is likewise conditioned, namely by being conscious of 
something else. Consciousness is the being of spirit as conditioned. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (80-82) 
69 
Spirit in truth lies in mediating itself with itself. If we stop with what 
is finite, it is conditioned. The finite is mediated. If I now say HThe fi-
nite has being," I pronounce it falsely to lack mediation, which is un-
true. By His" we express immediacy. There is no alteration, transition 
into something else, in His." All alteration is cancelled in the His." The 
understanding is the apprehension of something merely determinate, 
so that it is taken up only in its relationship to itself. The thing is thus 
made fast. Yet no finite content stays fixed, everyone falls subject to 
alteration. Contained in the Kantian antinomies is the principle that 
the understanding contradicts itself. This is also the principle of im-
mediacy, which essentially lies in the understanding. 
(§75 and the following) It is presupposed by Jacobi that [finite] 
knowing proceeds in the second realm of mediation, in the realm of 
what is conditioned, and that this is the only kind of thinking there is. 
But his presupposition is false. For still another kind of thinking exists, 
which the science of logic illustrates. What is true is this third realm 
(das Dritte] about which immediacy [or immediate knowing, the first 
realm,] knows nothing; God is both true as immediate, but he at once 
transmutes himself into mediation. This is the eternal process. 
(§76) If we compare immediacy [or immediate knowing] with the 
former[, classical] metaphysics, Descartes says that being and thinking 
are inseparable: cogito ergo sum. The same assertion is also expressed in Ja-
cobi's immediate knowing. But the inseparability of thought and being is 
not merely immediate-since thinking is true only by the mediation of 
being, while being is true only by the mediation of thinking. As Descartes 
already says, we know immediately[, i.e., innately] of the thought of God 
and of his existence. [Jacobi says that] we know immediately of the exis-
tence of external bodies, and it is in this that sensory consciousness con-
sists. But there is also mediation in such consciousness. If I know a sheet 
of paper, I know this sheet only by the mediation of my consciousness. 
(§77) But now consider the differences between the two points of 
view [of Descartes and Jacobi]. In the first place, the point of view of 
modern philosophy[, unlike Jacobi's point of view,] started out and 
proceeded quite innocently. The Cartesian philosophy originated in the 
principle of the inseparability of being and thinking, and then pro-
ceeded to knowledge of a more developed sort. Descartes began to phi-
losophize freely, simply by thinking, and by thinking objects he appre-
hended them and held them in thought. He is in this respect the true 
founder of modern philosophy. Yet his philosophy, in its execution, is 
[contrary to Jacobi's in that it is] solely a philosophy of what is finite. He 
holds in mind two thought determinations: thinking and extension. 
Whatever is extended is material. Thinking, for him, is thus so limited 
that it never gets beyond determination by whatever exists naturally as 
something material. Descartes became stuck at the level of mechanical 

Lectures on Logic ( 82-83) 
70 
being[, the mechanical being of nature]. Yet from there he proceeded to 
knowledge of a wider sort that did not restrict scientific knowing [Wis-
sen] to the principle by which mediation is allowed no validity. What 
God is we cannot simply know [erkennen]-here in scientific knowing 
the demand for mediation immediately arises. This second difference 
between the two thinkers is that we cannot [according to Jacobi] know 
[wissen] of God in any determinate or necessary fashion. For Jacobi we 
proceed [in "knowledge" as Erkennen] in the usual manner, dealing 
only with what is finite. That is also the result of the Kantian philoso-
phy: we know only appearances-whether appearances have being or 
not does not come into question. The manner of "knowing" remains 
entirely the same throughout. The abstract determinations [of appear-
ance] have no hold on the content of knowledge. The empirical sciences 
of the finite come to be pursued in this very way. But Jacobi's stand-
point of immediacy dispenses with all the considerations of method 
[which preoccupied Descartes]. Yet we must nonetheless carry on with 
the sciences of theology and morality. If we wished to proceed by Jaco-
bi's principle, the entire dogmatic content of theology would be reduced 
to the bare proposition that we immediately know [wissen] that God is. 
Yet it will still be admitted that God has deigned to reveal himself to us. 
But from this Jacobian standpoint we make no attempt to know [by 
what is finite-Erkennen] anything that is true of God. Because we are 
not to philosophize [as contrasted to having a bare philosophy of immedi-
ate intuition], no method is acknowledged. For method strives after a 
true procedure for thinking-which is nothing other than true philoso-
phizing, knowing something [truly]. Such philosophizing is tossed 
aside. But in that we cannot really remain stuck in immediate know-
ing, we proceed in an entirely uncritical and unphilosophical fashion, 
with neither rule nor measure, with no science of what we are doing. 
Philosophy is in particular tossed aside because it cannot really rest con-
tent, as Jacobi prefers, with mere assurances. Philosophy cannot be 
based on merely giving assurances, on imagining that human beings 
merely speak out of moral feeling [Gemut], that they merely speak feel-
ings [ Gefuhl]. The question of philosophy that must be put to a human 
being with feeling is "Is the feeling [Em.findung] true?" By the principle 
of immediate knowing, however, one just allows it to be true without 
further inquiry. 
Either we have immediate knowledge [Wissen] or we have knowl-
edge along with representations that mediate it. This Jacobian disjunc-
tion assumes that there is no third type of knowledge. But a third type 
most certainly exists, i.e., knowledge that contains mediation every bit 
as much as immediacy. God is simple identity with himself, and that is 
the moment of non-mediation. But he is equally mediation of himself 
with himself through what is other than himself. Everything contains 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (83-84) 
71 
the moment of mediation, whether mediation within what is finite or a 
thing's mediation through itself, with itself [in its other]. Yet Jacobi pre-
supposes that either one or the other holds, but not both. 
The above standpoints are thus the three standpoints [preceding the 
science of logic] about which the interest of present time revolves[: the 
appeal to innocent immediate thinking, to skeptical mediated thinking, 
and back to immediate thinking polemically directed against skeptical 
thinking]. The interest of philosophy itself is to know the matter at hand 
as it upon itself is. First, the naive metaphysics [of the ancients]lacked all 
consciousness of the criteria, categories, or thoughts by the use of which 
such philosophizing naively moved about. The result was the contradic-
tions in which such thinking came to be caught up. Second comes the 
separation of thought and its content, the standpoint according to which 
the content and thinking are two quite different sorts of things. Thinking 
[from this second standpoint illustrated by Kant] is incapable of winning 
the depth that comes by entering into its objects. Rather, it remains here 
on the one side [of appearance], while something else stands over there 
on the far side. A gulf comes to be assumed between thinking and its ob-
ject. The incoherence of it at once lies in the fact that thinking, since it is 
subjective, is explained as untrue, as not being of anything that is true. 
The other over yonder, which has being in itself, is something empty, and 
so we determine it to be merely this abstract being. The third standpoint 
is once again[, but polemically and reflectively,] the unification from 
which naive philosophizing proceeded, [according to which] thinking 
and being are immediately one. 
(§78) The presuppositions of this third standpoint are now to be 
given up as we enter the science of logic. What is to be given up is the 
immediacy of knowledge with mediation set over against it. [This op-
position] is but an arbitrary assurance [on Jacobi's part]. Indeed all 
presuppositions are now to be given up. In the science of logic these 
thought forms will be examined in their totality. Immediacy and me-
diation, being and thinking-all these thought forms will be thor-
oughly examined. In Jacobi's reasoning they are only used without 
being examined. As Descartes already said, de omnibus dubitandum 
est-one must start out from doubt, in fact from despair. Doubt ex-
presses rather an external circumambulating, an uncovering of con-
tradiction and the unrest of contradiction. To be sure, this unrest and 
contradiction are what drive us to philosophy. Ancient skepticism was 
not merely a doubting but, so to speak, a despairing which harbored 
the complete misery of the human spirit. This skepticism had as its re-
sult a total stilling of spirit, ataraxia. Skepticism proved above all that 
nothing is fixed, so that no one is licensed to invest him- or herself 
heart and soul in anything. For everything lacks being to the same 
degree that it has it. If everything is fixed, if everything is frozen fast, 

Lectures on Logic ( 84-85) 
72 
by the same token nothing within me can be brought into motion. 
Skepticism comes to a stop in the abstraction of nothing. An introduc-
tion to philosophy can indeed be effected by showing that everything 
contains within itself contradiction. That would be a joyless path to 
take, but it would also be quite superfluous, since this negative [skep-
tical] side is already present within the science of logic itself. 
[More Exact Concept and] Division of the [Science of] Logic28 
(§79) The expression "laws of the thought" in the science of logic is re-
ally a misnomer. When we speak of laws of the will, they are only [ exter-
nal] laws, assuming that the particular [impulse] stands opposed to the 
universal will according to the very concept of that will. When we con-
sider thinking as it is upon and for itself, it is not subject to any external 
laws, but is self-legislative. Logic is to be considered in these lectures 
from three consecutive points of view, which are not to be viewed, how-
ever, as parts of a whole. One cannot limit consideration of logic to 
merely one of its sides. The first side which it presents is the abstract, un-
derstandable [verstiindig] side. 
The second side is dialectical or negatively rational. Immediacy and 
mediation are the two thought determinations corresponding to these 
first two sides. The understanding sets up these two thought determi· 
nations as separate, but it is still something else to exhibit the second 
determination as negative, to show that these thought determinations 
of the understanding are not so very fixed, but rather are finite, tran· 
sitory, a confounding of these very determinations and of the under· 
standing itself. The third side of the logic is the speculative or positively 
rational. It brings the first two determinations together in their unity, 
unseparated from each other. 
( §80) The understanding holds each determination fast. I hold the finite 
over to the one side, and the infinite over on the other. For example, the 
cause is held on the one side, and the effect on the other. The understand· 
ing is one-sided, and it thus presents a false apprehension of things in op· 
position to philosophy. The understanding holds fast to one thing, and 
must give it validity over against its other. A man who thinks he must 
hold his destiny fixedly in mind is a man of the understanding who holds 
to one thing, and who does not allow himself to be distracted by any of 
the other good and excellent things along his path in life. We employ the 
understanding in dealing with all our concepts in determining them 
28. As its last paragraph shows, this section, which is presented as a preview of 
the science of logic, may be better understood as a review, after reading the whole 
logic. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (85-86) 
73 
fixedly, in defining them. But if we limit ourselves to the understanding, 
we only have hold of the series of determinations as it appears in the logic 
of the understanding, which only gives definitions [or defining determi-
nations]. For example, to be a cause is merely to be such and such, and to 
be an effect is simply to be yet something else. In this way we can easily 
transform the logic of reason into that of the understanding. 
(§81) What is dialectical is the passage of such determinations into 
their opposites. Passage to a thing's opposite is commonly viewed as the 
result of hunting about it externally to find its opposite. But true dialec-
tic is the determinate apprehension of something according to the de-
termination to which it is destined. True dialectic peers into such a defi-
nition as is provided by the understanding and contemplates what is 
contained therein, whereupon it results that, without anything being 
brought in from the outside, the definition by its very content contra-
dicts itself. This does not occur by comparing one determination exter-
nally with another. It rather transpires simply within the first determi-
nation itself. That is what Plato and the ancients called contemplating 
something upon and for itself. It is one thing, for example, to see many 
an external thing, each of them striking this or that person in the eye. 
It is quite another to contemplate beauty by its very self-concept, to 
contemplate the good upon and for itself, and so on. 
The Platonic dialectic is mixed [in with this dialectical side of the 
science of logic]: in part objects are contemplated as they are upon 
themselves, and in part the contradiction in objects as they are upon 
themselves is brought forward through something else which is like-
wise fixedly held in view. The end result, then, is, that we no longer 
have anything fixed in mind. At this point the whole thus remains 
negative. Socrates in particular sought to exhibit contradictions in con-
ventional principles and opinions, and to challenge people to deeper 
insight. The dialectic is the immanent [self-activity of the object of 
thought] going beyond itself, but this activity remains within the 
scope of the original determination itself. 
The ancient skeptics in particular practiced this dialectic, in which a 
particular application[, namely a counter-example,] is set in opposition 
to a general assertion. But theirs was an external dialectic. However, the 
real dialectic of the general assertion is immanent in that it has come to 
show contradiction within the self-concepts themselves. Such imma-
nent contradictions go though all the sciences. Modern skepticism is very 
different from ancient skepticism. Modern skepticism[, e.g., Hume,] be-
lieves it has hold of the truth in whatever is sensory, while ancient skep-
ticism showed how whatever is sensory is precisely for that reason un-
true. The end result with which the ancient skeptics came to a stop is 
nothing. But they took this result to be abstract nothing. However, this 
view of the result is one-sided. To put it simply, the result is admittedly 

Lectures on Logic (86-87) 
74 
nothing, but it is nothing of a certain determination [e.g., something 
bright], and with that is a determinate nothing [i.e., nothing dim]. Where 
such a result comes from must, in our science of logic, be retained in 
mind. The result is not to be taken up without its derivation. It is a de-
terminate nothing, but this negative determination has its own content, 
so that nothing at once contains an affirmation[, e.g., it is nothing dim, 
but is affirmatively something bright instead]. So we must not break off 
merely with nothing. From the infinitely many contradictions [of the 
diverse thought determinations of the understanding] we retain only 
nothing, but it is never the same nothing. This points to the positive re-
sult of whatever is dialectical. But how what is dialectical is distin-
guished from what is understandable [verstandig], which is where we 
started out, we shall see in the sequel. 
(§82) The third speculative side of the science of logic is a simple 
summation of what has already gone before. The contradiction has van-
ished. The contradictory determinations are the premises [or assump-
tions], and within them nothing retains determinate form. We must 
not stop simply with the nothing, since nothing [of a particular deter-
mination] is now itself something determinate, and this content now 
constitutes something affirmative. But what is newly affirmative is 
present in form as well as in content, since our determinate nothing 
stands in the relation of simple self-reference [in that it determinately is 
what it is]. The result of going beyond contradiction is concrete, since it 
is the oneness of different determinations. That is what is positively ratio-
nal, in contrast to what is dialectical or negatively rational. The conscious-
ness of contradiction, our consciousness that dialectical negation bears 
affirmation upon itself, is the resolution of the contradiction, which is 
what is concrete. This resolution is not the abstract oneness of some-
thing with itself, but is the reconciliation of the dialectical contradicto-
ries. Harmony is not just abstract oneness but the unity [of different de-
terminations] which must be harmonious. The different notes must 
sound together in unison. Only harmony can be concrete: a single note 
by itself contains no contradiction, but it has no value either. Harmony 
is concrete unity. It is positively rational, and is alone in holding truth. 
God is God by containing within himself what is concrete. To be a spec-
ulative logician is to apprehend opposite determinations within their 
unity. This is what the understanding has such a tough time with, since 
it is always holding the determinations outside one another. 
However, the truth is first the dialectical activity of showing contra-
diction, and hence of showing the different determinations as transi-
tory. The process of the transitions is what holds truth. Both determi-
nations in the transition are restless, raising themselves beyond 
themselves [into their unity], and yet they are both present in the 
course of the process. Here we reach the speculative moment of the 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (87-88) 
75 
process. It is not the oneness of a determination with itself alone. nor 
the opposition of the two determinations alone, but both together. It is 
what is affirmative as contained within the resolution of the contra-
diction. What is affirmative is affirmative by negation of the negation. 
Things in the world are. but we say they are finite. In saying they are 
finite we give expression to their self-negation. Negation of the nega-
tion is then the negation of this self-negation, which is what is affir-
mative as it is constantly bringing itself forth. The I is this simple nega-
tion of the negation. I behold an object, I hold to it in representation, 
but in doing so I no longer [remain merely] with myself but am one 
with an object that negated me. But what negates me, the object, is my 
thought object, my representation. So I negate what negates me, I 
make something out of it that is mine, and with that what has negated 
me has been negated [in its negation of me]. 
This process eventuating in negation of the negation is my spiritual 
life. but it is also my corporeal survival. Rest is death. What is living is 
this very process. I am hungry, and the lack of food is a negation [of 
me]. I satisfy this negation, and that is the self-affirmation arising by 
negation of the negation[. i.e., by the negation of my need]. What is 
speculative is to know objects as they are upon themselves, to appre-
hend them as a process. What is speculative cannot be expressed in 
simple judgments. The speculative process cannot be contained in a 
fixed proposition, for any such proposition is one-sided. What is true is 
the continuing process with its three moments given in advance. But 
we must first see and prove upon the showing of that logic itself that 
this is the nature of the science of logic. That is our course. The method 
of the logic is the absolute rhythm of all that is alive, the truth of every-
thing in particular spheres as also in generaL inclusive spheres. Spinoza 
said that we must apprehend things under the aspect of eternity [in spe-
cie aeterni]. But eternity for him is the rigid substance. True eternity is 
this true speculative process, once we quietly allow the content to come 
into its own fullness and contemplate it upon its own self-showing. 
[I. Being] 
We have before us the self-concept or, more determinately, the idea, and 
it is this in its various forms we must now consider [§83]. We cannot 
begin with the idea itself. We can only begin with completely simple, 
wholly immediate being. With whatever isfirstwe have not yet proceeded 
to anything else. For mediation. two determinations are required, which 
are not yet present in what is only first. which is [only] immediate being. 
This beginning is not yet the self-concept, is not yet the idea in its full 
scope, but is the idea in its immediate form. The content of being posits 
itself additionally in the sequel to be only a particular determination, a 
form. the self-concept [still] merely in its immediacy. What is second [in 

Lectures on Logic (88-89) 
76 
relation to being], then, is the essence of being, mediation. We already 
have the determination that the essence of being is something inner in 
which we have abandoned what is outer. We have thus already gone be-
yond immediacy. The essence is the ground [of what is immediate]. (In 
bygone times, I have been what I have been. To have been is to be no 
more. Being in its essence has lost the immediacy of being there. The es-
sence is the logical essence of being. The essence of my being, in one re-
spect, is a determination of time, more precisely, the determination of 
times past. 29 ) 
Being is what is straightaway simple and without difference. In the 
essence of being, its immediacy is interrupted. Its essence is, quite 
generally, reflected [in something else]. In its essence being is demoted 
to [mere] show, which itself comes to be something reflected in its es-
sence. The essence of being has a being for itself, but in this being for 
itself it still bears reference to immediate being [as what is other than 
it]: the essence of being is not yet free. It is the realm of what is differ-
ent, it is the sphere ofjinitude in general. Third comes the self-concept at 
once upon and for itself: it is the healing of the breach between immedi-
ate being and its essence, of reflection upon immediacy. What was 
showing forth is now mediation, being is immediate, but in the self-
concept the two now find themselves united. 
(§84) Being is the self-concept only as it [abstractly] at first is, [with 
its determinations arising] merely upon itself [and not for itself]. What 
is merely upon itself is still bottled up inside itself. It has not yet come 
out. What is still bottled up in this way is the driving force. It dis-
patches its determinations outside itself, into an element which is dif-
ferent from itself. The element of manifestation, in which the self-con-
cept is [outwardly] realized, is only a one-sided determination of the 
self-concept. This element in which the self-concept thus unfolds is 
not yet the self-concept itself. The child is already rational, but only in 
29. For example, a champion's essence includes what he or she has achieved, 
even if he or she no longer immediately displays the achievement. The achievement 
is still posited upon the individual as his or her non-immediate essence. The past 
achievement cannot be erased, but shows what the individual as a whole is capa-
ble of. (By extension, in essence a human being who has not yet died is already 
upon himself or herself dead. The individual is already as good as dead: being 
dead has already been calculated into the individual's essential potentiality. Be-
cause of all the human beings who have died in the past, death is already posited 
upon now living human beings as part of their non-immediate essence. The tem-
poral determination of having died becomes the logical determination posited 
upon now Jiving human beings. A human being's essence includes what past 
human beings in the end have turned out immediately to be. A temporal determi-
nation comes to be raised up beyond itself into part of the timeless logical essence 
of the individual.) 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic ( 89-90) 
77 
the sense that reason in the child is still merely [posited] upon the 
child. Reason comes to be posited [within itself, actually] only in the 
adult human being. What has being only as force is not yet present in 
its expression. Energy is then the process by which something brings 
itself to the point of self-manifestation. The determinations of the self-
concept are first only determinations of being. In the logic of the es-
sence the same determinations occur, but they recur as reflected, as 
[externally] bearing reference to one another. 
The difference [between the logic of being and of essence] is this. 
Being and non-being are the simplest moments in the logic of being. 
The same moments can be expressed [in the logic of essence as explic-
itly referring to each other,] as the positive and the negative. There is al-
ready a difference between these two moments in the logic of essence 
and those of being and non-being. The negative is the negative of some-
thing, of the positive, while the positive [unlike being] is itself posited 
as having the determination of referring [to its opposite]. Whatever is 
positive has being over against its negative. What is positive is a being 
that is posited as reflected in something else, as bearing reference to 
something else. For it essentially belongs to the determination of what-
ever is positive not to be negative. That is the difference [between the 
distinction of positive and negative and that of being and non-being]. 
In the logic of the self-concept these determinations [of the positive 
and the negative] recur in their unity. In the sphere of mediation, which 
is the logic of essence, the other still appears with the determination of 
being other. In this sphere, reference to an other still has its place. In the 
logic of the self-concept, no opposition between the universal and the 
particular remains. The universal is all-encompassing, with the other 
particular determinations present within it. The particular is not the 
general. But the species[, e.g., rational animal] contains the genus [ani-
mal]: the particularization of what is general contains what is general. 
That is the unity of the moments of the self-concept. 
The further determination in the logic of being [beyond determi-
nate being] is the transition of something determinate into something 
else. Alteration in the logic of being consists in the fact that being, as 
something determinate, becomes somerhing else. So what is other 
than something is likewise something. In the logic of the essence, ref-
erence to an other also occurs, but does so immediately[, without 
transition]. An other-for example, the effect-belongs to the very 
meaning of "cause," to the very concept of being a cause. By contrast, 
if we return to the logic of being and consider again something and its 
other, the other is also something [but is not a different thought deter-
mination in the way that an effect is a different thought determina-
tion from a cause]. Something as something is not affected by the fact 
that it is another something. Yet in all subordinate spheres [of the sci-

Lectures on Logic (90-91) 
78 
ence of logic] we have the same basic development [appearing in dis-
tinct forms], and the sphere of this development is the totality. 
In the logic of essence, reference to an other occurs [without transi-
tion into something else by the alteration of something given]. To the 
unaltered meaning of "cause," to its very concept, there belongs its 
other, the effect. Every sphere is a totality, a distinct development of 
the self-concept. We can also start out from the self-concept. the total-
ity in which all its moments are posited. Being and essence are then 
the two distinct sides of the self-concept. The self-concept is the unity 
of these two determinations as posited. Every determination taken for 
itself on its own account[. posited without the immediate positing of 
its other,] is one-sided. The determinations each first attain to their 
truth only within the self-concept itself. If we take the self-concept 
and consider it from one side, we have the categories of being, and 
further on [when we take it from the other side] we have the catego-
ries of essence. But the self-concept [contrary to being] is not immedi-
ate, but is the mediation of itself with itself. The spheres of being and 
essence are but the mediation through which the self-concept emerges 
as the result. What comes to be proven thereby is that the self-concept 
is their truth. 
The logic of the self-concept, in its self-determination in the logic of 
essence, clears the way for itself in two ways. First, self-concept posits 
itself upon the solid ground of being external to itself, and its further 
activity then consists in proceeding from outside itself back within it-
self. As it posits itself as the result of this activity of directing itself 
outside itself, it determines itself to be something that passes merely 
for an external element. The self-concept posits, onto this alleged ex-
ternal ground, figurations of itself. The logic of being likewise con-
tains figurations of the self-concept. When being is no longer external 
[to the self-concept], it withdraws within itself. The self-concept thus 
explicates itself [in the logics of being and essence]. Being within the 
self-concept is no longer immediate being. It has ceased to be immedi-
ate to become a mere form within the self-concept. Being is no longer 
a ground [external to the self-concept] on which the logic of the self-
concept inscribes its figurations. As soon as we elaborate further upon 
[the logic of] being, what arises is no longer mere being. Being raises 
itself beyond itself up into its essence, which in turn raises itself up 
into the self-concept. Yet being does not pass over into its essence im-
mediately, but rather contains [as posited] upon itself its development 
into its totality. It is only by withdrawing back into itself that being 
raises itself into its essence. Just so does the essence of being also re-
turn back into itself, thus becoming the self-concept. This essence, 
posited outwardly before our gaze in the completion of its develop-
ment, in the full show of itself, is the self-concept. The beginning of 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (90-91) 
79 
the whole development is at once its end. The development does not go 
off into the infinite. Its progress is rather a circle. 30 
(§85) The logical determinations can be applied to God. But God is 
then represented as the subject, while what we say of God is the predi-
cate. In determining God metaphysically, God is present in pure thought, 
in the simple element of thinking. It can be said that, in the science of 
logic, the eternal essence of God is exposited as it still was before the cre-
ation of the sensory world. 31 In the creation of the world, the world as dis-
tinguished from the logic is externally present, posited as externalized 
thoughts. What emerges with the creation of the world is the fact that the 
distinctions [between thought determinations] are no longer posited 
within the ground of their unity[, i.e., within the self-concept]. Yet only 
the first determinations [in the logic of essence, e.g., cause], not the [cor-
relative] second determinations[, e.g., effect], can be regarded as deter-
minations of God. For the second determination is always a determina-
tion in differentiation [from the first determination or logical category by 
which God is identified]. The first determination is immediate, while the 
second one constitutes the sphere posited in its differentiation from the 
first. Within every simple first determination, [e.g., ground,] what is de-
terminately different from it[, e.g, the consequence of the ground] is at 
once also present, but is at first present without yet being explicitly pos-
ited. In the second determination, finitude [and with it contradiction] 
again enters. The third determination is the unity of the first and the sec-
ond, in which the contradiction is resolved. Thus only the first determi-
nation [in any pair of correlative determinations in the logic of essence] 
corresponds to what we first understand by "God." The progression is as 
follows. The beginning is simple, immediate. There the self-concept re-
mains merely posited upon itself in its immediacy. The progression lies in 
the self-concept increasingly coming out into the open, while what came 
first[, the self-concept as being or the abstract essence of being] recedes 
back within itself[, i.e., within the total self-concept]. Every newly 
emerging concept is more concretely determinate than its predecessor. 
We are always carrying everything that went before along with ourselves 
into what is new, but everything prior is, within what is new, put in its 
30. Hegel appears to mean, in saying that the science of logic is a circle that 
does not veer off into the infinite, that the system of logical categories is complete. 
Yet with each new, expanded edition of the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sci-
ences (1817, 1827, 1830), though the logic remains the same, the philosophies of 
nature and spirit which follow come to be stuffed with more empirical particular-
ization of the logical concepts. Since the entire system is held within the circle of 
logical concepts, it does not veer off into the infinite either, but the circle of the 
system, unlike that of the logic, is empirically ever widening. 
31. This statement has been used to sponsor a theistic interpretation of the sci· 
ence of logic. 

Lectures on Logic (91-92) 
80 
determinate place. Whereas, in what preceded, each [momentarily im-
mediate] determination [identifying God in its own time] passed as ulti-
mate, it is now demoted into being only a moment of the self-concept. 
We start with being, but matters at once proceed further. [1.] We first 
come upon determinate being, being as determinations, immediate [deter-
minateness], i.e., quality. To be is to be a determination, but in the form of 
immediacy. [2.] Second come differences [between qualities]. and with 
that the determination [of quality] is raised up beyond itself. The determi-
nation of quality is no longer absolutely speaking what is, but now passes 
for itself into indifference [to a continuing qualitative determination]. 
and so becomes quantity. An underlying state[, namely quality,] remains 
[through quantitative increase or decrease in the amount of units of that 
quality]. The size [of an aggregate] can be arbitrarily determined as such 
or such [without alternation of the·common quality of its members]. 3. 
[Third] is measure, an external and indifferent [quantitative] determina-
tion which has an enduring being[, e.g., as a ratio of a natural force or ele-
ment that remains constant through proportionate quantitative changes 
in the terms of the ratio]. Measure is the unity of both determinations[. 
i.e., quality and quantity]. God, it has been said, 32 is measure, a fixed 
boundary [beyond which lies what is disproportionate or measureless]. 
Measure is [the highest concept of] God within the logic of mere being. 33 
II. [Essence] 
Essence first appears to be as abstract as being. But essence is reflection. 
Being is raised up beyond itself into the mere show of its essence. Es-
sence is a correlation [between itself and its show]. but it is at once only 
by the mediation of being raising itself up into this show. Essence, first 
showing forth within itself, lies in the determination of reflection. But es-
sence does not only show forth within itself [as essence]. It is also 
grounds of something further, the raising up of the mediation [within 
the abstract essence of being] beyond itself into immediacy, into exis-
tence. Existence is being once again, but this time it is being as posited 
immediacy, immediacy posited by its ground. ("Being; "being there" 
[Dasein]. and ·existence" are usually used synonymously. But in the sci-
ence of logic these expressions are employed differently, designating dif-
ferent thought determinations.) The other of the essence of being is gen-
erally appearance. That essence must appear, which is to say that existence 
is the essence of being showing forth [in what is immediate, not simply 
within itself]. What comes in the third place in the logic of essence is the 
unity of both essence and appearance, which is actuality. The sphere of 
32. E.g., by the Pythagoreans, who viewed God as cosmic harmony. 
33. The Psalms may express a view of God as the measureless, but such a vieW 
already falls within the logic of the transcendent essence of being. 

Introduction to the Lectures on Logic (92-93) 
81 
mediation [within the abstract essence of being] comes to be posited in 
appearance. God is actual, and within actuality he explicates himself. 
Actuality is more than mere being. Explicated actuality is necessity, which 
is the totality and truth of essence. Necessity is essence [1.] determining 
itself completely within itself, [2.] showing forth and appearing, and 
[3.] posited in unity with its appearance. 
Ill. The Self-Concept 
Necessity is upon itself freedom. [l.] What is free is the self-concept enjoy-
ing being absolutely by itself. Absolute necessity posited as simple refer-
ence by oneself to oneself is freedom. The self-concept first shows forth 
precisely within itself. The development of the self-concept, insofar as 
that development is still held within itself, is the self-concept's division 
within itself. This development of the self-concept is [a.] judgment [Ur-
teil], and [b.] the·totality of the self-concept, the syllogism. [In the syllo-
gism] the self-concept has raised the difference [of subject and predicate 
in judgment] up beyond itself, and has posited difference as having been 
so raised up. This closure of the self-concept with itself is the self-concept 
in its totality. 2. The further opposition, the difference, through which 
the self-concept loses itself in objectivity, is the freedom of the self-concept 
falling away from itself into objectivity. But objectivity includes the posit-
ing of oneself as the [subjective] self-concept, it bears a reference to sub-
jectivity. With that come notions of the utility [of objects], wisdom, and 
providence [working its way through the objective world]. [3.] What 
comes in the third place is the idea, the absolute, the idea as the most con-
crete determination of the absolute [on the level of pure thought]. 34 The 
idea is objectivity taken back into the self-concept, the unity of subjectiv-
ity and objectivity. The idea is first [determinate as]life, second as knowl-
edge, but rather as finite knowledge, as the self-concept distinguishing it-
self [as object] from itself, with still no consciousness of what it is after. 
Third, absolute knowledge comes to be the consciousness of the idea, of 
which one form is science, another art, and still another religion. In ab-
solute knowledge, the self-concept, the idea, brings itself forth as self-
aware. The logic thus concludes with the self-concept of the logic itself. 
That is the precis of our path, the development of which arises out of it-
self. The above breakdown of the path into its separate sections will be 
self-determining only in the exposition of the science of logic itself. Such 
divisions into sections must for the present be left, to some degree, as 
matter-of-fact demarcations without justification within themselves. 
Their justification will now rather fall within the science of logic itself. 
34. "The idea: translating die Idee, is a common way of referring to Plato's form 
'of forms. But by the end of this paragraph we are given an Aristotelian explana-
tion of this pure divine form as self-conscious thought thinking itself. 


BEING 


l 
Being 
Being is the self-concept [Begriff1 as it [exhibits its determinations] 
merely upon itself [taken abstractly]. It is the self-concept as it devel-
ops in the element of immediacy. All determinations of the self-con-
cept take the form of immediacy. However, reference at once enters 
into this immediacy, showing forth in an other, but this reference it-
self has the character of an immediate transition into an other. What-
ever passes into an other in this way is unfree, and comes to be anni-
hilated. Being lies precisely in such an absence of freedom, in passage 
into an other, [i.e., into nothing,] into becoming, [and then] into de-
terminate being. 
Such determinate being is first given out to be the quale, quality ['Lo 
'ti Tjv dvm], as Aristotle says. Something is constituted by such and 
such a nature, and if it loses that nature its very being falls by the way-
side. Its [qualitative] determination is inwardly connected with its 
very being. In the second determination within the logic of being, [the 
determination of quantity,] that inner connection of being and qual-
ity is no longer present. In quantity being occurs with a determination 
that is indifferent. 1 The third determination [within the logic of being] 
is measure, which generally also falls under magnitude. Magnitude is 
indifferent [to quality due to the self-same quality of its units], but in 
measure [relative] magnitudes[, i.e., ratios] are themselves qualita-
tive. If, within measure, the [relative] magnitude comes to be modi-
fied, its quality itself gets lost. 
l. I.e., with a determination that does not contrast with another qualitative 
determination, that continues in qualitatively identical ones. 
85 

Lectures on Logic (95-96) 
86 
I.A. Quality 
Something in being determinate is the negation of something else. 
Something is determinate [§86], and with that has a limit. Every being 
there [Dasein] is finite by the very fact of being determinate. Determi· 
nateness is limitation, and thereby is finitude. Whatever is finite is also 
the negation of the infinite. 
What now follow are a. Being, b. Being there, finitude and infinity, c. 
Being for itself The infinite is the finite negated, while the finite has as its 
quality the negation of the infinite. If I say HI have being for myself; I 
mean that I do not depend on any other being. I negate this being out 
there that would negate me. The finite is being for an other, the infinite is 
being for itself That is the sphere of quality. 
The categories and thought determinations [examined here, initial 
categories in the logic of being,] are most familiar to us since we are 
thinking beings and they penetrate all our representations and !an· 
guage. To that extent they are what is most pedestrian, most common-
place, the best known. They are without a doubt familiar to us, but 
what is in question is coming to know what their nature is. For we 
employ them unconsciously. 
I.A.a. Being 
What has been presented up to now is only in introduction to the sci-
ence of logic. Only now do we enter into its content. The question is: 
with what are we to begin? In what does the determination of thought 
lie, whatever it might be, with which we are to begin? In the other sci-
ences there is no difficulty concerning where to begin. Their presuppo-
sitions, the objects themselves, are simply there. But in this science we 
also have a presupposition, which is simply the consideration of think-
ing as well as of what is thought. Our presupposition is the contempla-
tion of the simple activity of mind [ Geist]-not willing or feeling, but the 
simple activity of thinking. In transposing ourselves into this stand-
point we abstract from all particular, determinate representations. The 
beginning is to be made, therefore, in this pure, completely simple ele-
ment. The sensory realm is something externaL spatial and temporaL 
while thinking has the character of universality, simplicity. That we 
adopt this standpoint is, in this respect, an act of our own will. 
So what now first arises to be thought, first in the sense of being 
nothing other than the most abstract and purest thought object? Only 
the subsequent progression will bring in determination. As we pass 
over from one determination to another, we still find ourselves with 
determinateness. 2 What is first must be simplicity, immediacy, with-
2. Determinateness is the common character of different determinations. 

Being (96-97) 
87 
out [any posited] reference to whatever is other than it, and in this re-
spect it is most abstract, i.e., immediate-it must be being [§86]. 
We could also call our abstract starting point pure thinking, the pure 
activity of contemplation. And yet pure thinking is already a more 
concrete activity of our own mind, an activity of our [rational human] 
nature, of mind [vouc;]. But this activity already contains unrest, it is 
already mediated. If we call something "simple," it is simple already in 
the reflected light of something else, since it bears reference to what is 
composite. The beginning, then, is what is completely immediate, being 
rather than thinking. We have to make our start with a beginning 
that is totally and purely beginning, not with the beginning as space, 
as number, and the like, but rather a completely indeterminate or ab-
stract beginning, the beginning and only the beginning. 
Should we now ask "What is the beginning?" it is apparent that the 
beginning itself is already something, but it is also only the beginning. 
What only begins to be is not yet, and yet [as a beginning] it already 
is. This beginning thus already contains the determinations of both 
being and nothing [§87], and, beyond that, perhaps the third deter-
mination that matters should proceed still further. But with a purely 
immediate beginning this further determination still falls by the way-
side. We thus might already lapse into beginning with "the begin-
ning" itself as already pointing to something that is to follow. 
Being is, out and out, the pure beginning. Much can still be said in 
its regard, but it is all quite unnecessary. Fichte began with the proposi-
tion that I = I. For him it was a matter of making an absolute beginning 
with something totally certain. For Schelling it was a question of making 
such a beginning with the absolute indifference beheld in intellectual in-
tuition. Or it might also be said that we must start with God. But with 
regard to "I= I" as the beginning, there is no certainty in it. For the I al-
ready implies consciousness-I say I know something-self-conscious-
ness has already entered, which is already a further movement beyond 
mere being. Moreover, what is certain here in Fichte's philosophy is the 
subject, not the object. Again, if I speak of "absolute indifference" or 
"intellectual intuition," it all already consists in further, more concrete 
determinations than that of mere being. 
If it is said that we should start with God, that is quite correct, but the 
question then becomes "What is God?" The simplest representation of 
God is that of mere being. We may give logical determinations out to be 
the determinations of God. We can give them out to be definitions of 
God. 3 But then in the beginning we have, for the purpose of defining 
3. To be God appears throughout to be the all-embracing (and hence non-rela-
tive) absolute, i.e .. that beyond which there is nothing. Each logical determina-
tion or category "defines" God, not by analyzing the bare concept of being God 

Lectures on Logic (97-98) 
88 
God, only the most immediate determination of thinking, which is 
being. There is absolutely no further difficulty in the matter-being is 
totally simple. Essence is just as simple as being except that it already 
contains reflection upon something else. 
Among the Greeks, philosophy also in reality began with being. The 
Eleatic school said that God is being. What holds truth is being alone. To 
be sure, the Ionian principle chronologically preceded the Eleatic school. 
It asserted that the first principle [ciQXTJ] is water, or fire, or the infinite, 
or the indeterminate, which would be matter. These thought forms of the 
Ionian school are natural formations, not pure thoughts, but something 
natural. The [Pythagorean] principle of number also [preceded the Ele-
atic School]. A number is a pure thought, but is the thought determina-
tion of what is sensory generally, namely, of [beings] outside one another. 
Number marks the transition from the representation of sensory beings 
outside one another [to the pure thought of beings outside one another]. 
But pure thought [by itself] was first apprehended by the Eleatic school. 
In the science of logic we follow the trail of thought forms as they 
themselves develop. The history of philosophy is nothing but the ex-
ternal exposition of the mind's own activity. In our own thinking, in 
the science of logic, a sequence of before and after also exists. But the 
same sequence is followed in the sensory temporal order as is followed 
in pure thinking. With respect to this further progress of philosophy, 
the determinations of difference [as contrasted to those of identity] 
fall by the wayside [as we hit upon the starting point]. for the differ-
ences themselves fall away. For we cannot make such differences into 
our principle, since they already bear limitation upon themselves. The 
differently, but by proposing one way of identifying what God is under one or an· 
other particular determination or category in a logically developing sequence of 
such determinations. The science of logic seeks to show how each way of identify· 
ing God or the absolute, except the first and most abstract way, is made less ab· 
stract by adding still another particular determination also found in God. Each 
subsequent category, which in this sense is more nearly true, develops out of a 
contradiction discovered when the previous way was taken to be complete. Each 
prior category is successfully used by the reader to single out God and only God. 
But, since each prior way of identifying God falsely restricts God to falling under 
a determination which is exclusive of further determinations also found in God, 
it does so under a false determination. If we were to engage in linguistic ascent-
which is always possible but which Hegel. living before Friedrich Ludwig Gottlob 
Frege (1848-1925), does not engage in-we might say that the reader of Hegel's 
texts on the science of logic is led to successfully refer to the referent of "God" 
under successive false descriptions each of which is subject to correction by re· 
description. On the possibility of linguistic ascent in connection with the science 
of logic, see Clark Butler, "Hegel's Science of Logic in an Analytic Mode." in Hegel's 
Theory of the Subject, ed. David ·Gray Carlson (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2006), chap. 13. 

Being (98-99) 
89 
history of philosophy has meaning only insofar as we know the deter-
minations of thinking within their own internal development. 
The later philosophies contain the principles of earlier ones, but are 
more concrete over against them. So our own philosophy [absolute ideal-
ism] necessarily is also the richest, the most concrete, since it is the result 
of the work of millennia. Everything is contained in this result. The Ele-
atic, Platonic, Aristotelian, and other such philosophies cannot be the 
philosophy of our own time. Our principles are of necessity more con-
crete than theirs, which arose when spirit still stood at a lower level of 
development. Yet we begin from being, which was the principle of the El-
eatic philosophy. 
We could begin the progression by saying that we have analyzed the 
beginning. We would then say that being is contained in this beginning. 
But what is only beginning to be at once is not yet. We might cursorily say 
in such an analysis that we want to start with becoming [§88], and then 
proceed to see what it is. If we compare becoming as our beginning with 
alteration, the latter is already more concrete than becoming, since in al-
teration there is already something that becomes something else. Mere be-
coming does not yet contain something. Rather, being submerges within 
becoming and never emerges out of it, for within becoming non-being 
lies in wait to consume being. Being and non-being are both present 
within becoming, and yet are different. Becoming is totally simple in 
representation except that the determinations of being and non-being 
are also contained within it. If, not forgetting this, we at once know the 
determinations of being and non-being to be contained in becoming, 
what we have in becoming is something [relatively] simple within which 
those two determinations are contained, and what we have is thus a 
unity. Against this simple reflection on becoming, nothing is to be ob-
jected. We have the determinations of being and non-being within the 
single determination of becoming. Such is the fact of the matter, which 
cannot be gainsaid. It might be replied that becoming cannot be grasped 
conceptually, but becoming is the self-concept. There is really no diffi-
culty here. But if it is said that becoming is the unity of being and noth-
ing, it will be protested that we want to hear nothing of such a unity. For 
nothing is the negation of being, and being is the negation of nothing. 
Being and nothing are, to be sure, irreconcilable. We have here the sharp-
est of contradictions, and yet this contradiction is nothing beyond what 
has already been shown by our analysis. This contradiction is the fact of 
the matter. If I speak of "the unity of being and nothing," I have after all 
succeeded in bringing both determinations into my consciousness where 
they oppose themselves to each other, in giving expression to them in 
their complete contradiction to each other. But the fact of bringing this 
contradiction before my consciousness is off-putting. We will admit with-
out a doubt that this is the most maddening of contradictions. But we will 

Lectures on Logic (99-100) 
90 
also say that the contradiction self-destructs. Becoming is precisely this 
unrest, this process of the destruction of mere being and nothing, for de-
struction is itself a further side of becoming, beyond coming to be. Be-
coming contains destruction within it. In becoming being fails to hold 
out, and just as little does nothing hold out within it. Becoming is this 
very [circular, alternating] movement. But becoming must still be laid 
out as the unification of being and non-being. It is the truth of being. Yet 
for the understanding, which remains fixed in its isolation of the one or 
the other, becoming is simply not to be grasped. But let us proceed, not 
from becoming, but from being as such. 
(§87) Being is the most abstract of all. The abstraction of being is to-
tally immediate and at once totally empty, but along with that it is at once 
abstractly negative. If we give expression to its merely abstract character, 
we will say that being is nothing. What is negative [in abstract being] is the 
non-being of anything at all. And yet, quite regardless of that, being is 
also blankly nothing in a completely immediate fashion. So, as the Chi-
nese [Buddhists] say! the absolute is nothing. It has been said that every-
thing came out of nothing, and that it is into nothing that everything re-
turns [Heraclitus). Nothing is then both the beginning and the end. 
Nothing is, precisely, what is totally simple, immediate, and without dis-
tinction. It is thus the same as being, it arises from the very same abstrac-
tion. Being and nothing are abstractly opposed, and yet even in this ab-
stract opposition to each other their identity is posited. If we fix on this 
[unity of opposites), we have becoming. Being and nothing each bears 
reference to itself in the same abstract manner. They are empty. But a 
host of reflections can be made about such an assertion. 
In the understanding, being and nothing are distinguished and are 
held fast over against each other. Yet what determination belongs to the 
one that does not also belong to the other? We are incapable of indicating 
any determinate difference. If we call for a determinate difference, the 
very demand turns out to be contradictory. Something determinate, 
something in particular, is to be indicated in being that is not in non-
being. But we have not yet reached any such determinate being, but still 
remain with pure being, with what in itself is empty of all determina-
tions. The difference is unutterable, or, to put it otherwise, it is merely in-
tended. We can state nothing, nothing determinate, that is found in being 
but not in nothing. But whatever is inexpressible is purely subjective. 
Whatever already contains some substance within itself can be stated. 
So the difference [between being and nothing] is unutterable. We rep-
resent being to ourselves, for example, as pure light, and we then repre-
4. In the Science of Logic Hegel explicitly cites Buddhists in this context. See G. 
W. F. Hegel, The Science of Logic, trans. A. V. Miller (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Hu· 
manities Press, 1969), p. 83. 

Being (100-101) 
91 
sent our relation to it as the pure intuition of light. But this intuiting is an 
activity that is as much rest as it is activity. As for nothing, it is represented 
as total darkness. But if now I ask what I see in pure blinding light, the an-
swer is nothing at alL as little as is seen in total darkness. In the pure act 
of intuiting I must represent myself to myself as the purely mental eye, 
not the spatial corporeal eye. What is posited in being is complete inde-
terminateness. Totally formless, it is as much darkness as light. 
But if I insist on saying that being and nothing are thoroughly differ-
ent each from the other, what I say of the one is no different from what 
I say of the other. Any difference is merely intended, and so is no differ-
ence at all. Becoming [as coming to be] is this very unrest, this move-
ment, and becoming as perishing is this same movement. The difficulty 
always lies in the attachment of the understanding to something one-
sided. Furthermore, from the proposition "Being and nothing are the 
same" some will conclude that it is all the same whether I possess or do 
not possess something, whether the earth exists or does not exist, 
whether virtue reigns or does not reign. The immorality of this last 
proposition will be alleged as much as its absurdity. When such proposi-
tions are uttered, it is usually objected that one means something else 
than what the proposition itself says. The difference between the edu-
cated and the uneducated lies in the fact that the latter always go on to 
speak of something else than what has been brought up in what has ac-
tually been said. We have a good illustration here. If we allow the for-
mula that being and nothing are the same to pass muster, it will be said 
that their identity is absurd. But the assertion of their identity gets 
twisted around because being and nothing are the same only within 
the process of each becoming the other, not in their respective resting 
points. But in asserting their identity we are only speaking of abstract 
being and abstract nothing. As soon as I bring up something determi-
nate, e.g., a particular purpose, what I say falls in the province of what 
is particular. It is then a question of something determinate [whose 
being or non-being does make a difference]. 
In this connection definite purposes come to be presupposed, and 
only with this presupposition of something fixed does the difference 
between being and non-being enter. Philosophy and religion cast these 
particular purposes aside. In the case of limited, determinate purposes 
[based on fleeting interests rather than on the constancy of moral vo-
lition], it is a matter of indifference whether they are realized or not. 
[Philosophically as well as religiously,] a human being ought to re-
main tranquil with the loss or gain of such temporal things. There lies 
in this self-abstraction from such things a great truth. If we say it does 
not matter whether virtue or vice reigns, and the like, the statement is 
false because the determinate being that is present [in the contrast be-
tween virtue and non-virtue] presupposes a decision of the will. Such 

Lectures on Logic (102) 
92 
decisions of the will are concrete presuppositions in the realm of de-
terminate being. But here we are speaking of abstract being and noth-
ing. Yet when such abstractions are invoked, people will turn away 
and say they rather want to know what the good and true are, what 
God is, what the essence upon and for itself is. "Why do we even 
bother with abstract being or nothing?" it will be asked. A good ques-
tion. We reply that we begin with these abstractions knowing full well 
that we want to get beyond this beginning, that these abstractions are 
what is worst of all, and that what is true is whatever is most concrete. 
Being and nothing are abstractions, and what we have is precisely in-
sight into their nullity. We observe these abstractions as they develop 
out of their nullity, as they determine themselves further as such a 
concrete being, as God, what is most concrete. 
If we say that pure being is nothing, that the truth is the concrete 
world, we can say to ourselves-if we leave .behind what is concrete for 
what is totally abstract-that this abstract being is nothing at all, and 
that what is true is the state, the good, God. Being is indeed nothing 
at all. It is indeed what we ourselves say it is, and we say that it arises 
from the fact that we have abstracted from everything concrete. Its 
ground lies in the fact that we look away from everything else, and for 
that reason its being is completely empty. What belongs to mere being 
is total abstraction, the negating of everything, and that is at once why 
nothing belongs to being. Being cannot be without being nothing. 
Being and nothing are inseparable and in this sense are identical. Yet 
they are not one and the same if we may make reference to the one 
under the first determination [of blinding light] and then obliquely 
refer to the other under the second determination [of empty dark-
ness]. What is true is the process [of becoming, passing back and forth 
between being and nothing], this unrest of movement. 
The proposition that being and nothing are identical arises in the realm 
of total abstraction, as a totally elementary proposition. We can more or 
less readily be brought to believe that this proposition must first be solidly 
laid down. But this is the sort of foundational proposition that, no sooner 
than it is laid down, raises itself up into another proposition. Hence it 
shows itself to be no real foundation all. But if it should be regarded as 
such a solid foundation, we may come to believe ourselves obliged to 
pause in its regard for an unduly drawn-out length of time, and in whil-
ing ourselves with the proposition we will always come to have particu-
lar bright ideas of our own in its regard. But any such ideas are further 
thought determinations that we do not and cannot yet assume here. 
Precisely to progress further in the science of logic, we must first oc-
cupy ourselves with Eleatic thought. One might conclude that such 
thinking is not adequately grounded, and then settle on the aim of giv-
ing it a firmer foundation. But such a backward line of movement would 

Being (102-104) 
93 
get us no further. Philosophy does retreat into a foundation, but the 
foundation into which it retreats is [not abstract being, but] true in its 
determinateness. Through philosophy, the retreat into an abstract Ele-
atic foundation does come to be founded. It is founded in the result of 
the science of logic as the self-concept of this very science. This self-con-
cept of the science of logic, the result, is the true foundation of this logic 
[in its beginning] . 
The Phenomenology of Spirit teaches us to contemplate the onward 
movement of consciousness. The last truth reached in the Phenomenol-
ogy is pure knowing, pure thinking, conceptually comprehending 
knowing. It is this last truth in the Phenomenology that makes its start 
[as the first truth] within the Logic as being in general. The last truth 
in the Phenomenology, absolute knowing, thus grounds the beginning 
in the Logic. But this grounding of the beginning of the Logic is found 
once again in the subsequent progression of the Logic [in the philoso-
phy of spirit]. This progression from abstract being is at once a retreat 
[from abstract being to the concrete whole from which it was origi-
nally abstracted]. But we must remember that, though it is always 
possible to tarry in the analysis as we arrive at the thought determina-
tion of difference, or of what is infinitely great and infinitely small, 
such dallying in our onward movement gets us no further. 
Thus, pressing directly ahead, what becomes clear regarding the 
true beginning of the science of logic is that the abstract principles of 
being and nothing turn out all the more to result in becoming as their 
truth. In every concept that follows, the totally general concept of be-
coming again necessarily recurs. One gets used, in the progression, to 
holding onto fixated moments. The circle of becoming is the first [con-
crete] determination, and upon analysis it gives two [abstract] deter-
minations, being and nothing. Being results from the fact that all de-
terminate content has gone back into the simple oneness of being. 
This being is being by the fact that everything particular and determi-
nate has negated itself. [Abstract] being is not, and cannot be, except 
by the negation of everything particular. Being taken abstractly for it-
self has no truth but this abstraction, this negation of what is determi-
nate. We are not permitted to leave out of a result that from which it 
has resulted. [Abstract] being has resulted from negation, and this ne-
gation therefore belongs to it. 
The [Eleatic, Parmenidean] proposition "From nothing comes only 
nothing" is an ancient one. The proposition that nothing [as empty] is 
only a transition into being [in its fullness], and that being is only a 
transition into nothing, is a further [Heraclitean] proposition set in 
' opposition to that first Eleatic proposition, the ancient proposition of 
pantheism, the proposition of the eternity of matter. To matter belongs 
the predicate of being. To hold solely to being is the Eleatic principle, 
~-t 

Lectures on Logic (104-105) 
94 
the principle of pantheism. We, on the contrary, say that God created 
the world, and that he created it out of nothing. But in saying this we 
turn aside from the proposition "From nothing comes only nothing," 
the very principle of pantheism, of the eternity of matter. 
Regarding becoming, one more reflection can be made: if one says 
that nothing is nothing, nothing is posited as independent. But the 
truth of nothing is that it is being. We make a distinction within be-
coming so that we start from [mere indeterminate] being [viewed 
positively as total presence] and then pass over into nothing[, namely 
the same indeterminate being viewed negatively as total absence,] and 
then from nothing pass over into being again, so we have the two de-
terminations of coming into being and going out of being. These categories 
greatly occupied the ancients. The pantheism of the Eleatics denies 
both coming into being and going out of being. Rather, being alone 
holds truth. Out of what, the Eleatics asked, is something to arise? 
From the nothing only nothing can come, they said. But if that which 
[ determinately] is [das Seiende] were to arise out of being [Sein], noth-
ing would come into being, since they are both [forms of] being. 
Heraclitus said that the principle, the [aQx~L is becoming or process. 
He said that everything flows [m:Xvra], or that being is no more than noth-
ing itself. This speculative opinion caused the reproach to be raised 
against Heraclitus of a certain obscurity [ aKo'tnv6<;], since his principle 
proves difficult for the understanding [even though reason can grasp 
it]. The process invoked by Heraclitus has won, through him, its place 
in the history of the philosophy. Heraclitus said, in a physicalistic mode, 
that his principle was fire, which is simply unrest, becoming, passing 
away. This unrest, like the pulsation of blood, is the very principle of 
everything that is alive. Heraclitus also says that time is the principle, 
that time is this same becoming, that in time we find only another way 
of intuiting becoming. In space everything is side by side, but what is 
now, even as I pronounce it, is no more. The present now is inseparable 
from the following now, is continuous with it. 5 The present now, insofar 
as it is, has vanished. Time is self-negating. Yet time presents us with but 
an abstract intuition of becoming. Being alive gives a higher intuition of 
becoming than time. Life is this very process of becoming, and this pro-
cess, cast in relief as such, is the very pulsating of blood as it courses 
through a living being. Spirit is this same unrest, the pure process of 
5. Note that the idea of "the following now" divides time into successive units, 
contrary to the supposition that between any two nows there is an infinity of 
them. Continuity does not here mean a mathematically continuous series, but a 
continuity of the quality of being now throughout a series of discrete nows. Note 
also that this Hegelian thought determination of continuity is incompatible with the 
Heraclitean representation of continuity at the start of the paragraph: "Everything 
flows.· 

Being (105-106) 
95 
being alive within itself. Alteration is also becoming, except that within 
it the more concrete content [of something that is altered] is present. 
I.A.b. Determinate Being [Dasein] 
(§89) What we now encounter is the transition from the disquiet of be-
coming to the quietude of simply being there [Dasein-i.e., being there 
rather than elsewhere]. The transition is located by contemplating be-
coming. Within becoming we have the particular disquietude consist-
ing in the fact that being and nothing, as the negation of being, are one. 
Hence, within becoming, being is no longer simply being; and nothing, 
through its oneness with being, is no longer simply nothing. It is no lon-
ger the nothing that we supposed it to be. Both determinations are van-
ishing moments, with the result that becoming is now itself an absolute 
contradiction. As a contradiction, becoming absolutely collapses into it-
self. Becoming is becoming only through the distinction between these 
two vanishing moments. It may be said that, since becoming is a contra-
diction, in the end it is nothing. 6 But, if we say that becoming is nothing, 
we simply return to the former one-sidedness we already examined in 
nothing [as opposed to abstract being]. Yet becoming is not nothing, 
since being belongs to it as wel].7 
Becoming collapses within itself, within the simple quiet unity [of 
being and non-being]. Combustible material is consumed in fire. The 
quiet that now results out of becoming, the quiescent unity of being and 
non-being with itself, is still [pure] being, but it is such a being which at 
once contains non-being within it. Within becoming, the determination 
of non-being is also contained. But the quiet resulting from the disquiet 
of becoming is being there, determinate being, [pure] being burdened with 
a negation, [pure] being and nothing in quiet unity with each other. 
So here is the result. Becoming collapses upon itself within simple 
self-reference, within a being that nonetheless necessarily also contains 
the determination of nothing [which is not pure being]. The two deter-
minations, being and nothing, now lie within a unity. These determi-
nations, starting with their prior isolation from each other, have raised 
themselves up beyond themselves into being simply there. 
To raise up [aujheben] means to negate as well as to raise up, and it 
is at once to absorb and to preserve what has been negated. In becom-
ing, being and nothing are raised up beyond themselves into each 
other. Precisely for this reason they do not vanish, but are contained 
6. This nothingness of becoming may be understood by comparison with the 
nothingness of a brick wall constructed by forthwith removing with one hand the 
brick just put in place with the other hand. 
7. The alternation of removing and replacing the brick yields nothing in the 
way of a wall. but it does have being as the very process of this alternation. 

Lectures on Logic (106-107) 
96 
in becoming as lifted up beyond themselves. as moments that have 
validity. not for themselves. but only within the whole of becoming. 
Being there, unlike becoming. no longer contains either pure being or 
nothing merely for itself. Rather, the two together now make up with 
each other only one in which both are preserved. while the isolated 
being of each is negated. just as for all idealistic philosophy all deter-
minations are only moments within a whole. Being there is simple 
self-reference, self-reference fully in the form of being. In being there, 
becoming is fully raised into the form of being. Being, as it was con-
tained within becoming. is demoted into a merely [empty] form. 
We must now analyze being there to see what comes of it by the 
above determinations. Being there is no longer the total emptiness 
that we encountered in [abstract] being. It is possible to give an analy-
sis of something only if it is concrete. In being there we find [pure] 
being. but it is [pure] being only with a negation attached to it. This 
negation within being may be called determinateness within being itself 
[§90]. This nothing is the negative moment within being there[. e.g .• 
the moment that distinguishes being there as being there and not 
here]. We can now say that we have reached. within the science of 
logic, determinateness [or being determinate]. that we have arrived at 
the thought of it. There is no doubt that nothing as understood above 
occurs as embedded within being there, within quiescent being. 
The question arises as to whether "determinateness" [as the nega-
tive moment within being there in the science of logic] is the same as 
what we call "determinateness" in ordinary language. [In ordinary 
German] we say "It is determinateness" [Es ist Bestimmheifl-it is defi-
nite]. That is a strong assertion. Maybe "determinateness" is falsely 
applied [in ordinary German, by the standard of the science of logic]. 
But that makes no difference to the result. When we say "nothing" [in 
ordinary language] we do not seem to be saying the same thing as is 
meant by "determinateness" [in the science of logic]. We have reached 
the point where determinateness is identical with being. Quite gener-
ally, in anything determinate we have a negation.9 Spinoza said "All 
determination is negation" [Omnis determinatio est negatio]. That is an 
important principle, which was especially important to Spinoza. Rela-
tive to [Spinoza's] One, everything else is determinate, and every-
thing determinate is a negation. 
Being determinate is contained within being there. But nothing and 
being are now quietly identical, and so we say of a determinate being 
8. This can no longer be considered an ordinary German expression. 
9. This •negation• is ambiguous, since it may mean the negation of pure inde-
terminate being or the negation of another determination. To be is then to show 
determinateness. 

Being (107) 
97 
that it is a determinateness that has being, 10 which is to say that it is a qual-
ity. Being determinate as found within any quality displays self-refer-
ence, and hence is a rigid, fixed, enduring reference point. Contained 
within any quality is the fact that the negation of [pure] being extends 
as far as the very quality itself. [Pure] being cannot escape being deter-
minate. If I strip something of its quality, it is no longer anything at all. 
Thus being there is the unity of both determinations, both [pure] being 
and being determinate. Being there as the negating of both its differen-
tiations [in their isolation] is what is [ostensibly] there, i.e., something. 
And with this thought of something we have the onset of subjectivity 
[in the science of logic], the onset of unity as negative[, i.e., as the sub-
jective negation of mere being, which is itself negative]. Such are the 
determinations that lie within being there, determinations obtained 
merely by contemplating being there itself. 
( §91) Quality, being determinate, has now been cast in relief. First 
we have being determinate insofar as it is. However, being, with its 
positive quality, is now not alone, but bears immediate reference to 
the quality that negates it [das Negative]. If we lay the accent on being 
determinate as it [positively] is, we have [positive] reality [§91]. A 
[positive] quality is reality, determinateness shown as being. Some-
thing negative is also contained within being there. Whatever is nega-
tive is also determinate, is itself a quality, but it is the positive quality 
under the opposite sign of its non-being [Nichtssein]. Being determi-
nate thus contains nothing [Nichts] within itself. If the accent within 
something is placed on something else as nothing, we have negation[, 
i.e., a negative quality in the place of a positive quality]. It is being 
there[, not becoming,] that is the truth of being and nothing [Nichts]. 
The same determinations are present in [positive] reality as are pres-
ent in being there. It is said of God that he is the most real of all beings 
[Wesen]. To say this is to explicate God metaphysically. In conceiving God 
in this way, we take up reality insofar as it is stripped of any limits, and 
yet being determinate lies in everything real. Divine power is not divine 
wisdom, God's justice is not his goodness, and so it goes. If God is taken 
to be the most real of beings, without any limits whatsoever, the fact of 
his being determinate falls by the wayside, and we are left with God only 
as [abstract] being. 
Negation [in the form of something that is not something given] be-
longs to everything that we call Nsomething" [§92]. Something posited 
with such negation attached to it is something else, which is again pos-
ited with its negation. Everything that is something contains negation. 
Negation is always one moment within anything that is something. 
10. "Determinateness that has being" may be read as a determinateness that 
shows or exhibits itself. 

Lectures on Logic ( 1 08) 
98 
Something insofar as it distinguishes itself from its negation is other 
than that negation. What is other than something here is itself some-
thing[, namely, something else]. What is other than something also has 
its being there. Everything that is something bears reference to some-
thing else. It bears reference to it insofar as it is differentiated from it as 
something that has its being there and not here. Thus to have a positive 
quality is to have being for something else that does not have that quality. 
What is ostensibly there bears manifold references to things other than 
itself. Its being is thus being for something else, indeed for a whole range 
of whatever beings other than it that are there. It is manifested through 
those other beings. God exists, but he manifests himself, posits himself, 
in his being for something else. We have, here and there, something 
and something else, and we at once have something in its being for 
something else. Something, in its being, comes to bear reference to itself 
in contradistinction to its being something else. Something posited 
[merely] in its self-reference, in contradistinction to this other, evinces 
being upon itself (All prepositions introduced in the science of logic are 
apprehended according to the content of their thought determinations. 
It was Jacobi in particular who philosophized in prepositions.) 
We have thus reached something both with being upon itself and with 
being for something else. But with that we have also reached [by abstrac-
tion] mere being upon itself [dasAnsich], [what Kant called] the "thing in 
itself; something whose being for something else is negated. All deter-
mination falls under being for something else. In mere being "in" itself[, 
with Kant,] only indeterminateness remains. What is [merely] "in" itself 
in this way is nothing but what is left over upon total abstraction, a worth-
less residue [caput mortuum] . Being "in • or upon itself differs from being 
for something else. Being upon itself is thus expressed as what is real, as 
being only by having, over against it, being for something else. 
What something is [ideallyn] upon itself[, e.g., in the case of a 
human being,] is what we call a determination to which something is 
still only destined-a vocation or destiny. A human being has such a 
destiny, but at first has it only [ideally] "upon" him- or herself. When 
an individual's [ideal] being for another [thinking subject] comes to 
be V\lhat we call his or her destiny, the individual's negation by the 
other comes to be raised up beyond itself as that individual incorpo-
rates that other within that destiny itself. 
Should we inquire into the determination to which a human being is 
11. Hegel has just used the term ·real" but does not explicitly use the term 
"ideal" [idee/] in this context. Yet the two bear reference to each other in the ter-
minology of the logic. The present context shows that he is distinguishing be-
tween a human being's ideal or essential being as a thinking being for another 
thinking being, and that human being's real sensory nature which also has its 
being for the other thinking being. 

Being (108-109) 
99 
destined, the question concerns the very concept of what being human 
upon itself is. The positive quality of a human being lies in his or her being 
determinate, but also lies in the particular determination to which he or 
she is destined. An individual's sensory nature and impulses fall under 
his or her [real] being for another. What he or she is upon him- or herself 
[ideally] is something different. Thinking is his or her positive quality 
[implicitly posited upon him- or herself by and for another]. It is his or her 
determination, but at once his or her destiny. This determination to which 
the individual is destined is now to be taken up with reference to his or 
her being for another. The individual's being upon itself in truth bears ref-
erence to the other. The determination to which one is destined is thus 
something that ought to be, but that still merely ought to be. 
So we say a human being ought to be rational. This obligation, this 
striving, is the human being as he or she is [ideally] upon him- or her-
self. Over against a human being as he or she is upon him- or herself [as 
a rational being] stands the individual's other, all that negates the indi-
vidual (in his or her sensory nature] Y Reason ought to be, but it at first 
merely ought to be, and what merely ought to be is not. Being for an-
other, like being upon oneself [whether really or ideally]. is present in 
every human being. We blithely make whatever merely ought to be into 
something finaL but what ought to be is then made to be quite deficient 
and impotent. We then represent reason to ourselves as impotent. The 
vocation of being a human being ought to be fulfilled. Such fulfillment 
arises from a human being in the determination to which he or she is 
destined, i.e., from his or her [ideal] being for another. For in one's 
[real] being for another one ought to conform to the determination to 
which one is destined. 
If we have something with a determination merely in itself. [as in 
Kant,] being other than it is at first excluded, and yet the thing con-
tains both moments. Negation generally, something's being for some-
thing else which it is not, is just as essential a moment of something as 
what it is upon itself. Being for something else belongs to being upon 
itself. Something is something only through the moment of this nega-
tion, which belongs to it in its very being upon itself. Something posi-
tive extends as far, but only as far as, whatever borders upon it-and 
thus is limited. Its border is its limit, and what something ought to be 
12. A human being's sensory nature depends on its accidental relations to an 
accidental environment as that nature exists both for things as some kind of other 
in its environment and for other persons who observe its being for other things. A 
human being's destiny as written upon itself depends on what it essentially is for 
other persons who have realized themselves as rational. thinking beings. A thing's 
ideal non-sensory being upon itself for another, for a thinking subject, is an inci-
dental anticipation, within the logic of being, of its "essence" (Wesen) as it will be 
thematized in the subsequent logic of essence. 

Lectures on Logic ( 109-110) 
lOO 
runs up against this limit. Being upon itself bears reference to this 
limit, and is itself its limit. Something has a limit, and so will be taken 
as being ostensibly there, as real [within its limit]. So there is a border, 
a limit, which, as it were, only lies on something's surface. The border 
doubtless belongs to something. But the border contains the contra-
diction that it both belongs to something as its border and at once be-
longs to something else taken affirmatively in its own right. 
In negation two things come together. They are alike. At first some-
thing has negation upon it as a limit which encircles it. In negation 
something borders on something else that, reciprocally, also borders 
on something as first given. The border itself thus falls between some-
thing and something else, and yet one thing's border also belongs to 
the other in its very being upon itself. 
If we say none hundred,n the hundredth unit is the border of the 
hundred units. But the hundredth unit is itself merely one of the hun-
dred. If I take this unit away, I no longer have a hundred. What is 
more, every unit within the one hundred units is, just like the last 
unit, a border unit for the whole hundred. A border first falls outside 
something it contains, and yet it also belongs to it. Something is what 
it is only through its border, and therefore is not outside that border. 
The something goes within its quality only as far as its border reaches. 
Indeed, that quality lies precisely within this border. 
We say that a point is the border of a line, and that the line is the bor-
der of the surface, which is the border of the body in its volume. We 
imagine that the point as the border of the line lies outside the line. But 
something is what it is only through its border, and to this extent the 
border comes to be characterized as the line in its very element. It is 
often said that a line arises from a moving point. as if the motion were 
accidental to the point. But it is rather the case that the origination of 
the line is a necessary result of the point. For, put affirmatively, the 
point lies in its passage into the line. This results from the fact that the 
point is the negation [of itself as a solitary point and is the positing of 
further points]. and hence is a pure border in a space [of other points]. 
By the fact that the point passes into being such a pure border in space, 
it is itself spatial. As for the line, it is the purely spatial border, and 
stands in relation to the further space [of the surface]. The line is a bor-
der of yet another space: it proceeds out of itself into another space, the 
surface. The procession of the point out of itself is the line, and so on. 
[In the procession from the point through the line and surface to the 
volume] we have an inner necessity which is dialectically constructive. 
The border is not outside what is [qualitatively] affirmative. Rather, it 
reaches as far as something's affirmative being itself reaches. Or rather, 
the border is the very element of the line, its very essence. 
A [contained] border is identical with something of which it is the 

Being (110-111) 
101 
border. Suppose one represents to oneself two spaces next to each 
other. A field has its size only through its border. Now if something's 
border belongs to it, it lies entirely within its border. Any other adja-
cent space lies equally within its border. Something has something 
other than itself lying upon its border, and with that the first some-
thing is posited as being in contradiction with itself[, i.e., as being 
other than itself]. It is posited as self-annihilating, as putting an end 
[ein End] to itself [as a single something]-it posits itself, in other 
words, as finite [endlich]. Something is an everyday category for us, as 
likewise is the category of something else. From these categories the 
further determinations result, namely, that something is not merely 
such and such upon itself but is also for something else. 
Something's [real] being for something else we call its "nature," 
which we distinguish from its "destiny," from the [ideal] determination 
to which it is destined. The nature of something [though not its destiny] 
can be what it is accidentally, but something cannot be what it is with-
out its being such upon itself. Such is the course of the dialectic. Any-
thing that is something contains negation in the very fact of its being 
there [and not elsewhere]. Simply by being there, it already evinces 
subjectivity as negative unity. Something lies merely in its one-sided 
determination upon itself, but it is also to be posited negatively, as some-
thing else [and hence as in contradiction]. 
Something's negation is distinct from its being, and is to be posited in 
distinction from it. But if something's negation were entirely different 
from it, that something would be merely nothing. But instead of being 
nothing, something is present and determinate as being [ostensibly] 
there. It is posited as having that very sort of being-being there as 
nothing at all of some initially given something. This nothing is thus in 
reality something else than something given. The first something is re-
pelled from itself into something else. 
We distinguish in our mind between something and something 
else, and it seems that neither has anything to do with the other. But 
the inner connection by which something else is a moment of the first 
something's own being has now acquired being for us [in the science 
of logic]. Both moments have being. But it is now to be brought out 
that both moments, beyond their being for us, bear mutual reference 
to each other: that the determination of its negation is present within 
everything that is something. Being other than itself thus belongs to 
something itself. Something thus contains being other within itself, 
but it also contains reference to itself [as well as to its other]. In refer-
ring to itself something differs from its being other [than something 
else]. First, it is there. Secondly, however, it has being for something 
else, it bears reference to another. Something else at first simply differs 
from any first given something, but the first something bears refer-

Lectures on Logic (lll-112) 
102 
ence to the other something through its own being for that other. 
Such is the development of the logic of being. The noted determina-
tions lie in the very self-concept of something itself. 
Such metaphysics is totally abstract. and is dry as dust. The other is at 
first independent and purely self-referential. Plato calls it 'rO E'rEQOV, that 
which is different. In the Timaeus he says that God first made what re-
fers to itself. He then created what is, upon and for itself, other than that 
self-referential being-matter, nature, whose being consists in being 
[side by side] outside itself. The ancients in particular took up such sim-
ple determinations as the objects of their philosophizing. What some-
thing is [at first) merely upon itself[, e.g., as something merely bright by 
direct inspection] is itself a negation [of what is other than it, e.g., being 
dim]. so that what it is [positively] merely upon itself is to be extracted 
from its being for its other. And, with that, something [with a positive 
determination) upon itself has a negative determination lying [posi-
tively] upon something else [so that to be dim is not to exhibit the 
brightness of something else]. The [German ]language itself makes this 
distinction between what something is [positively] "upon itself" ["an 
sich"] and what it is [negatively through a quality that lies positively] 
"upon an other• ["an ihm"]. For something's being upon itself to lie [in 
not being what positively lies] upon an other makes up the first thing's 
being for something else. What is [negatively] upon itself also lies [posi-
tively] on its other. For a determination to be upon something else is for 
something initially given to have being for the other. What something 
is upon itself at once [negatively] includes a determination which lies 
[positively] upon the other. 
We have also designated what something is "upon itself" as having 
a [negative] determination to which the thing is [positively] destined 
[so that, e.g., what is bright is destined to be dim and vice versa). What 
something is upon itself is [at first] positive over against its being for 
something else. [The category of] reality is subsumed under [that of] 
being for something else. What is real is also immediate being, it is 
qualitative, but it now exhibits a quality that [as a negative quality] 
stands over against what it [positively] is upon itself. Thinking ought 
really to [observably] lie upon a human being, thinking ought not 
merely lie [bottled up] upon itself. Something's being for something 
else has been called its "reality." It has also been called its ·nature" as 
determined by its external mode and manner of being. 
In something's [real] being for something else the other from with-
out sets itself in play within the first thing. The fact that something else 
can impinge on something initially given, that it can work itself upon 
the first thing from without, [requires that this change] must already 
lie [as a possibility] upon the first thing itself. That possibility must lie 
out there upon whatever is acted upon. For example, suppose one man 

Being (112-113) 
103 
is killed by another. What is first posited only as coming from the other 
man already lies [as a possibility] upon the man who is killed. The pos-
sibility is already there. 
Thus we have the [immediate] determination of the thing, what it is 
upon itself, and its nature, i.e., its being for something else. A contradic-
tion emerges within something taken merely in itself[, e.g., the thing 
in itself]. Something's being as it occurs merely in itself is its fixed 
being, its substance. But this being of something in itself is also [and 
quite inconsistently] being for something else. Something else holds 
sway within the first something, there is something else that also be-
longs to it. Here we have the contradiction inherent in something. The 
contradiction arises precisely at the point where what something is 
not determines itself as its border. 
What something is not, we have said, belongs to its very being. 
Something's negation lies upon it itself. Something already implies in 
general a border or limit over against its being upon itself. Its [ideal] 
being upon itself is what it ought to be, over against the [real] limit 
[which prevents it from being what it ought to be]. Its [ideal] being 
upon itself transcends the limit. 
We speak, for example, of limitations of the mind, of the limitations 
of human reason. These limitations pass for being something ultimate, 
which ordinary human representation cannot get beyond. But the limit 
of something is its limit only over against something else which upon 
itself limits it, [in the case of a human being] over against what the in-
dividual upon itself [ideally] ought to be. But as human beings we know 
of this limit only because we have upon ourselves (i.e., in thought) al-
ready crossed the border that would limit us. Natural things only have 
borders, though their borders fail to be the sort of limits that have any 
being for them [i.e., within their own self-knowledge]. 
Leibniz said of beings that each has its nature, whose unfolding is 
the very expression of its freedom. A human being takes him- or her-
self to be free. Since he knows the laws of his being, they are his own 
laws. This is what, taken formally rather than naturally, freedom is. A 
magnet directs itself toward the north. If the magnet were conscious 
of this northward direction of its motion, Leibniz says, it would be 
conscious of it as its own action, and that consciousness would for-
mally define its freedom. But we view its action merely according to 
its qualitative character, according to its law [and not according to any 
knowledge it has of that law]. In being fixedly determinate, this law 
would constitute, for the magnet, its formal freedom [if it were con-
scious of it]. This is no doubt formally correct, and the content of the 
law would also have to be the freedom of such a magnet. Here the 
content is nothing other than that of being directed to the north, and 
being directed to the north is what we call the limit of being a magnet. 

Lectures on Logic (113-114) 
104 
If the magnet were conscious, it would be a thinking being. It would 
then know its universal law, and its exclusive direction toward the 
north would be something totally particular and limiting for it. But for 
the magnet as it in fact is, this direction is no limit or negation at all. But 
such a limit within the magnet does have being for us as thinking be-
ings, if not for the magnet itself. A limit is a limit only for those for 
whom it is at once posited [in thought] as a negation [of what is lim-
ited], i.e., in reference to what is limited upon itself for those individu-
als, or in reference to the universality of whatever is limited. 
So we say that reason is limited. But our very statement that reason 
has a limit is proof that reason has transcended this limit, that it is not 
limited. For it is only by comparison with [an allegedly unknown] 
being in itself[. e.g., the Kantian thing in itself,] that there is any limit 
to reason. In the case of reason, to want to set any limits to it is the 
greatest of follies. For all such limits have already been overcome. What 
we have called the unegation" and "other" lies squarely upon something 
itself. It belongs to its determination. The negation lying upon some-
thing itself is first its border. If the negation of something [real] refers to 
what it nonetheless is [ideally] upon itself, that negation is for example 
that of a [real] person and what he or she ought to beY 
Something's being upon itself is already beyond all limits. Within its 
border the contradiction within something determines itself according 
to its negative side. A border divides something off from something else 
which it is not. The border lies on the far side of whatever something is, 
and yet it also lies within the thing's own being. Whoever wills to ac-
complish something great, Goethe tells us, must place limits upon him-
self. He must lay hold of something determinate, and then shape it fur-
ther. In that something's border is determinate as its negation, it is 
through its border that something is what it is. Yet that is a perfect con-
tradiction. Something is first taken up as a thing in itself in its pure self-
reference, without negation. But the thing's other[, its negation,] also 
belongs to this being in itself [which is thus in truth negated upon itself]. 
This contradiction is now posited as such. We see the contradiction, but 
the contradiction also lies objectively within the very determination of 
being something with an [unrealized] destiny. 
Something, when posited with such a contradiction, is finite. Finitude 
is negation. What is roughly understood by something being ufinite" 
[endlich] is that a time will come for it to come to an end. Finitude belongs 
13. Thus something's being for a thinking being. which may be either immedi-
ate being for another thinking being or mediated being for a non-thinking being 
through being for a thinking being. is also ambiguous in a second way: it is either 
something's real being for a thinking being. or it is its ideal being or destiny for a 
thinking being. 

Being (113-114) 
105 
to something. Something, we say, is finite. It is not accidental for it to 
come to an end. Doing so rather belongs to its very nature. The hour of its 
birth is the hour of its death. Every finite being enters into the world fa-
tally wounded at birth. Negation belongs to such beings as written upon 
them themselves. To say that something is "finite" is to say it is alterable 
[§92]. The suffix "-able" seems to allude to possibility, but [real] altera-
tion also belongs to something finite in its very being upon itself. This fol-
lows from what it is to be something. To be something ought to consist in 
being that thing affirmatively, but in the end it surrenders its affirmative 
being [to something else that negates it], it is finite. When we say that 
things are finite, our statement seems the result of accidental observa-
tion. But the finitude of things belongs to their necessary nature. 
For something to be finite is for it to raise itself up beyond itself into 
the infinite-and with that we reach the opposition of finitude and 
infinitude. Something's alterability is, as it were, its superficial fini-
tude. Finitude lies upon something insofar as the thing is contradic-
tory through the self-negation which constitutes the very determina-
tion to which it is destined. Something, posited negatively, is something 
else. It thus lies within the very determination of something to alter 
itself into something else. The negation of something's being upon it-
self lies upon something else. The negation of something is something 
different from it, it is something else. With this development posited 
upon something, it is alterable. Something becomes something else-
and still something else again, ever onward. But now, way off in the 
distance, we see the infinite [§93] beginning to emerge into view. 
(Thus, the infinite also appears in cause and effect, where the cause is 
also effect of a prior cause, on and on endlessly.) 
(§94) This first infinity is the bad infinity. To put it otherwise, it is 
infinity posited merely negatively[, as not finite]. Let us imagine that 
we have an infinite series. Everything in this series is something, 
something finite which comes to be negated. This negation will then 
again be negated, and will again be posited as something else. Two 
things are going on here. First, something gets beyond itself. We first 
merely have the negation of something, but this negation becomes 
something else, which is thus something positive in its own right. The 
negation of something comes to be negated, something positive again 
enters, and the negation is thus given up as negation, and so it goes. 
Such a series is the bad infinity, which is only an infinity that merely 
ought to be but never is. Something is raised up beyond itself, but 
something new arises again. Thus matters do not come to merely ne-
gating the other, which is what they really should come to. Rather, 
something positive again arises. In the infinite series there is thus al-
ways a determinate number which ought to bring the series [were it 
truly infinite] to an end. But what follows is once again only another 

Lectures on Logic (114-115) 
106 
such number, which is again something finite, and so on. All we have 
is an ought, the infinite series is never finished, it is never simply 
there. The infinite is out there, and is represented as a beyond. Some-
thing alters itself and becomes something else. This is merely the con-
tradiction contained, as noted, within something. Something is finite, 
and thus is its own negation. But something else comes to be, positing 
is once again present, and something else again is posited. Yet this 
endless emergence of something else should not be. Again we have 
negation, and once again something else is posited. This infinite is a 
perennial exchange of something for something else again. This is 
how we first find the infinite before us. Thus in space or time we pro-
ceed away from the place from which we first begin to another place 
which also has a border, and so off we go in the direction of the starry 
heavens and the like, off in the direction of the infinite. 
This infinite series expresses the thought that we will never reach 
the end of it. This thought is equally true of an infinite series in time 
as in space. And in time as in space, a hundred years are a borderline, 
a benchmark, but so are a thousand years. Reaching any such a bench-
mark in time is no sooner accomplished than it fails to satisfy us. The 
same is true of the infinite divisibility of matter. As I proceed outward 
in space, so I can also proceed inward into space, into time, or into a 
material object. Space, time, material objects bear upon themselves 
the characteristic of the mutual externality of parts. As a consequence 
they are divisible. They can all be posited as each containing parts 
outside one another. What I identify as parts of a space, of a time seg-
ment, or of matter are once again space, time, matter, and so it goes. 
Passing off into the infinite is considered sublime. To be sure, it is a 
case of passing beyond any borderline. But a new borderline marker 
always reproduces itself after passing beyond the former one. 
Kant says that dreaming is like ambling further and further into the 
far reaches of some lengthy space. Suddenly one awakens, unable to bear 
the immeasurable expanse. We succumb, in the very thought of such a 
space, to our representation of the immeasurable. But succumbing to 
such an expanse is really only boredom. It is forever a question of the 
same thing over and over again, and repetition of the same thing always 
makes for boredom. Our sense perception contains nothing other than 
the perennial exchange of one finite thing for another. Thought always 
passes beyond abstract negation, but what it gets anew is the same ab-
stract negation, it continually runs up against that same border marker. 
But all of this is, quite generally, the doing of the understanding. 
The bad infinite is through and through a beyond, never anything 
present. The fact of the matter is that something positive comes to be 
recognized as equally something negative, its negation comes to be 
negated [by something positive again], and this makes for the second 

Being (115-116) 
107 
negation. The infinite beyond itself is negated, since something finite 
emerges anew out of it. Thus negation of the negation is now at hand. But 
negation of the negation is affirmation. What is negated is also itself a 
negation. Negation of the negation bears reference to another negation 
[which it negates]. Thus we have negation referring to itself [in refer-
ring to its object], and this self-reference is affirmation. This sort of af-
firmation is our first example of the true infinite [§95]. What lies within 
our consciousness is that both the finite and the false infinite repre-
sented as beyond it have been negated. 
Nothing stands over against the understanding so fixedly as the fi-
nite standing over against the [false] infinite. They are supposed to be 
as clearly opposed as being is opposed to nothing, and they are just as 
clearly irreconcilable. Knowledge is finite, so it cannot reach the infi-
nite. But if we take a closer look at knowledge, we already find our-
selves beyond this extreme opposition [between the limitations of 
knowledge and an unknowable infinite]. A first something becomes 
something else, which is other than the first. Thus something else 
stands still again over against something else. From something nega-
tive we proceed to something else again, to something equally nega-
tive. Hence, something present, itself something else, is always self-
referential [in referring to something else]. 
When we say that something else comes to be something else again, 
what appears before our eyes is nothing but negation and diversity. But 
the fact is that the other comes to be on top of another other that comes 
before, that each is truly said to be something else, so the two are equally 
other, so that the first other comes to itself in the second. The determi-
nation to which something is destined is no longer one of exchange be-
tween something and something else. This point emerges from a reflec-
tion that is as simple as can be, and yet is fundamental. The self-reference 
we find here is in fact the true infinite. All that we have that is new is 
[the self-concept of] the other of the other, which turns out to be affirma-
tive. Being is positive rather than negative, this affirmation has being. 
Anything that is something is the other of another, and so in referring 
to its other it returns to itself. It contains the other in itself. It is the other 
of itself, and it thus negates itself as other. What is negative comes to be 
negated, which yields affirmation. That is true infinity. 
With the true infinite the stupendous question of the opposition of 
the finite and the infinite is resolved. Dualism holds fast to the opposi-
tion of the finite and the infinite, and the understanding is on the 
whole dualistic, as in the ancient Persian representation of light and 
darkness, and as in Manichaeism. God and the deviL good and evil-
good as the infinite and evil as thoroughly finite. The resolution [of all 
such dualisms] lies in an examination of the determinations already 
at hand. We have on the one side the finite, the entire finite world, 

Lectures on Logic (116-117) 
108 
and to the other side the infinite. So there are two sides, with the infi-
nite merely off to one side. As long as that is how matters stand, the fi-
nite stands outside the infinite. The infinite is thus not what it ought 
to be, since the finite is outside it, and with that the infinite is itself fi-
nite and limited. Because the infinite stands yonder beyond the finite, 
it is not a perfect infinite. Being one of two, it is itself finite. 
The false infinite generally expresses the negative moment: it is the 
one-sided negation of the other finite side. But the negative infinite is at 
once identical with itself in its finite [and hence negative] other. Its 
other, the finite, coincides with the negative infinite, and that is the af-
firmative moment of the infinite. But this makes matters, as it were, too 
easy. We have an other and then still another other, and with that a sort 
of coincidence between the two others which is all too easy. But now 
posit, in the place of the self-same determination of the other and of its 
still further other, the determinations Nfinite and Ninfinite." These two 
new determinations admittedly do not seem to be the same as the de-
terminations of something and something else again. The transition 
from the finite to the infinite seems to imply that the finite is to have 
nothing in common with the infinite, and vice versa. On the one side, 
we have the infinite in such a manner as to be only one of two. This 
false infinite runs up against its border with the finite, which holds it 
within that border. We have said that the finite bears the determination 
of being something that is there. We have said that negation belongs to 
something as it is upon itself. This is what has already resulted from the 
development of the self-concept of something. But we at once have this 
further result: since what is negative belongs to something as it is upon 
itself, we have in what is finite a contradiction which then raises itself 
up beyond itself as finite. What is finite is upon itself contradictory, and 
it thus raises itself up into what lies beyond itself. 
Whatever is finite must come to an end. It is thus something nega-
tive as well as affirmative. This is the truth of the finite: it raises itself 
up into what is beyond itself. At first it is therefore in truth only noth-
ing at all of anything else. We have long since gone beyond abstract 
nothing [in the science of logic]. The result of something, something 
finite, is no mere abstract nothing. We have here a nothing that is at 
once something upon itself, a nothing that is self-referential [under 
the determinations of being something and being something else 
again]. The true result of something as nothing of anything else is the 
infinite. But this infinite is not merely negative, not merely non-finite, 
for it contains affirmation as well as negation. 
Insofar as it is something, a being is what it is by the mediation of 
its negation. The infinite is not the finite. The finite is a negation [of 
the infinite). and the [true] infinite is a negation of this negation. 
Since the infinite is a second negation, it is affirmative. The finite con-

Being (ll7-ll8) 
109 
tains upon itself the infinite. The infinite, as it is for itself, is a self-ref-
erential negation. Such self-reference is negation of the negation-is 
what is identical with itself [within its other]. Mere being upon itself, 
[i.e., Kantian being in itself,] within such negation of the negation, is 
merely negative, and hence is an incomplete moment. It is only ab-
stractly affirmative, and with that it is itself also negative. The true in-
finite is concretely affirmative, not the abstractly affirmative being of 
mere being upon itself [or being in itself], but rather the concrete af-
firmative that arises through negation of the negation. Within the 
false infinite we at first have only negation of the finite. But the finite 
is itself a negation, so negation within the true infinite arises as nega-
tion of the negation, negation as self-reference. 
One must distinguish here the first negation-it is the other which is 
not something given. The second negation is the negation of what is nega-
tive, [of the thing itself,] the other of its other. Infinity, insofar as it is 
merely the beyond, is the bad infinity. The main point is the return [of the 
infinite] into itself, which is the reflection of the beyond [in the present]. 
We have already shown that this return transpires within the infinite it-
self. Infinity is thus something affirmative, something assuredly present. 
In the bad infinity we have a mere negation of something[, and not yet 
negation of the negation]. But we have seen something itself to be some-
thing finite, hence to be something negative. Yet there is nothing so very 
excellent about a true infinity that is now present, since such an infinity 
is found in every self-concept. Becoming is already such an infinity.14 
As Spinoza defined infinity, it is what is affirmative in any matter. 
Infinity for him is the infinitum intellectus, the infinity of reason. The 
other infinity[, which Spinoza rejected,] is that of the imagination, 
the bad infinity which is only an endless alternation of determina-
tions. Zeno already said that it is all the same whether we say some-
thing a thousand times or only once. This is what Spinoza calls the in-
finity of the imagination. What has been left behind [in an infinite 
series] is always retrieved in something new. 
The Spinozistic determination of infinity, by which infinity is the 
unlimited affirmation of any matter, is one-sided, since it does not in-
clude infinity as negation of the negation. The true infinite is that 
which remains identical with itself through mediation. But infinity is 
also the raising up of mediation into something beyond itself, into 
something else, or rather mediation by itself is the raising up of itself. 
One other becomes another other. That both sides are identical is what 
raises the mediation beyond itself into self-mediation. ·This is an affir-
mation, but one that has passed through negation. 
14. This should be understood to mean that a "true infinite" may be true only 
to a limited degree. Only at the end of the dialectic could it be completely true. 

Lectures on Logic (118-119) 
110 
Examples of the true infinite are life, the self, and whatever has being 
for itself. I am for myself, since I am at once there and am something 
other than myself. But in that I am for myself, I negate the other [for 
whom I am] as other and posit the other as something ideal [idee/], I raise 
up its independence beyond itself. Because I am infinite, I negate the 
other within me. As a subject I am finite, and in consciousness I run up 
against the object of consciousness as the border that contains me. But al-
ready by the fact that I represent the object to myself, the content of the 
object is mine, it belongs to me, and so its independence of me is negated, 
and any behavior toward it is behavior toward myself. I am myself an ex-
ample of true infinity, but a true infinity that is still abstract. 
Life is a true infinite. I breathe in oxygen, and with the air around 
me I reach the borderline of my being. In negating the air I negate it 
insofar as it is other than myself, I cause the other to be mine. I trans-
form food, equally negating it as other than myself, and in so doing I 
produce [and reproduce] myself. 
Spirit is a true infinite. In its higher form the true infinite is recon-
ciliation. One makes the other over into oneself. Love and friendship 
are examples of the infinite. As a single person I have being for myself 
in total rigidity. The other person is also rigid and hostile. But [in rec-
onciliation] I make the other over into myself. 
Our knowledge of nature also illustrates the infinite. I leave aside here 
any claim that reason belongs merely to me. I transfer reason over into 
nature, while nature leaves to the side its own show of being something 
merely external or irrational. The other of nature[, i.e., the self,] knows 
in nature its other, knows that it is the same as the other. Spirit lies in the 
capacity for accommodation with the other, and the ability to assimilate 
it. In no way is the other hostile to spirit. A free man can bear up in the 
face of an other, can remain at rest with himself even in being with it. 
Something as found in the physical world fails to maintain its pres-
ence in the face of its other. When I bring two objects together in the 
mechanical sphere, they collide into each other. In the chemical sphere 
acids and bases neutralize one another. But this neutralization is not 
infinity, since neither acid nor base maintains itself in the process. 
So that is what the true infinite is. It is the foundation. What lies 
further is knowledge of this infinity in its more concrete forms. The 
understanding holds finitude and infinity apart from each other, and 
is persuaded that it holds the infinite entirely clear of the finite. The 
finite is thereby itself made into an absolute. The great self-deception 
of the understanding is to claim that we cannot reach the infinite. The 
understanding would make the finite into what lasts, where in fact 
the finite is but a transition to the truth of itself, to the infinite. 
The infinite, then, and the finite. Whatever the one is the other 
ought not to be. But each is thereby the opposite of what it is [as pos-

Being (119-120) 
Ill 
ited] upon the other [an ihm]. For the finite has the infinite [posited] 
upon the infinite itself [an ihm]. The finite is the negative of itself as it 
raises itself up into something beyond itself, and it thereby becomes 
non-finite, which is what it in truth is. Infinity is at first the non-fi-
nite, and only afterwards is it the affirmative reference of itself to itself 
[in the finite]. If we say that that the infinite is the non-finite, we 
thereby say that the infinite contains the finite [posited] on the finite 
itself [an ihm]. Within the infinite there are two negations: a first ne-
gation and the negation of that negation. The true infinite, as negation 
throughout, already contains the finite within itself. But the finite is 
contained within the true infinite only insofar as it is as negated, only 
as raising itself up beyond its finitude into the true infinite. 
This inclusion of the finite in the infinite is twisted around into some-
thing altogether different should we come to say that the infinite is 
"finitized" and thus made into something finite. This would be to say that 
we no longer have anything but what is finite. But to make such a state-
ment would be to forget the other side of the matter, namely, that we re-
ally have nothing merely finite. For within what we have now seen de-
velop, within the unity of the finite and the infinite, the finite has directly 
disappeared into the infinite. We have nothing merely finite, since the fi-
nite is precisely the negation of itself and is thus at once the infinite. We 
grant that the infinite has become the finite, but the determination of 
being finite consists in precisely negating itself. Finitization [correctly 
understood] is this process of the finite negating itself. If one speaks 
merely of the "unity of the finite and the infinite," the expression is, as 
indicated, twisted out of context insofar as what has [dialectically] pre-
ceded it is not expressly posited within it. Precisely because the finite is 
one with the infinite, the finite cannot hold out in relation to it. 
There are two kinds of infinity to be distinguished, much as one 
distinguishes the universality that stands over against particularity 
from the universality that contains both universality and particular-
ity within itself. [Within this second infinity] the finite is no longer to 
be apprehended as something. The finite is what straightaway disap-
pears. But the "oneness of the finite and the infinite" as an expression 
is twisted out of shape because it places the accent on oneness while op-
position between the finite and the infinite also belongs to their one-
ness. Finitude and infinitude are inseparable. The finite is this transi-
tion, this self-transposition into infinity, and infinity at once consists 
in having the finite within it. Neither apart fr.om the other holds truth. 
But when I say "finitude and infinitude," I represent the finite off to 
the one side as the absolute-like some pillar of Hercules. But nothing, 
when thus taken thus in isolation, holds any truth. 
Plato also treated the thought determination of finitude, the lim-
ited, niQac:;, and the unlimited, anELQOV, the indeterminate and 

Lectures on Logic (120-121) 
ll2 
thereby the infinite. The finite [peras] was for Plato much higher than 
the infinite [ apeiron]. Every determination falls within the sphere of 
form. Plato does battle with the barren desert of all that is indetermi-
nate or infinite. The 7tEQa~ is not only the finite, but is also the border 
and, at once, the [activity of] determining. Determining is the activity 
of distinguishing. Thus the finite [peras], understood as the border in 
its totality, as pure form, appears much higher than the infinite 
[apeiron]. By uform" we understand limitation, but the activity of lim-
iting is self-determining activity. Plato holds that we must break out of 
the barren desert of the infinite. 
The second negation is negation of the first negation-so to speak 
the square root, the first negation being the root. The true infinity is 
an infinity that is present[, not beyond]: it is and at once it is present. 
If we now look about in the German vernacular for an expression 
with which to designate the infinite as present, this purely determi-
nate infinite, such an expression is close at hand. For the logical deter-
mination in question is the most familiar of all. The expression for 
which we are looking is "being for itself" [§96]. which is completely 
ordinary German. If we ask how the unity of the two determinations 
of the finite and the infinite arises in all its simplicity, this unity is 
being for itself, which represents the [logical] self-concept in its gene-
sis. Being for itself: first it is being there, second it is reference to its 
other, but third it is at once the negation of the other [as merely other]. 
As I negate the connection that I have with the other [merely as other], 
I remain by myself [even with the other]. I posit myself in simple self-
reference [even in my reference to the other]. and it is precisely in 
such self-reference that the affirmative infinite lies. 
Being for self arises in the logic of being in the third place[, following 
being and being there]. Being came first, while being there-being for 
other, being with a negation of itself-was second. So in third place is 
being for itself, self-reference through negation of the other [as merely 
other]. the negation of any being there [that would in turn negate it]. 
In being for itself we have the ideality of the other, while in being there 
we have its reality. The ideality of anything finite consists in the fact 
that it is posited only as raised up beyond itself [into true infinity, into 
being for self]. Ideality lies in nothing beyond the fact that nothing fi-
nite has true being. Its being is raised up beyond itself and is some-
thing negated. Its being is only one moment of the truth.15 
15. To be "ideal" is first to be a passing moment in an accomplished dialectical 
process. To have a determination posited ideally upon itself is for the ideal deter-
mination to have the dynamic potential for passing into its realization. The ideal 
maturity of a child is a passing moment in the still incomplete process of its real-
izatiqn. Thus Hegel distinguishes between ideality as an actual moment in the 
process and as the potential for its full realization. 

Being (121-122) 
113 
[At first] we take nidealityn in the sense it has in [Fichte's] subjective 
idealism, according to which everything is merely my representation. 
Within my representation things in their own independence of one 
another are raised up beyond themselves. In that I know them, they 
are raised up beyond themselves [into beings of my subjective repre-
sentation]. But such ideality is purely formal. Subjective idealism is 
but a trivial abstraction, since the question is how the content itself of 
things is constituted. I myself am, within this content, ever so finite a 
being-so there is no true reality to any mere representation of mine. 
In my activity of grasping anything conceptually, my own subjectivity 
is itself overcome. For whenever I grasp something my being is con-
tained within the matter at hand, that matter itself. But there is an 
idealism [beyond subjective idealism] that is present in all true philos-
ophy-an idealism based on the ideality of whatever is finite. 
In everyday life we ascribe truth to the things [Ding], but already in reli-
gious consciousness we deny any [enduring] being, any eternity, to the [fi-
nite] thing. The question will still be asked: how, beginning from what is 
finite, is it possible to reach infinity? We are also struck with a wish to 
clearly see how, beginning with the infinite, we may reach the finite. 
This second question is with good reason asked of Spinozism. For Spi-
noza, everything goes back into the one substance, but how anything fi-
nite ever comes out of that substance is not apprehended. How does the 
finite have any being in the infinite? The answer is that when we first 
have hold of the infinite we have it alone, much as God before the cre-
ation of the world is alone. Yet when we have the infinite alone it is the 
bad infinite-just as God is not the true God if he does not manifest him-
self outwardly. For God is God only in the act of creating the world. 
The infinite that we first represent to ourselves is the bad infinite, 
and as such it is only a finite infinite. By virtue of this very fact we al-
ready have the finite [as apparently reached from the infinite]! Here 
there is no need to see how the finite emerges. But we may still reply 
that the question is not yet answered-this question concerned the 
movement from the true infinite to the finite. 
The infinite, we see, must be so apprehended as dividing into the true 
and false infinite. The false infinite consists in falling outside itself, 
which is precisely what the finite also does. That the infinite must be 
apprehended as so dividing in this way we have already seen. The infi-
nite is mediation, and lying within it is its own positing of itself as de-
terminate. One must bear in mind the presupposition [that lies behind 
this question of how the finite comes from the true infinite]. To ask 
how this is possible is a quite empty interrogative form[, for to pose the 
question is to already know the answer]. For the matter at hand is the 
infinite with this dynamic of the finite emerging from the infinite al-
ready contained within it. Every presupposition[, including the presup-

Lectures on Logic (122-123) 
114 
position that there is a question as to how the finite comes from the in-
finite,] is to be abandoned. Being for itself, affirmation as negation of 
the negation, has already passed through the mediation [of being with 
its other]. Being for itself is now being, being that refers to itself, and 
that does so precisely through the ideality of its other. Being for self is 
thus the being there [of the other] taken back into itself. 
What now follows we shall take up more briefly, for the method has 
now on the whole been exhibited. 
I.A.c. Being for Itself 
Being for itself is being, but as being for itself is immediately more than 
being [§96]. The subject within being for self is a being, but in such a 
manner that it is the negation of what is other than it. This subject is a 
oneness that within itself is mediated through the negation of this very 
mediation. What has being for itself has being merely by referring to 
itself. 
Being for self in immediate form is the one, the negation of every dif-
ference, something absolutely determinate within itself, but at once 
without differentiation from anything else. I can also view the one as 
having within itself a hundred ones or more, but that is not yet how it 
is to be considered here. Here the one will rather be viewed as brittle, 
merely as an arid point [and not as proliferating into a continuity of 
ones]. The one here is exclusive and immediate. Inasmuch as the one 
has being it bears reference to an other, though it immediately negates 
this other. The one excludes the other, and is within that very other [in 
ihm] the very negating of it. 
(§97) In German we literally have the everyday expression "What is 
that for one [such and such]?" In using this expression we inquire into 
the matter itself, into that for [the sake of] which something has its being, 
which is the very matter itself. This expression is unique to the German 
language, which thus assigns to the associated logical determination of 
being for itself a place of privilege. "What manner of such and such is 
that?" -or in German "What is that for one [such and such]?" The mean-
ing is that something else than what is first cited is now supposed to come 
along, but that what comes along [as that for the sake of which the first 
thing has being] is still precisely the very same object of inquiry. 
Negative reference in something's being for itself means its self-dif-
ferentiation. The one bears negative reference to itself, to the one. The 
one bears reference to itself, to the one, but the reference is negation. 
The one is itself the act of making reference negatively to itself, and it 
is thus the repulsion of further ones from itself, the positing of many 
ones [§97]. The many as such is indeterminate, but as the number 
two the indeterminate r:nany becomes determinate. The many them-
selves are beings. The one is a being, and the many contains ones, 

Being (123-124) 
115 
each of them a being. If we say None," we at once say many ones. 
uwhere do the many ones come from?" we ask. By its very concept 
the one is itself many ones. The one is the transition into many ones 
in making negative reference to itself. But insofar as it has being, the 
one is its negative self-reference as a being. 
Plato exhibited this dialectic of the one and the many, and Proclus 
and the Pythagoreans followed suit. The one, and then the atom, the 
individual, is in its determinateness undivided simplicity. The atom 
necessarily comes forth in the development of thought. In the history 
of philosophy, the thought of the atom marks an essential standpoint. 
But a principle such as the atom then becomes the ultimate, passing 
for the very essence of things. The one is at once dispersion [into the 
many]. But if the one is this reversal into many ones, the many ones 
are also the reversal into the one, the negation of the many. 
(§98) The truth of the many is the one. This observation could not be 
simpler. What is the many? The first, the second, and the third are each 
a many. But, alternatively, the first one in the many is a one, the second 
one is likewise a one, and so on. Thus the first, second, and third are 
each and all the same, they are each the one. Nothing could be simpler. 
The repulsion of the one from itself is the being of the many. Exclusion 
is a form of reference, it is reference in the affirmative determination [of 
positing another one]. The many in negating the one each negate what 
each of them is, and so they negate themselves. Or rather that to which 
they refer is the one, and they all refer to it. In its repulsion of another 
one from itself, the one bears reference to itself Repulsion is thus attrac-
tion, the reversal of the many into the one one. 
In contemplating the oneness of God we constantly go off in the di-
rection of these categories [of the one and the many]. But what reigns 
in the atomistic philosophy is accident. The atoms are all alike. Absolutely 
no determination of a concrete manifold lies within any of them. The 
existence of an atomic manifold is thus mere accident, entirely devoid of 
thought, purely external [to any given atom]. The atomists asserted the 
many and the void, and held that the atoms bear reference to one an-
other by way of mutual exclusion. An atomism of more recent vintage 
speaks of "molecules." Atomism is driven into minute particles-into a 
oneness empty [of internal qualitative differentiation]. 
[The opposite forces of] repulsion and attraction are inseparable. If 
one represents to oneself the flow of the many ones [by their mutual 
attraction] into a single one, ever new ones enter the representation. 
Precisely this is what is meant by saying that attraction is at once re-
pulsion, at once the production of new ones. One imagines that some-
thing new comes out of attraction. Or, seeing that there are after all 
many ones, it is asked how attraction emerges between them. Attrac-
tion is present in the many ones like the weight of gravity, since the ac-

Lectures on Logic (124-125) 
116 
cursed manyness of ones never reaches its truth in a single one. 16 
These blighted ones only seek their center of gravity but never reach 
it. Many material ones seek the one one. There are many ones, but 
their manyness is an untruth. So long as matter is of this accursed 
sort, it remains stuck at the level of merely searching for the one one. 
Atomism comes forth in the political sphere as well. A people con-
sists in many individual wills, which make up a general will. The sin-
gular is here, too, the principle. The attractive [force bringing individu-
als together]lies in the individual's needs, inclinations, and social action 
for the sake of utility. Beyond such atomism, substance, reason, the will 
upon itself, right [or law-Recht], and justice are the foundation in the 
political sphere-all of these [non-atomistic] categories being categories 
of being for itself. 
In attraction [between qualitatively identical ones], the raising up 
of being many beyond itself into something else[, i.e., into the one] is 
posited. In attraction the one refers to what is qualitatively itself, and 
with that the logic of quality is raised up beyond itself [into the logic 
of quantity]. Being for itself is quality in its developed totality, the 
[full] determination of a being that endures [without further qualita-
tive alteration]. The raising up of what is qualitative into what is quan-
titative raises it up into a new, non-qualitative determination. It is the 
determination of a qualitative indifference of ones [in increasing or 
decreasing quantity]. If we now look about to see how this new deter-
mination presents itself in representation, we find it present in repre-
sentations of quantity [§99]. 
The logic of quality at first consisted in a simple transition within 
the nature of the quality, a transition from something into something 
else that was qualitatively different. From this transition we now have 
to distinguish what comes to be posited as a different sort of transi-
tion. This new quantitative transition at first lies [recessively] only 
upon the surface [of qualitative being] even in its being for us. What 
happens in the second place is for the new transition to be posited by 
us. What comes last is always our positing of what already lies upon 
the surface of being as contained within the self-concept. The negative 
determination[, the determination of the one referring to itself as not 
being itself, as another one] which unobtrusively lay upon being 
within the self-concept, in showing itself, now comes to the fore. Re-
pulsion posits a quantitative one [which is expelled by an initial one 
negating itself], while attraction is its negation [of that negation]. 
16. The manyness of ones is accursed because intrinsically they are qualita· 
tively the same. They are distinguished only externally or accidentally by spatial 
location. The manyness of ones which is essential to atomism contradicts the in· 
trinsic discernibility of non-identicals. 

Being (125-126) 
117 
LB. Quantity 
Quantity, put generally, is magnitude [§99]. But the term umagnitude" 
is not quite right. For it means a [particular] determinate quantity, 
whereas quantity is [l.] general. After [indeterminate] quantity comes 
[2.] the quantum [§101], which is quantity insofar as its being is de-
terminate, with a border posited upon it. [Extensive] quantum, taken 
back into its simplicity, is [3.] intensive [quantum] or degree. 
The question is whether by the ordinary term uquantity" we under-
stand the present conceptual determination [of quantity in the science 
of logic]. It is said in mathematics that what has magnitude is suscepti-
ble of increase or decrease. In other words, any magnitude can be added 
to or subtracted from any other magnitude. But such a statement really 
clarifies nothing, though it carries with it the implication that magni-
tude is quite generally variable. Variability is contained within it. 
Quality is already variable, but variability comes to be posited [in quan-
tity]. As quantitative variability comes to be posited in the foreground, the 
[qualitative] determination of being retreats to the background. Consider, 
for example, an intense red. If I alter its degree of intensity, if I remove a 
dim redness, redness as a quality still remains in the background. But if I 
alter the quality as a whole rather than merely its [quantitative] degree of 
intensity, we have in the foreground a color that is no longer red at all. If I 
alter something's quantitative determination, what results is nothing 
[qualitatively new]. Its quantitative determination is understood to be 
posited in the foreground as alterable, rather than being alterable like 
something qualitative merely upon itself [ansich] in the background. 
Space in all directions is capable of being held within borders, but 
these borders never interrupt the continuity of its extension. For space 
is continuous, as also is time [§99]. 
(§lOO) Continuous and discrete magnitude. Quality contains both 
[indeterminate] being and its negation [through one or another deter-
mination]. It contains both only insofar as they occur within being 
there [Dasein], only in their unity. What we have there is nothing if 
we remove from it its being determinately there. In quantity, as well, 
we have the posited form of unity, in which the border [as containing 
something] is raised up beyond itself and yet still exists [as containing 
something further]. Both the repulsion of a new one from a first one 
and the subsequent attraction between the two-so that through their 
attraction the separateness of repelled ones is lifted- come to be con-
tained within quantity. They are distinguished, but are both held 
within quantity. They are distinguished but are no longer external to 
each other [like atoms in physical space]. 
We must now contemplate this repulsion and attraction of ones as 

Lectures on Logic (126-127) 
118 
they are held within quantity. If we take the one as it occurs in quantity 
we first have discrete magnitude, and this is the whole of quantity as pos-
ited in one of it forms. The discrete one exhausts quantity in its entirety, 
but it provides only one of the determinations under which quantity 
exists. The other determination under which it exists is continuous mag-
nitude, which [like discrete magnitude] also contains borders, but bor-
ders posited under the determination of [qualitative] equality between 
the ones lying within them, and thus under the determination of the 
negation [of ones as mutually repulsive or discrete]. Using the self-con-
cept of discrete magnitude, we say, for example, •a hundred men·-
which is a discrete quantity, every man, everything, counts on its own 
as one. But continuity is also necessarily present when we say •one 
hundred": everything contained in one hundred is itself a one, and that 
by which all ones share something in common we call "oneness," which 
is their continuity. Only by virtue of this [continuous] oneness is it pos-
sible for discrete magnitudes to be posited. In discrete magnitude we do 
not have merely [mutually repulsive] ones that would differ from one 
another. Rather, the ones are also [qualitatively] equal, and in that lies 
their continuity. Space also contains borders [between line segments, 
surfaces, volumes], as indeed it must since [the thought determination 
of] the border is contained within the very determination of space as 
space. Discrete and continuous magnitude each bear imprinted upon it-
self the determination of the other. 
But an antinomy arises here. It is said, on the one hand, that space 
is not divided by any borders, that it does not contain [discrete] atoms 
or points, since these come to be raised up beyond themselves [into 
their continuity, into their oneness with another]. On the other hand, 
mathematicians do speak of space and time as consisting in [discrete] 
points, and in this they are quite right. It will be asked whether matter 
is infinitely divisible, whether it consists in atoms, or whether it is the 
composition [of atoms] that is the first principle-whether what we 
come upon is always composite. 
Atoms are indivisible. From this indivisibility arises the contradic-
tion according to which both the discreteness and the continuity of 
matter can be equally well demonstrated. But this equal demonstrabil-
ity only means that we have exhibited the two discrete and continuous 
sides of what it means to be a border. True, the [discrete] one is an es-
sential principle. But the assertion of continuity and of composition is 
equally essential. One can go on dividing forever, but what one comes 
up with always contains further borders-it is one, but is also a continu-
ity. Here we find the simple solution to our antinomy. Only the insepa-
rable identity [of discrete and continuous quantity] holds truth. 
The second [stage in the logic of quantity, the stage beyond indeter-
minate quantity] is quantity in its determinate being here or there-as 

Being (127-128) 
119 
we find this quantity in contrast to that quantity. Here we find that a 
quantity with a border, discreteness rather than continuity, inter-
venes. But such a quantity, a quantum [§101]. within itself immedi-
ately passes for a continuity [of ones]. The one is the principle of the 
quantum, of the border in its being for itself, but within a quantum 
this one passes over into a manyness of discrete ones. One hundred is 
a quantum which [as one] at first excludes manyness, but which is al-
ready within itself this very manifold of one hundred. 
[§102] A quantum is perfectly determined as a number [Zahl]. Ge-
ometry, by contrast to arithmetic, is the science of continuous magni-
tude. But. in order to determine a space, we must make use of num-
ber. Number is perfectly determinate because its principle is the one. 
The principle of number is the totality, which is the one. If we begin 
with one [as our unit]. we may view it as consisting of a thousand 
parts. Our one has many ones within it. and it is thus designated as an 
amount [Anzahl] of the one viewed as the unit-it is an amount of 
some unit. An amount is a contained manyness of ones-all contained 
by a border. These many ones have a common oneness. A number con-
tains both discreteness and continuity: many ones and their oneness. 
There are three arithmetic operations. Regulating them throughout is 
the distinction between the amount of a unit and the [continuous] one-
ness of the unit itself. Performing arithmetic operations comes down to 
counting. It is only a matter of seeing how such calculations come to be 
differentiated from one another. The combining of numbers yields the 
identity of each as external to the other. Each unit neither loses nor 
gains [anything in its internal qualitative identity] by being combined 
or not combined with another one, regardless of how many ones it is 
combined with. 
Reason [Vernunft] is absent from the determinate character of number. 
A number is thought under the form of a being completely external to it-
self [in any further number]. To express philosophical thoughts by means 
of numbers is the worst conceivable way of proceeding. Pythagoras never 
advanced far enough to be able to abstract thought simply as thought it-
self. The first to do so was the Eleatic School. Number, admittedly, is also 
an object of thought, but it is thought only in the form of externality. 
Number helps make the sensory realm determinate. For sensory 
beings to be is to be [determinate as] external to one another, outside 
one another. What is sensory is at once raised up beyond itself into the 
abstract determination [of quantity]. The general nature of number is 
thus to stand in an intermediary position between pure thought and 
whatever is sensory. This is why number is not suitable for expressing 
the self-concept, which essentially is merely one. 
Counting is our first arithmetic operation. But what is at issue is how 
we count. To number units in an amount is, quite generally, to make 

Lectures on Logic (128-129) 
120 
numbers, to construct them. An initial one, a unit, is not yet an 
amount. If I divide one into four parts [or units]. an amount thereby 
comes to be posited. I say "1, and, then, l again," and the result is 
what I call "2," and similarly with "3," and so on. This is how we con-
struct numbers: we take many ones together as a single one. But the 
other types of arithmetic operation are likewise only a matter of 
counting-except for the fact that what is brought together by count-
ing is diverse in nature. 
[ 1.] First comes the combining of numbers which are not ones as 
such, but which are already amounts. We can add such amounts, but 
we can also subtract them. If we assume any given number and any 
other given number, their combination we know as "addition." The 
numbers available for combining by addition are already constructed 
ones. To a number such as 7 I add 5, i.e., I add five counts and then 
stop counting. Adding is thus nothing more than numbering, while 
subtraction is the dissolution of some number that has already been 
added up. [By subtracting 7 from 12] I so dissolve l2 that the remain-
ing number is 5. But 5 is not required as the result, since I can break 
up 12 in a number of different ways. 
[2.] Second, among arithmetic operations, comes a form of addition 
in which the numbers added together are equal. Two numbers are ca-
pable of such identity or equality. So I can add 4 and 4. These two 
numbers come together to form a sum that is itself a new unit, beyond 
each of the two 4's that was already a unit in its own right. 
But now the question arises as to how many times such a unit [e.g., 
4 or 8 as unit]. which is itself also a many and not just a unit, is to be 
taken. Taking it three times illustrates the arithmetic operation of multi-
plication. Here the distinction again arises between unit and amount. 
Yet the distinction is indifferent. For each of the numbers multiplied by 
the other can indifferently be designated "unit" or "amount." We learn 
multiplication tables by heart. 
Dividing is once again[, like subtraction,] a negative operation of 
dissolution. I ought to dissolve a number so that the different numbers 
into which I set the dissolved number apart from each other are equal. 
Multiplication is distinguished from addition only by the way in which 
numbers are brought together[. whether by the combination of any 
two numbers in addition or by the combination of the same number 
with itself two or more times in multiplication]. 
[3.] In multiplication, amount and unit need not be equal. Yet they 
can [as with the case of a number squared] be equal, so that I can have 
3 as my unit and 3 at once as my amount. That is what occurs when 
we rise to the second power of 3, which is the arithmetic operation of 
the third type [beyond addition-subtraction and multiplication-divi-
sion]. In this third type of arithmetic operation, the negation of the 

Being (129-130) 
121 
operation is the extraction of the square root of the number raised to 
the second power[, i.e., of the original number squared]. Suppose I 
identify a number squared, a unit equal to the amount of that very 
unit. We may then proceed into still higher powers, but at that point 
matters become purely formal. Finding the square root is the basic 
[third] operation. The reason for making resolution into the square 
root basic is that only the square root can be extracted. The higher 
roots[. e.g., 9 as the square root of 81.] cannot be irreducibly extracted, 
but must be reduced to extraction of the square root [as 3 is the square 
root of 9]. Similarly, surfaces in geometry have to be reduced to the 
right-angle triangle. This is the thought determination that provides 
us with the guiding thread. 
(§103) The quantum is indeterminately any quantum. The unit 
within a quantum that borders on another quantum is identical with 
the entire first quantum. One hundred runs up against its border. But it 
is not merely the hundredth one that is the border within one hundred 
ones. Equally each and every one [within the quantum] is such a bor-
der. And every border unit is identical with the whole quantum. 
The border unit within a quantum can primarily assume the form 
of either manyness or simplicity, or more particularly of either exten-
sive or intensive magnitude. This latter opposition, we shall see, differs 
from the opposition of discrete and continuous magnitude that deter-
mines quantity in general. Extensive and intensive magnitudes per-
tain to the particular way in which a quantum becomes determinate. 
Discreteness and continuity are inseparable within quantity in gen-
eral. But each limited quantum likewise assumes the form of many-
ness every bit as much as that of [intensive] oneness. 
When a quantum [of some material] weighs down more or less heav-
ily on something else, that quantum shows intensive magnitude. But it 
likewise has extensive magnitude. Wherever there is weight, there are 
just so many [extensive] points of contact that exert [intensive] pres-
sure, just so much leaden weight, just so many pounds. If a light shines 
brightly, its brightness is an intensive magnitude, but the same light 
manifests itself extensively in space. If I am given a color of a particular 
intensity [within a limited surface area], I can col or a larger surface, but 
ever more faintly as the size of the surface increases; or I can color the 
surface more vividly the smaller the surface becomes. The more inten-
sive a characteristic is, the more extensive it is-it expresses itself in a 
greater number of planes. The more intense characteristic, expressing 
itself outwardly, is all the more universal and effective. As expressed, it 
at once acquires extensiveness-without which it must remain con-
tained within itself as a rigid and abstract point. 
A degree is quite simple in its reference [§104]: the warmth I feel is 
an intensive degree of warmth that is quite simple as this determinate 

Lectures on Logic (130-131) 
122 
degree. But it is also determinate as an extensive magnitude. As an 
extensive quantum the warmth I feel is a determination indifferently 
external to the intensive warmth I feel. Yet if my body temperature is 
20' centigrade, all the degrees below that degree belong [internally] to 
the determination of the twentieth degree. The attained degree has its 
determination only thanks to all the others, to their aggregate. The 
intensity of a degree of warmth is thus also extensive. The extensive 
quantum assumes the form of simple self-reference, but in such a way 
that the determinate warmth [as a felt intensive magnitude] still falls 
outside the extensive quantum. 
In a circle degrees are determined by the circle's division into 360'. 
The more exact determination of a given circle is then the determina-
tion of the size of its periphery. If many ones essentially share a single 
oneness, their oneness still bears manyness upon itself. When the 
quantum is laid out as one, yet in such a way that it bears upon itself 
reference to an external one, it is a ratio [§105]. Such a ratio is at first 
simple. Thus 3/4, 2/l, or 3/1 is not merely an amount [in the numera-
tor] and a unit [in the denominator], but is also a ratio; 6/2 is 3, but 3 
is expressly given as something divided, as a quantum that bears upon 
itself external reference to another quantum. Thus 6 and 2 no longer 
pass, within the ratio, as immediate quanta, but rather 2 is taken as 
determined through 6, while 6 is similarly what it is only in reference 
to 2. Hence each is only a relative quantum. But what happens is then 
that, in the place of these two numbers, all possible numbers can 
enter. Instead of 1/3, I can just as well posit 10/30, 3/9, and so on. Here 
10 counts for neither more nor less than 1, so 10/30 passes for the 
same as 113. Normally, ifl substitute lO for I, the result is a completely 
different quantum, but here [in the quantitative ratio] the new quan-
tum is posited as indifferently the same as the original quantum. The 
determinate character of being a quantum already means that it is 
upon itself something indifferent, but [in the quantitative ratio] this 
indifference now comes to be expressly posited. 
But we not only have ratios, we also have different ratios that bear 
reference to one another. A quantum in a ratio bears reference selec-
tively to something else and only to it, and such reference is itself a 
qualitative determination. An infinite quantitative progression [of ra-
tios] enters here [§104]. An exponent is a quantum. If I say 6/2, I have 
the exponent 3, which is equally expressed as 90/30, and so on. I can 
posit ratios to infinity, but what I posit is always a distinction of equiv-
alent ratios all contained within the exponent itself. The two finite 
numbers 2 and 6 are [each taken absolutely by itself] negated. Their 
value within the ratio lies solely in their reference to each other, and 
thus they are variable magnitudes that vary with each other [but only 
within the invariable ratio]. The determination contained in the ex-

Being (131-132) 
123 
ponent remains constant, while the expressions N2" and N6" no longer 
have any value as distinct determinate quanta. 
The relation of the infinitely great to the infinitesimal is the same 
as the relation of other quanta in a ratio. To be infinitesimal is to be 
smaller than any given quantum, but the implication is that the infin-
itesimal is no longer a quantum at all. What is infinitely small is no 
quantum at all, and yet it is somehow to be retained as a quantitative 
thought determination. Mathematicians must face up to the difficulty 
here. [Following Leibniz] they speak of this quantum as the increase 
dx where the difference d [on which the value of the variable x de-
pends] is infinitesimal. The ratio of dx to dy is to be exhibited. It comes 
to be said that every resulting increase in x and in y is, as [infinitesi-
mal] quanta, simply zero, i.e., no quanta at all. And yet the ratio be-
tween these infinitesimal values is still to be given. 
What matters come down to is that this ratio is to be determined. 
We have the ratio of zero to zero. But that is no ratio at all, since both 
terms are said to be infinitely smalL which is to say that they are no 
longer quanta at all. The solution to the difficulty invokes the concept 
of determinations of quantity which are infinitely small, and which 
therefore are no longer quanta at all. Such determinations of quantity 
lack all sense [Sinn] outside their relation to each other [as extrapo-
lated by mathematicians from relations between really existing 
quanta]. The terms have meaning [Bedeutung] only for one another 
[as posited terms having no existence in themselves independently of 
the ratio]. 
Newton clarified the matter in a different manner from Leibniz. 
Newton says that we are always to take the magnitudes within a ratio 
as existing. He held that vanishingly small magnitudes, before they 
actually vanish, remain finite magnitudes and have coefficients, while 
after they vanish, their coefficients become zero. He wants to say that, 
even when finite magnitudes vanish, their ratio still exists. He means 
[contrary to Leibniz] that the different terms within the ratio exist but 
are no longer quanta or finite magnitudes. 
The infinity at which we have now arrived through our consider-
ation of quantitative ratios is the true quantitative infinity. In mathemat-
ics we have a diversity of infinite series. We seek to capture each such 
series in summary fashion, to find a suitable finite expression for des-
ignating each series. Thus 2/7 is the simple finite expression for a true 
infinite series. But the infinite series [of complex expressions for 2/7] is 
itself an imperfect, finite or false infinite, since [in reaching no matter 
how great a finite member in the series] I never exhaust all [complex] 
expressions of the number 2/7 itself. But 2/7 is perfectly complete, 
and corresponds to all that can be expected of it. 

Lectures on Logic (132-133) 
124 
I.C. Measure 
(§107) Within a quantitative ratio every quantum becomes determi-
nate only through the other quantum within the same ratio. The self-
reference [of each quantum to itself through its reference to the other] 
is thus posited, a determinate oneness of different quanta with each 
other in which every quantum has its sense only insofar as it is insep-
arable from the other term. This absence of separation between quanta, 
their determinate oneness, their self-reference through reference to 
each other, is precisely what is qualitative within the quantitative 
ratio itself. In this way, within measure, quantity and quality are al-
ready united [§106, §107]. 
A quantum is posited amid the externality of ones as qualitatively 
bearing reference to itself alone. It has being for itself lying on its very 
surface, and is the negation of different alternative quanta. This unity of 
a sensory qualitative determination and a quantitative determination 
constitutes a measureP A quantum within a particular ratio can be al-
tered, but such quantitative alteration within a ratio is not by itself a 
qualitative alteration of the ratio. Yet when the measure changes, the 
quality of the ratio contained in that measure also changes [§108]. The 
externality of quantity attains to its truth only in the quantitative ratio, 
in something qualitative. A measure is a quantum with quality already 
exhibited on the very face of it. The absolute is a measure. Everything is 
a measure. 
"Nothing too much!· the ancients said. The quantum shows itself 
as something to which a measure is attached. Whatever oversteps its 
measure, the measure to which its quality is attached, is cast down by 
the Furies. A measure is a quantum with the determination of being 
not merely quantum but also a quality. The transition [to something 
qualitatively different by gradual alteration of the quantity] was par-
ticularly striking to the ancients, as shown by certain paradoxes to 
which they gave popular currency. 
An example is the paradox of the baldhead. If one takes away one 
strand from a whole head of hair, the quantum taken away makes no 
difference to the head of hair as such. This will be readily admitted. 
17. The term •quality" within the logic of measure has two possible referents. 
First it refers, as in the previous paragraph, to the quality of a ratio-e.g. 2x is quali-
tatively different from 3x, which is how it was already understood in the logic of 
quantity. But second it refers to the sensory quality with which some quantitative 
ratio of materials, forces, and spatiotemporal magnitudes is correlated, as for exam-
ple the sense quality of water is correlated with H20 or felt force is correlated with 
the ratio of mass times acceleration. Water is conventionally measured in gallons, 
but it naturally measures itself off in a number of units of H20. 

~ 
Being (133-134) 
125 
But by doing nothing more than pulling out one strand of hair again 
and again, ultimately not a single strand is left. This will appear to be 
a joke, but contained in it is the concept of the transformation of quan-
titative into qualitative change. Out of a hundred thalers one can eas-
ily give away one thaler, but after doing so repeatedly ultimately noth-
ing is left, and one's savings thus come to be qualitatively altered. 
The development of the logic of measure leads into many catego-
ries, and it would require an immense [natural] science to develop 
this whole logic out of the very concept of it. The principal matter is 
the relation of powers. A measure [as a ratio] is on the very face of it 
qualitatively determinate, but on top of that its determinate qualita-
tive character [in the sensory world] must be discovered. In the case 
of the free fall of bodies, the space traversed bears reference to the du-
ration of the fall. We might imagine the slow mechanical speed of that 
space remaining constant. But the particular velocity of a body in free 
fall which is discovered in nature itself falls within another ratio: in a 
free fall of bodies the space or distance through which a body falls 
stands in a ratio determining it as the square of the motion's duration. 
If the body has fallen five seconds, it has passed through twenty-five 
units of space, and so the power relation enters. 
Intervention of the power relation is even clearer in the case of the 
free movements of the heavenly bodies. The square root of the dura-
tion required for the orbit is the cube of the distance traveled. That is 
Kepler's third law. The system of measures is immense in its content. 
This system consists in all possible goings, hither and thither, as 
contained in the logic of quantum and measure. And yet there is al-
ways a border. Quantity and quality always pass into a different [mea-
sured] quantity and quality, and beyond all determinate measures is 
the measureless [§ 109]. 
The same passage happens in the social sphere. The constitution of 
the city of Hamburg would probably be very good for a small state, but, 
if we transferred it over to a large state, such a state would fall to the 
ground. As the Roman state became larger after the Second Punic War, 
freedom was brought down by quantitative change. The destruction of 
measure entered-the measureless. It was but a relative change in quan-
tity, but with that change the quality of the whole fell to the ground. 
Water is liquid, and as the temperature rises it remains liquid. At so· in 
Reamur's temperature scale the point arrives where quantitative change 
comes to be overstepped in favor of change into another quality. First 
we have liquid fluidity, then the [ambivalence of the] measureless in-
tervenes, and then another quality enters, water's state of being steam. 
The warmth of water will be also be reduced to another quality in the 
opposite direction. At one degree of temperature water is still perfectly 
liquid. It does not pass into another state [gradually], but rather [after 

Lectures on Logic ( 134) 
126 
the intervention of the measureless] becomes all at once ice, solid ice.18 
This is a qualitative leap. Qualitative change is precisely this alternation 
between a determinate measure and the measureless. But what we 
have reached here is measure raising itself up into what lies beyond it. 
It first raises itself up into something measureless. But a new measure 
once again emerges out of the measureless, and thus one measure 
reaches closure with itself in another [ § ll 0]. 
18. It has just been said that the measureless intervenes apparently in momen-
tary hesitation and ambiguity between two stable measures. Assertion of the in-
termediary moment of the measureless must qualify the statement that liquid 
water becomes all at once ice. 

ESSENCE 


2 
Essence 
[§ 112] The three subsections of the logic of the essence of being are es-
sence as the ground of existence, as appearance, and as actuality along 
with necessity. Only in this third subsection does the essence come to 
be perfectly explicated. Essence, we may say, is self-explicating. All 
being, and all [empirical being in the form of] being there, serves only 
to lift itself beyond itself, and to show its essence. Yet this inner essence 
of immediate being is itself replete with a content all its own. Being 
now comes to be known through the explication of its essence, and this 
now becomes necessary. What is explicated is this essence, which itself 
appears. 1 
Being is the self-concept merely reduced to its immediacy. Now, in the 
logic of the essence, the self-concept comes to be posited [by us as specu-
lative logicians], but it is not yet posited upon and for itself [as happens in 
the third and final branch of the logic, the logic of the self-concept]. 
Thought determinations in the logic of the essence are purely relative. 
Ground has meaning only by reference to existence, cause only by refer-
ence to effect, and so on. No such category is any longer purely indepen-
dent of the other, but each is marked by its reflection within the other, by 
its reference to the other. They all bear the mark of reference to each other, 
and with that everything comes to be something posited or mediated by 
another, so that it has its being solely through something else. Here the 
form of mediation becomes the universal thought determination. 
1. It may seem that logic, pure imageless thought, should have nothing to do 
With ·appearance" taken as sensory. But the logical concept of sensory appear· 
ance, though abstracted from what is sensory, should not be taken as itself 
sensory. 
129 

Lectures on Logic (135-136) 
130 
Essence and Being. "The essence" has the same referent [Bedeutung] 
as "being." In going from being to its essence, we pass grammatically 
from "is" to "have." A thing in the logic of the essence has its proper-
ties-it no longer is its determinations but rather has them [§125, 
Note]. The verb "to have" and the participle "have been" are used in 
expressing the past perfect tense. "I have seen something" in the past 
perfect expresses possession of it. Seeing something [in the present 
tense] is the immediate intuition of it. But only when immediately in-
tuited being is lifted up beyond itself do I come into possession of it, do 
I come to have it. Yet in thus taking it into my possession, I do not rel-
egate it to past time. For the possessed content is contained within me 
ideally [idee/] even now, it is purely relative to me. 
What has immediate being has now passed over into its essence, 
and in its immediacy is no more. The essence of being expresses being 
as it comes to be reflected within something else. What I have seen is 
present-otba [I have seen, I know]. What I have seen I now know, 
and so it is present. This logical essence of being is thus higher than 
any determination of [past] time. The essence of being arises by the 
fact that immediacy raises itself up into its essence by the mediation 
of itself with itself. Being is now demoted to [the thought determina-
tion of being a mere sensory] show. Within its essence being is only 
this show. But whatever has being is lifted up into its essence, and so 
being in no way stands way outside its essence. So if we represent 
something to ourselves as inessential, as lying outside what is essen-
tial, its show still belongs to its essence, and the essence is the show-
ing forth of itself within what is inessential. But the essence of being 
also shows itself forth, beyond this external show of being, as the 
ground of that being. Ground is a further, broader determination [to 
be taken up shortly]. But the essence of being first shows forth within 
itself even prior to its determination as ground. We have here, in the 
logic of essence, a new definition of the absolute: 2 the absolute is the 
essence, it is what is inner. 
(§113) The essence of being is simple self-reference understood as the 
abstract identity between what does the referring and what is referred to, 
as the referent's own self-reflection within itself. Abstract identity is medi-
ated by the negation of all mediation [§114]. The negation of mediation 
by something else returns thought back to simple self-reference. In ab-
stract identity, the form of mediation by something else is suspended. 
Sensory awareness lies in taking what is empty of thought, what is 
finite, to have being. The understanding gives validity to every man-
2. If definitions in a theory remain constant, if "the absolute" remains that 
outside which there is nothing, •a definition of the absolute" is rather an identify-
ing description. 

Essence (136-137) 
131 
ner of being limited, each being abstractly identical with itself. The es-
sence of being is abstract. For [unlike the self-concept] it comes to be 
apprehended in the form of [mere] identity. Force has being, and the 
expression of force also has being. Each is thus abstractly identical with 
itself. [Falsely] holding the two apart from each other is the work of 
the understanding. 
From the abstract essence we first distinguish what is inessential, 
which is generally whatever has being. Secondly, the understanding 
holds that essence fixedly in mind, while what is inessential is shunted 
off to the other side. But what is inessential also enjoys self-reference 
and so also has being, and to be sure there is something inessential. Yet 
logic is concerned with being in its truth, not with a being so pathetic as 
to be inessential. The essence of immediate being is being within itself 
[Insichsein], being that quite generally has its self-identity through nega-
tion of the negation[, i.e., negation of what is finite, which is itself nega-
tive]. This essence, like immediate being, is internally a movement, a 
process, a showing forth within itself. 
The sensory show in its diversity is what [in the logic of being] first 
has being. But that being is then reduced [in the logic of the essence] 
to something ideal [idee!]. The whole, what we call the essence of 
being, is the negation of [immediate] being. It is being as it now first 
and foremost is, being that has passed within itself, being as expli-
cated, but which has not yet explicated itself. It has not yet explicated 
itself in its true [concrete] identity [as will be done in the logic of the 
self-concept]. It is not yet self-explicated[, in the logic of the essence,] 
that the whole cannot in truth be this one-sided form of the essence 
showing forth merely within itself. Mediation is already contained 
within the essence of being, but is not yet posited by it. 
Because of the one-sidedness of this determination of the abstract 
essence of being as showing forth within itself, the other inessential 
determination[, that of the sensory show,] still remains to be posited 
within itself. The determinations of the essence of being are determi-
nations of self-reference by whatever is self-identical. But the showing 
forth of this abstract essence within itself bears reference to some-
thing else. In other words, its showing forth bears reference to the fact 
that something other than it also shows forth within itself. These ref-
erences[ -self-reference and reference to an other-]are not yet pos-
ited as identical [as in the logic of the self-concept]. The sphere of the 
essence of being is therefore the sphere of contradiction. A cause is ab-
stractly self-identical merely with itself, but it is also a showing forth 
of itself within something else, within the effect. It is not yet posited as 
identical with its effect. What is merely inner is in truth at once merely 
external. To be merely inner [as in the abstract essence of the logic of 
the essence] is one-sided. 

Lectures on Logic (137-138) 
132 
I I. A. Essence as the Ground of Existence 
The essence of being must necessarily appear. But this essence is also a 
showing forth merely within itself. We therefore must first consider this 
show as wholly and merely abstract. What is second is, then, that the 
determination to which the essence of being is finally destined is that of 
the sensory show, but this show must fall to the ground, and so its es-
sence is determined as its ground. The ground is precisely this show fall-
ing to the ground, where this falling to the ground is then the existence 
of the ground: the ground of the show raises itself beyond itself into 
what exists. But existence is immediately posited being, being as total-
ity. This totality is the thing, the unity of essence and existence. What we 
have then is the thing, the totality of both essence (along with self-refer-
ence) and existence. 
II.A.a. The Show of the Essence of Being 
Show [as abstractly contained within the essence of being] is a wholly 
simple overall determination which at once has successive moments 
to be considered: [l.] the determination of being self-identical, which is 
simple identity; 2. the determination of difference, a showing forth that 
includes mediation, diversity, and opposition, the reflected being of being 
other than oneself; and 3. the determination of ground, which marks 
the totality of this showing forth. 
Il.A.a.a. Identity 
The Showing Forth of the [Abstract] Essence Within Itself With this self-
identity one finds oneself driven about in manifold directions. Self-
identity first has being for itself. The understanding holds fixedly to 
such identity. It finds self-identity in a limited content, to which it 
clings fast. A cause [in abstraction from its effect] is something incoher-
ently fixed upon by the understanding. The absolute is something self-
identical [Identitiit]. The very expression "the absolute" is an expres-
sion of the understanding, an abstract expression. 
Regarding identity and the determinations that follow, it is to be re-
marked that expression has been given to them as the laws of thought.3 
3. The reader is misled when Hegel gives the impression that he rejects the 
three traditional "laws of thought" of formal logic, since the three laws of thought 
which he actually examines and rejects are quite different. In the following para-
graphs he rejects an uncustomary law of abstract identity ("A is merely A") be-
cause, for example, magnetism is not merely magnetism but is indentifiable under 
a different description. He rejects a novel law of non-contradiction-"-(A =+A. A 
=-A)," "-(A generally is both A in particular and non-A in particular)" -because, 
for example, the state of satisfied need (+A) alternates within the general life of 

Essence (138-139) 
133 
Identity is the first [thought] determination within the logic of the es-
sence, and thus is itself an essential determination [§ 115]. Everything 
has an essence, it is said. But that is poorly put, since we have already seen 
a progression parade by with its beginning in the logic of being, and only 
then proceed to the logic of things having an essence. We should rather 
say that all being in its determinateness acquires an essence, and that this 
is how everything is self-identical. According to a fundamental law of the 
understanding [in the logic of the essence], every being is determinate in 
its essence, and as a consequence everything is self-identical. 
[True] philosophy is no [Schellingian] system of mere self-identity. 
For [beyond affirming that everything is self-identical] we also affirm 
that everything is diverse, that everything is an opposite, and that ev-
erything has a ground. This legislation by the understanding [in the 
laws of thought] is self-contradictory, since each law, as we shall see, 
cancels the preceding [absolutized] law in favor of the next law. 
Everything is [abstractly] identical with itself. A= A. A cannot be both 
+A and -A. This is the law of non-contradiction. The law of opposition[, 
i.e., of the excluded middle] states that A is either +A or -A. It is said that 
this law cannot be proven, for everyone grants it as a primary fact without 
proof. The law holds sway with all. Should the appeal to be made to expe-
rience, according to the law of abstract identity we are always left with a 
tautology. Yet identity must not be taken so abstractly. Rather, self-iden-
tity is self-mediated through a manifold of determinations.4 If we say 
"Magnetism is .. :" we do not afterward expect the same thing, magne-
tism, to be repeated all over again. We rather expect [in the predicate] a 
development [of the subject of the judgment]. which development in its 
totality nonetheless becomes the equal of what was first given [in the 
original subject, which is now grasped concretely]. Experience thus shows 
that we are wrong to make abstract identity into the law of all truth. 
The same false law [of abstract identity] also comes to be expressed 
in the form of [the false law of non-]contradiction. It is said that we 
cannot think a contradiction. But in giving expression to a contradic-
tion[, i.e., "both +A and -A"]. we most surely do immediately think it. 
[Contrary to the abstract law of non-contradiction,] we cannot say that 
nothing contains within itself a contradiction. For many, many things 
an organism (A) with a state of unsatisfied need (-A). This in turn leads to the re-
jection of an uncustomary law of the excluded middle-"A generally is either 
merely +A in particular or merely -A in particular," ·A is either A in particular or 
non-A in particular" -because a living being alternates between the fulfillment of 
satisfied need and the unfulfillment of unsatisfied need. 
4. "What is merely A taken abstractly= what is merely A taken abstractly" is a 
tautology, but "A taken concretely is merely A" is not tautologicaL since it is false. 
A human being taken concretely is not merely a human being, but is also particu-
larized by nationality, sex, religion, etc. 

Lectures on Logic (139-140) 
134 
are within themselves self-contradictory. Everything that is bad is self-
contradictory [since its existence is in contradiction with its own con-
cept]. Whenever I am in a state of need, the very negative of my feeling 
of being present to myself[. of the satisfaction my need,] is also posited 
within me and at that point I am myself a contradiction.5 Every activity 
is a contradiction. 
Il.A.a.f3. Difference 
The essence of being is [thus contradictory] self-negation, negation 
directed in its reference upon itself. This essence essentially contains 
the determination of difference as well as identity. [Abstract] identity 
is the oneness of something with itself. But it is also the negation of 
what is diverse. Suppose that two beings are identical. With their iden-
tity I at once have their difference in that they are [referred to under 
different descriptions as] two [§ 116]. It will indeed be demanded [by 
the understanding] that we think their identity alone [without differ-
ence]. Yet the fact is that two and not one are present. Negation di-
rected in its reference to itself is identity with itself [within what is not 
itself]. Such [concrete] self-identity thus contains difference within 
itself. Without difference self-identity cannot in truth be. Thus, ac-
cording to the logic of the self-concept [but not according to that of the 
abstract essence of being]. difference is also present. Therefore, [ab-
stract] identity is a false, untrue thought determination, since it is 
merely one-sided, mere self-reference. 
What comes next is the consideration of difference for itself, that is to 
say, difference as merely identical to itself. Whatever is different is self-
identically different: what is different, in bearing reference to itself pre-
cisely as different [from something else]. is thereby lifted beyond itself 
as merely different back into self-identity as different. Whenever we 
take difference as it is for itself on its own account, what we have is at 
once its self-identity as such. What is different is at first immediately 
different. Everything distinguished, whether as [immediate) being or 
as self-referential [under different determinations], is diverse in rela-
tion to all other things. Yet their diversity from one another is a matter of 
indifference [insofar as they are all identically diverse-§ 117]. 
The difference between two beings acquires its being through com-
parison [§ 118]. Their diversity falls solely within a third term, within 
5. The contradiction in the living being is between its immediate state (e.g., 
need) and that state (e.g., satisfaction, absence of need) posited upon its immedi-
ate state by reflection on the cyclical life process. Thus need, within the circle of 
need and its satisfaction, is need and then at once the negation of need. But need 
and its contradictory negation posited within the concept of the life process are 
not simultaneous as in a logical contradiction. but are successive moments of that 
process. 

Essence (139-140) 
135 
the activity of comparing. Difference through this third term is exter-
nally posited, and similarity and dissimilarity are the two forms which 
difference assumes. Similarity is the identity of different things when 
compared, while dissimilarity is their non-identity [when compared]. 
But the two moments of similarity and dissimilarity bear reference to 
each other in an external manner [through a third term, the activity of 
comparing]. Difference here is external difference. 
Diversity, difference, is a category of the understanding. Everything 
within any diverse assortment of things has being for itself. Viewed in 
one respect, everything is identical upon comparison to everything else. 
Yet viewed in a different respect, it is not identical upon comparison to 
anything else, but is ever different as seen in that respect. Just so is di-
versity to be apprehended. But even if it should now be demonstrated to 
the understanding that the two sides of the matter are inseparable, the 
understanding will still always separate them into identity and diver-
sity. The understanding makes its appeal empirically. The claim is then 
that we directly see the matter at hand, that we run our fingers over it, 
and that we accordingly pronounce it to be merely diverse. But this em-
piricist pronouncement by the understanding is simply false. Gold has 
its specific weight and is yellow and is glittering, and so forth. Gold thus 
comes to be falsely separated [into its self-identity and diversity]. 
So the further law of thought, beyond the law of abstract identity, is: 
"Everything is diverse [or discernible from everything else]." This is a 
famous law of Leibniz's. Yet it is a matter of complete indifference 
whether [by comparison] we ever find a second sense object exactly like 
a first or not. An object's [Gegenstand] indiscernibility from some other 
object is a determination completely external to the object itself. It 
makes no difference to an object whether it is exactly like some other 
object or not. The matter is wholly without interest. It may be wondered 
how this law could have awakened the interest of a Leibniz. Yet for 
Leibniz the law did not have this sense of mere externality [based on 
empirical comparison and contrast]. The intended sense for him was 
rather the thing's [intrinsic] character of being different from any other 
thing [Ding]. The thing's determinateness belongs to the thing itself. 
The difference between things does not. according to Leibniz, lie merely 
in external comparison, but lies in each thing's own determinateness, 
the determinate difference lying within the thing itself. 
(§ll8) If one now speaks of similarity [Gleichheit]. one means the 
identity [Identitat] of two things [in some respect]. Yet what I have im-
mediately before me [empirically] are various things that are not identi-
cal in any essential respect. The determination of dissimilarity [in some 
respect] is inseparable from that of similarity [in some other respect]. 
(The triangle as such is completely determined [in its essence] as soon 
as its three points are determined.) Similarity [in one respect] is such 

Lectures on Logic (140-141) 
136 
that it is at once entails dissimilarity [in another respect]. Just so does 
dissimilarity between things lie in a similar reference of dissimilar 
things to one another. Such common reference of things to one another 
is quite generally their identity, the fact of their being one. Thus similar-
ity [in some respect] lights up dissimilarity [in other respects], and re-
ciprocally dissimilarity lights up similarity. The two do not fall outside 
each other. That is upon itself the essential difference between similar-
ity and dissimilarity. It is the essential difference consisting in the fact 
that the similarity and dissimilarity in question are inseparable. So 
there we have similarity in some respect and dissimilarity in other re-
spects, both belonging to the essential difference between the two. 
So we have upon itself the difference to which similarity and dis-
similarity both belong. If we take this difference as it is upon itself, it 
is posited with the determination that similarity in one respect has 
being only with reference to dissimilarity in another respect. Here we 
designate similarity in one respect as the positive, and dissimilarity in 
another respect as the negative [§ 119]. 6 The positive and negative carry 
the sense that the one has being merely with the determination of not 
being what the other is. By this opposition the negative is not what it 
is without the positive. The one is not what the other is. We thus arrive 
at opposition [between things inseparably positive and negative, essen-
tial and inessential]. 
Previously we set up the [Leibnizian]law of thought: "Everything is 
essentially different [from everything else]." We now assert "Every-
thing is something opposite [to something else],· whkh is yet another law 
of thought. These two laws contradict each other. The first [Schellin-
gian]law of thought with which we began was that everything is merely 
identical with itself. The second [Leibnizian]law says that everything is 
diverse [or self-differentiating]. The third law is now "Everything is the 
opposite [of something else]." The first law is "Everything is merely 
identical with itself." But, as an opposite, everything bears reference to 
something else, and so [by the third law] is not identical with itself. It 
refers to something else.7 
This law [of "opposition"] is known as the law of the excluded mid-
dle: A is to be either positive or negative, either +A or -A. It is said that 
there is no third possibility. But insofar as we say this and yet wish to 
make any assertion at all, we have already stated the opposite of what 
we intended. If A is either +A or -A, a third [middle term] arises which 
6. Thus the three-sidedness of a triangle belongs to its positive abstract essence 
while the length of the lines is opposed to its three-sidedness as a negative, ines-
sential aspect of the triangle's positive essence. 
7. Thus a triangle is not merely a three-sided, closed, plane two-dimensional 
figure, but is such only in opposition to the inessential property of having lines of 
a certain length. 

Essence (141-142) 
137 
is the indifferent A, which is neither merely positive (+A) nor merely 
negative (-A), which is as much +A as -A. This third [middle term] is 
A taken generally. A that is neither merely +A nor merely -A. I express 
this middle term in the law [of opposition] by positing A generally, but 
then by positing it alternately both as + and as -. It must be said that 
nothing can be found that is not [at bottom] a third [or middle term]. 
Truth lies only in the third term: + and - are differences, but neither is 
fixed. They each have being only in their reference to the other. This is 
the third [or middle term]: what is neither/nor as much as it is both/ 
and. What we have here is indifferently the one as much as the other. 
Yet it has been said in Schelling's philosophy that the absolute is marked 
by mere indifference, without any such alternation. 
But even for Schelling it surely makes a difference whether I have six 
thalers in assets or six thalers of debt. If I owe them they are a minus with 
respect to my assets, but those same thalers are in the plus column as the 
assets of others. Yet that in no way affects the six thalers for themselves. 
We bring forward "contradictory concepts" such as being both blue and 
not blue. Blue and yellow, on the other hand, are contraries, not contra-
dietaries. The contradictory is merely non-blue, mere negation, no matter 
what calor the other thing has. The universal. color, lies at the foundation 
of [different opposed colors]. The law according to which "Everything 
has one of any two predicates opposed [as contradictories]" passes as the 
greatest wisdom. Yet, to take another example, if we take spirit [as sub-
ject] and white [as one of two contradictory predicates]. such a law to-
tally fails us. For spirit is neither white nor non-white. 
Opposite predicates become contradictory predicates when they are 
thought of as belonging to one and the same thing; we then end up say-
ing of something that it is both round and non-round. If one says that 
something is round, it is [not] non-round. That is what correctly follows 
if we suppose that it is round. Yet geometricians suppose a circle to be a 
straight-lined polygon, [so that] its curve is viewed as straight [i.e., quite 
inconsistently as not curved]. 8 But being a circle is [a thought determina-
tion of the understanding,] not a concept. The line [of a circle, despite 
its representation by geometricians,] is indeed merely curved, not 
straight. That is the one fixed determination [of a circle]. 
8. Hegel is saying that being curved and straight are opposites, that opposites 
are mutually exclusiw, and that mutually exclusive predicates attributed to the 
same thing yield a contradiction. Being curved is not being straight, being straight 
is not being curved, so that something that is both curved and straight is inconsis-
tently both curved and not curved. He may be taken to mean that the possibility 
of self-contradiction can be derived from opposites because it is always at least 
possible to attribute opposites to the same thing. Note that this is not to derive the 
truth of any contradictory assertion, but only the possibility of such a false 
assertion. 

Lectures on Logic (142-143) 
138 
Within the self-concept matters proceed differently [from the logic of 
the essence of being]. God is as much the middle point as the periphery, 
but we say this of God [with seeming contradiction] when we base our-
selves solely on the sensory image9 which God calls to mind. In the sen-
sory realm things as contradictory opposites fall outside one another in 
different things. But God is everywhere, present in all life, and yet is at 
once the middle point. Here, in the logic of the essence of being, this de-
termination of being a middle point remains finite and goes its separate 
way from the way followed in the logic of the self-concept. 
(§120) Something is this insofar as it is not that. As long as we re-
tain its opposition in mind, the one expressly excludes the other. It is 
not what the other is. It is not supposed to be taken as the one along 
with being at once the other. To be sure what is in fact expressed is the 
unity of both opposites. But we shall have to inquire [in the logic of 
the self-concept] as to whether this form of the unity of contradicto-
ries is what such unity should in fact be. Something is what it is only 
insofar as it is not something else. The other thing thus in fact belongs 
to the first. For, again, the first is what it is insofar as it is not the other. 
Saying this, we directly need the other [if we are to have the first]. 
Polarity, magnetic polarity, is currently a widespread representation 
in physics that has now been carried over into chemism. It amounts to 
an important advance insofar as what lies therein is opposition and not 
mere diversity. One does not merely say that things are diverse, but also 
that each is what it is only insofar as it is not the other. That is what op-
position means: the North Pole is the opposite of the South Pole. As 
mere regions of the heavens they are not opposed to each other. But as 
soon as we say "polarity" we represent to ourselves the fact that the one 
is what it is insofar as it is not what the other is. To have the quality of 
the one I need the opposed quality of the other. We have here nothing 
but the identity of both. 
If we think away the North Pole, north and south poles still exist on 
our magnet, and there they are to be sure still opposed. The acid is what 
it is insofar as it is not bound [neutralized] with the base. And yet the 
North Pole does not exist without the South Pole. The two are insepara-
ble. The one is what it is only insofar as it is not the other. The acid is acid 
only insofar as it is not alkaline. If I have hold of what acid is for itself, it 
to be sure harbors an impulse toward its base. An acid that is not bound 
with the base, that is totally waterless, is but a pure opposite, a smoking 
acid full of unrest until it neutralizes itself. It eats away at its other. An 
opposite is what it is insofar as it is not that other, which is also to say in-
9. Representation pictures opposite contradictory predicates, attributing them 
to spatially separate things. Conceptually God is the middle point through being 
the periphery, not to its exclusion. 

Essence (143-144) 
139 
sofar as it is its other. The North Pole has its other in the South Pole, and 
that leads to a true view of what, upon itself, its other is. 
A human being differs from a tree, or from the air. Yet air is also an 
opposite. Indeed, from one side of our nature as living beings, air is 
even our very own other. A human being cannot be without air, and 
so we are always struggling to get our next breath. Such, generally, is 
the life process. In hunger a human being is also directed to his or her 
other, to food. Food is not merely something else in general. but is a 
human being's opposite. A human being can posit the other only as 
identical with him- or herself. Such is the inseparability of opposites. 
Their inseparability is nothing other than their reference to their oth-
ers, which is nothing else than their identity. If we take opposition be-
tween two things merely by itself it is not true opposition, since unity 
also belongs to them. To say what one opposite is I need its other. In 
opposition I have both the thing and its other. 
Now let us determine both opposites more closely. Each is similar to 
the other, since each is similarly in opposition to its other. In this they 
are in no way different, but this similarity belongs to [the realm of] 
comparison. Yet if I am to give the opposites different determinations, 
the one is positive, the affirmative [term] that bears reference to itself, 
while the other is negative and with that opposes what is positive, lies in 
opposition to its other which is positive. If we consider each opposite 
merely for itself, it is positive. Yet what is positive is not supposed to be 
negative, and in this lies its reference to its other. Taking now the nega-
tive, it is the negative ofsomething, ofthe positive, and with that we 
have an expression of its reference to its other. With that we have the 
negative itself and its other. 
If we take the negative in its being for itself. in its being within it-
self, it is the very negative of itself; it refers negatively to itself-which 
means that it raises itself up beyond itself into something else. The 
negative as it refers to itself is nothing other than unity, nothing other 
than the affirmative. The negative raises itself up beyond itself. it re-
fers to itself, and with that we have identity. Putting it otherwise, if we 
say of opposites that one is positive and the other negative, both fall 
under what is opposite. The positive is the affirmative, what is self-
identical. One of the two opposites is thus identity. We can in no way 
escape this fact, however we take the matter. The essential difference 
is the self-reference of difference, and, with that, this difference itself 
contains identity, even while one of its two members is also identity. 
Such is the dialectic of essential difference [as contrasted to inessen-
tial diversity]. The positive and the negative are each the same activity 
of each raising itself up beyond itself. The positive is posited as not being 
the negative, but therein at once lies its reference to something other 
than itself. With that the positive is the contrary of itself, since [by the 

Lectures on Logic (144-145) 
140 
law of mere abstract identity] it ought to be merely self-referential[, 
merely positive]. The negative is self-referential as negative, and with 
that there is identity in what is negative. Yet both the negative and the 
positive fall to the ground, and are themselves the very unrest of this 
fall. An acid and alkali consist in negating each other, thus becoming 
neutral. But the North Pole and South Pole remain opposed, which is 
their imperfection as opposites. The chemical process shows this to be 
true of the opposition of the two poles. The opposites in their very being 
for themselves each fall to the ground. In chemical processes the nega-
tive side is the first to be cast in relief. But the ground [into which the 
negative side falls] is affirmative [§120]. To this ground we must hold 
fast-the ground into which the opposition of the negative and the af-
firmative returns, with opposition raised up beyond itself. Opposites 
collapse in upon themselves, as [did being and nothing] in becoming. 
II.A.a.y. Ground 
(§121) The ground is the [abstract] essence of being as that essence 
comes to be posited in its totality. We talk of getting to the bottom 
[ Grund] of matters, i.e., going into their very essence. Yet this ground 
is no dry essence, nor is it essence as [mere self-]identity. Rather, the 
essence of matters is a self-identity that at once includes something 
still different from this very self-identity. The ground [of a matter] is 
different from the matter itself. What is essential [as ground], insofar 
as it has been repelled from itself as essence, is what is existent. Ground 
is self-identical but is also different from itself. The ground, so-to-
speak the ground floor, is first self-identical. The ground of a house is 
something firm and fixed. It is no mere abstraction; it is not something 
that is not. On the contrary, the ground floor at once holds up the 
whole house. The house arises from this ground, in differentiation 
from it and in opposition to it. 
This thought determination of the ground is contained in our usual 
representations. The house is something insofar as it is not its ground. It 
is the other of its ground. In the thought-determination of a ground all 
the determinations of essence are present, the totality of [abstract] es-
sence. Identity and difference, identity and non-identity, positive and 
negative-having all been posited they all now raise themselves up be-
yond themselves. The difference between the two terms in each of these 
pairs comes to be lost, and with that the totality of the determination of 
identity is posited, but this identity is within itself at once repulsion. The 
ground is the totality of the [abstract] essence of being as that essence 
now shows forth. This essence as it shows forth is self-identical, while at 
once giving a show of having its opposite within itself. 
The law of thought according to which #Everything has its [sufficient] 
ground" has been put forth like the others we have considered. This law 

Essence (145-146) 
141 
again contradicts the prior Jaw [of abstract identity] by which "Some-
thing is what it is, A is merely identical to A." If one thing has a ground, 
this thing bears reference to still something else as its ground, to some-
thing which, over against what is grounded, is the essence [of whatever 
is grounded]. Leibniz placed great importance on the law of the sufficient 
ground. The term "sufficient" at first appears superfluous, since a ground 
that is not sufficient simply cannot ground anything. Yet the distinction 
has been made between final causes and efficient causes. Final causes are 
purposes. If, in apprehending life, I say that certain means of nutrition, 
digestion, and so on, belong to it-these means are the efficient causes of 
life, which are in reality its external causes. Yet to consider a living being 
as it is for itself is to consider it as [embodying] purpose, and when life is 
considered in this manner purpose is its sufficient ground. Air and the 
means of nutrition are necessary, but life is still something else than these 
things. Life comes to be determinate and active as purpose. Its own pur-
posive activity is the sufficient ground of itself. 10 
The ground [as the abstract essence of what is grounded] is essen-
tially identical with whatever is grounded by it. Yet what is grounded is 
repelled [from its own ground], which is essential over against what is 
grounded. The ground [as distinct from something existent which it 
grounds] is thus something formal[, i.e., a formal cause]. The ground is 
what is essential insofar as it is form. The ground is not yet the self-con-
cept, which is the whole totality and is not merely [like the ground] a 
single moment of it. The ground [as the formal cause] is the good. It will 
be said that the ground, taken in this way is totally indeterminate. Ev-
erything is good, which only means that everything bears reference to 
itself, has being for self. We can point out a good ground for everything, 
no matter how bad it is. 
If someone is a thief, the theft can have the very good ground of 
feeding the family. [Under one determination] the action is that of 
taking property into one's possession. This action surely has this as-
pect of keeping body and soul together, and it must be admitted that 
the content of this motive is essential [and good]. The intention, the 
ground, is good, and so it is said that the action is perfectly justified. 
The good ground takes from a multi-faceted action a single facet and 
makes it essential, but that facet is then taken [merely] for itself. The 
action is reduced to this single simple determination, which is pre-
cisely its essentiality. But the action taken according to its self-concept 
10. If the category of ground is expressed as the deterministic principle that 
every occurrence has a sufficient external explanatory ground for it being thus 
and not otherwise, the principle fails because each individual occurrence exists 
beyond its general grounding conditions unless the occurrence's existence itself is 
included in its sufficient ground. 

Lectures on Logic (146-147) 
142 
is something else again. When we grasp the action conceptually, we 
do not abstract and isolate merely one side of the matter. The self-con-
cept determines what the action by its very nature is, and over against 
this nature of the action whatever is other than it does not come in for 
consideration. Some things have [beyond their internal conceptual 
nature] an external nature. They accordingly have different external 
sides to them, and each such side is susceptible to being made into the 
main side, the thing's ground. The ground can thus always mean 
something good. A ground can either have or not have a given conse-
quence [ Folge ]. But for a ground to be effective [and thus to be the 
sufficient ground of an outer action that follows as its consequence,] 
my own [free act of] will [directed at this consequence] is necessary. 
What has being not only upon itself but at once for itself gives validity 
to itself in the world [by being carried out by an act of will]. 
(§122) The essence first shows forth within itself. It is mediation 
within itself. As ground it is the totality of all mediation. This totality 
first has being for itself, but it repels something away from it-it grounds 
something. What is grounded is simply there, it has immediacy [beyond 
its mediation by the ground]. A ground thus betokens at once the re-
turn of being. The ground is the collapse of all mediation merely within 
itself [in sich]. What is posited by the ground is something immediate. 
The ground is still what is reflected within itself. It is at once the simple 
reference of itself to itself, but only insofar as it mediates [what is 
grounded]. What is mediated by the ground[, i.e., what is grounded,] is 
mediation raised up beyond itself into immediacy. The determination of 
immediacy is thus posited along with that of ground. 
What is posited [beyond its ground] is the existence of the consequence 
of the ground. It is generally asserted that, in doing one's duty, one must 
not think of the consequences of doing so. Duty for duty's sake is thus 
formally or universally good, but only formally. An action posits some-
thing in existence. Existence itself is inner inasmuch as it comes from 
an inner [ground]. What the action itself is develops and reveals itself in 
its external existence. The correctness of every action, of every inten-
tion, is manifested in its [external] existence. The action gives itself out 
to be known in its consequences. Insofar as I act, I posit my purpose in 
its [external] immediacy, in its being simply there. Yet contained within 
it is a reference of my purpose to something [unintended, something] 
which is other than itself. Something else comes into play here that has 
not been posited by me. These further consequences do not lie within 
my action. The action finds its development in the consequences, and 
then something else comes on top of the intended consequences that 
does not lie within my action. It is a question of the very content of the 
action, and what follows otherwise does not belong to it. The next cate-
gory is existence. 

Essence (148-149) 
143 
II.A.b. Existence 
Here the nature of the ground is given. If I inquire into the ground of 
something, I want to see within this ground the very matter at issue, I 
want to see imprinted upon this matter what is essential to it, what is 
present there in the form of its own self-identity. Existence also contains 
within itself a determination of identity with itself. But it at once contains 
a determination of difference from itself, of showing up something other 
than itself-both reflection within itself and within something else. 
As existing everything is being, is immediacy, but is such by raising 
the mediation of the ground up into immediacy. What exists has being, 
but something other than it at once shines forth within it. Here is a world 
ofreciprocal dependence [§123]. Everything is ground and everything is at 
once grounded. The other imposes its rights. Existents are grounds, but 
are at once also grounded. Such, in general. is the world of relations. 
(§124) Anything that is something has being, but at once shines 
forth within something else. Its reference to something else belongs to 
it itself. Taken as a ground, something is reflected within itself. Any-
thing that is something is itself the totality of these two determinations 
of being reflected within itself and of shining forth within something 
else. The two determinations both belong to whatever exists. Such an 
existent is, through its reflection within something else, at once re-
flected within itself. And with that they make up a whole which now is 
itself posited as ground. 
II.A.c. The Thing 
Whatever exists is called a thing [§ 124]. A thing is something existent, 
hence something with immediate being. But it is more than immediate 
being, since it is also abstract in being interconnected with thought. An 
existent thing, beyond its immediacy, has being as something that is 
thought. Imprinted upon the thing is thought, thought in the form of 
reflection within itself. That a thing is abstract is seen even from chil-
dren, who give the name of "thing" to everything they cannot specifi-
cally determine. Moreover, no one can point out a thing to anyone [as 
distinct from pointing out its immediate being or properties] -and this 
argues for the abstractness of things. 
An existing thing is first taken up as reflected within itself, not yet as 
exhibiting its external reflection within another thing. For its reflection 
within another thing, indeed within other things, would make it a 
manifold rather than a single thing. A thing subsists with being for it-
self, and upon every thing lies the show of the whole essence of being. 
For every thing is self-identical, and lying upon it are all the determina-
tions of reflection. A thing bears imprinted upon itself difference. its re-
flection within something else. There are at once many diverse things. 
But their diversity is not only their diversity over against one another. 

Lectures on Logic (149-150) 
144 
Each thing also itself exhibits a diversity upon itself. The diversity of a 
thing within itself diverse, we call the diversity of the properties of the 
thing [§125]. Diversity lies upon the thing, but this diversity of its prop-
erties is the thing as reflected within something else, within other 
things. This reflection of a thing within something else at first differs 
from its reflection within itself. To reflections of something within 
something else [in the logic of being] belong certain diverse ways of 
being determinate which are now [in the logic of essence] called proper-
ties of a thing, insofar as we have now distinguished the thing within it-
self from its properties. For we distinguish between the thing within it-
self and its [immediate] qualities. The properties of a thing are reflections 
of diverse things as they lie upon the initial thing taken as something 
other than them, upon the thing as the ground that bears these very 
properties. 
Within something [in the logic of being,] being and being determi-
nate are not separated. Being determinate ranges as widely as being it-
self ranges. But in the logic of the essence, being a thing as reflected 
within itself is to be set apart from its determinations or properties. The 
properties things have imply a relation of things having their properties. 
Being and having are both essential categories. [Grammatically] they 
are temporal participles, but [logically] they are determinations of the 
category of ground, [a category of essence]. Compare "I am sick" and "I 
have a sickness." If I say "I am sick," I assert an identity between myself 
and sickness. But if I say "I have a sickness," the property sickness is dif-
ferentiated from me, separated out. In "I am sick" my being lies in 
"[being] sick." But if I say "I have a sickness" the persisting subsistence 
of the property sickness has entered externally into the thing, into me. 
A thing in its development lays out on all sides a contradiction for us 
to see. It is the development of show, but this show is no longer held 
within essence [as it is abstractly within itself]. The thing is existent, it 
is immediate. But in a thing the determinations of the show gain sub-
sistence in their differentiation from one another. The field in which 
these determinations have their being is that of the thing. The determi-
nations give forth contradictions on all sides. A thing has properties that 
are different from it. These properties make up the thing's reflection 
within other things. Yet the thing and its properties are not separated. 
The thing's reflection within something else is equally reflection within 
itself, since the thing refers to itself in its reference to what is different 
from it. 
The thing's properties themselves characterize grounds or rather 
"matters" [Materien] in the plural [§126].1 1 A thing has properties, and 
11. "To have" may mean either to exemplify or to contain. The noun Eigen· 
schaften is translated as "properties" understood as universal determinations 

Essence (149-150) 
145 
these properties themselves mark such material beings. A thing con-
sists of [portions of] different matters. For example, a thing has color. 
That a thing has a scent can also be extracted from it. The property 
subsists for itself on its own as a matter with a scent, or as a magnetic 
or electrical matter. Thus we take a thing as consisting of [portions of] 
different matters. 12 If we bring the different matters together [in a 
single primary matter], to be sure we no longer have a thing, which 
will now be totally compressed in that matter. The thing is the bearer 
of its properties. But these properties themselves subsist [indepen-
dently of any thing]. The thing is the external connection of the mat-
ters [received into it as properties], and hence something superficial. 
It is the matter that subsists. 
(§ 127) [Primary] matter makes up what truly subsists in the thing. 
But no one can point out this matter to anyone else [any more than 
one can point out a thing]. This matter as such is indeterminate, while 
there are many [determinate] matters. We do not call these matters 
"things," for a thing is a unity reflected within itself which at once has 
a manifold of properties. A matter is, by contrast, simple, not a syn-
thetic unity of many determinations [ Bestimmtheiten]. Still, a matter 
may be generally described as a thing insofar as it is somewhere out 
there. By a [determinate] matter one understands being, immediacy, 
reflection within another-but so that such reflection within another 
is taken up in a completely abstract fashion. There are various [deter-
minate] matters, but [primary] matter as the immediate unity of exis-
tence is indifferent over against the diversity of determinate proper-
ties. Such matter is merely, self-referentially subsistent or existent. 
( § 128) Reflection as set identically in reference to itself, lying upon 
itself without diversity, is the one matter. Diversity altogether falls 
outside this matter, and the great swarm of determinations lying out-
side of this matter are called "form." The thing converts into the inde-
pendent subsistence of its properties, and the properties as themselves 
subsisting are the determinate matters. These matters are at first di-
verse, but [primary] matter is the One of existence reflected within it-
self. It is indifferent towards the thing's determinations. Difference is 
also present, but it lies outside such matter. 
A thing falls apart into matter and form. Materialism asserts that ev-
which the thing is thought "to have" in the sense of exemplifying them. But to 
refer to the universal determination of being water as a thing's property is then 
also to refer to the element or matter which more directly exemplifies that prop-
erty. A living organism exemplifies the property of being watery, but another way 
of saying this is to say that, since the organism "has" water in the second sense of 
containing it, the organism has (contains) a portion of a material element which 
has (exemplifies) the property of being water. 
12. Thus a soup may have vegetable matter in it. 

Lectures on Logic (150-151) 
146 
erything is merely matter. Primary matter in its being for itself is said 
[by Aristotle] to be eternal. Self-identical subsistence is without differ-
entiation. Alteration [or change] has thus been withdrawn from such 
matter. Yet this matter has a capacity for form, and is molded into its 
form. But form also has being for itself. Generally, it has determinate-
ness, the totality of all determinateness, the whole of difference in its 
being for itself, difference in its reference to [primary] matter. Form we 
allow [with Aristotle] to be externally added to matter. God is the pro-
cess of giving things their form, the demiurge or fashioner of worlds. 
But matter and form [for Aristotle] are not what they ought to be. 
Indeed they are here, upon themselves, the very opposite of what they 
ought to be. Matter merely for itself ought to be indeterminate exis-
tence, though with that it indeed does contain existence. Yet matter [in 
its existence] ought to be out there before our gaze. It ought to be pres-
ent before our very eyes. If matter were completely simple [as primary 
matter], it would be mere self-identity. It would contain nothing but 
what is also contained in the I. But matter is not completely simple, but 
ought to be an existing matter which is yet identical with itself. For mat-
ter to have a potentiality to be something or other, a capability, means 
that it is itself a determinate potentiality, that it has being as such and 
such a potentiality. The fact that matter upon itself exists implies that it 
bears upon itself the imprint of being for something other that itself. 
Form thus appears upon matter: as existence, matter has this relation 
[Relation] to its other, i.e., to form. Form in its being for itself is the total-
ity of form, infinity, infinite activity. Form at rest is one among forms, 
but all forms ought to lie outside of [primary] matter. So, as the totality, 
form for itself bears reference to itself. Yet this self-reference of form is 
the same self-reference as is found in primary matter. From whence 
does the creativity of form derive? It derives from itself. So form has, 
imprinted upon itself, the very same moment [of mere self-reference] 
that is said to make up the distinctive character of primary matter. In 
themselves matter and form are identical, unseparated and inseparable. 
Such is the thing in the upshot of its logical development. 
(§130) Each thing ought to have its form, which is responsible for 
what the thing determinately is through its properties. But the thing 
also has matter in it. Matter ought to be nothing more than having 
properties; it ought not subsist merely for itself. Through its mere form, 
matter comes to be reduced to having properties. But [determinate] 
matters are what subsist, while the thing does not subsist. A thing [as 
self-subsistent] is self-contradictoryY It is said in physics that things 
13. A thing is contradictory because it is referred to under the contradictory deter-
minations of both subsisting walled off in itself as singular- and being a composite of 
matters receiving various properties from other things. Thus the glimmering of the 

Essence (151-152) 
147 
consist in diverse matters. Metals have warmth, shininess, clang-we 
may call metal matter with a ring to it. Metal also contains within it-
self magnetic and electric matter. 
If I take up the thing in this way and cut it into tiny parts, all the 
parts that I find in it are [portions of] determinate matters. But how is 
this to be understood? It is said that materials subsist independently in 
given places. But the precise place where one material subsists is not the 
exact place where the other subsists. The non-subsistence of a material 
thus comes to be called Npores," holes where that matter is not. Every 
material is scattered, each being stuck inside others. There we have our 
explanation. Without a doubt pores do occur in skin and in plants. But 
in stone and metal pores are a mere invention of the understanding. 
What is in fact present here is the moment of the negation of indepen-
dent matters by one another. Within a thing different matters cease to 
be self-subsistent. 
The thing in itself is now the unity of matter and form. Being in it-
self is now no longer at hand. Matter is now itself only one moment of 
form. But this unity of the thing as both matter and form is at once its 
falling apart into subsistent [matters], and these matters are at once 
distinguished from one another, but again lack subsistence for them-
selves. Thinghood[, succumbing to the circle of its contradictions,] 
thus now converts itself into appearance [§131]. 
II.B. Appearance 
The abstract essence [of being] must necessarily outwardly appear. The 
very identity of this abstract essence passes over into an existence exter-
nal to it, into immediacy. Existence [in contrast to being] consists pre-
cisely in having its essence [concretely] within itself. But existence falls 
apart into many existents, which, however, bear reference to one an-
other, and which again pass over into the moment of [their distinguish· 
ing] forms. This is the process of appearance. Diverse existents have 
being, but they are catapulted into being mere forms, with their [essen-
tial] being contained merely within themselves. The essence [of what 
exists] does not now lie way over on the other side of what appears. That 
essence lies within what exists, in that its existence is the appearance of 
its own essence. Appearance is a matter of the essence itself, and the es-
lake is a property received from the light of the moon. It is consistent with what 
Hegel says about the thing to suppose that it does not really exist under contradictory 
determinations. But our reference to a thing under such determinations may. be in· 
tersubjectively shared in everyday thought, and at least in this sense the thing might 
be an objective contradiction. 

Lectures on Logic (152-153) 
148 
sence must appear. There is an important principle here. For what has 
being [as essence] is now only inwardly a one-sided abstraction. The es-
sence outwardly has its being in its appearance, and brings existence to 
the point of the appearance of what is essential. In appearance three 
stages now arise: I. the world of appearance, 2. form and content, and 3. 
correlation. 
[II.B.a.] The World of Appearance 
In existing, what exists subsists only as one of the moments of form 
[§ 132]. A human being has his or her own purposes, is independent, but 
he or she is equally but one formal moment within [the world of] his or 
her overall purposeful activity. The world of appearance is the explica-
tion of appearance itself. But, within this world·of appearance, a differ-
ence is cast in relief between M form" in a further sense and M content." We 
have already beheld in the above the difference between form and matter. 
but now we come upon a distinction of form and content. The world of ap-
pearance is one of mutual externality between appearances, since their 
forms are diverse. The world contains existent appearances. These mutu-
ally external existents make up a totality, and are contained within their 
mutual reference in the world of appearance. Whatever appears within 
this determination of self-reference between appearances will now still 
prove to be the entire explication of any limited appearance. 
[II.B.b. Form and Content] 
In the first place[, in taking up the distinction between form and con-
tent,] consider form as content [§133]. Consider the content of a book. 
Such a content is a developed material that bears, imprinted upon itself, 
its own form. But the content of a book is also something quite simple. 
Any content that lacked form would thereby lack content. Thus an [es-
sential] form is lodged within any [essential] content, within its deter-
mination as the whole. Within the content, its form is the whole content 
as taken up in its simplicity, and the whole content quite simply resides 
within that form. 
We distinguish from the just-mentioned essential form that is one with 
the content of the book, a still further form that lies outside this content, 
outside what is essential to the book. This second form is the inessential 
form-in the case of a book, the print, the paper.14 But the essential con-
tent of the book is given out as the whole law governing its [limited] ap-
pearance. The two determinations of essential content and its [limited] 
14. Essential form and content have previously been identified. Now inessen-
tial forms-print, paper, cover, binding-are identified with essential content. 
Such inessential forms are demoted to mere appearance. The essence is in the 
accidents. 

Essence (153-154) 
149 
appearance belong in their inseparable unity to each law governing such 
appearance. To cite another example [of a law that governs appearance), 
punishment is inseparable from crime, an action whose content is in it-
self null and void. The punishment is only the exposition of the very nul-
lity of the criminal action-the punishment annuls the action. 
We attain determinate knowledge of the world by bringing it under 
the system of law. These laws do not linger in the background as if the 
appearances themselves were lawless, but rather the law is right out 
there in those appearances themselves. The form of law contains self-
reference, but it also contains reference to what is other than it. Form is 
therefore twice present, [once essentially and once inessentially] . In fi-
nite things, external [or empirical] form is diverse. But every inessen-
tial externality in the orbits of the planets is identical with the inner law 
of such orbits. To know the world of appearances as the system of its 
laws is important, even though to know that system is not yet to grasp 
the world conceptually [as in the third branch of the science of logic]. 
One and the same whole is both content and form. 
[II.B.c. Correlation] 
Our distinction between inner [or essential] and external [or inessen-
tial] form construes content as inner form. It encompasses the con-
tent, not within external existences, but within true existents. The 
content comes to be posited as the developed, essential form. Each of 
these two determinations, the content and developed form, embraces 
the same One. The content of both[, first as undeveloped and then as 
developed,] is the same, so that the distinction between them is only 
superficial. and such a superficial distinction we shall call a ucorrela-
tion" [§134] .15 The undeveloped content and its formal development 
each pass as independent of each other, but they are likewise posited 
as both being mere determinations of form itself. The three particular 
correlations are those of the whole and its parts, force and its expres-
sion, and the inner and the outer. 
[1.] The whole and its parts 
[§135] The whole has a certain content. The parts are the same as 
the whole. The whole is spoken of as referring to itself, while the parts 
are referred to as broken up outside of one another. If I take away one 
15. Self-identity first appeared without difference, and upon reflection we were 
then led to think difference. The correlation of identity and difference was thus 
uncovered, but not immediately posited in positing identity. What Hegel calls a 
correlation is a correlation in which the two terms, e.g., the whole and the part, 
come pair-wise, so that to think the one is immediately to think the other. The 
relation of the whole to the part is eo-posited simultaneously with the relation of . 
the part to the whole. 

Lectures on Logic (154-155) 
150 
part, the whole remains. But when the parts pass as independent in 
this way, they lose the determination of being parts, since parts are 
parts only as parts of the whole. But again, the parts and the whole are 
thus one and the same. So at first the whole is independent. Yet if I 
have no parts, I have no whole. And if I take the whole away I have no 
parts. Such is the contradiction in the correlations of whole and part 
[taken as both independent and at once dependent]. The whole ought 
to be independent [of its parts]. but without parts it is nothing. 
Moreover, the parts are parts only in their reference to one another, 
and only in their reference to all the parts taken together, which is 
[the good category of] the whole. The bad category of the whole and 
parts occurs where the parts lie in merely external. mechanical[, non-
organic] connection. What is defective in this correlation is that ev-
erything is represented as having an [independent] being for itself, 
even while the whole has no sense without the parts. Each side essen-
tially contains reference to the other. The parts, being outside of one 
another, essentially bear reference to what [as the whole] is self-iden-
tical [as they also bear' reference to one another]. 
[2. Force and its expression] 
When[, as in the correlation of whole and parts,] everything is so 
posited as to have the determination to which it is destined only within 
something else, we arrive at the correlation of force and its expression 
[§136]. Force is the entire content, which comes to the fore in appear-
ance, in the expression of the force. The content [or essential form] is 
the law of the force, and the law appears only in being reflected within 
the force [taken along with its apparent expressions]. No matter how 
the force is determined, we behold its determination within its ex-
pression. Both the force and its expression have the same content, but 
force falls within the form of self-reference, simple reference of self to 
self. Force is simple-it is what is inner. Hence, force has the same de-
termination as the whole, and its expressions, which lie outside one 
another as external parts, likewise have the same determination. 
Force, we say, consists in positing itself outwardly as its expression. 
The parts come forward as each having a being for itself. But we have 
seen that they do not in fact have being for themselves. The whole 
consists in positing itself as being under the determination of parts 
outside of one another. Thus the force, in its self-reference [merely as 
force and not as expression]. is something one-sided that must neces-
sarily express itself. But the expression of the inner force is itself only 
one side of the total form of the force. 
The expression passes merely for what is posited, while the force passes 
for what is independent. Yet this is by no means the case. Rather, the force 
has being only insofar as it expresses itself. The inner force passes for 

Essence (155-156) 
151 
what subsists, and the expression at once appears as what is merely pos-
ited, as what essentially bears reference to the inner force as its other. But 
this inner force consists precisely in raising its one-sidedness up beyond 
itself. Force as a whole is force only through the fact of expressing itself. 
Each side is itself the whole. A force itself is the expressing of itself, and 
the expression is already posited as mediated by its reference to the inner 
force as its other. Thus only one and the same content is present within 
the different determinations of force and expression, just as is the case 
within the [determinations of the] whole and the parts. 
We must show experimentally what a force is. The content of the 
force is the same as the content of [sensory] appearance. Conversely, we 
feign to derive appearances from the inner force. What this means is 
that we have in fact so arranged the content of the inner force as to con-
form to its appearances. We make matters easy for ourselves by intro-
ducing into the inner force what we already have in the appearances. 
But to truly grasp something conceptually is to lift it up out of any false 
opposition [of a force and its expression]. What is true in the apprehen-
sion [Erfassen] of force [in the physical sciences] is that we have lifted 
out of the appearances what is essential. what remains self-identical in 
those very appearances. The opposition of force and its expression is a 
pure fiction of the understanding. When we intuit electricity in the 
particular circumstances belonging to its expression, we strip away 
what is accidental [to electricity in those circumstances) and hold onto 
what is essential. to electricity in its very simplicity. I reduce electricity 
to the simple determination of what it is. It was, in particular, Newton 
who introduced the reflective determination of force [withdrawn into 
itself, e.g., gravity,) into natural scientific research. Yet the sensory ap-
pearances themselves are, in their determinateness, the sole content of 
any such force. 
(§136, Note) Force is finite. It is Herder in his text God, an edifice of 
Spinozistic representations, who principally speaks of Nforce."16 Force is 
finite, and so is at once finite in its content. Force within itself is the es-
sential content in one-sided form, but so that this one-sidedness comes to 
be negated through the expression of force. But the force comes to be laid 
out as if it were independent, with a being for itself. A force expresses it-
self, but this expression transpires as if it were something accidental to 
the force itself, as if the force could sleep without ever gaining expression. 
The determination of expression is not yet immediate in the inner force; 
the force must be solicited [by something else, by another force] in order 
to express itself, and without such solicitation its expression is not yet im-
manent in it. This is what makes a force finite. It is dependent on an other. 
16. Johann Gottfried Herder, God. Some Conversations (Indianapolis: Bobbs-
Merrill. 2002). 

Lectures on Logic (156-157) 
152 
It comes to be solicited by an other. But the soliciting other must itself be 
solicited to do its soliciting, and so on [to infinity]. 
Mathematicians [in contrast to Newton) protest that the metaphysics 
of force does not concern them. They want only to observe the expres-
sion of force. But if they do only that, they do not make use of [the de-
termination of] force [withdrawn within itself] at all, since for them the 
entire content of the force is present solely in its expression. For them, 
the force is thus completely known by its apparent content. The form of 
force is left alone by itself, and this form is that very content of the force 
posited merely in reference to itself. What resides within the force in 
this its form is something entirely known. This form is that of the force's 
reflection solely within itself. To be sure, the content of any given force 
is finite. And since the content of a given force is finite, it contains inti-
mations of its dependence on something beyond that force[, i.e., on an-
other force within itself soliciting the expression of the first force]. We 
have intimations of a force such as magnetism or electricity as coming 
in its content from something beyond it that remains still unknown to 
us. What remains of scientific interest is the systematization of this fi-
nite content with its reference to something else. 
It is important to see that isolated forces lack independent being for 
themselves. The greatest of incongruities occurs when one takes the 
mental forces [or faculties] -fantasy, sensation, etc.-to each have 
being for itself. To proceed in this way is, conceptually, completely 
empty and barren of thought. For spirit is absolutely one. 
[§137] A force is a force only in its expression. It is the negation of its 
one-sidedness. The expression of the force is the mediation by which the 
force as force acquires its being. In fact the force returns to itself in its ex-
pression. In its expression the force is all it is ever to be. In the expression 
of force any distinction between the force and its expression, which have 
both passed as independent, raises itself up beyond itself. And with that 
the correlation between force and its expression is reduced to the correla-
tion of the inner and outer, where the identity of both is now simultane-
ously posited. Force and its expression are not independent, but each is 
only a formally distinct determination of the other. 
Force and expression are one in content. The [inner] form of force is 
purely external and meaningless. The expression of a force is a clarifica-
tion of the form of force, of its unclarified being merely for itself; it is a 
clarification of the form of force as something initially meaningless, 
something purely null and void. Thus the identity [of the unclarified 
form of force and its expressed clarification] is [implicitly] present 
within that very form. But that inner form of force also comes to be dif-
ferentiated into [external] formal determinations which[, being due to 
other soliciting forces as mentioned above,) are not themselves essential 
to that inner form. The force's [outer sensory] determinations of form 

Essence (157) 
153 
are thus posited as a merely defective expression of it. The inner form is 
the ground, but in such a manner that this ground is posited in the 
merely empty form of reflection within itself [§138]. Just so is its exter-
nal reflection within whatever is other than it reduced to another empty 
determination. But the content of what is merely inner lies, so to speak, 
in its drive to become non-defective external expression of itself. For 
this content posits the form of reflection within itself at once as its re-
flection within what is other than itself, as befits the content of what-
ever is merely innerY 
{3. The inner and the outer} 
(§139) What is external[, crowning the success of the inner force in 
its drive to become outer and thus abolish itself as force,] now has the 
same content as what is inner. 18 There is now nothing within the ab-
stract essence of immediate being that is not outwardly manifest. There 
is great truth in this perfect oneness of the inner and the outer. A human 
being, what he or she is, his or her character, how he or she has worked 
him- or herself out to be what he or she now is-all that is inner, but all 
that is now perfectly external. A human being thus lays him- or herself 
out in an external exposition of him- or herself. All the actions of a 
human being make up the totality of his or her acts-and that totality is 
what that human being is. That this is so is noticed should a human 
being ever wish to hide him- or herself in his or her totality. The few 
cases in which one can [seemingly] succeed in hiding oneself, do not in 
the end turn out to be real cases of concealing the totality of what one 
is.19 What God [is, as the inner,] is now revealed in the outer world. 20 
What a people is comes to be revealed in its existence, in its customs, in 
its acts, in its constitution. In pragmatic, psychological history writing it 
will be said that a human being who has accomplished great deeds has 
17. This is to say that force as merely inner, solicited to imperfectly express it-
self by another soliciting force, is driven to attain perfect expression in an inner 
content which is no longer merely inner, but which is an inner content fully and 
perfectly expressed in what is outer. 
18. Thus the complete set of causal laws of nature is the inner stable intelligible 
image of the entire range of unstable external appearances. The same content is 
compressed· inwardly in the laws of nature and expressed outwardly in the sen-
sory phenomena. 
19. A possible interpretation of this is that, in choosing to conceal part of one-
self, one still reveals all of oneself precisely in trying to reveal only part of 
oneself. 
20. If we may assume that God as the inner is alone perfectly revealed in the 
external world, a person or nation is perfectly revealed in the external world only 
if that person or nation partakes of God and is thus taken to be fully revealed only 
in the entire external world including all other persons and nations. 

Lectures on Logic (157-158) 
154 
such and such [hidden] weaknesses and passions. It is a common saying 
that no one is a hero for his valet. Nothing could be truer. The service of 
revealing such weaknesses is the one often rendered by pragmatic writ-
ers of history. But this service has its source in the envy expressed when 
such an historian proceeds to bring another person down to a plane of 
equality with him- or herself. 
It is said that large effects can follow from the slightest of causes. 
Yet what is not already present within minute causes can never 
emerge out of them. True, a great event has an inner dimension. But 
nothing inner exists within nature comparable to what is inner 
within spirit. Within nature, everything is directly out there in the 
open-it is all directly given. To grasp something conceptually is, to 
be sure, not to grasp it stuck in the externality of its forms. Such ex-
ternality is separated off by the [abstracting] understanding. Nature 
itself exhibits no such separation of externals by the understanding. 
As human beings we are capable [by the understanding] of abstract-
ing [external forms] and of remaining stuck in a one-sided manner of 
proceeding. 
The inner and the outer are, to be sure, opposites as formal deter-
minations. The inner merely as such is only inner, and the outer is at 
once only outer. Whoever holds fast to abstraction merely of the inner 
at once already falls into externality. These are the two categories now 
in question. They are to be sure formally separated from each other, 
differentiated, except that each within itself has the same content as 
the other [§140]. A human being has reason as his natural impetus 
[Anlage], but at first reason is only something inner, while reason as it 
unfolds in customs and laws is still, at that early point in his or her de-
velopment, something external to him or her. Thus the rationality [of 
custom] still assumes the form of externality for such an individual. 
Nature has the idea imprinted upon itself. But if we do not yet know 
the idea, it is first present only as a purely inner concept within na-
ture. A human being is endowed with an impetus to give him- or her-
self form. For a child, its parents are reason itself. But such under-
standability perceived in its parents is, for the child, still something 
external to it. Further on, customary lawful regulations become rather 
something inner for the growing child. Rationality is something inner 
only for the person for whom it is also still something outer. Children 
strive to grow up, and so have, already imprinted by themselves upon 
their own selves, intimations of being grown up. They come to be in 
fact grown up when adulthood is not only upon themselves but also 
within themselves. What is [still] inner, imprinted upon the child, 
possesses an impulse to become outer or external. The determination 
to which whatever is inner is destined is a determination to pass over 
into what is external. It is this [activity of] making oneself external 

Essence (158-159) 
155 
that makes possible the eventual positing of the oneness of the outer 
and the inner. 
Empty abstractions come to raise themselves concretely up beyond 
themselves into one another. What is inner[, e.g., the system of causal 
laws,] is translucently only outer [as the totality of phenomena], and 
what is outer is only inner. Or, to put it otherwise, these very abstrac-
tions of the inner and the outer from each other disappear. The instinct 
of reason is precisely for such abstractions to disappear. This identity of 
these formal abstractions of inner and outer is actuality [§ 141]. Actual-
ity is the identity of [outer] existence with [inner] content. The differ-
ence between the inner and the outer is absolutely raised up beyond it-
self into actuality-the inner is raised up into the outer, and the outer 
into the inner. In the correlation of the whole and the parts we have 
seen that the whole becomes determinate only in the parts. The whole 
bears necessary reference to the parts, and equally the parts to the 
whole. In the inner and the outer we have opposites that are emptied of 
any opposition, and the impetus toward the disappearance of opposites 
is an impetus toward the disappearance of each opposite. This impetus 
is already certain of realizing itself. It has only to work itself out. The 
form of mere inwardness is imperfect, defective. The certainty of this 
impetus regarding its self-realization is the total determination by which 
both the determination of the inner and that of the outer coincide in the 
same content. 
ILC. Actuality 
What is essential now fully lies within its appearance. Appearance is 
no longer burdened [as mere appearance] with the opposition of exis-
tence and essence. Rather, existence itself is immediately the essence. 
We have here the third position within the logic of the essence of im-
mediate being as a whole [following the ground of existence as the 
first position and the concrete appearance of essence as the second 
position]. We have now beheld the logic of the abstract essence of 
being within its own development. The abstract essence of immediate 
being must appear. The essence lies upon appearance itself once the 
opposition within essence between the [abstract] essence and exis-
tence ceases. What we then have is actuality [or efficacy, Wirklich-
keit-the efficacious process of real possibility actualizing itself-
§142].21 The entire [outer] content of the essence is identical with its 
21. Note that actuality is the universal process of the essence of being, of its es-
sential potentiality actualizing itself throughout the diversity of all existents. For 
Aristotle an Olympic prize winner actualizes a single human being's physical po-

Lectures on Logic (159) 
156 
[inner] form. The opposition between essence and external existence 
has raised itself up into a purely empty distinction of mere form. Ac-
tuality is the oneness of essence and existence.22 It contains the deter-
minations of essence and existence within itself, and is their content. 
But actuality when developed is, as we shall see, necessity [i.e., the pro-
cess of necessitation] . 23 
( § 14 3) Actuality contains the determinations of inner and outer, both 
the form of reflection within itself and the form of reflection within the 
other. Actuality is immediate only by raising any oppositions [of essence 
and existence, force and its expression, whole and parts, or inner and 
outer] up beyond themselves. These opposed terms, lying within this dif-
ference of inner and outer, are thus posited upon actuality itself [where 
they are raised up beyond themselves] into the process of efficacy. This dif-
ference will still be posited within actuality, but the moments of this dif-
ference are each the same whole of actuality [as an efficacious process]. 
Actuality, efficacy, at first lies within merely one of two formally distinct 
determinations, namely, merely within the form of being an essence, i.e., 
the form of self-reference, reflection within itself. Thus it is first of all pos-
sibility that comes to be inscribed upon whatever is actual. 
So we first say that whatever is actual must be possible. It will also 
be said that what is [logically] possible is whatever does not contradict 
itself. The form of being an essence is thus reduced to something logi-
cally possible or non-contradictory. What is merely inner is only logi-
tential. For Hegel all existence appears to actualize the entire essence of immedi· 
ate being. "Actuality" as a universal process singles out (Hegel says "defines") the 
absolute. It seems to follow that, since there is nothing outside the absolute corn· 
parable to other substances that actualize the potential of a given Aristotelian 
substance, the absolute is self-actualizing. It gives itself actualization; its actual-
ization is so to speak freely self-creative or rather spontaneously emergent in 
•activity." 
22. In an Aristotelian vein, actuality is outer existence as the actualization of 
an essential inner potentiality. The identity of the inner and the outer which pre-
ceded actuality in Hegel's exposition was a tranquil identity in which the inner 
(the law) and the outer (the phenomena) were each transparent in the other. Ac· 
tuality is, by contrast, their dynamic identity. It is the process of actualizing the 
inner in the outer. The inner translates itself into the outer realm, and the outer 
realm then translates itself into a new real inner possibility or potentiality for the 
actualization. The process of actuality is the alternation between a momentarily 
stable outer actualization of one real possibility and the crumbling of that actual· 
ization, which withdraws into its potentiality for some further actuality. 
23. Since actuality is a universal process, necessity as actuality is also such a pro· 
cess: the process of necessitation. This necessity is not logical necessity, since it can be 
the surprising actualization of real possibilities that are not logically necessitated by 
prior conditions. This seems to be because, beyond prior conditions, the actualization 
of a possibility is itself one of the actualization's necessary conditions. 

Essence (159-160) 
157 
cally possible. Yet such possibility is a one-sided form of the inner. 
Such possibility is indeed one general category [within the efficacious 
process of actuality]. It is especially in philosophy and history that we 
must do away with such mere logical possibility, which is only the ab-
straction of self-reference. Whatever is concrete is upon itself set in 
opposition to itself, so that everything is contradictory, everything is 
impossible. But everything remains logically possible if I merely con-
sider its simple reflection on itself [and not its concrete reflection 
within anything else]. 
Yet all such talk of mere logical possibility is quite trivial. Everything 
must be taken in interconnection with something else. What has valid-
ity in philosophy is not what simply can be, but what must necessarily be. 
In historiography we must grant validity to whatever is simply there as 
reported [without its being necessary]. As soon as we say of something 
actual that it is only logically possible, we at once recognize that we are 
dealing with a one-sided, defective form of the thing. Within whatever 
is actual, non-contradictory identity with itself is present, but it is pres-
ent only as a single aspect [of an actual whole process], and is thus con-
sidered to be by itself something untrue. 
[Moments of Actuality as an Efficacious Process: Contingency and 
Mere Possibility versus the Real Possibility, Pre-Conditions, and 
Necessity of a Matter at Hand] 
In §144 of the Encyclopaedia we find that the other of what is reflected 
merely within itself is logically possible. We find reflection of oneself 
within what is other than oneself, within mere external actuality. Thus 
the determination of whatever immediately is, we say, is inessential actu-
ality.24 This inessential, accidental actuality, standing over against essen-
tial actuality, we call contingency. What is [abstractly] essential, under-
stood only as logically possible, is in truth inessential. Such an [abstract] 
essence is as inessential as can be. But whatever is actual but only con-
tingent is also only logically possible. Contingency here is actuality that 
merely has the value of logical possibility attached to it. But what is con-
tingent, merely as such, is something that either can be or cannot be. 25 
24. Thus what is reflected within something external to itself is reflected 
within an actual entity (or "actuality," as Hegel says, privileging reference to uni-
versals) that is not essential to it. 
25. Hegel has just said that what is contingent is something merely possible. He 
now admits that what is contingent (non-necessary) either can or cannot be ac-
tuaL is either possible or impossible. A married bachelor, being contradictory or 
impossible, is not necessary, and so is contingent. So, when he said that what is 
contingent is something merely possible, he may be taken to mean that what is 
referred to as merely contingent without being further designated as either actu-
ally existent or impossible is merely possible for us. 

Lectures on Logic (160-161) 
158 
We have here the thought determinations that together make up ac-
tuality [as the efficacious identity of essence and existence, inner and 
outer: contingency, mere logical possibility, impossibility; and real pos-
sibility, necessity as necessitation ]. Whether something is logically pos-
sible or not depends on its content [§145]. Possibility and contingency 
both depend on the content in question. But it may further be said, in 
view of its content, that something harbors a real possibility, where a real 
possibility is understood as its necessity [i.e., its necessitation by prior 
conditions]. Whatever is really possible is both actual and necessary. If 
we explicate the point at which we have now arrived [through the de-
termination of real possibility], we have arrived at the category of being 
a condition [of what is necessitated-§146]. Whatever is [abstractly or 
logically] possible or contingent is merely posited. When we view things 
as external to one another, what is external to something else is [ines-
sentially] actual. It is merely something posited. In other words, it is 
posited, but because it also is, it is at once something immediately given 
[and thus not something merely posited]. Its being merely posited by us 
is thus raised up beyond itself into its immediacy: its being merely pos-
ited bears reference to what is other than being merely posited, i.e., to 
the mediation of what is posited by the immediacy of its being. In that I 
take what is contingent as something purely posited but at once say "It 
is; I raise its being merely posited, i.e., its being merely presupposed [or 
pre-posited], up beyond itself. It is and yet is something posited. It has 
existence; its existence is out there, even while it is only something pos-
ited. It is, but its being is also that of being posited. Insofar as its contin-
gent being is merely posited, its existence is only a possibility and has 
the determination of being raised up beyond itself [as a mere possibility 
into something that is not only posited but is an actual efficacious con-
dition of something else, of a consequence]. In possibility as actual and 
efficacious there lies an other[, a posited consequent]. [Antecedent] 
possibility is thus the possibility and thus a condition of something else. 
But conditions are specific existents that have validity for themselves. 
The existent conditions of a house include stones, beams, funds, which 
are all necessary conditions of the house. These conditions first exist out 
there with a being for themselves, without any regard to the house. 
They are also conditions of many other outcomes than the house. And 
since they also bear reference to something other than the house, as 
conditions merely of this house they are contradictory. 26 
(§147) So necessity contains contradiction[, i.e., contradictory out-
comes of prior conditions each with a being for itself]. It is only as con-
26. This seems to say that conditions at first contain alternative possible out· 
comes, although as matters develop the possible outcomes are narrowed until 
there is but one necessary outcome. 

Essence (161-162) 
159 
taining such contradiction that this [hard] necessity [in contrast to logi-
cal necessity] is to be apprehended. The earlier determinations, those 
that have gone before, thus contain an alternation of contradictions[, i. 
e., contradictory outcomes]. What is [really] possible must be separated 
[by the future] out from these prior conditions understood as what is 
immediately actual. What is immediately actual differs from what is 
possible. The possibility [that becomes real] generally contains some-
thing other than what the immediate actuality has been. Within the 
contingency of immediate actuality there is still something else than 
that actuality, and with such immediate actuality we thus have a condi-
tion [of something else]. If something else is to be [really] possible, its 
[necessary] conditions must all be present. But its conditions are exis-
tents that, in their immediate existence, do not bother themselves with 
anything else to come. Yet something is really possible only by virtue of 
having such conditions. Further, to any real possibility there also be-
longs, beyond its necessary prior conditions, its own content, the matter 
at hand [die Sache] which is not only upon itself but at once for itself de-
terminate. What has been immediately actual is broken up. It has its 
own being, but it contains within itself something different, the [real 
future] possibility. Immediate actuality within itself is thus broken up. 
Consider, for example, political revolution. The [pre-revolutionary] 
present is what is immediately actual. In order for some other state of 
affairs to become present, the conditions of that new state of affairs 
must be present. Thus first the [pre-revolutionary] present is broken up. 
It bears within itself something else. Yet these two determinations-the 
initial conditions and the outcome they contain-are not merely like-
wise broken apart, but rather come together in a unity. The are not only 
upon themselves but for themselves the very fact of the matter, [the 
revolution itself,] the very content for which the initial existents enter 
as mere conditions. Contingency [in the initial conditions] is destined 
to fall away, and the [real] possibility of something else is itself a condi-
tion of itself. This is the mediation in question-the [real] possibility of 
something else. Such is the course of externality in its development. 
and this externality is the real possibility as it runs the course of these 
its own determinations. The course of the mediation as such is the total-
ity. But the course of these diverse determinations is simple in form, re-
flected within itself. Thus reflected within itself, this whole is the con-
tent which is equal to itself. 
[II.C.a. The Matter at Hand] 
This content, then, is the matter at hand. The course [that has been ex-
ternally run through is] reflected within itself [in its inner intelligibil-
ity]. The same [tranquil inner] course recast in its [external] form, as 
the totality of that form, is then disquiet and activity. In its closer de-

Lectures on Logic (162-163) 
160 
termination, the matter at hand is the translation of the inner into the 
outer, and of the outer into the inner. In translating the matter at 
hand as inner into the form of the outer, it is activated, and to this ex-
tent the matter as inner is the ground [of the same matter as outer]. 
The real ground, the matter at hand [as inner]. is raised up beyond it-
self into actuality. Conversely, what is outward, immediate actuality 
comes to be reduced to mere possibility, and to be used up in the mat-
ter [as the unity of the inner and the outer]. The conditions, which are 
external. come to be used up in the matter at hand. This is the com-
plete course, a course that is a circle of courses grasped conceptually 
through and through [as leading] into one another. 
The course of the matter at hand takes its start from what is exter-
nal [Ausserlichkeit]. When all [necessary] conditions are present, that 
matter must become actual. Given those conditions, the matter is a 
real possibility. The complex of conditions, the totality as the com-
pleteness of conditions, the whole-this is real possibility. Insofar as 
these conditions are present, the matter at hand must become actual. 
and the actualization of this fact raises the difference [between inner 
and outer] beyond itself, whereupon the matter comes to be posited in 
its existence, gaining the moment of externality which thus far had 
been missing within it. This course, in which the outer course is over-
turned and hurled into the inner one, in which the outer receives a 
counterblow projecting it back into the inner, is what is meant by Nac-
tivity." This alternation between the inner and outer courses we now 
call "necessity," the actuality lying within what it has posited upon it-
self, within what actuality upon itself is. This we have now seen. Ne-
cessity is defined as the unity of actuality and possibility. On the 
whole, this is correct-necessity is the third [term]. but it is not well 
expressed. Necessity is this very course. What is difficult here is com-
ing to know transition. The transition is a manifold one, but these 
manifold transitions then constitute a single course. 
Just one example. If we represent to ourselves the great revolution 
that occurred with the passage of the Roman Republic over to rule by a 
single individual. that revolution was a necessity. To have insight into 
this necessity means to see what has run its course in that revolution. 
The course of events starts out with the existence of the state of the Re-
public within all its innocence. The Roman Senate held sway over the 
entire civilized world. The Roman Republic thus had its constitution. its 
immense splendor, its power, its wealth, its culture-the whole stood 
there as a glorious empire. That was the immediate state of affairs. But 
this state of affairs came to be reduced to being a mere condition, a state 
of affairs broken up within itself, which contained within itself a totally 
different spirit and called within itself for still another formation. No 
longer did that state of affairs have a hold on actuality. This other. the 

Essence (163-164) 
161 
inner spirit [contained by the established state of affairs in itself] now 
became the matter at hand. The break with the past then comes to be 
seen more closely in the fact that the spirit of the empire was ill-suited 
to the constitution of a republic. Along with that incongruency came a 
disappearance of [republican) patriotism. The general matter at hand 
[in the empire) becomes too large for the actual interest of all individu-
als in the Republic to be excited, and with that self-seeking originates 
within the Republic. These circumstances of the Republic are broken up 
[internally only insofar) as they are destined to be the mere condition 
of another state of affairs. That [other state of affairs) is [a real] possibil-
ity. The whole is the [external] matter at hand reflected within itself. 
The [new] matter at hand could only step forward, it could not be with-
stood, it was now the absolute power. The rich unity of purpose found 
within individuals [in the Roman Republic] could not withstand the 
rupture. Power no longer resides within the single individual. 
Th~ greatest of statesmen contain this rupture within themselves. 
What is powerful and active is rather the whole, the matter at hand. Yet 
within the matter at hand there lives an activating subject. There must 
be an [individual] subject who has an intimation of the coming rup-
ture. Individuals like Caesar have felt this rupture coming and have 
gained definite knowledge of it. One who knows the outer conditions to 
be null and void, something destined to fall by the wayside (like the 
German Empire with its determination frozen in time), becomes the 
executive agent of the matter at hand. Individuals within whom there 
is consciousness of the matter, who know what the times call for, are 
agents of the matter at hand. They place themselves at the forefront be-
cause they know and feel the matter itself, and the nullity of the forma-
tion in which that matter is still enveloped. Heroes are those who make 
the new matter at hand their own personal matter. The preceding exis-
tence falls, and is reduced to being mere material used in the new for-
mation. What previously was only a condition for a new formation is 
now material serving that very formation. Here is the course, the condi-
tion, the possibility of something else, of the new matter at hand, this 
very matter in the form of its activation. Particular individuals are al-
ways required to translate what is outer into what is inner, and to posit 
what is inner in its being externally out there. If we want to come to 
know this translation of the inner into the outer, such knowledge is 
called the contemplation of something in its necessity, and to such con-
templation the very course of the matter belongs. 
[II.C.b. The Moments of Necessity) 
(§148) The moments [of necessity] are now to be set apart from one 
another more exactly. These moments are the three moments of con-
dition, the matter itself, and activity. 

Lectures on Logic (164-165) 
162 
[1.] Conditions 
At its outset, a condition enjoys immediate being for itself. It is a 
merely accidental, external state of affairs destined to fall by the way-
side. As something purely posited, a condition is a condition only rela-
tive to the matter at hand [of which it is posited to be a condition]. In 
this state of affairs, the matter at hand exists [implicitly] as the contrary 
of what it will be [explicitly]. When the totality of conditions is present, 
the matter at hand must come to be. To apprehend the [present] state of 
affairs correctly means to apprehend all that is presently at hand, [all] 
the conditions. These conditions come to be utilized as material, and so 
they enter into the content of the [new] matter at hand. The content of 
the matter at hand is already present in its conditions. 
[2.] The matter at hand 
The matter at hand [such as a political revolution] is at first some-
thing merely inner and purely possible. Yet such a matter has an inde-
pendent content with a being for itself. It is this content that holds 
truth. It is by its utilization of its conditions that the matter at hand re-
ceives external existence. There are states of affairs in the world where 
all is [apparently] in order, but where something else suddenly breaks 
out, and the entire state of affairs is overturned. Yet that state of af-
fairs will never be overturned if nothing smolders underneath it, if the 
state of affairs does not already contain within itself some quite other 
matter at hand. But there is a certain illusion of heedless insouciance 
that consists in limiting one's attention to only the immediate present. 
The matter at hand then strides forth from out of its conditions. 
3. The activity [of a matter at hand actualizing itself] 
Activity has being for itself. A man, a character, [e.g., Napoleon,] 
places himself at the head, existing for himself. The content which 
makes him a power to be reckoned with lies in the conditions that are 
present, along with the fact that he himself makes the matter at hand 
into the very content of his activity. The matter gathers unto itself its 
own individuals. They will not be lacking. No individual is capable of 
doing anything against the matter at hand. The individual is capable of 
something only by placing him- or herself on the side ofthe [ascendant] 
matter at hand. The activity finds its content only in that matter. 
The activity is thus the movement of translating the conditions of 
the matter at hand into that matter itself, into the affirmation of the 
matter insofar as it enjoys a being that is simply out there as present. 
By this movement, the [sufficient conditions of the] matter at hand 
lend necessity to the matter itself. What comes out of the movement is 
the matter itself. Whatever emerges with necessity attached to it has a 
certain hardness to it due to the fact that one form of existence, with 

Essence (165-166) 
163 
the form of being something actual. comes to be raised up beyond it-
self into the form of being something else that comes onto the scene as 
equally actual. Something befalls the first actuality that is alien to it, 
and this show of an alien second actuality befalling the first is a rela-
tion of violence [Gewalt] done to the first. Necessity appears as vio-
lence, a loss of freedom. Through something alien to it, the immediate 
actuality is annihilated. Freedom. by contrast, consists in the fact that 
what seems to happen to us from outside is really identical with us. 
For example, in crime and punishment, the punishment appears to 
the criminal to be an alien essence, to be the will of men quite other 
than himself. The law first comes down on the individual. and does vio-
lence to him. Yet in the end it comes to be experienced by the criminal 
as something to which he has a right. The law becomes a determination 
of the criminal's own reason. In being punished the criminal is set free. 
Insofar as the law comes down upon us from the outside, we suffer vio-
lence and so lack freedom in our relation to the law. Yet if, by contrast, 
they have the laws as their very own, they stand in a relation of freedom 
with regard to the law. In the first case a human being behaves as in-
wardly compelled against his will. He owns up to the matter at hand 
only ruefully. Yet if he is conscious of [his oneness with] the matter at 
hand, the law, he behaves within it freely. 
If we consider more closely this transformation in one's relation to 
the law. it is the matter itself that here brings itself to completion. For-
mations that are actual existents over against one another topple one 
another down. But the matter at hand only brings itself forth through 
this transformation in one's relation to the law [so that it is no longer a 
relation of the criminal and the law in opposition to each other]. Neces-
sity upon itself thus contains freedom within itself. This freedom. what-
ever is free, is the self-concept [as examined in the third part of these 
lectures]. The correlations that we are now about to consider explicate 
necessity and raise up the determination of actualities as posited over 
against one another [into the freedom of the self-concept]. 
What the ancients took to be fate may be recalled here. especially 
as it arises in the tragedies belonging the highest level of Greek con-
sciousness. Tragedy lies in the fact that the hero goes under. The cho-
rus always preaches that one must recognize fate and go along with 
the times. But the Greek heroes who go under refuse to surrender 
anything of their character, and rather show themselves to be free in 
the face of their very fate. The freedom of the tragic hero comes down 
to saying "It is so, and because it is so we accept it" [§ 149]. In Sopho-
c!es' Heracles it comes to pass that Heracles says to his son that even 
ungratifying work is gratifying. Freedom, the maintenance of one's 
independence, lies in the fact that one exhibits steadfast serenity. Such 
equanimity refuses to succumb, it allows nothing alien to pass muster 

Lectures on Logic (166-167) 
164 
within itself, but rather solely allows the expression "It is so" to pass. 
Such equanimity is the simple reference which one bears to oneself. It 
is the mediation that raises itself up into the simple being of the matter 
at hand. Spirit takes itself back into this simplicity. It has raised every-
thing up and is unbroken in its being for itself. 
The dissatisfaction of a human being, his unhappiness, lies in the con-
tradiction of suffering a loss because of something done to him [by hard 
necessity]. My greatest unhappiness is due to the contradiction between 
my consciousness of the [current] state of affairs and that to which I have 
my highest right. I have the highest right to something, but suffer the 
highest grievance. This contradiction is quite generally unhappiness. To 
be thus unhappy is to remain sunken in this contradiction. But when a 
human being says "It is so," he has withdrawn into simple equality with 
himself, and into imperturbable freedom. So long as I harbor claims of 
any sort, so long as I hold fixedly to some end, I remain sunken in such a 
contradiction. But if I give up all determinate interests, all ends, all bonds, 
the contradiction is lifted and I ensconce myself in the simple expression 
"It is so." The ancients had no use for consolation. Such strength as theirs 
needs no consolation. The need for consolation is a need for something 
lost, something that one ought have back. Consolation is an expression 
for substitution, the fact that something else is to fall my way [in compen-
sation]. Lying at the basis of consolation, then, is the supposition that I 
have lost what I ought by right to have. [Receiving back the equivalent of 
what is lost-] this for consolation is the highest freedom. But the freedom 
[of the Greek tragic hero] is abstract. Merely succumbing to necessity is 
lower [than the freedom contained in consolation]. Yet we are attracted 
to a human being who maintains his strength of character [in the man-
ner of a Greek tragic hero, accepting what is without needing consola-
tion]. The ancients had no need of consolation for losses. Yet succumbing 
unperturbed to necessity is not higher [than consolation]. but is defi-
cient, since within the ancient world we have the surrender of all ends, 
[the acquiescence in] indeterminate necessary being. Yet this state of 
being bereft of all ends in antiquity still remains within the logic of neces-
sity. For to be subject to necessity is to have hold of the self-concept only 
insofar as the self-concept is merely upon itself. The end here is still the 
self-concept only as it is upon itself. Only when freedom has passed over 
into [its particular] determinations do ends [cease to be merely upon 
themselves and] come to be posited. The alternation of necessity is diffi-
cult, but is of the greatest interest. All the relations of [the logic of] being 
and [the logic] of essence are recapitulated in it. 
[II.C.c. The Forms of Necessity] 
Three forms of necessity are: l. the correlation of substantiality, 2. the 
correlation of causality, and 3. that of reciprocal interaction. 

Essence (167-168) 
165 
[ 1. The correlation of substantiality] 
(§150) The correlation of substantiality we have already explained: it is 
necessity within its immediacy. The substance is what we have already 
been calling "the matter at hand." This matter explicates itself through 
the course which it runs. It explicates itself within the sphere of acciden-
tality, within accidental actual existents. This is what is first posited: the 
substance is immediately actual. What is accidentaL what is internally 
ruptured, then comes to be translated into another actual existent which 
as such is equally necessary. Yet this other is, and with that it is an imme-
diate actual existent. Thus the exchange that occurs in substantiality is 
the same as that which took place before in the matter at hand. This nec-
essary course is substance. Accidentality is also actuality in its immedi-
acy. Substance first takes the form of being accidentally there. 
(§151) The substance is the totality of the accidents. The One is expli-
cated so as to become immediate actuality. The substance is thus absolute 
power, the reduction of actuality to mere immediate actuality. The sub-
stance is the power to reduce actuality, and with that it is negative. Here 
violence finds a home, in that actualities are posited over against one an-
other. Power explicates the form of substance, the form of the conversion 
[of opposed actualities into one another] within necessity. Necessity itself 
is empty of any content. Its content is merely this exchange [of prior ac-
tualities for further ones], this mediation [of actual beings one with the 
other], a mediation that raises itself up beyond itself [into the sheer power 
that prevails over all actualities]. Necessity is only this manifestation of 
power. Hence it is said that necessity is blind, i.e., it is devoid of any deter-
minate content that would make up the absolute end. 
In the Spinozistic system, the absolute is determined as the absolute 
substance, as the One from which the world falls away. This state of 
having fallen out [of the one substance] makes up the world in its ex-
ternality, in its immediacy. Everything actual internally breaks ups, 
and so is only temporary. The breaking of everything actual is the 
power of substance over whatever is actual. It is the explication of 
substance. There is only one substance, which is purely affirmative, 
which remains equal to itself in the exchange of actualities [in their 
rise and breaking up.] All figurations [in the actual world] are deter-
minations, negations, vanishing [entities]. Thought is swept clean of 
all ends. Here is the greatness of Spinoza. The oneness of his substance 
is the fire in which the soul cleanses itself of all particularity. That is 
liberation, but it is only formal freedom. In that Spinoza proceeds to 
the human spirit, he makes emancipation from bondage into his voca-
tion. Bondage lies in human affects [or passions], since by such affects 
we posit ends. Human freedom [from bondage to the passions] lies in 
the love of God. Such freedom is the direction taken by spirit toward 
the one single substance. Everything particular consumes itself. The 

Lectures on Logic (168-169) 
166 
affects make up human bondage [servitus humana] insofar as they are 
what is determining. 
Yet from this determination of substance [as object] the transition 
must be made to the subject in which the human being attains to free-
dom. What is revolting in Spinoza is the determination of his sub-
stance by which human beings are considered only as accidents, as 
beings in which there lies no absolute end upon and for itself. What is 
incoherent in the Spinozistic system shows up in this its content. Di-
vine revelation takes the form of divine [self-]manifestation. This 
manifestation is the world itself. The two forms [or attributes of sub-
stance] are for Spinoza extension (physical) and thinking (spiritual). 
That there are two such forms, extension and thinking, is accepted 
empirically. They are what they are, and are simply come upon. Where 
do these two forms come from? For Spinoza what is determinate is not 
conceptually grasped. But we fail to grasp conceptually how thinking 
and extension should come out of the one substance. 
Everything [coming out of Spinoza's substance] merely goes back 
into it. But what is particular fails to be explicated as the self-move-
ment of the substance itself. Spinoza did not proceed from his sub-
stance on to the correlation of causality [as deduced from the sub-
stance]. The causal correlation lies in something [of the nature of a 
process] which further differentiates the self-referential substance 
from its [eternal] attributes. Substance posits itself merely as undiffer-
entiated, but [in causality] it is nonetheless different from what is thus 
posited, the substance is different from its differentiation [in causal-
ity]. Causality is thus a [self-]differentiation as posited within Spino-
za's substance. So the substance comes to be the cause as the original 
matter at hand, as reflection within itself, as infinite negativity within 
itself. The substance in its determinateness is now one-sided merely as 
cause. In the totality of its form, substance then raises up its one-sid-
edness [as cause] beyond itself, and posits itself in the form of some-
thing further that is merely posited, of something relative. It thus pos-
its itself as effect [Wirkung]. and what is now actual, merely posited [as 
effect], comes from an original cause that [within its effect] is at once 
different from itself. Cause and effect are different only through the 
differentiation that lies [undeduced from the substance] within the 
correlation of substantiality[, i.e., the correlation of substance and its 
accidents]. Causality consists in negating the form of originality [as 
mere cause] in order to posit itself as something relative, something 
that essentially comes to bear reference to its other as effect. 
We first have the representation of a finite cause. A finite cause is 
present wherever the cause comes to meet up with its end in its effect. 
The effect is also a finite actual existent [Wirklichkeit]. It is immediatelY 
determined as finitely actual, as [previously] illustrated by force [Kraft] 

Essence (169-170) 
167 
and its expression. But this cause [unlike a force] does not need to be so-
licited in order to act as a cause. A force was thus at first only inner. The 
cause is the matter at hand, the whole, something actual. We now hold 
in representation two actual existents: cause and effect. The finitude [of 
the cause] consists in the fact that the cause is separated from its effect. 
The cause is thus off to its own side, and is independent. The cause is 
thus blind and mechanical to the extent that it is an actual existent, and 
the same holds for the effect. This finitude of the form [of a cause] is at 
once a finitude of its content. This finitude of such content follows from 
the finitude of the form of causality. Yet we have already beheld the 
identity of form and content. The determination of form [as active] at 
first operates against [the form of] the effect. The content is identical 
with the form only as the [essential] form of what is inner as distin-
guished from itself in the [outwardly] explicated form. 
[2. The correlation of causality] 
( § 15 3) The difference is now posited between two actual existents 
that in point of content are both finite. Yet if we consider the self-con-
cept of each, the cause is cause only insofar as it is at once the effect. The 
cause consists in raising up its one-sidedness beyond itself [into its ef-
fect]. The cause is immediately actual, which is a one-sided determina-
tion. The cause lies in raising its immediacy up beyond itself and in pos-
iting itself as the effect. The effect itself belongs to the self-concept of the 
cause. Only a single such concept is present. The cause, like the effect, 
is only one of the two determinations of form-which make up but one 
being. The cause's being posited belongs to the very concept of the cause. 
According to their concept, cause and effect thus do not fall outside each 
other. It is only in its effect that the cause becomes cause. The cause [in 
being the cause of its effect] is self-caused [causa sui]. Spinoza says that 
God is causa sui. Only in its effect is the cause just such a cause. It is 
within the effect that the cause posits itself as cause. 
The identity of cause and effect in concept is the same identity that 
we find between them in representation. If a stone strikes a man dead, 
the stone and his death first appear to be two separate actual beings. 
But the stone merely in its being for itself is no cause. Only in its effect 
does it become a cause. The stone is a cause insofar as it sets itself in 
motion, while the effect is the fact that through the stone and its mass 
a [further] movement is posited, a jolt [in the dying man] which con-
tradicts the original self-movement [of the stone]. Both before and 
after the impact. the [quantity] of movement remains the same. A law 
of mechanics is at work: the movement that is in both cause and effect 
has [quantitatively] one and the same determination. 
The rain dampens the ground. The rain itself, as water, causes the 
ground to be wet. What we have here, in both cause and affect. is one 

Lectures on Logic ( 170-171) 
168 
water, one and the same thing. This is the identity of the two in point of 
content. We so represent matters to ourselves that the cause comes be-
fore the effect, but in fact the cause has its being only within the effect. 
Time is not the distinguishing factor between cause and effect. Water 
falls to the ground. This falling is the negating of the immediacy, of the 
independence of water [from the damp ground]. This rain is thereby the 
cause which this effect has. Cause and effect are inseparable. 
But the oneness of cause and effect is also marked by their exter-
nality. Here infinite progress enters the picture. The above insepara-
bility of cause and effect is one determination, while their diversity is 
the other. We now have a contradiction. The infinite succession of 
causes and effects merely expresses this contradiction, with its alter-
nation of the two determinations. Given finite causes and effects, the 
same contradiction holds throughout-whatever we determine as 
cause we must also determine as effect. The cause is an effect. The 
cause has again a cause, so it is itself at once an effect. We thus sepa-
rate them, so that the cause has an effect. but on the other hand is an 
effect. We thus have a separation of causes and effects backward or 
forward on into infinity. This infinite progression is only an expres-
sion of the contradiction. 
(§154) If we leave the self-concept of the [infinite] cause off to the 
side and take up what now is to be posited, what we have is the course 
run by cause and effect as each cancels itself in favor of the other. Cause 
and effect differ from each other: the effect is another actual existent 
[Wirklichkeit]. At first the effect is what is posited by the cause, but what 
is posited turns out to be itself an actual existent in its own right. It is an 
actual existent because it attains [self-]reflection within itself. Inas-
much as this is so, being posited by the cause is at once raised up beyond 
itself, so the positing of the effect is really a matter of positing it in ad-
vance, i.e., of presupposing it [Voraussetzen]. The cause in its positing is 
in advance of the actual effect as the original existent from which the 
effect springs. If we separate an effect from its cause, we must at once 
determine the effect to also be a cause in its own right. The effect is 
something posited in advance, and with that the effect is also another 
actual being, another substance to which that effect happens. This fur-
ther substantial cause is passive insofar as the effect of the first cause 
happens to it. acts upon it. But this new cause is [self-]reflected within 
itself. It at once functions as that from which a further effect springs, 
which is the negating of its being posited, of its being an effect. Yet it 
happens to the first cause that it becomes an effect, since only by virtue 
of being an effect is it a [further] cause. The effect, insofar as it is pos-
ited, negates its cause as a cause[. i.e., as positing]. In other words, the 
effect posits its own cause as its own effect. This is what reaction con-
sists in, reciprocal interaction [Wechselwirkung]. 

Essence (171-172) 
169 
[3. The correlation of reciprocal interaction] 
We have now fully explicated the correlation of finite causes and 
effects. The cause is itself substance. Being an effect lies upon that 
same substance, and so the effect is also a cause. This differentiation of 
cause and effect [in their oneness] is necessity in its developed form. 
Our own reflection on necessity [within the science of logic] is that 
both sides, both cause and effect, are the same [§ 155]. Each is cause 
and each posits its own effect within the other. They are both immedi-
ate as cause, and in both cases the other of what is immediate contains 
the effect. They are upon themselves one and the same. 
(§156) The oneness of cause and effect has being for us, but not 
merely for us. Rather, reciprocal interaction [Wechselwirkung] itself 
consists in raising up the difference that underlies the interaction be-
tween them beyond itself into identity. For us, their difference has al-
ready disappeared. Each of the posited determinations is raised up be-
yond itself into the reciprocal interaction of cause and effect. The cause 
within its own effect bears reference to what is a further cause. 
But the other cause is itself a substance, which subsists for itself. In 
that the effect is posited within another substance, the second cause 
persists for itself. This other cause negates having an effect merely pos-
ited upon itself, it negates merely receiving an effect from another cause. 
The second cause reacts against the first cause, and thus cancels its own 
initial determination merely as an effect of the first. It posits the first 
cause as something negated as such, i.e., it posits it not as a cause but as 
the effect of the second substance. It cancels the first cause as cause. But 
the first substance is still cause, and so it negates having the effect of the 
second substance lying upon itself. It thus reacts, and cancels the effect 
upon it of the second cause [in favor of acting as a further cause]. What 
is thus posited within reciprocal interaction is that cause and effect are 
undifferentiated, so that neither substance differs from the other. Re-
ciprocal action thus shows that cause and effect negate not only the dif-
ference between them, but also their difference as actual beings 
[Wirklichkeiten], and their difference as substances as well. In the recip-
rocal interaction between cause and effect, the necessity of the causal 
correlation is now stripped bare, and the nature of necessity becomes 
fully manifest [§ 157]. Given anything that is, it is by the mediation of 
its other. But this mediation raises itself up beyond itself, and the result 
is simply what necessity itself is. And with that the exposition of the de-
velopment of cause and effect is complete. They, cause and effect, at first 
appear as actual beings, but the reference they bear to each other di-
rectly negates their independence as any such beings. 
(§158) What is necessary [Notwendigkeitjl' remains inner. Some-
27. I.e., what is subjected to necessity. 

Lectures on Logic (172-173) 
170 
thing else, something hidden, comes forward as something alien to 
whatever is subjected to necessity. The bond, the connection between 
the two, is hidden. But all mediation has now disappeared. The result 
is that necessity at first is freedom merely upon itself, but is then raised 
up into freedom [not only upon itself but] for itself. What comes to be 
shown is that the independence of the two is merely the show of dis-
tinct independent actual beings. What is brought forward here is the 
same as what was first present [as we considered the matter at hand]. 
Necessity is the mediation, not of diverse substantial actual beings, but 
of the matter at hand with itself. But that is exactly what freedom is. 
Either I obey the law as something alien to me, as something that is not 
mine; or, as I recognize within the law a determination of my own rea-
son, in referring to the law I refer only to myself, I remain with myself [in 
my reference to the law]. That is freedom. It is the self-concept [Begriff1 
that is free. Freedom in general, when taken abstractly, is the abstraction 
of being and remaining by oneself, at home with oneself, even within the 
other. More exactly, the different beings are each totalities, but these to· 
talities are only a showing forth within one substance. The self-concept 
is independent. It is the repelling of a thing from itself, but what is re· 
pelled is identical with what does the repelling, it is a movement of recip-
rocal action by which the first thing remains at home with itself in the 
other. That is the simple determination of the self-concept, in which op-
posed beings are one, so that their substantiality is one and the same. 
(§159) The self-concept is the truth of both being and essence. In the 
logic of the essence there is only show. True, the distinctions within the 
self-concept have their being, but they have only a posited and finally 
negated being. We have now witnessed this show [of the essence of im· 
mediate being] in its development. Everything within the logic of the 
essence has shown itself in the end as a totality, as substance, as the 
original matter, and yet has done so only as an original matter that re· 
pels itself from itself in the form of different actual existents. The simple 
determinations of reflection are compressed into being only one, but 
into being such as one whole. That is freedom, that is the self-concept. 
The self-concept now appears as a result, but it is the truth, which is 
why it is really first rather than last. At first the self-concept lies [hid-
den] upon itself in its immediate form as being. With that comes what 
is external to the self-concept, i.e., being, immediacy. Now we have the 
sheer developmental emergence [of the self-concept]. Its determina· 
tions already fall within one [substance], and in their development they 
show that they belong only to the one [substance]. In the logic of being 
we first had being, then something, then something else. Each of these 
categories had immediate being for itself. In the logic of essence we have 
had a showing forth of each category in another, we have beheld imme· 
diacy with mediation linked to it, but have only witnessed a showing. 

Essence (173-174) 
171 
Every category of essence is, but is such that another category appears 
upon it. The cause is only cause insofar as its mediation by its effect be-
longs to it. Now, in the logic of the self-concept, the two sides are still 
posited as beings, as [distinct) substances, but in such a manner that 
they are in fact but one substance. To be sure, they each have being only 
within the other, and they are the one only insofar as their oneness 
merely lies [hidden] upon each. But they themselves then negate each 
other's [merely posited] independence. The differences are posited to be 
throughout the same, and these differences have meaning only within 
their oneness with the other. The self-concept is the result [of the logics 
of being and essence). The form makes up the differentiation. Being is 
the self-concept merely in its immediacy. 
Being, mere self-identity, is a poor abstraction. That being belongs to 
the self-concept is what is least of all within that self-concept. The self-
concept now shows forth upon itself [as immediate being]. but in such 
a manner that it comes to be certain of itself [in its other). The other of 
the self-concept has its independence, its foundation, only insofar as it 
has the self-concept as its ground. The transition from necessity to free-
dom is the hardest transition of all. The opposition between necessity 
and freedom appears absolute. Nature contains within itself necessity. 
But [through the science of logic) we come to grasp nature and neces-
sity conceptually. We accord to ourselves the freedom to so grasp it. In 
nature things are ever and ever other actual existents, and they destroy 
one another when they collide. But when we grasp nature conceptu-
ally, we know that everything attains to the determination to which it 
is destined within its opposite, and within its opposite it comes together 
only with itself. The show of nature lies in the being of things outside 
one another. Within the sphere of all that exists we found the field of 
necessity. But insofar as we conceptually grasp nature, we are free even 
in our act of bearing reference to nature. Within spirit, the self-concept 
comes to enjoy being for itself. Within nature, spirit merely lies [pos-
ited) upon nature without yet attaining being for itself. Nature as such 
has, to be sure, a bond with us, but it is a bond that is not yet conceptu-
ally grasped by us. In spirit the self-concept exists within its own proper 
form as the self-concept. emancipated from the independence of its dif-
ferences over against one another. 
Subjugation to necessity is the hardest subjugation of all. Within it 
what rules is the relation of violence [Gewalt]. of passing outside one-
self, of self-negation. But to think necessity is to dissolve its hardness, 
and this is emancipation. The abstract emancipation of Indian hermits 
or the heroes of antiquity is no longer in question here. True emanci-
pation is to be and remain by oneself, at home with oneself, in all that 
is different from oneself. Emancipation is the I. the pure self-concept 
itself. A concept of course can be a concept of something or other, of 

Lectures on Logic (174-175) 
172 
something external. But at that point the self-concept is caught up in 
the forms of externality, and is not yet for itself in simple self-refer-
ence. Spirit is free in that it is at home with itself in being at home with 
the I. and there we have the fullest form of freedom. 
The self-concept merely on the level of sensation is love. In love I 
am totally free [in my reference to the other as reference to myself]. 
and yet I am at once immediately [for the other who loves me] a rigid 
singular being [who is loved in all my singular interests]. I am also ca-
pable of withdrawing from this rigid being into the abstraction of my 
self [from all my diverse interests, as the one who loves me does]. I am 
also capable of surrendering all my singular interests [connecting me 
to others and to the world]. But I then again become [for the other 
who loves me]. completely and absolutely, a rigid central point [from 
which all my singular interests radiate]. But in loving I myself leave 
this rigidity of mine behind, and expand my interest to include my re-
lationship to the beloved, who is now for me just as much a rigid cen-
tral point of diverse personal interests as I am for him or her. The sen-
sitivity [of love] is here, in its determinateness, the unity of both 
individuals in their rigidity, who are thus still both distinct indepen-
dent beings [for each other]. Each rediscovers his or her own [surren-
dered] rigid personality in the full rigidly centered personality of the 
beloved. This makes for the feeling of the identity of the two. To be 
sure, there is a contradiction here, since each has given up its rigid 
personality and diverse interests in his or her love for the other. Such 
is the contradiction that is here present on the level of sensation. 
Love is completely speculative. Commonsense is speculative in the 
same way, but in reflection upon itself it forgets its true speculative 
character. In law I assert myself, my personality with all its singular in-
terests. Law is a field in which the difference of persons is held fast in 
their respective rigidities. Within love, within the form of the self-con-
cept, this whole field as found in law has disappeared. Blessedness is the 
actuality of the feeling of being in complete harmony, the feeling of sat-
isfaction and of this peace. The self-concept thus attains to a being that 
is free at once upon itself and for itself [in its being for the other]. 
A "concept" often means nothing more than this or that determina-
tion of thought, some representation or other. If I say "man," that is no 
self-concept. Just as little is "blue" a self-concept. These are not "self-con-
cepts" in the true sense of the term. A self-concept is strictly only what is, 
within itself, concrete, within itself something differentiated, but so that 
the oneness of what is differentiated also has being. The self-concept is 
abstract but is also within itself absolutely concrete. The self-concept 
does not merely have its being in the form of simplicity, but rather in the 
form of being determinate within a differentiation that is at once posited 
as identical with itself. What is one-sided releases the contradiction that 

Essence (175) 
173 
it has engendered. The result is the self-concept, the contradiction's state 
of being released, a state which, however, still retains that contradiction 
[as the moment of difference within the self -concept]. 
We human beings have hold of self-concepts. But only within spirit 
does the self-concept exist as such, only within spirit is it cast into relief 
for itself. For only spirit is free, existing as free within itself. But self-
concepts taken generally are something else; they are not merely this 
freedom of existence which we come to enjoy. Everything, not merely 
self-concepts lodged within our human consciousness, is a self-con-
cept.28 With the category of the self-concept we do not remain stuck in 
our own human subjectivity. The substance of all things, their ground-
all this goes back to this truth of the self-concept. We can say MGod is 
the self-concept." The [concrete] essence of anything is itself its self-
concept. The self-concept is absolute freedom. What is absolute is at 
home with itself in its difference from itself. 
28. For example, a tree is upon itself a self-concept which holds itself within a 
single whole through its trunk, roots, branches, and leaves (cf. §161). But it is not 
self-consciously or for itself a self-concept. A thinking human being is self-con-
sciously a self-concept. And, when the human being thinks the tree as a self-con-
cept, the human being exercises self-consciousness on behalf of the otherwise 
un-self-conscious self-concept of the tree. 


THE SELF-CONCEPT 


3 
The Self-Concept 
(§160) The self-concept is free by virtue of its substantive power of hav-
ing being for itself. It is what is concrete, not by growing together from 
what is by nature externally two, but by being one by its own very na-
ture. It is from the very beginning only one. What is concrete is a total-
ity. It has the form of simplicity, but it is not simple being for itself. Every 
moment in the self-concept is at once the whole, the entire concept. We 
have the whole at the level of its greatest purity as a whole, in its absolute 
infinity, only in God. In everything else, in every other self-concept, 
something else, something different from that self-concept, is also pres-
ent. The highest truth is God. This truth bears the august determination 
of the Trinity. Every one of these three moments is itself the whole. God 
is Father, is Son, and is Spirit. We count them as three, but they are only 
one. Here is the self-concept in its absoluteness, as absolute not only 
upon itself but also for itself. Each of the three moments is the totality 
for itself, and not merely upon itself. 
This divine totality is the one which on the sensory level is love, 
and which in the form of delectation is blessedness, i.e., spirit in its the 
most concrete form. This is how the self-concept must be taken. Spirit 
has hold of the self-concept as such. We find ourselves, here within 
the self-concept as such, on the ground of spirituality, of freedom, of 
the highest universality within which everything else is but a mo-
ment. This universal is not any original matter lying at hand, but is 
rather the universal substance within which everything is merely mo-
mentary. Yet every moment is upon itself the whole. This totality for 
itself, this absolute one, we call "God." Such being for itself as a whole 
is missing in Spinoza's substance, which is merely upon itself the 
177 

Lectures on Logic (177-178) 
178 
whole, which is neither freedom itself nor freedom amid differences in 
any way permitting the differences to be each the whole. 
(§161) Here [in the logic of the self-concept] we no longer have transi-
tions into something else [as in the logic of being]. Nor do we any longer 
have any showing forth within an other [as in the logic of the essence]. We 
no longer have any necessity, any inner conditioning and outer show-
ing forth, but rather only a development within which everything has 
within it the nature of the one as its truth. Within a whole grown tree 
nothing ever comes forth that does not already lie, within the seed, 
upon the seed itself. In the seed, buvan [potentially], is the trunk 
within which the whole tree is contained. The nature of the roots, the 
branches, the determinate bark of this tree, and so on-all that is con-
tained, so to speak, spirit-like within the whole tree. There in the seed 
even the tree is already in the form of the self-concept. Everything else 
is only its further development. Everything is already [in its general or 
universal character) determined beforehand. Whatever comes out of 
the development bears upon itself the imprint of the whole. Everything 
that develops in a plant has the whole nature of the plant imprinted 
upon it, just as every part of any living organism has lying upon it the 
nature of the whole living organism. This, then, is development. 
Subdivisions [of the Logic of the Self-Concept] 
(§162) l. The self-concept as such shines forth within itself so that the 
determinations of its [internal] differences make up its whole. The dif-
ferences are posited as still remaining and contained within the oneness 
of the whole, but merely as shining forth within the self-concept itself. 
This is the subjective or formal concept. 2. Within itself the self-concept 
passes judgment on itself. When we formulate our end we project before 
us our entire plan, but the plan is still something inner, it is still held as 
something subjective, not yet freely released [into the external world]. 
What comes further, then, is for the self-concept to release itself into ob-
jectivity, to give itself the form of immediacy, to posit the being it has 
within itself in its being at once outside itself, so that the moment of differ-
ence also now receives its due. This being outside itself of the self-concept 
is, then, the object, which has being but which nonetheless contains the 
totality of the self-concept. 3. What is immediate [as object) is not in the 
true form of the self-concept. The object itself raises this immediacy up 
beyond itself and brings the self-concept to be for itself within the idea, 
which is the reality of the subjective self-concept together with its objec-
tivity. The idea is a reality that is posited only through the self-concept. 
It has been called the "subject-object." It is commonly thought that logic 
is purely formal, but it also contains content. We have seen how form 

The Self-Concept (178-179) 
179 
catapults itself into content. The idea is all-determining within itself and 
is the substantial truth of everything. Yet the difficulty, to be sure, is to 
get to know the oneness the self-concept within whatever is concrete. 
III.A. The Subjective Self-Concept 
First comes the self-concept in general. the subjective concept, the self-
concept still held within the oneness of the subject. Whatever is objec-
tive lies upon the self-concept only insofar as the self-concept has for-
gotten itself. We will then see that subject and object each catapults itself 
into the other. In the subjective self-concept we have the self-concept as 
such. In judgment, then, we have the self-concept determining itself such 
that its determinations[, e.g., subject and predicate,] are posited as dif-
ferent from each other and yet also as one. The third form assumed by 
the oneness of the self-concept and difference is the syllogism. Here the 
oneness of the differences is posited [in such a manner that] the self-
concept[, unlike the form it takes in judgment,] reaches closure with 
itself. 
III.A.l. The Self-Concept as Such 
Let us now see more precisely what lies within the self-concept. What 
we have are determinations of the self-concept that are no longer as ab-
stract as determinations of reflection [in the logic of the essence]. Rather, 
every moment of the whole self-concept comes to be known as the 
whole itself. The relation of the moments to one another will first come 
to be considered in the logic of judgments. The self-concept is three in 
one, the oneness of three, and among these three it is the one itself, the 
oneness of the other two. The self-concept, proceeding forth out of ne-
cessity, is equality with itself, free equality. Within difference is posited 
self-identity. The self-concept within its reference to itself is [I.] univer-
sality. Universality [within the logic of the self-concept] is the same as 
being [in the logic of being] and identity [in the logic of the essence]. But 
the determination of universality is not as abstract as that of being or 
identity. Being is totally abstract, and the same is true of identity. But 
universality is posited as identity only as falling under the determina-
tion of being oneness with itself [within its other]. 2. [Further, the sub-
jective self-concept in its reference to itself] is particularity, and 3. is sin-
gularity [§163]. 
When we say #the universal." we represent it as including everything 
particular within itself. The universal runs through everything. It does 
not have the particular outside it. but rather contains it within itself. 
What we know of the universal is that it is absolutely prolific, encom-
passing everything within itself. Universality now posits itself for us 

Lectures on Logic (179-180) 
180 
much as identity and being have each posited or determined themselves 
for us. Particularity likewise contains universality within itself. For the 
species includes the genus within itself. But the species also contains 
within itself singularity, individuality. Each also contains the other two 
moments, every moment is posited as inseparable from the other two. 
Whatever is singular can be expressed more exactly as subject. As some-
thing that simply is, the subject falls within the form of immediacy. As a 
more abstract category [than singularity] we found being for itself, the 
one [within the logic of being]. Singularity, as subject, is the concrete 
unity of universality and particularity. This infinity of the singular sub-
ject is reflection within itself as the negation of what is different, so that 
the latter is posited as a purely ideal moment within the singular subject. 
The subject is the negative unity of things differentiated. It is determinate 
not only upon itself but also for itself. The subject is subject insofar as it 
has the two moments of universality and particularity, and that makes 
up the whole concept. The subject [when taken abstractly] is being for it-
selL having determined itself as the simplicity of being. 
Everything is contained in the self-concept. One can thus analyze its 
moments [out of the self-concept itself]. Universality is being. Reflected 
being is identity, i.e., being as the moment of showing forth within dif-
ference, its other, in the logic of essence. The subject is something that 
is, and it is further being for itself, the one. All these categories lie within 
the self-concept. The subject, as being for self, is the negation of mere 
universality and particularity. The subject is something universal and at 
once determinate. These are the simple moments of the self-concept. 
The horse is first an animal. and that is its universality. It then has its 
determinateness, which is particularity-the species horse. But third it 
is this horse, the singular subject. Its particularity steps forth as the spe-
cies of the genus. To grasp something conceptually is to recognize upon 
it this procession from the universal to the particular and from the par-
ticular to the [singular] subject. Its subjectivity emerges as a quite trivial 
determination within the definition of the thing. The subject is simple 
self-reference, something universal [referring at once to itself] as some-
thing particular. It is something complete. The self-concept is absolutely 
concrete [§164]. The moments of the self-concept cannot be held out-
side one another. We speak of the clarity of the concept. But this comes 
to mean nothing more than a representation, such as the representation 
of blue. The self-concept of what is blue is something else again. Fur-
ther, if one speaks of distinctness, one should indicate the criteria of dis-
tinctness. That we are able to take note of [or refer to] something is 
purely subjective. Having an adequate concept of the thing is higher 
[than merely identifying it or referring to it under an abstract determi-
nation]. To lay hold of the thing in the adequacy of its self-concept is to 
lay hold of what we will shortly determine as the idea, in which differ-

The Self-Concept (180-181) 
181 
ences have a being such that all are equal to one another, in which the 
different ways of being determinate [Bestimmtheiten] are each the same 
self-concept. That will be the self-concept in its realization. 
We now come to speak of the distinction between concepts as subor-
dinated and as coordinated. In the self-concept as subordinated or coordi-
nated we have a universal determination. The true representation of 
something, such as animal, is the universal. The particular, such as the 
mammal, consists in concepts subordinated under the universal. In the 
case of coordinate concepts, the particulars lie next to one another on 
the same level, i.e., the different species of the same universal. Thus 
mammals and birds are coordinate. Then still to come are contrary and 
contradictory concepts. These are enumerated empirically. They are ab-
stract thought determinations. Contrary concepts are diverse, while a 
contradictory concept is internally set in opposition to itself. Beyond 
that, we can tick off yea-saying affirmative concepts and nay-saying 
negative concepts[, e.g., not being a mammal]. 
(§165) If we wish to explicate the self-concept further, this is what it 
comes to: singularity first posits its moments as diverse. The singular sub-
ject's negative reference as mere being for itself to itself at that point be-
comes exclusive. The subject posited in its immediacy is exclusive. Yet 
being for itself here is in fact this very subject posited concretely. Strictly 
speaking, if we posit being for itself merely for what it is, it is abstractly 
simple. The moments that belong to being for itself remain, but they lie 
outside the abstract self-concept of mere being for self. In other words, ab-
stract being for itself distinguishes itself from what is other than itself, and 
so it excludes the self-concepts that are in fact held within it. Within mere 
being for self, the subject is thus immediate, it is the identity of the self-
concept with itself in its simple oneness. The abstract determination of 
being belongs to the subject [as the subject of predication], and with that 
it acquires the determination of something that simply is.1 This is a matter 
of distinguishing the subject within the whole concept, and it is from 
such distinguishing that the particularity of the self-concept arises. 
We have first posited the self-concept in general, in its universality. 
Now it is posited in its particularity, which brings us to judgment. The self-
concept is subject, with that comes something particular as well. What is 
originally given [at the present stage of development] is the subject rather 
than cause and effect as before. For the self-concept remains one with it-
self, and what it excludes from itself [as subject] is at once also posited as 
belonging to itself [as predicate]. And with that we have judgment. #The 
rose is red." #Red" is distinguished from "rose," but their oneness is at 
once posited. The rose is what is here distinguished from itself. HJudg-
I. A singular subject by itself becomes a subject of predication in judgment. 
Cassius by himself develops into the Cassius who is judged to be mortal. 

Lectures on Logic (181-183) 
182 
ment" [ Urteil] is a fine word. It will be said that we have a swarm of predi-
cates in our head, and that we attribute them to a subject as if they were 
to be superadded to it from the outside. That would be a matter of colliga-
tion. But judgment is a matter of original division, not of composition-it 
is a matter of the [self-]division of the self-concept. The self-concept [as 
subject] is exclusion, but what is excluded is the entire concept [as pro-
jected outside the subject in the predicate]. 
III.A.2. Judgment 
(§ 166) [In judgment] the self-concept comes to be posited in its particu-
larity. "The human being is rational." The human being is here the sub-
ject. and being rational is the predicate. The predicate has greater gener-
ality than the human. But the distinction between the human being 
and being rational is no sooner made than it is raised up beyond itself 
into the identity of the two. Judgment is not a bringing together of [ex-
ternal] determinations. Rather, the self-concept is one, but posits itself 
under different determinations. 
The judgment [ Urteil] in its abstract form is expressed in the proposi-
tion [Satz] "The singular is the universaL the subject is the predicate." 
Further formal determinations of judgment are: "The singular is partic-
ular" and "The particular is universal." [Introducing determinate con-
tent into the abstract form, we have] "The rose is red." "The rose· ex-
presses the form of singularity, while •red" expresses that of universality. 
Another example is "God is absolute spirit.· • [Being identical with] ab-
solute spirit" is the predicate of God. 
It is said that the content of [the terms of] any judgment does not 
concern the [logical] form of the judgment. But anyone who says this 
[as we shall see] evinces the greatest absence of mind. The under-
standing will at once assert [as a possible further form of judgment]: 
"The singular is not the universal." Yet every judgment [at least implic-
itly] asserts that the singular is not the universal. That this is so the 
simplest of all experience. 
(§167) We usually understand "judgment" only in the subjective 
sense, [i.e., as judged by a thinking subject,] just as we usually also 
understand the "self-concept" in general in the same subjective sense. 
But the judgment is now the matter at hand, the matter itself in its de-
terminateness, the particularization of this matter with its differences 
posited. The creation of the world we also designate as a "judgment." 
To create the world is to effect the most original division [between 
God as subject and the creation of the world as predicated of God]. To 
be God [as creator] is to posit difference. In creation we lay hold of 
thought determinations [predicated of God]. 
Judgment is to be taken in a completely universal manner [without 
being restricted to subjective judgment by a consciously thinking sub-

The Self-Concept (183-184) 
183 
ject]. Everything is a judgment. Everything is a subject that has within 
itself some inner nature, which is its universality. Everything is a one-
ness of what is singular and universal. Every animal as animal is [both 
universal and] at once singular. The human being as such is universal, 
but the human being is at once singular as this human being. The spe-
cies preserves itself, while the individual dies off. Singularity occurs on 
the side of immediacy, and it is what vanishes. Body and soul are sepa-
rable. We can take the body as immediately singular, while the soul is 
what is universal in its being for itself. The two are thus separable, and 
yet are also identical. The vitality of a human being lies precisely in this 
identity. So there is a oneness between them, but also a difference be-
tween the two that every finite being brings with it [as its mortality] in 
the very hour of its birth. With that the human being is condemned to 
be fleeting, since the human being is caught up within an identity in 
which body and soul in their [contingent] identity are at once [contin-
gently] different [§ 168]. 
We represent judgment to ourselves as if, within judgment, we attri-
bute a predicate to an object. For example: "This painting is beautiful." 
Yet it is not I who make the painting beautiful. Rather, it is itself beauti-
ful. The correctness of a judgment either belongs or does not belong to 
it as a subjective judgment. Yet, leaving subjective judgments to the side, 
if an action is bad, the judgment that it is bad is the action's own sub-
stantive being. Gold is metal, but I need not [subjectively] say this of 
gold in order for it to be metal. 
Proceeding from the Latin term propositio for judgment, as also with 
judicium, judgment is the form of universality. Every purely historical 
statement is only a proposition [ein Satz-i.e., without showing any judg-
ment]. "Something happens to something"-that is a proposition, but not 
a judgment. Of a subject something accidental may be said, something 
quite external to that subject. We may say, however awkwardly, that a 
human being is now transitory. But time has no place in true judgment, 
and temporally determined occurrences are likewise doings that remain 
external to the subject-they are not its [internal] predicates. 
(§169) Judgment in its first abstract form lays outside of each other 
the most widely separated determinations, something singular and 
something universal. The singular subject is immediate, it is what is 
concrete. "The rose (which is concrete) is red (which is a universal, 
related [at once to other singular subjects])." The two determinations 
are linguistically connected by the copula "is." The predicate is con-
nected with the subject by "is." In being referred to the subject, the 
predicate ceases to be a merely abstract universal, but now becomes a 
determinate universal within that subject. The predicate is identical 
with the subject, and is thus also itself determinate. Insofar as the 
universal within the subject is determinate, the universal comes to be 

Lectures on Logic (184-185) 
184 
particular. Being determinate thus falls to both subject and predicate, 
and in that respect they are posited as identical with each other. 
This identity [of subject and predicate] must now be distinguished 
from their difference. Their difference is one of form [as subject and 
predicate]. Their identity is thus different from that form by which they 
are distinguished. In contrast to the form of the judgment, the identity 
of the two makes up the content of the judgment. Being determinate first 
falls on the side of the predicate. «Red" is a determinate predicate, but it 
is [implicitly] the entire concept, the entire [singular] oneness of what 
is particular [as red] and what is universal. As such a oneness, what is 
red is the whole concept. Suppose I say «God is most real" or «God is ab-
solute spirit." The predicate gives out the content, and the content, what 
is most real. is God. For "God" [as the subject of predication] is at first 
only a word, but what God is, is expressed by the predicate. Thus the 
habit of attributing logical determinations to God is superfluous. For the 
content, which God himself is, lies within the predicate, and the predi-
cate we already have [prior to judgments of attribution]. 
(§170) We have two sorts of terms: [concrete] subject terms and 
[concrete] predicate terms. If we hold to what is abstract, we do not 
need such concrete names. We could as well say «the singular" and «the 
universal." But, in the progression of judgment, the subject does not re-
main on the level of abstraction as merely singular, and the predicate 
does not remain merely universal. «Subject" and "predicate" are names 
for what is singular and universal, no matter how determinate what is 
singular and what is universal may also be. If we say «The rose is red." 
one term is in the form of universality and the other is in the form of 
particularity, but the subject bears reference to what lies on both sides 
of the copula, not merely to what is on its own side. The subject refers to 
the common content of both sides. 
The subject is generally the whole, tmoKELfl£Vov, the [substratum or] 
foundation, and thus the predicate is not fully independent of it. The 
rose as what is actual is the bearer of redness, as the thing and its prop-
erties where the thing possesses the properties. Thus we say that the 
predicate inheres within the subject. The predicate is a determinate con-
tent within the subject taken as a totality. But the subject as a totality 
has within it a greater number of determinations than merely those ex-
pressed in the cited predicates. Thus the subject is richer, more encom-
passing than any such predicate. That is one side of the matter. 
The other side of the matter is that the predicate is universal in point 
of form. It has the determination of being universal. The universal now 
passes as what is substantive, as subsisting for itself. It is [posited as] the 
identity of the entire concept with itself while remaining indifferent to 
any one singular instance. "Red" is more encompassing than "the rose," 
it goes far beyond the rose as subject. since it is a predicate that also be-

The Self-Concept (185-186) 
185 
longs to many other things besides the rose. The universal now subsumes 
the subject. whereas before the predicate inhered within the subject. In-
herence of the abstract universal within the concrete singular subject 
and subsumption of the singular instance under the self-subsistent uni-
versal concept are the two sides of [subject-predicate] judgment. the 
two ways of viewing it. Finitude falls within this diversity [of the uni-
versal's subsumed instances]. But absolute spirit is the absolute identity 
of subject [as totally concrete, not as abstract or subsumed] and the 
universal predicate [as equally concrete, not as abstract or inherent 
within a larger whole]. 
( § 171) At first both sides, subject and predicate, appear to fall outside 
each other. They are simply different. Each is taken within this differ-
ence as something immediate. The rose is independent of being red, and 
so at times is not red. The existence of the singular subject is entirely in-
different to being red, to this universal. Yet by their concept, subject and 
predicate are identical. The copula expresses this identity, it is the dry 
"is," empty of all content. which upon itself constitutes the identity of 
the two. Identity [of the subject and the predicate] lying implicitly 
merely upon itself must be expressly posited, and the empty "is" then 
comes to be filled with content. That is the further determination of 
judgment. When the "is" comes to be filled with content, we will, as we 
shall see, have the syllogism. 
The self-concept lies at the foundation of all content. Whether some-
thing is true to itself depends on its self-concept. The subject and predi-
cate in their distinction from each other lie upon the face of judgment. 
The further determination of the self-concept falls [beyond the subject] 
on the side of the predicate, which is the universal determination of the 
subject. So the self-concept first assumes the form of universality in the 
predicate. The different determinations assumed by the predicate lay 
out the succession of judgments. l. The first determination of the predi-
cate is the totally sensory universal, i.e., the universal in its immediacy. 
2. Second comes the universal of reflection, of allness. 3. In the third 
place is the universal as genus. 4. And finally, we have the universal as 
the self-concept. We thus have [four] different classes of judgment: l. 
qualitative judgments, 2. reflective judgments, 3. necessary judgments, 
and 4. conceptual judgments. 
When I say of a flower that it is red and they say that it is a plant, 
being a plant is a different sort of universal from being red. If I say 
"This plant is a perennial or annual plant," that is an important point 
about the plant, but it does not yet get at its genus, at the simple nature 
of the thing itself. That plants form a genus is expressed by their sub-
stantive nature. Whether a plant corresponds [in its external exis-
tence] to what it ought be is something further. When I say "good" or 
"bad," I compare what the object ought to be with what it is. The judg-

Lectures on Logic (186-187) 
186 
ment is necessarily nothing but the positing of the self-concept in its 
determinateness. 
{III.A.2.a. Qualitative judgment} 
The first judgment, then, is the immediate qualitative judgment. The 
subject in its universality is immediate, and qualitative, and with that it 
is something sensory. That is the first, positive judgment. What is singu-
lar falls under a universal, and universality generally becomes determi-
nate by being imprinted on something singular. But with that the uni-
versal itself becomes something particular. With respect to qualitative 
judgment, subjective correctness enters-for example, as to whether the 
rose is in fact red or white. There is no truth here. Were I to say "Now is 
daytime," that could be correct but at another time not correct at all 
[§172]. Such correctness or incorrectness is not what is true. The entire 
content here, being immediate, is empirically sensory. 
We distinguish [within the realm of qualitative judgment] positive 
and negative judgments, and then infinite judgment. If we start with the 
positive [qualitative] judgment "The singular is something particular," 
we have immediate singularity and immediate particularity. If I now 
say "The singular is something universal," that, too, may be quite cor-
rect. But if I say "The singular is not something general or universal, but 
rather is something particular," that as well may be correct. Thus we 
also arrive at a negative qualitative judgment. In this case the [qualitative] 
positive judgment is as much negative as it is positive. 
(§173) The infinite qualitative judgment is an ancient type of judg-
ment that comes to us from Aristotle. He calls it an "indeterminate judg-
ment." If I say "All singular individual ... " this singular individual falls 
within reflective judgment [§174]. Take "All men are mortal" or "The 
rose is red"-no further determination yet exists here beyond mortality 
and redness. But with the negation "The singular is not a particular," 
e.g., "The rose is not red," the meaning is that the rose has positively 
some particular color or other, but that its color is not red. Thus I have 
only negated one determinate color, but I have left in place the univer-
sality which here is called "color." In negating "red" I have only negated 
a determinate calor. "The rose is not red." There we have negation, but 
we still have an implicit reference by the subject to some other particu-
lar predicate. 
Reference is still present. Reference merely as such starts off as ab-
stract reference, which is [reference to mere] universality. I have a hold 
in my reference on something purely abstract: "The singular is some-
thing merely universal." But I must now negate that judgment. "The 
singular is something merely particular," which again ends as a positive 
judgment. "The singular is not merely particular" is then once more a 
negative judgment. Universality is already negated. What remains [after 

The Self-Concept (187) 
187 
negating mere universality and mere particularity] is only the singular 
thing's empty reference to itself as identical with itself. #The singular is 
singular" is a judgment of empty identity. But such a judgment as a 
judgment is as nonsensical as the infinite judgment, which is the judg-
ment of the bad infinite. 
More concrete than the positive infinite judgment[, e.g., #Spirit is 
something"] is the negative infinite judgment, the absence of all refer-
ence of the subject to any [determinate] predicate at all. Reference to the 
predicate here remains neither in the form of reference to the subject's 
universal nor particular character, but only in the form of reference to 
the predicate that is required by any negative infinite judgment. What 
remains is only the subject's reference to its predicate by which the predi-
cate corresponds to the subject neither according to the predicate's par-
ticularity nor according to its universal character. An example of such a 
nonsensical [negative infinite] judgment, which nonetheless may be 
quite correct, is "Spirit is not an elephant." What is said here fails to make 
reference to spirit, the subject, whether in the particular or universal 
character of what spirit is. For spirit does not belong to the genus to which 
elephants belong, since it is no animal at all. [We are in effect saying here 
that] spirit is only spirit, in its perfect singularity. As this mere singular 
individual, spirit would be something completely empty, absolutely this 
and only this singular being. Insofar as we hold fast to this result, namely, 
the result that "The singular is the singular: we have the subject as sin-
gular, and it is designated simply as something singular. But the singular 
as singular is still a judgment: it harbors the self-concept within itself, 
and hence bears reference to [singularity as its] universal character. 
III.A.2.f3. Reflective judgment 
Despite the fact that some singular thing is merely something singular, 
it stands connected with something universal, with an external world. 
Everything that exists is relative. As something existent, such a singular 
thing stands within a relation. "Useful, • "dangerous" are such universal 
predicates. The reflection on what is singular falls within its [hypotheti-
cal] interconnection [with something else]. What is singular is useful, 
heavy, dangerous [in the reflected light of similar singular things]. 2 
Consider first the singular [reflective] judgment [§175] according to 
which the singular as singular is something universal. What is singular 
does not flee the self-concept. But the singular is thus raised above its 
2. Reflective judgments of "allness" are commonly called dispositional judg-
ments today. A wolf is dangerous because it is placed in the universal class of all 
wolves, past members of which have actually caused harm, so that we posit a 
dangerousness upon this wolf before any immediately perceived harm. We posit a 
disposition toward causing harm. 

Lectures on Logic (187-188) 
188 
own singularity. Singularity as [such exclusive] singularity is not a true 
determination of anything. We cannot posit ourselves as [exclusively] 
singular. What is singular is thus immediately [posited as] something in 
particular [in the reflected light of what is not singular but universal]. 
What is singular, having become determinate as something in par-
ticular, is found in judgments of "some" [members of a class, the sec-
ond type of reflective judgment]. "Some animals are tame." "Some 
celestial objects move around the sun." Here the negative is also ex-
pressed: "Some animals are not tame." With that the determinateness 
of animals exhibiting tameness is raised up beyond itself. 
The third [type of reflective judgment] is [the judgment of] allness 
[i.e., of all members of a class]. To be merely particular [Partikularitat] is 
to be completely indeterminate, but in such a manner as to bear the im-
print of singularity. Given singular things, what is universal is then 
posited as being identical with [an all-inclusive class of] such beings. 
This universality is allness, the universality of all singular things [in a 
universal class]. Singularity lies at the foundation of such universality, 
and the all, the universal in this sense, falls within the sphere of com-
parison [of members of the class as all similar], within an external com-
position [of singular things by comparative thinking]. What is univer-
sal is posited here as invested with [repeated] singular beings, as identical 
with them all. The "all" makes up a closed circle, which again is some-
thing singular at a higher level, bearing reference to itself alone, exclud-
ing every other singular matter. "All metals are electrical conductors." 
All metals are at once singularly separated off [as a universal class from 
other matters], and what is other than electrical conductors is excluded 
by all metals. Universality, in the sense of such allness, includes within 
itself all singular things [in the class]. But it is also posited as determi-
nate not only upon itself but equally for itself [through its being relative 
to or for other matters], as itself identical with something singular. Uni-
versality, taken in this way as concrete within itself[, e.g., as that which 
is singularly metal,] is substantial universality. 
III.A.2.y. Necessary judgment 
The concrete universal at which we have now arrived, the universal 
as itself singular, is the genus that is clearly distinct from the sort of all-
ness in which universality is merely a matter of a composition [of sin-
gular things]. Being red, being green, and so on is universality as taken 
up in its various outer abstract forms. By contrast, with the genus we 
have the concrete universal. The universal as a determinate genus is 
exclusive [in relation to other determinate generic universals ]. This 
mutual exclusion gives the various species within a single genus their 
specific differences. Each species within a genus is determinate as ex-
clusive of other species. This relation of exclusion enters into the classi-

The Self-Concept (188-189) 
189 
fication of species. The genus in its determinateness grounds the differ-
ences between the species. The genus is necessarily the source of our 
differentiation of its species in their juxtaposition. Here we have arrived 
at the categorical [necessary] judgment [of the genus as divided into its 
species]. Without laying out the species in this way, our account of the 
genus will remain indeterminate. 
The [necessary categorical] judgment MThe elephant is an animal" pos-
its the subject in its generic substance. Just as we saw a transition occur 
[in the logic of the essence] from substance to causality, so now the 
same transition occurs [as a transition from the categorical] to the hy-
pothetical judgment. The genus is upon itself a substantial unity, but a 
substantial unity particularizing itself [into the species], and so it sun-
ders itself into two. The genus itself is its different species as they hang 
together. The genus holds the species together. This yields the hypotheti-
cal judgment: if one species is given, the other species is also given. If 
something is blue, something else must be yellow. This particular hypo-
thetical judgment does not immediately appear in the external repre-
sentation [of something as merely blue or yellow], but yellow and blue 
are nonetheless interconnected through the nature of color. What is 
bright shows forth in what is dark, and dark shows forth in what is 
bright. If the one is, the other is. The one is the being of the other, 
though the other is distinct from it. Thus the one is its own non-being 
[in its other-§ 177]. 
What comes in the third place[, beyond categorical and hypothetical 
judgments,] is the unification of the two. The connection, the bond be-
tween them, now comes to be posited. And with that we have the disjunc-
tive judgment [§ 177]. In the disjunctive judgment we have universality, 
e.g., color. Color is either blue or yellow or red or green. It is thus articu-
lated into its species.> Color is every bit as much each and all of them. It is 
as much the one color as the other. Universality in its particularization is 
either/or as well as both/and. The universal is first the genus, and is then 
at once the circle embracing its species. Here in disjunctive judgment the 
subject is genus and the predicate its particularizations. The predicate, as 
the entire circle, is the same as the subject. The predicate is thus identical 
with the subject, which is the concrete universal. The generic universal 
bears reference to the species, which are thereby determinate. Universal-
ity is posited with its particular determinateness. The content [of the 
predicate] is now posited as corresponding to the entire concept. 
3. Note that yellow and blue are cited as species. Since they are each simple 
qualities, they are not ·species• in Aristotle's sense. Neither yellow nor blue is a 
genus differentiated by a specific difference. Each in fact appears to be what in the 
twentieth century came to be called a determinate of color understood as a 
determinable. 

Lectures on Logic (189-190) 
190 
III.A.2.D. Conceptual judgment 
We now come to judgments of the self-concept. Here the predicates be-
come "good," "true," "correct.· Good is something substantial that be-
longs to the will as its object. It expresses the species' reference to 
what is universal and substantial. The good lays down a general rule. 
Something comes to be subjected to the rule, and it either conforms to 
it or does not. What is substantial is the foundation, and what is true 
is true because it conforms to it. Whatever is false is untrue. A thing's 
determination [as false] is known on the very face of it. It has an un-
true existence. Thus a bad action or bad state is not a true action or 
state. There is still a degree of agreement [with the self-concept] pres-
ent, but the thing has within itself an existence consisting in merely 
ramshackle scraps of what it would be in its true existence. 
Only such judging [by the rule of the self-concept] is truly judgment. 
If I say the painting has this color, or is of this master, no one will as-
cribe to me a great power of judgment. Only when I say the painting is 
beautiful. and know how to point out how it is beautiful. do I truly 
show judgment [or discernment]. The predicate [in judgment of the 
self-concept] expresses the conformity of the subject of predication to its 
self-concept. Conceptual judgments first take the form of assertoric judg-
ments, in which the ground supporting the judgment is not given in the 
judgment. As human beings we have the right to put forth assertions in 
opposition to one another. In this way, assertoric judgment at once re-
duces to subjective particularity, to the problematic judgment [§179]. 
The third conceptual judgment is the apodictic judgment [§ 179]. Some 
particular objective thing is posited in the subject of the judgment. The 
predicate then expresses the conformity of the thing's nature to the de-
termination [for which it is destined by its self-concept]. "House" is a 
genus, but each house has its own particular manner of existence. Thus 
a house, constituted in such and such a way, may be a bad house. Within 
both the subject and predicate the same foundational determination [or 
end] is posited. The subject is "this house." Being constituted in such 
and such a way is its particularity. All three moments of the self-con-
cept[ -singularity, universality, particularity-]are posited within the 
subject itself, and at once within the predicate as well. So judgment is 
only a comparison of the destined determination, of the thing's pur-
pose, with the way it is constituted in its existence. The apodictic judg-
ment [unlike the assertoricjudgment] contains the ground and demon-
stration of the predicate. Everything is of a particular constitution and 
occurs with a singular actuality. The finitude of things arises from the 
fact that a particular thing can fail to conform to the self-concept as well 
as succeed in so conforming [§178]. 
Transition to the syllogism [§ 180]. We have here reached the identity 
of subject and predicate, with the same determinations in both, so the 

The Self-Concept (190-191) 
191 
immediate constitution of the subject grounds the judgment of its 
conformity to its concept in the predicate. This mediation [of the judg-
ment with itself through the ground for asserting it], insofar as the 
mediation now comes to be explicitly posited, is the syllogism. The syl-
logism is the posited oneness of both the subject and the predicate. 
They differ only in form. We have here the oneness of both in their 
difference from each other-the oneness of subject and predicate. With 
that the copula Nis" is filled with content, insofar as it is a posited one-
ness, the posited oneness of both extremes, of singularity and univer-
sality. Yet both are at once different in form from each other. There is 
nothing dryer in formal logic than the syllogism, and the entire doc-
trine of syllogisms remains without application and has by now gone 
out of fashion. Yet we ought not push the syllogism so entirely off to 
the side, but rather must be alert to where the defect in it lies. The 
working up of the syllogism is the work of thinking by the under-
standing and it contains essential thought determinations. These de-
terminations must be recognized as belonging to the very nature of 
the syllogism. The old ballast of the syllogism remains, since ordinary 
logic manuals have no idea how to get any further. 
III.A.3. The Syllogisms 
The syllogism shows itself in the end to be rational. One may thus speak 
of the Nrational syllogism" [in contrast to the syllogism of the under-
standing].4 Rationality and purely formal syllogisms appear to be un-
connected with each other. The syllogism in general, however, is the 
self-concept itself in its self-explication. NEverything is a syllogism," it is 
said in the note to § 181 [of the 1830 Encyclopaedia]. The syllogism ofthe 
understanding is so represented that a subject, through its external 
property [in the syllogism's particular middle term], comes to reach 
closure with itself in a third [externaL universal] determination. The 
4. The contingency of a line of inference in syllogisms of the understanding 
means that the author of such a syllogism is an external authority who determines 
the direction of the syllogism. In a rational syllogism the course of the deduction 
will be autonomous and self-determining merely by considering the assumptions 
and premises from which it begins. The deduction is immanently self-propelling, 
as has always been the case with the dialectic invented by Zeno, which today is 
called indirect proof or the reduction of existing premises and assumptions to the 
absurd through discovery of the contradiction in them. It is a tautology-certainly 
no great discovery-to say that formal logic is formal or empty of content. Dialec-
tical logic unites the content of initial assumptions with the formally valid deduc-
tion of their consequences. It tests the content of the assumptions from which we 
start by exploring the consequences that formally follow from it for possible con-
tradiction. See Clark Butler. "Hegel and Indirect Proof," The Monist, vol. 75, no. 3 
(1991), pp. 422-437. 

Lectures on Logic (191-192) 
192 
result of the syllogism of the understanding contrasts with the true self-
concept as explicated in the rational syllogism. In the latter the subject 
reaches closure through self-mediation[. not by the mediation of some-
thing external to it]. 
The universal first enters as simply being there, and second comes to 
be particularized, i.e., to acquire a relationship to the external world. 
Then, in the third place, the universal finally becomes the subject. The 
universal nature of something substantial particularizes itself. It thus 
becomes the negative oneness of both universal and particular [negat-
ing each in its one-sidedness], and so it becomes subject. Everything 
must be apprehended as just such a [rational] syllogism. God himself 
is such an eternal syllogism. He is for himself, and thus negates all that 
is differentiated from himself, taking it not to be so differentiated. He 
is identical with himself in what is different from himself. 
Conversely, we may begin in the [rational] syllogism from what is 
singular [instead of, as in the preceding paragraph, from what is uni-
versal]. The singular subject is propelled by an inner drive, it wants 
something, and posits itself as becoming something other than itself. 
It realizes itself in the other, negates what is different from itself in its 
difference, and so becomes identical with itself [in its other]. The sub-
ject's own drive thus finds satisfaction. Reaching closure with itself 
within the other, the subject is at once actual. 
The other, what first is different, we may name the Son, who re-
mains [eternally] included within the idea of God. But the other lying 
beyond the Son, posited in the freedom of being ostensibly there, is the 
world. But God loves his Son, and is in identity with him, and so God is 
Spirit. Within the world as spiritual, within human beings, God attains 
consciousness of distinguishing himself from himself, and becomes 
identical with himself [in his other]. And so God is [now more con-
cretely] Spirit. 
God first becomes Spirit syllogistically, by [divine] reason. The syllo-
gism thus attains theologically high meaning. Our own human action 
is always one of reaching closure with ourselves through the mediation 
provided by our means of nourishment, by air, etc. By the mediation of 
these processes, we give ourselves actuality and are actual. 
(§182) The syllogism of the understanding. In the syllogisms of the un-
derstanding reason finds itself in a fallen state in which both sides, 
both subject and predicate, pass as subsisting outside each other. Here 
the concrete self-concept is reduced to the simple determinateness of 
being something particular. The moments of the self-concept in such 
syllogisms of the understanding remain external to one another. 
We will now pass in review the different species of syllogisms along 
with the development of the syllogism in general, laying out their vari-
ous determinations, and concluding with the posited identity of the 

The Self-Concept (192-193) 
193 
moments that first appear to be diverse in reference to one another. This 
development of the syllogism will come to a conclusion in the logic of 
the objective concept with its complexity condensed as simplicity, with 
that negation of all mediation which is the immediate object in its con-
trast to the subject. 
We must first hold principally to the qualitative syllogism [§ 183]. and to 
indicate what is defective in it. In German we say "syllogistic conclusion 
[Schluss]," in Greek we say auMo((,wem, meaning reasoning through 
judgments coming together in a conclusion, what in Latin we call "ratio-
cinatio," ratiocinium. To the qualitative syllogism belong the three deter-
minations [of the self-concept]: singularity, particularity, and universal-
ity. The middle term is what is particular, harboring the singular and 
universal terms within it. It is in Latin that these three determinations 
are designated as "terms," the two external ones being the extreme terms, 
termini extremi, and the middle term being the termininus medius [§184]. 
Of the two extreme terms one is called the major term, to which the 
form of universality belongs; the other is called the minor term, to 
which the form of singularity belongs. The three terms also entertain 
three referential relations to one another. The minor term immediately 
refers to the middle term, to what is particular. If we take ·cassius is a 
human," the reference is immediate: the judgment is propositional in 
an immediately given judgment. The second reference goes from the 
middle term to the other extreme beyond the middle term, to the major 
term ["All humans are mortal"]. The middle term, humans, thus bears 
this double reference to both Cassius and mortals. These two judgmen-
tal references, one containing the minor particular term and the other 
containing the major universal term, are designated as two proposi-
tions, respectively the propositional minor and major premises. From 
these two references a third mediated proposition comes to be drawn as 
a conclusion ["Cassius is mortal"]. The minor term posited in its one-
ness with the major term is the mediated[, i.e., demonstrated] proposi-
tion. It is the syllogistic conclusion. 
III.A.3.a. The qualitative syllogism 
The first syllogism conforms to what has just been stated: first the 
singular [S] is particular [P], then the particular [P] is the universal 
[U], and so the singular [S] is universal [U]. The propositional premise 
containing the major universal term is "The particular Pis the universal 
U." The premise with the minor particular term is "The singular S is the 
particular P." Therefore, the singular S is the universal U. 
We reach a conclusion regarding the subject, something singular, 
through a particular quality, taken together with some more general or 
universal form of being determinate. What is particular, here in the 
conclusion, pertains to what is singular: it inheres in it. But the particu-

Lectures on Logic ( 193) 
194 
lar in the major premise also inheres in a further determination, which 
is universal. Therefore, this other more universal determination also 
inheres in the subject. The particular is included in the universal. and 
the singular is contained in the particular. Therefore, the universal also 
subsumes the singular. 
What is defective here is that we have a subject such that, the more 
concrete it is, the more determinations it has within itself. One can 
tick off a whole swarm of a thing's qualities, as is fully allowed within 
the syllogism of the understanding. The quality that happens to be se-
lected makes up the middle term of a syllogism of the understanding. 
But the middle term contains still further determinations. It is more 
abstract than the subject. This sheet of paper is green. But this particu-
lar, the green, itself contains still further determinations. For example, 
green is pleasant to the sight, and I so include together with the sub-
ject this second determination of the particular. In fact, any subject 
within a syllogism of the understanding swarms with diverse quali-
ties. It also has a swarm of middle terms, and what I choose from 
among these qualities is quite contingent. This choice is already quite 
generally a contingent one. 
I then proceed, from whatever quality I select as the middle term, to 
see what determinations that quality contains within it. Every particu-
larity of the subject is once again a middle point from which, when the 
particular term is taken from another perspective as relatively universal. 
ever so many lines of alternative further particularization extend out-
ward. The particular line of inference with which I conclude regarding 
the subject is thus quite contingent. These qualities of the middle term 
can even be set in opposition to one another. Indeed, by syllogisms of the 
understanding one can demonstrate everything and anything! It only is 
a matter of my selecting some further determination. I simply choose 
some other quality in order to arrive at the most opposite conclusion. 
For example, an action of stealing [S] falls under appropriation (P]. 
which is legal. The thief defends himself by holding appropriation[, e.g., of 
life necessities] to be his duty [U], and so his action is completely justified. 
But if we select some other middle term, [e.g., deprivation of another's 
rights,] it follows that that the man deserves a hanging. The middle term 
contains within the man numerous possible ways of being determined. 
Beyond that, there is a whole swarm of determinations that (not only 
oppose but] contradict one another. For example, a chief predicate of the 
world is that it includes evil. It is said that this predicate evil-as the mid-
dle term-is against the will of God. Hence the world is not of God. But it 
can also be said in contradiction that the world falls under another middle 
term, that of being good and thus not evil. And so it goes. 
Or, to cite a second example, consider conflicts within criminal law. 
The state determines punishments for violations. Such punishments are 

The Self-Concept (194-195) 
195 
threats. But there are thus diverse sides to crime, and according to these 
different sides the punishment determines itself differently. Rehabilita-
tion of the criminal is one essential aim of punishment, and so the 
punishment is then not a threat but is rehabilitative. 
Now consider, in the third place, the following antinomy. A human 
being has free will. He determines himself freely. But he is also wholly 
determined by others things, and so he has no free will. Or, to give a 
fourth example, a body that is not supported from below falls toward its 
center of gravity by centripetal force. The planets are not supported 
below, and the sun is their center of gravity. Yet the planets do not fall 
toward the sun. One thus adopts an opposing centrifugal force as a fur-
ther particular predicate of bodies. 
(§185) What comes in the second place [beyond the singular sub-
ject] is contingency with respect to the form of the reference. Drawing 
the conclusion syllogistically occurs by the mediation of two extreme 
determinations that come to be exhibited within a third middle term 
as within their unity. Each extreme term bears reference to the mid-
dle term. The singular S is the particular P, and the particular Pis the 
universal U. The first two references are immediate. Within this syllo-
gism they are the presuppositions, and it is concluded from them that 
the singular S also refers to the universal U. 
Two immediate propositions occur here, and it is concluded that 
what is laid out as mediated by those two propositions is alone correctly 
inferred. Yet by the principle of the syllogism the two premises of any 
syllogism must each also be mediated, since immediacy [non-demon-
strability] is not to be allowed to pass muster. For each of the two prem-
ises two further premises are thus again demanded, and for each of 
these once again two more premises are required, and so on into infin-
ity. Yet the mediation [demonstration] is so constituted that it rests upon 
immediacy [undemonstrated first premises]. This is the defect quite 
generally of syllogisms of the understanding. 
The three syllogistic terms are each held fast in their respective ab-
stract determinations, the first being universality, the second being par-
ticularity, and the third being singularity. The progression is such that. 
of each of these three, it is posited that it holds within itself the two 
other determinations. With that the one-sidedness of the understand-
ing [abstracting and separating each term in negation of the other two] 
is raised up beyond itself. The inclusion of the other terms in each term 
grounds the derivation in the doctrine of the syllogism's figures. This in-
clusion is the source of the figures, which we may now briefly note. 
(§186) Given that I myself have constructed the syllogism to be the 
syllogism that it is, we see where the contingent character of this syllo-
gism (the first figure S-P-U syllogism) lies. The true result is that two 
extreme determinations, the singular minor and universal major terms, 

Lectures on Logic ( 19 5) 
196 
are only contingently bound up with each other. The conclusion of a syl-
logism depends on the middle term, which, as we have seen, can always 
at will be determined differently. The two extreme minor and major 
terms are with each other in the conclusion only in [different] singular 
ways. Insofar as we express the bond or connection between particular 
and universal within the form of the syllogism, it is what is singular 
[defined as the oneness of these particular and universal extremes) that 
makes that connection as the middle term. The universal U is the sin-
gular S, and the singular S is the particular P [in the second figure].S 
HereS [rather than P, as in the first figure,) is the singular middle term 
that binds. That is the meaning of the result of connecting the particu-
lar and universal terms. The singular is the universal [and the particu-
lar]. The singular term binds together the two extremes of universal 
and particular, and to that extent the singular is itself the middle term. 
The singular [in the second figure, U-S-P,] is contained as the middle 
term, with the particular and the universal off to the two sides. 
Three positions can be occupied by the middle term within the syllo-
gism: the three positions of singularity, particularity, and universality 
are all possible. Yet [by the syllogism's internal self-development] the 
universal comes to step into the middle place occupied [in the second fig-
ure] by singularity, and [the singular steps] into the place of particularity 
[yielding the third figure, P-U-S]. If we now first take contingency in the 
form of an immediately singular subject, if we second take up each of the 
two predicative moments of particularity rThe horse has four legs") and 
universality [NThe horse is white"], and if we third form a conjunctive 
proposition according to this form, the concluding proposition shows it-
self to be equally contingent: "The horse is white and has four legs." But 
if we then want to go on and say nwhatever is white has four legs; that 
is of course a false conclusion. Only the [empirically contingent] horse 
here binds together being white and having four legs. 
5. The bracketed addition comes from the German editors. The conclusion is 
·u is P," the universal is particular. By today's logic manuals, this syllogism is not 
a second figure syllogism, since the premises contain the middle term in both the 
subject and predicate places. It should also be noted that current expositions do 
not classify syllogisms according to whether their terms are singular, particular, 
or universal. That is a matter of content that does not enter into purely formal 
logic. Current convention makes a figure depend on whether its middle term as-
sumes the predicate or subject place in the premises, not (as with Hegel) on 
whether the term is universal. particular, or singular in content. For Hegel. the 
particular is the middle term in the first figure; the singular term is the middle 
term in the second figure; and the universal term is the middle term in the third 
figure. Since there are only three moments of the self-concept, there are only 
three figures, not the four of usual formal logic. There may be nothing wrong 
with Hegel's classification of figures, but to prevent confusion it must be noted. 

The Self-Concept (195-196) 
197 
But then[. given the contingency of "The horse is white and has four 
legs."] comes the [equally possible] negative conclusion: "The horse has 
four legs and is not in particular white." Whence the syllogistic conclu-
sion "Some things that have four legs are not white," or conversely 
"Some things that are white are not horses." The syllogisms of the un-
derstanding, as we know, are susceptible to being enumerated: Barbara, 
Celarent, Darii, Ferio, and so on. 
The third figure [S-U-P) occurs when universality becomes the 
middle term. We may, quite dryly, take up this universal middle term 
as implying different singular determinations in the preceding [con-
junctive] subject, and we may then help ourselves to some common 
immediate particular predicative quality of each. Thus we have a syl-
logism with the premise "The horse is white and the snow is white." 
Here the universal middle term [generalized from the singular sub-
jects, the horse and snow,] is in particular "white." In the conclusion 
the horse and snow [through the mediating universal class including 
them] come together within the white. Here the conclusion that 
emerges would be that the horse is snow [§ 187]! 
(§188) Every one of the three moments of the self-concept is itself a 
middle term, and every one of them also takes the position of each of 
the two extremes. If we hold fast to this fact, the result is that the deter-
minateness of each moment [as middle term or one of the extremes] 
over against the others raises itself up beyond itself. What we then ar-
rive at is the mathematical syllogism: if a first thing and a second thing are 
identical with a third, the first and second are identical with each other. 
This mathematical syllogism occurs without any distinct determinate-
ness of the three moments [since it can be indifferently expressed as the 
second and third thing being identical to each other by their identity 
with the first, and so on]. Consider, for example, three lines, each just 
like the other two. All differentiation of the moments of the self-concept 
[as the middle term] is gone. With which line I begin depends on a 
purely external determination. I already know, of such lines, that they 
are all identical to one another. 
(§189) The negative result to which we have now arrived is that 
every moment of the self-concept[, each negatively displacing the two 
others,] has assumed the place of the middle term. Each moment of 
the self-concept has assumed the mediating function of the whole. 
The mediation of any two moments by the third is now complete. 
Within the first qualitative syllogism, ·s is P" and ·pis U" hold imme-
diately [or empirically], not mediately [or demonstrably]. In the sec-
ond figure [P-S-UJ, the singular S does the mediating, and the con-
clusion reads •p is U." This proposition was one of the premises in the 
first qualitative syllogism, but now it is posited as mediated or demon-
strated. The other premise, "S is P" is posited as mediated by U accord-

Lectures on Logic (196-197) 
198 
ing to the third figure. Every premise finds its proof in the two other 
figures. These figures presuppose each other reciprocally, and form a 
single circle of mediation. Particularity is posited in its development. 
The singular along with the universal makes up the concrete particu-
lar. We no longer have abstract particularity as the middle term. 
Rather, particularity now occurs within a developed form [as the par-
ticularity of some singular thing within a universal genus]. 
III.A.3.f3. The reflective syllogism 
The first form in the syllogism of reflection [§190] is the syllogism of all-
ness. The major premise reads ·All singular individuals .. ." If I say 
"Bodies without support beneath them fall toward their center of grav-
ity," the major premise abstractly intends bodies in general. But if I in-
stead say ·All singular bodies," all bodies in general are no longer meant 
abstractly. Rather, bodies only in their singularity are meant. The plan-
ets and heavenly bodies are also conceptually included as such bodies. 
But one singular one-sided determination of a singular thing excludes 
the singular determination of another singular thing. If I say "Green is 
pleasant to sight," green is apprehended abstractly. But if I say "Every 
[singular thing that is] green is pleasant," green is no longer abstract, 
but is apprehended concretely. 
"All humans are mortal, Cassius is human, therefore Cassius is 
mortal." But in order to assert the first proposition of this reflective 
syllogism I must already know of Cassius that he is mortaL I must al-
ready know the conclusion of the reflective syllogism! The conclusion 
of this syllogism rests on a prior inductive syllogism. All singular hu-
mans, human beings taken extensively, are here the middle term [es-
tablishing "All humans are mortal"]. What all humans are is only de-
termined by all the singulars within the class of men. Induction 
contains the same determination[, e.g., humanity] in the conclusion, 
but does not contain all humans in general in the premises. It contains 
only this or that many singular human beings. In induction it must 
first be established that certain singular things-platinum, gold, sil-
ver, etc.-are metal. Secondly, platinum, gold, silver, etc., are estab-
lished to be electrical conductors in an empirically immediate way. 
Therefore, inductively, all metals are electrical conducts. That is the 
conclusion of the inductive syllogism, based on experience. But this 
syllogism is once again defective, since to prove the conclusion I must 
show the conclusion to be true in all singular cases, not just in some. 
The induction can never be made completely. 
At this point we are driven to take flight to analogical reasoning. The 
middle term here is also singular, but it is singular in the sense of [the] 
universality [of all singular members of a class]. [1.] At least up to now, 
we have historically found no human who in the end has not died. But 

The Self-Concept (197-198) 
199 
this represents only a limited class of men, though one from which we 
[analogically] draw a conclusion about the rest of us in the present. [2.] 
The earth as a celestial body has inhabitants, and the moon is a [kind of] 
earth or celestial body. Here, based on the earth and the moon, the uni-
versal character of being a celestial body is taken as inductively inferred. 
Therefore, [by the moon's analogy to earth as a celestial body] the moon 
has the characteristic of having inhabitants in common with the earth. 
Yet maybe the earth has inhabitants according to the particular quality it 
has upon itself as the earth, and not according to its universal qualities 
common to all celestial bodies. These syllogisms of reflection [taken as 
including inductive and analogical syllogisms] allude to one another. 
III.A.3.y. The necessary syllogism 
[1. The categorical syllogism.] The first necessary syllogism is based on 
the oneness of what is universal and what is singular[, e.g., of all metals 
and that which is metal]. Copper is metal. Metal is an electrical conduc-
tor, so copper is an electrical conductor. But if my meaning is ·Metal [as 
a singular genus] is an electrical conductor" [on analogy with ·The 
human being is rational"], the assertion is meant to hold according to 
the very nature of metal. This copper body is metal. that is its genus. 
And what is true of the genus is necessarily, categorically, true of this 
body. That is the categorical syllogism [§191]. 
2. The hypothetical syllogism. The universal [in an antecedent clause] is 
given in its immediacy [without being demonstrated]. Secondly, the par-
ticular P [falling under that universal] is necessarily given by the univer-
sal. and with that we have the connection, with a [singular] being of its 
own, between antecedent and consequent clauses. This immediate being 
of the hypothetical connection by itself is the middle term, and it is at 
once the mediation [of the conclusion with itself as one premise through 
the other premise categorically asserting the antecedent clause]. The uni-
versal U has an immediately given being. But [in the hypothetical middle 
term] the universal determination U is no longer immediate but is medi-
ated by the consequent clause, and with that we have the particular P [as 
the consequent clause detached in the conclusion- §191]. 
3. The disjunctive syllogism lies in the disarticulation of the universal 
into its particularizations. Color is red, blue, green, and so forth. Here at 
once enters the mutual exclusion of singular colors. One and the same 
universal col or is posited in the circle of its particularizations, in such a 
manner that each one of these particularizations is posited as at once 
singular, and so as exclusive of the rest. The universal color is posited as 
the totality of its particularizations, but is equally posited as but one 
singularity in its own right. posited as singular in a manner excluding 
the other particular colors. 
If we hold to the form of the disjunctive syllogism, we have within it 

Lectures on Logic (198-199) 
200 
one and the same thing explicated within the differences as contained 
in the whole [§ 191]. The singular color is what it is thanks both to its 
particularization and to its universality. The whole is so posited that 
the different colors, which are each extinguished as each singularly 
being for itself on its own account, are posited as ideal [idee!]. The dif-
ferent ways of being determinate are negated [in their mutual inde-
pendence]. The subject reaches closure with itself, not through what 
is other than it as such, but through the other as raised up beyond it-
self into the subject itself. With this closure reached by the subject 
with itself [in its other], the self-concept is realized [§ 192]. 
The self-concept comes to be a totality withdrawn within itself, 
whose differences are each within themselves likewise such totalities. 
Such a totality is the object [§193]. The distinct moments of the self-con-
cept are covered over, becoming indistinguishable within the simplicity 
of the self-concept reduced to an object. Within the syllogism up to 
now, these moments were posited differences that were present at hand. 
The moments are now present as only raised up beyond themselves, and 
with that the self-concept turns back into simple oneness with itself. 
The meaning of the [necessary disjunctive] syllogism is that every mo-
ment of the self-concept is in its turn posited as the whole concept. With 
that what now is present is a oneness with being merely in itself, with 
its differences [erased], raised up beyond themselves-hence a oneness 
with the determination of immediacy. And that is the object. 
The transition from the subjective self-concept to the self-concept 
as object is now accomplished. The self-concept is the unfolding of its 
differences, and now is the negating of them. Every moment is at once 
mediated and mediating. Through the negation of the differences, the 
totality is posited in its simplicity. The self-concept is so posited that 
this oneness without posited differences has now arisen. But it has not 
only arisen for us. Rather, its undifferentiated oneness results out of 
the self-development of the determinations already in place. The self-
concept posited [as a whole without posited differences] is the object. 
III.B. The Object 
The object is something existent, something actual. But it is the total-
ity. It is identical with itself, and is such a totality as contains [unpos-
ited] differences condensed within itself, and indeed so that each of 
these differences is also a totality. Every differentiation is also the en-
tire self-concept. Every moment within the object is itself the totality, 
and yet all the moments, all these totalities, make up only one totality. 
In the Leibnizian system [as distinct from the science of logic] the 
monad is the atom, and yet every monad is itself the whole. Differen-

The Self-Concept (199-200) 
201 
tiation within the monad comes to be more or less developed, but no 
monad has connection with the others. Any differences are ideal. 
Within the object we distinguish between mechanism, chemism, 
and teleology. The object is a totality such that the differences within it 
are each also a totality. [l.] The referential relation is at first an external 
one [of one atomic unit to others within mechanism). [2.) In chemism 
the reference [to another unit] is posited as immanent [within the first]. 
3. In teleological reference the self-concept steps forward in being for it-
self [before the objective external world or object], and then posits itself 
within the object. 
III.B.a. Mechanism 
The difference between units is at first, within mechanism, an indiffer-
ent one, where every differentiated being is independent, and is itself a 
totality. There the object is an external unity of units, an aggregate. In-
sofar as the different objects within the mechanical whole do come to be 
set by me in reference to one another, they still remain external to one 
another. A stone, a tree, is such an object. If I cast each apart into pieces, 
every piece is itself a new object. And if I bring them together again, 
they still remain external to one another. This external unification of 
the external pieces into which we fall is the category of external compo-
sition. It is said that a human being is composed of body and soul. and 
then that the body is further composed of blood, nerves. It is imagined 
mechanistically that each unit exists for itself, and can so exist. This is 
formal mechanism [ § 19 5] . 
The mechanics of push and pull are also brought forward in physi-
ology. We say that we know something by heart, which is a good way 
of saying that we know it #mechanically." Sense, understood as the 
understanding, is a unifying activity connecting words. But it con-
nects them purely mechanically, so that spirit itself makes itself into a 
thing, into something external. Yet spirit as such, not reduced to such 
a thing, alone underlies the whole, sustains all, and is the disrupting 
power capable of breaking up what is established. Within spirit, de-
pendence, i.e., non-independence, is posited as the negation of atom-
istic mechanical units now held within the one. 
The positing of a first object as negative toward other objects within 
a total external mechanical object is not external to that first object. 
Rather, its negation of other objects generally belongs to that object's 
own being upon itself, to its immediate being. Moreover, the first ob-
ject's negation of the second is its own negation of itself. The negation of 
other objects first appears quite generally in the form of centrality, which 
is still mechanism, but is mechanism as differentiated from the above 
mechanical aggregate of purely indifferent ones. The center is the unity 
within which many ones are posited as dependent. In the case of a 

Lectures on Logic (200) 
202 
physical body, the many show themselves to be dependent by falling to-
ward the center [of gravity]. But the bodies still form a mechanism, 
since in their manyness they inconsistently still remain outside one an-
other [§196]. 
The subject, the feeling subject, the thinking being has also found its 
own particular center. Desire is also a seeking, a drive, and by desire a 
human being shows that even as an atom he, in self-contradiction, is 
not independent. A human not only has personality, but is also an ani-
mal, a living being driven toward centers outside itself, a being which 
seeks out an [an embodied] middle point in other animals. Among 
human beings, the center of attraction is relatively more independent 
than among animals. A human being, as an object, has its center only 
in another centrally placed body. This implies the dependence of all 
bodies that tend to that [more independent] bodily center.6 Here we 
have the opposition between what is independent and what is depen-
dent, between the center and objects belonging only to the periphery. 
The objective syllogism of absolute mechanism [as contrasted to the al-
ready-examined subjective syllogism of formal logic] takes form here 
[§ 197]. We may call it the syllogism of the [universal] center and [par-
ticular] periphery. It is the syllogism of objects absolutely separated from 
one another as in all mechanism, but of objects that nonetheless, in 
contradiction to that separation, bear reference to one another. The uni-
versal center refers throughout to what is not the center[ -to the pe-
riphery, the particular term]. The third, middle term here is the unity 
of the two previous terms, centrality and lack of centrality, and that 
makes for a syllogism. But in fact there is a triad of syllogisms, as has re-
sulted from our inquiry into the nature of the syllogism. 
Within the [first] syllogism as completely laid out in its different 
determinations, the immediate determinations of center and periph-
ery raise themselves up beyond themselves into what is concretely 
singular. Every member within the objective totality runs through all 
three positions [of universality, particularity, and concrete singular-
ity]. Each object within the total object takes its turn l. as concretely 
singular, 2. as immediately [or abstractly] sing1,1lar [as universal], and 
3. non-independent [as particular]. Even within their concrete singu-
larity, the peripheral objects, the particular planets, are dependent, all 
referring through the mediation of their unity to their other extreme, 
to their universal center in the sun. The common reference [which the 
particular peripheral planets at one extreme and their universal cen-
tral sun at the other extreme bear to each other] is now the concrete 
middle term of the syllogism, something other than either of the two 
6. A possible interpretation is that Hegel is referring here to the great man of 
history as a center of human attraction. 

The Self-Concept (201) 
203 
exrreme terms. This concretely singular middle term is as much center 
as periphery, as much independence as dependence. 
Thus the sun is imprinted upon the particular dependent planets as 
their universal center. The planets are independent centers in their own 
right, but at once are dependent since they rotate around the sun, since 
they have their common universal center of gravity outside themselves. 
The planets seek out the sun in the heavens, they have their center in the 
sun, but are themselves common universal centers for their footmen 
[,i.e., moons] rotating about them. (Comets are also non-independent, a 
kind of excrescence, and yet placed in the train and service of the planets, 
and indirectly in the service of the sun like those footmen.) The moons, 
satellites of the planets, have their center in the planets, which in turn 
have their center in the sun. And so indirectly these footmen are them-
selves bound up with the sun. The sun is to this degree the abstract uni-
versal center for all particular peripheral objects including the planets, 
while the planets also function as the more perfect concretely singular 
centers. Here we place planets, which were first non-independent ob-
jects, under the determination of concrete singularity, but they fall just as 
much under universality [as the center of attraction for their moons] as 
under such singularity. The sun functions as the extreme of common 
universality for concretely singular planets in their particular depen-
dence on the sun. But the sun can at once function as the extreme of 
concrete singularity. And in that case the independent singular central 
sun and dependent particular periphery together make up the universal 
all. And that is one syllogism, in the heavens above as everywhere. 
A magnet is also a syllogism. First the north and south poles are the 
extreme terms related in the conclusion, while the middle term con-
necting them is the magnet itself. The conclusion is that the north pole 
is what it is only by the mediation of the south pole[, i.e., through the 
magnet which concretely points both to north and south]. [1.] The 
[particular] middle term, within which the two extreme poles col-
lapse into one, is called the point of indifference. So this particular point 
[of demagnetization] becomes the middle term between the collaps-
ing poles, and we have here one form of the syllogism. [2.] Concrete 
singularity [or the oneness of universality and particularity] must in 
turn also assume the middle position, as when dependence becomes 
the concretely singular middle term precisely to the extent that cen-
trality [universality] itself occurs in and through dependence [partic-
ularity]. 3. Third, the absolute center as the abstract [universal] center 
also becomes the middle term. The absolute [as the abstract center of 
the system of philosophy] will rightly be called *the idea" in the sci-
ence of logic. At the level of mechanism the abstract [universal] center 
comes to bear reference to what is other than it precisely through its 
non-independence, i.e., its dependence. That is the third syllogism, in 

Lectures on Logic (201-202) 
204 
which the universal is the middle term. This universal abstract middle 
term in physics is seen in weight, where weight is the abstract mutual 
reference of physical objects by which one [singular] physical object 
refers to other [particular] objects by weight, by the universal attrac-
tion of all bodies. Those are the three syllogisms. 
If we also view civil society and even the state as a mechanism, they 
contain persons who are [first singularly] concrete, but who thus have 
needs and drives, both spiritual and physical. by which they bear refer-
. ence to [particular] objects [around them that can satisfy their needs]. 
The third or middle term connecting individual persons is here the uni-
versal term, civil society in general. My self, my person taken as my 
need is the [particular] side of myself, my dependence on others. I bear 
reference within my need to things external to me belonging to others, 
which form the bond between us in human society. Through my par-
ticular needs I am bound to that great complex which is civil society. 
And, still further, I am bound to the law, to the state and government 
[which regulate civil society]. Civil society and the state are here what 
is universal. Due to their particular needs men have been compelled to 
form states. The formation of the state is itself one great and true syllo-
gism, and here again is the objective syllogism in one of its forms. 
Singularity is also the middle term, the subject as such, personality 
with reference to the law. The activity of the subject is essentially the 
middle term, connecting [particular] needs with the universal in gen-
eral. making them conform to the requirements of justice. The media-
tion of my particular needs and their just satisfaction mean that my 
needs are made to accord to the universal, to the state, to the law. That 
the law is also the middle term occurs through this subjective activity 
of mine. I activate the universal law. Here the subject is present as the 
activity that mediates the two sides of law and needs, so that needs 
may be brought under the universal law. The law is the abstract uni-
versal [of the state] so long as it is not mediated by the inner convic-
tion of the individual [identifying with the state]. 
Within the third mechanical syllogism, the state, government, and 
justice are the foundation, the [concretely singular] middle term. This 
substantial middle term penetrates everything: needs, convictions, all 
particularities. We thus have these three syllogisms. Every objective 
whole is a unity of all three such syllogisms, and knowledge of this 
unity is what is implied by the objective [objectiv] knowledge of objects 
[Gegenstiinden]. [Going beyond the syllogism of the mechanical object 
to that of the whole system of philosophy,] the science of logic pro-
ceeds through nature to what is spiritual. What is logical also does 
duty as the [relatively abstract universal] mediating term, as the foun-
dation. Spirit likewise is the [concretely singular] middle term that 
binds what is logical with nature. We again have a triad of syllogisms. 

The Self-Concept (202-203) 
205 
We may go from what is logical to spirit through nature (as particu-
lar]. and that, too, is one form of the syllogism [§198]. 
What follows is the transition from mechanism to chemism [§199]. 
Chemism is nothing but these references which, as we have already 
seen, the moments of the self-concept [in their objectivity] bear to one 
another. These references are now posited in their existence as objec-
tive. The planets wander in their orbits as isolated bodies. This is the 
form of immediate independence present within whatever is mechan-
ical. But dependence among the planets is upon itself likewise present. 
Their reference to one another is the negation of their independence. 
It is by their mutual dependence that they bear such references. This 
is how the object is to be posited [in its dependence]. The immediate 
independence of the object has its being as something negated, and 
this is how it is to be posited. The object is a being such that, within its 
behavior toward the other, it also bears reference to itself. 
III.B.b. Chemism 
(§200) We have now reached chemism in generaP An acid is a body or 
object. Taken merely as acidic, it is something differentiated off from 
potash the base, each object having its determinate character over 
against the other. The celestial bodies [within mechanism] are also 
differentiated from one another, but their scarcely detectable self-dif-
ferentiation remains purely inner. The true form assumed by objects is 
their self-differentiation over against one another. One the one hand, 
an acid cannot exist merely for itself as acidic. The acid is, on the one 
hand, independent. Yet, on the other hand, it harbors an inner drive 
[Trieb] to posit itself in identity with what is other than itself. The acid 
is itself the totality of its identity with what is other than it, and the 
base is the very same totality. But with that we have a contradiction. 
The totality is present only within the acid and base taken together. 
But since they exist outside each other, each is one-sided and yet is 
upon itself the totality. This is the contradiction, and at once the drive 
to overcome contradiction. To overcome the contradiction, the base is 
7. Chemism, like mechanism, is a logical category. Although examples from 
chemistry and physics fall under these categories, chemism and mechanism are 
not exhausted by examples from physical science. Thus we may speak of the 
chemistry between two people. For Hegel, this may be understood as literal, not 
merely metaphorical. Chemism is the negation of atomism, monadology, objects 
as merely independent. It depends on an internal selective reference or targeting 
of partial objects by one another. Whereas chemistry endeavors not to psycholo-
gize the bonding between atoms and molecules, chemism goes beyond chemistry 
by doing so. When Hegel says that objects have a selective drive toward oneness 
with one another, it is hard not to interpret chemism in psychological terms stem-
ming from Schelling's panpsychist philosophy of nature. 

Lectures on Logic (203) 
206 
unconditionally driven toward something acidic, and the acid toward 
its base. The contradiction of their independence and mutual depen-
dence from each other finds its resolution in the chemical process it-
self. The product of that process is neither acid nor base but their neu-
tralization [§201]. The acid and base each brings upon itself the same 
neutralization, and the chemical process is the bringing forth of that 
totality. The totality is the oneness of both acid and base, and is neu-
tral. neither acid nor base. In their neutralization neither is accentu-
ated more than the other. 
The three syllogisms [with respectively universal. particular, and 
concretely singular middle terms] are also present in this chemical pro-
cess. The concept is the foundation within both acid and base, but 
merely lies upon the surface of each. 8 An acid cannot be without its 
base, and the acid is thus upon itself also the base. The same is true of 
the base with respect to the acid. The substantial ground then reaches 
closure with itself, within the neutralization of acid and base. The total-
ity is this closure of both within one. So acid and base can bond because 
of their inner drive toward each other. Their activity is this pure form 
which is, in and through each, their difference from each other. It is 
what achieves the closure of the two sides. Yet the inner totality is par-
ticularized within its species, within opposites. The universal. to be 
neutralized, reaches closure through its particularity with singularity 
as immediate [un-self-mediated] subjective being. 
(§202) This immediacy of this subjective being is what is one-sided 
within chemism. According to chemism, the self-concept reaches closure 
with existence, and yet both extremes, both acid and base, are presup-
posed as independent of each other. In the neutralization of acid and 
base, the chemical process itself is extinguished, so that what is neutral is 
a quiescent immediate object. The bespiriting principle no longer exists 
within the neutral object, but must come upon that object from an exter-
nal source(, i.e., from us]. What is neutral must be posited from the out-
side in its differentiation respectively as acid and base. Neutrality does not 
sunder itself directly into the extremes of acid and base. The chemical 
process rather presupposes that a beginning is made with independent 
differentiated objects. And these differentiated objects again presuppose 
that they have been externally separated out from their neutral state, and 
have come to be placed under tension in order to be differentiated. 
The reduction of what is differentiated to what is neutral is one pro-
cess, while the reverse process is the placing of what is neutral under 
8. The acid and base form a single concept for us, but not for either acid or base. 
An alternative reading is that we act on behalf of the acid by forming the self-concept 
of the acid as including the base. The totality of acid and base by itself does not acti-
vate itself as a self-concept, so that the concept simply lies upon that totality for us. 

The Self-Concept (204) 
207 
the tension of opposed acidic and base objects. Each process presents it-
self as a particular one, independent of the other, and with its being for 
itself to the exclusion of the other. Yet each has the other process for its 
presupposition in the background and is not in fact independent. This 
presupposition sets itself apart into products. The differentiated [prod-
ucts] are presuppositions, and with them the beginning is apparently 
made. Yet that these products are not what we really begin with is 
shown by the process itself. These products as existing separately fall to 
the ground. The chemical process is a totality that separates itself into 
different parts-it is judgment. The separated beings emerging from 
judgment do not truly subsist for themselves to the exclusion of each 
other, so that it is posited that they are not independently present be-
ings. Their immediacy is again independence, but as immediacy it is at 
once something untrue that sunders itself out of the totality. 
Such is the self-concept as it quiescently lies upon the surface of the 
chemical process, lying there for us to grasp. This self-concept lying on 
the chemical process is a concrete universal that particularizes itself 
within itself, that passes over into reference to itself as singular, i.e., 
over into an exclusive negative unity with itself. It comes to differ from 
itself, excluding itself from itself [as an acid excludes its base]. The ex-
position of the concrete universal is laid out for us to grasp within the 
chemical process itself. Indeed, this concrete universal is what the 
chemical process upon itself is. What now comes to be posited is that the 
two diverse courses-now separating acid and base from each other and 
now neutralizing them, two courses which in the chemical process first 
appeared to be external to each other-are now negated as mutually 
external courses. The self-concept in being posited, in the posited ideal-
ity of its previously independent courses or moments, is the self-concept 
in being for itself. Here in its [abstract] being for itself, in its being for it-
self as its own end, the self-concept breaks free of whatever is external 
to it, it is upon itself the free self-concept. 
III.B.c. Teleology 
The self-concept, no longer lying quiescently upon a chemical process, 
is posited in its [abstract] being for itself over against what remains 
external to it. But the result is once again that the self-concept is [sub-
jectively] one-sided, and is posited as negative toward the object that 
is external to it. The subjective self-concept thus bears reference to 
what is objectively external to itself as well as to its unrealized being 
for itself, and with that double reference it becomes [the pursuit of] its 
end [§203]. Given this subjective self-concept, with this its being for 
itself [fixated as something absolute], it becomes self-contradictory 
that anything at all should be external to it. For what is external to it 
to be sure lies already within the self-concept, but it lies within it only 

Lectures on Logic (204-205) 
208 
ideally-so that the self-concept still remains to be posited out there 
within what is external to it. Abstract being for oneself as being for 
one's end then raises up its one-sidedness beyond itself into oneness 
with what is objectively real, but the objective realm to which the self-
concept now bears reference is still posited only ideally [idee!] within it. 
The self-concept still harbors merely upon itself what it would be con-
cretely for itself in the realization of its end. It is not yet its own accom-
plished activity of having posited objectivity within itself as an ideal 
moment of itself. Within the teleological goal-directed self-concept. the 
external object remains to be posited [by external action] as non-
independent, as dependent on the self-concept itself, with a being that 
conforms to the self-concept. And positing the object with a being that 
conforms to the self-concept yields the idea, the truth itself. 
The self-concept in its external realization is within itself the infi-
nite self-concept. But the infinite self-concept first comes to enjoy 
being for itself as infinite only through its being infinite for us in our sci-
ence of logic[, i.e., as we bestow being for itself on it. on its behalf]. Its 
own activity is not initially that of negating its immediate external 
object. The finite self-concept contains the contradiction of being held 
back within its subjectivity, without having the determination of being 
in its immediacy lying yet upon it. Accordingly, the subjective self-
concept is placed under tension. This is the tension of self-contradiction, 
where the subjective self-concept is the activation and then the resolu-
tion of its own self-contradiction. Teleology is the self-concept as the 
[practically] rational self-concept. It exhibits practical rationality it-
self. For within teleology what reigns is totality, a totality that is rea-
son itself stripping the self-concept of its subjective one-sidedness as it 
objectifies itself outwardly. 
In modern philosophy a prejudice has arisen against the teleological 
relation[, i.e., against final causation in nature]. God is wisdom, good-
ness. He was previously presumed to have prepared the content of the 
whole world for the realization of these ends. In a way the teleological 
content of the world may not appear to be worth mentioning. For the 
adaptation of means to ends can be seen everywhere. For when it comes 
to references to such adaptation of means to ends, we think first of our 
own finite activity, where the material we act upon is externally pres-
ent to us. Our human action, unlike God's providence, is only a finite 
adaptation of the world to an end, where the objective world remains 
external to us. Internal teleology [§204], contrary to the external teleol-
ogy of human action, we come to know only in beholding a living or-
ganism. All needs, all drives within the organism refer to ends, to the 
organism's own being for itself. In the product of a mechanical or chem-
ical action or reaction, on the other hand, what comes out in the end 
differs from what was there at the start. But in the realization of a pur-

The Self-Concept (205-206) 
209 
pose within living beings, the beginning is at once the end. For ex-
ample, if I as a living being build a house, I start with a plan. But the 
house must in the end turn out to be exactly as called for by the plan. 
And so it is among living beings generally, including the animals. 
From the seed of a pear comes only a pear tree. Already within the 
seed all the determinations of the pear tree are contained. This is 
what, within nature, inner adaptation to an end consists in. Aristotle 
recognized, within nature generally, the self-concept of a living being, 
and of its internal teleology. He called it entelechy. What comes out in 
the end is what was there from the beginning. The product, the end is 
what motivates the beginning. The house as my end is what moves me 
to build it. In teleological activity the content [of the self-concept] is 
maintained within my activity. My activity is that of bringing some-
thing forth in which the content reaches closure with itself [in the re-
alization of my end]. But the self-concept is still subjective, just as the 
pear tree is still subjective within the seed. Beyond this bare subject or 
seed of the tree, the object requires favorable external conditions. This 
requirement is what restricts the teleological relation of living organ-
isms to the external object to being only finite teleology [§205]. 
If the subjective end reaches self-closure with the object, it becomes 
the entire soul of what is objective. Through a middle term, the [sin-
gular] subjective end or being for itself reaches closure with initially 
alien objectivity[, i.e., with the universal]. This middle term is activity 
upon the object. adapting it to an end, and such activity is at once a 
utilization of means [§206]. And that makes up one whole syllogism. 
The subject is singular. Ideality is then expressed within the subjec-
tive activity that holds its means at its disposal. This activity is the mid-
dle term that brings forth the other extreme, the object [as the realiza-
tion of the end]. We thus have the three terms of the syllogism, [namely 
subjective activity, objective means or tools, and objective material.] but 
each term is also the whole syllogism within itself. The subjective end 
[taken as the middle term] is itself a syllogism [§207, §208]. In German 
one says "I have subjectively decided [ entschlossen] to do something," but 
one also says "Doing something is concluded upon" [ beschlossen ]. "To 
decide" [entschliessen]literally means to "to open up" [aufmachen] what 
is subjective to the objective world, while "to conclude with doing some-
thing" [beschliessen] means "to settle fixedly on a decision, making it 
fast." But we rightly say both "I myself decide to do something objec-
tive" and "I open up the simple abyss of the [subjective] I to the world." 
Deciding outwardly expresses the content of my decision. Within my 
decision a content steps forth. But it steps forth only subjectively as con-
clusively intended within me. I conclude with some decision which is to 
be the content of my will. I posit it as identical with myself, as a particu-
lar decision to the exclusion of alternative equally particular decisions. 

Lectures on Logic (206-207) 
210 
This syllogism we call either a decision released into the world or a 
conclusion [of deliberation-ein Beschluss]. The house that I only intend 
to build, which I have in representation, is within me a negation [of what 
is objective]. This is the defect in the end being pursued, stemming from 
the fact that it is so far merely subjective, that the content of my decision 
is only subjective. Here is the contradiction. For the self-concept [my 
being for myself in being for my end] is upon itself objective, not merely 
subjective. The self-concept holds within itself the self-certainty of reason 
[§209]. According to this self-certainty, the self-concept must necessarily 
realize itself [§210]. The end is the self-concept with the infinite certainty 
that it is irresistible power, and that the alien object over against it is null 
and void. Yet that object is essentially a judgment [dividing itself off from 
the subjective self-concept]. What is objective thus gives itself the form of 
being immediate[, not mediated by the self-concept]. The [subjective] 
end is the contradiction of having unity [with what is objective] only as 
something ideal [idee/], not yet as something developed before it within 
the form of immediacy. The raising of this contradiction up beyond itself 
into the realized end is activity. That gives the second premise, an immedi-
ate overpowering of the object by the subject. 
The self-concept in its being for itself, in its being for its own end, thus 
by activity gives itself immediate objective reality. The self-concept has 
the self-certainty of being itselfthe totality-what is objective is no longer 
independent of it. This overpowering of the object is the utilization of the 
available means. Mastering the object remains in its one-sided immedi-
acy until the mediated process of utilizing the means also intervenes. The 
particular object which the end takes unto itself is the object understood 
as the means to the end. Among human beings, these means are first of all 
our own hands, which are the tools of the senses. Living beings have 
these means contained immediately upon their hands, and yet they must 
develop the habit of using these means. By their utilization I must pro-
ceed to overpower whatever is immediate in the object. I have here, 
within the means, the middle term of a syllogism. My [singular] activity 
thus arms itself with the necessary means with which to realize my [uni-
versal, general] end. The middle term thus brings with it a break between 
my activity and the means. The means are something external that is 
taken up by my activity in light of my end. 
In the third place, the possibility now exists for activity on behalf of 
the end, as it is resumed again in the light of one achieved objectification, 
to objectify itself still further. Activity is again directed over against the 
object, but is so directed to another object mediated by its function as a 
means to the end. With these objective tools at hand, my activity pro-
ceeds to direct itself against another object beyond these tools, against the 
material [§211] on which, with the tools at my disposal, I continue to act. 
Objects [as means] now come to stand over against other objects [as ma-

The Self-Concept (207-208) 
211 
terial]. Here we find the ruse of reason, the ruse of the end pursued by 
deploying objects against one another. Reason brings on the means. The 
third place [or middle term] is now occupied by the realized end. The ex-
ternal material is transformed by activity according to the requirements 
of the end, and that is once more a syllogism. This syllogism is the true 
fundamental form of the whole teleological relationship. The teleological 
relationship is at first the finite adaptation of the material to an end. The 
material remains something external to the goal-directed activity. The 
object serving as the means or the tool is also something external to it. 
The content in this finite adaptation to the end is a limited one. The 
achieved end is no sooner achieved than it becomes an object which falls 
back into finitude, but which can progressively also again be made into 
the means and material for still other ends. To be sure, the achieved end 
represents a satisfaction which the world spirit prides itself upon attain-
ing, but what is achieved is always a mere means for the further endless 
progress of spirit. 
(§ 212) But what now follows is the transition to the end internal to 
the means and material, to the idea, to the end that has within itself 
both the means and material adequate to itself as the end. The finitude 
of an end lies in the fact that the means and material are at once still in-
dependent of the end. The activity on behalf of the end is the explicit 
positing of what at first lies quiescently upon the material, of the nullity 
of the difference [between end, materiaL and means]. The end is the 
self-concept which negates the subjectivity of activity on behalf of it, 
and which is certain of that activity as a mere ideal moment. Within re-
alism or empiricism [in contrast to idealism] objects are independent-
!, the subject, am off to the one side, and the object is off to the other. 
But not a single human being really believes realism stated as such. 
Even the animals consume grass with the gut feeling that in the grass 
they chew there is nothing fixed or independent standing over against 
them. The animals themselves thus posit this independence of the grass 
as something null and void. 
Human beings [in knowledge] penetrate the far reaches of the heav-
ens and stars with their self-concept, and thereby make independent 
celestial beings over into dependent ideal beings within themselves. The 
self-concept from the very beginning has been a matter of the end 
reaching closure with itself, and it has reached closure with itself only 
when the moments of itself lack independence, only when they are 
mere moments of the self-concept. The end itself bears, imprinted upon 
itself, the very means, as also the materiaL by which it posits itself ob-
jectively. The end thus becomes the infinite end. What is true as such 
has now become our object. The self-concept in its own mere being for 
itself is one-sided being, the being of only the [subjective] self-concept. 
That subjective self-concept now raises this its own one-sidedness up 

Lectures on Logic (208) 
212 
beyond itself into its own self-realization. What holds truth is this self-
realization of the self-concept, and this we call the idea. 
III.C. The Idea 
The term "idea" has often meant "representation" [as in, e.g., Locke]. 
Kant called attention to the distinction between this former usage and 
the meaning he assigns to the term. The "idea" [in the present lectures] 
means the infinite, the limitless, but only in the sense of being con-
cretely infinite. Finitude finds total fulfillment within the idea, the in-
finite self-concept. The concrete infinite is subjective, but it is also objec-
tive, since it is real. We now lay hold, within the idea, of the oneness of 
the subjective and the objective. This oneness is the truth. What holds 
truth is no mere subjective representation of mine. What holds truth, 
what is true to itself, is rather the concrete self-concept, the self-concept 
as not only upon itself [potentially] infinite but equally for itselfinfinite.9 
What is true, the concrete self-concept. at once contains within itself the 
infinite realm of all that is objective. For this objective realm is abso-
lutely adequate to the concrete self-concept and to it alone. The content 
of the concrete self-concept is this very process [of constituting the one-
ness of the subjective and objective self-concepts with each other]. Ob-
jectivity, taken as ideal [idee/]. is the form assumed by the self-concept. 
This infinity of the self-concept is what makes for truth. Essentially the 
idea is subject [§213]. Substance, if it is to become true, must be appre-
hended as subject. What has been differentiated as subject and substance 
is, for substance, the oneness with itself of the subject as its other. But 
substance and subject are not neutralized within their oneness like acid 
and base. Rather, what comes in the third place [beyond the abstract 
substance and abstract subject] is the concrete self-concept as the sub-
ject [overreaching the substance or object]. 
What is ideal [das Ideale] is to be distinguished from the idea. The idea 
taken in its sensory immediacy is ideal. Ideal Greek sculptural figures 
embody the idea. The beautiful embodies the idea. Yet within a beautiful 
work of sculpture there is always something extraneous to the idea 
merely as such. What is extraneous is, to be sure, one side of the work, but 
9. In Aristotelian terms this statement may be taken to mean that what is upon 
itself or potentially infinite is infinite for itself by first actualizing its potential 
within itself and then reflecting upon its own successful actualization of its po· 
tential. Our grasp of the infinity of the heavens in science is the infinite's grasp of 
itself in and through its human members. Scientific knowledge becomes the full 
realization of our end in teleological activity, so that nothing is left to the side as 
unassimilated by knowledge, i.e., as a field of alien objectivity challenging further 
teleological striving. 

The Self-Concept (209) 
213 
it is a finite side of it. Even so, when a work of art is taken as ideal. exter-
nalities of color and space come to be spiritualized, and such figuration 
upon the work thus comes to express something spiritual. The form of 
the artwork imbues it with soul. Far from being abstract, the form is self-
revealing spirit. Every single characteristic, every spatial figuration, every 
point is pregnant with meaning, laying bare not itself but its soul. its 
meaning as unseparated from the art object as sensory. But what is true 
is the idea without any such extraneous aspects. The idea, as the oneness 
of the inner and outer, is alone actual. Contrary to ideal classical sculp-
ture, the outer of the idea is the totality of all that is objective. What is 
subjective has its content in that totality, and that totality is actuality.10 
(§214) Reason, truly expressed, is the idea. The self-concept reaching 
closure with itself, the idea, is the oneness of what is subjective and ob-
jective. The idea is found wherever [1.] the end as intended, [2.] the 
means utilized, [3.] material at hand, and [4.] the end as carried out 
into reality all coincide. All these limited categories are consumed in 
the unity of the idea. The understanding has an easy time of saying that 
the subjective and the objective each has its being for itself. Quite cor-
rect. Yet it is quite perverse to simply talk of their identity, since all dif-
ference is then left aside. The idea is an identity to which the moment of 
difference also belongs. The idea is the [concrete] self-concept laying 
hold of itself within freedom, within blessedness, within what is other 
than the [subjective] self-concept. 
( §215) The idea is essentially the process of absolute negativity [or 
double negation, negation of the negation]. and it is thus at once dialec-
tical. [1.] The idea is at first the universal. which is immediate. As im-
mediate, it is nature or, putting it more determinately, it is life. First or 
immediately, the idea is nature. But this immediacy is the judgment be-
longing to the idea, it is the idea divided off from itself within its exter-
nality. When the idea is displaced outside itself it is nature. The highest 
stage of nature, of the idea in being outside itself is life. [2.] The [subjec-
tive] self-concept in its being for itself then posits itself over against 
what is objective, over against the world stretched out before it. Thus the 
idea is, in the second place, finite knowing [Erkennen]. 11 The subjective 
self-concept [in its mere being for itself] truly knows [weiss] that this re-
10. What is actual may be understood as the actualization of the concrete self-
concept with a being for itself through reflection on the actualization of its poten-
tial as that potential already lay upon itself (an sich). 
11. Erkennen appears to mean cognition of the forms of the idea in the external 
world without conscious recognition of them there, so that it is a finite cognition 
which is for itself limited by the world it knows. In context, Erkennen thus appears 
to mean re-cognizing (wiedererkennen) for Hegel. Erkennen contrasts with Wissen 
in Hegel's text. Where Erkennen originates for Hegel in a Kantian context, Wissen 
means true rather than false or finite knowledge. 

Lectures on Logic (209-210) 
214 
cognizing falls short of the truth, and that the world remains external 
to it. For itself, the [subjective] self-concept. merely as such, is [a finite] 
knowing [of the world]. The self-concept as finite knowing proceeds 
from the certainty of reason, reason's certainty that it has being. [3.] 
What comes in the third place is absolute knowing [absolutes Erkennen], 12 
true absolute knowledge [Wissen], spirit as such. 
III.C.a. Life 
{lll.C.a.l. The soul] 
(§216) The self-concept realizes itself within the body as the soul. 
The soul within such [corporeal] externality is immediately within it-
self. The oneness of the soul is the fundamental determination here. 
The soul is what is speculative, and exists as such. Taken externally, 
the body is something material. As a body it is in space, and is one 
among beings which are all outside one another. The soul, by contrast, 
has no belief in bodies external to one another. It is simple, and is 
identical with itself. It is a sensitive soul. residing within the body. It 
becomes determinate insofar as its body is determinate. For the deter-
minateness of the body is the simple determinateness of the soul. The 
soul remains within its universality. 
Space also remains everywhere equal to itself, as also does time. And 
so the soul retains its universality, an all-penetrating oneness with it-
self. The self-concept [as a soul] holds fast here to its ideality. The sim-
plicity [of each sensitive soul] appears wherever we reach out and touch 
with our fingers. We are thus sensitive souls that feel. sensitive beings, 
souls one and all. Mutually external bodies make no difference to a 
sensitive soul. Within [the activity of] sensitive intuition we behave 
[toward bodies] in an external manner, but this sort of sensory intu-
ition holds no truth. What holds truth is rather ideality within the soul. 
Being sensitive is only [the activity of] the soul that is sensitive from a 
single standpoint. Sensory externality holds no truth for the subject. 
The wonders of animal magnetism [hypnotism] have their root 
within the [universal] oneness of the soul. A healthy rational soul re-
stricts itself to its own body. Yet if, as happens when one is under a 
magnetic spell, the rational soul is weak, it steps outside itself. It itself 
comes to be sensitive within [the sensitivity] of another [soul]. and rep-
resents to itself what the other represents to itself. The rational soul's 
[state of] being closed-off from all else, its singularity, is weakened, and 
even whether or not different sensitive beings are spatially more remote 
from one another makes no difference. Such is the ideality of one soul. 
12. Das absolutes Erkennen is the subject's conscious recognition of itself in the 
whole objective world. It is infinite knowledge, the same as absolutes Wissen or ab-
solute knowledge. 

The Self-Concept (210-211) 
215 
The soul stands within the real interconnection of sensitivity and does 
not restrict itself to its own body. As for the individual's state within 
sleepwalking, it is similar to the state of the child within the womb. 
Particularity is sunken deep within universality. 
[III.C.a.2. The bodily organism} 
What comes, in the second place [within life], is the particulariza-
tion in which differences are now posited outside one another in space. 
A living organism has parts, while the soul is without any parts that 
would be independent of one another. The organism has independent 
organic members. The bodily organism [Korper] [, by having indepen-
dent members,] does not consist in precisely such and such isolable 
parts. Rather, the body [Leib] contains no distinctions beyond those of 
the self-concept. Its distinctions are those of the self-concept. Getting to 
know how this is so is the difficult point. Each moment [of the self-con-
cept-universality, particularity, and singularity-]makes itself into a 
complete syllogism, and is the totality [§217]. These moments are pres-
ent within the living body. The insect divides into head, breast, belly, 
etc., and so does a human being. 
The head is the seat of universality [sensibilityj,l 3 the breast and 
heart [are the seat of particularity, irritability], and the belly and 
stomach are the seat of singularity, of reproduction. To grasp the body 
conceptually is thus to grasp it in the image of the self-concept. The 
subject as such is singular. Universality is present as sensitivity[, as 
being open to all]. What is singular exists as a sensitive being. The 
[singular] subject negates the difference between universality and 
particularity [as that difference occurs in their separation]. 
Life is the dialectic of objectivity, where beings lie outside one another. 
In the solar system, living subjectivity is not yet present. Each living sub-
ject is an individual closed off [from what is outside it], no part of which 
can maintain an external subsistence of its own. The process of things 
outside one another is a continuous one. In universal sensitivity the pro-
cess is simple, while it is developed when the subject is differentiated into 
organs and members belonging to the ongoing process. Every part has a 
life of its own, every one begetting itself anew. Every part consumes 
within itself the other parts that are themselves organic. Every member 
is a means, all members set ends for themselves, all are consumed by the 
others, and all beget themselves ever anew. Even the bones are included 
in this life process. The members are ends unto themselves, and yet are 
fluid, sacrificing themselves to the organism as whole. A living being is 
[always] beginning anew, but is essentially an end [Zweck]. It forever be-
gets itself, and continually makes itself into the result. Death enters 
13. "Sensibility" is added in brackets by the German editors. 

Lectures on Logic (211-212) 
216 
should life no longer be begotten. Life is the tranquil activity of self-pres-
ervation [Erhalten], but as the begetting of itself it both preserves itself 
and receives itself [er halt sich] as begotten. 
The particularization of the members is negated within the [abstract] 
universality of life. To be alive is to be a subject, a living being. Here, 
within life. is the sphere of finitude where body and soul are separable. 
Whatever is finite is born to die. A living being has the simple vocation 
of positing itself as something different. Quite generally. that is what the 
living body is. It posits itself as different from itself in its object. its 
means. its inorganic nature whose differentiation from itself must be 
negated. The individual thus feeds off itself and wastes away in the con-
sumption of its own organs. consuming its means [of self -preservation]. 
for those means are its very own organs. 
What comes. in the first instance. is the [life] process of the individual 
within itself [§218]. The individuaL feeding on itself. wastes away in 
consumption, as in the related tubercular disease. This process of wast-
ing away lies at the basis of what is known as the hunger cure. Less 
nourishment is given than meets a human being's need, so that the or-
ganism feeds on itself, consumes itself, and thus reconstitutes itself 
within itself. Every organ. every nerve is consumed and begotten anew. 
This begetting is the very activity of self-preservation. 
What.comes in the second instance [as a life process. after self-regenera-
tion through consumption.] is that the subject relates itself to its exter-
nal inorganic nature, to an inorganic nature with a free existence of its 
own [§219]. Life is the idea in its immediacy. This immediacy must at 
once be determined as something posited. The universal life of nature 
[outside the living being] is something created. The living individual 
[returning to health after self-consumption] finds its inorganic nature 
outside of itself. The living subject relates itself to something alien. But 
this subject enjoys infinite certainty of self. and negates the indepen-
dence of whatever is alien. To relate itself to something else is to negate 
its own self-feeling. and this negation occurs within the living subject 
itself. Life is within itself a contradiction. It is the feeling of deficiency. 
of need, where the deficiency is particularized in each species. Every 
animal has its own particular inorganic nature [or environment]. A 
whole world can surround an individual without holding any interest 
for him. An animal has no need of anything that. at least upon itself. is 
not already contained within it. Nothing purely foreign to it can ever 
enter it. Here we have absolute self-determination. Every deficiency in 
the organism bears reference to a specific content [in the organism's 
external inorganic nature]. Such is drive. need. self-feeling. the infinite 
certainty of self. the certainty of its oneness with itself, and hence the 
negation of the contradiction of life. The resolution of that contradiction 
is satisfaction. To reach satisfaction is to preserve self-feeling. 

The Self-Concept (212-213) 
217 
[III.C.a.J. The speciesjl4 
The third process of the immediate idea as nature is that of the species 
[§220]. The first life process was one of reaching closure with oneself 
through [regenerating] oneself from within. The second life process con-
sisted in reaching closure with oneself through something abstractly 
other than oneself[, i.e., through one's external inorganic nature]. The 
third relation is the unity of the prior two processes, a relation to another 
living being of one's own species, so that the other has an original [spe-
cies] identity with oneself. It is the relation that consists in reference to 
something concretely other than oneself which is nonetheless of one's 
own species. This sexual relation is the life process of the species. The sub-
ject [participating in this relation] attains its satisfaction, and in its satis-
faction is a singular [individual]. But its grasp has already overreached 
what is alien and has posited what is inorganic as identical with itself. 
This is the life process of the species. Kinds within the species are particu-
larizations of the [individual] subject.15 The species process brings to-
gether these different particularizations in one. The process brings the 
species to [the point of] being for itself in the newly begotten individual, 
in the new subject.16 The one side of the matter, then, is that a living indi-
vidual is begotten. The beginning and the end proceed here to the fore 
out of each other.17 As an individuaJ18 one reaches closure together with 
oneself, and yet there are not one but two individuals. Because life is still 
the idea in its immediacy, the first individual reaches closure with itself 
together with another individual, who is the one begotten and mediated 
by the first. The one-sidedness of immediacy is laid hold of, and the spe-
cies is now posited [beyond the mere individual- §222]. 
The other side of the matter is that the individual goes under, the 
individual in its mere immediate singularity dies. Natural death lies in 
the fact that the subject lives its [particular] life into universality. The 
body ossifies itself as natural, not abstract, universality. In the old age 
of a human being, everything has become habit. The opposition of his 
or her subjectivity [to an other] is no longer present, but has com-
pletely yielded to habit. Singular individuality yields itself up. Habit is 
rightly said to be second nature. Beyond the life of habit, the interest 
14. The German word in this section is Gattung. Gattung may mean species as 
well as genus. I have chosen •species• because it makes sense to speak of the sex-
ual process within a species, but not within the genus. 
15. The easiest interpretation of these "kinds" is that they are the two sexes. 
16. Following the interpretation in the previous note, this •new subject" would 
be the newborn infant. 
17. The "beginning• and •end" may be interpreted as parent and child. 
18. This "individual" may be read as the parent, keeping in mind that parent, 
infant, child, etc. are to be taken merely as examples of logical thought determi-
nations on the level of pure thought. 

Lectures on Logic (213-214) 
218 
of a living being is aroused solely where opposition is present. My ac-
tivity consists in overcoming what is alien to me, in positing it as iden-
tical with me. A human being who has experience with life comes to 
be used to whatever happens. Whatever happens never presents any-
thing new. The individual knows how things are, and so is indifferent 
toward them. Old age holds to the universal. Such is the dulling [of 
interest in the world] and, at once, the transition of the individual into 
what is universal. The species preserves itself, but only by way of an 
individual [infant] who is likewise merely transitory. The species 
again immediately falls into singularity, and that is the alternation [of 
newborns] between the two genders. 
While the single individual disappears, the species begets itself within 
the self-concept. The single individual disappears. This individual is not 
the true existence of the species. Rather, such an individual is rather al-
ways in the course of disappearing. The species has itself for its object. 
The demise of the individual living being, who goes under within his or 
her immediacy, is at once the rise of spirit. The process [of this rise], 
which goes on to infinity, lies in the contradiction of the species as it 
arises out of and yet falls back into the form of immediate singularity. 
Yet the line followed by this progression is that of a circle, a return upon 
itself. The species reaches closure with itself as a species through nega-
tion of the moment of individuality, which is the rise of spirit. The self-
concept is realized, and its realization, within which the [concrete] uni-
versal has its being, is itself the universal. It is the universal that has 
being for the universal. Both sides are themselves the same concept. 
III.C.b. Recognizance [Erkennen] 19 
The self-concept exists freely with being for itself. Within this form the 
self-concept is itself. What, within a human being, we call the "soul" is 
the simple subject, the process of positing one's body as identical with 
oneself while falling into individuality. The self-concept, the idea, now 
has itself for its object. Such, in generaL consists in knowing oneself in 
the other. Spirit is at home with itself as true knowing [Wissen], con-
sciousness, thinking. Those are the forms assumed by this realization of 
the self-concept within its object. I know myself to be this simple being, 
bearing reference to something there that has its being as transpar-
ently as my very own being. The universal is here at home with itself. 
Hence, the I is I only as this return within itself. Only in spirit does the 
self-concept have existence as the self-concept-only in spirit is the self-
concept in its own element. 
19. Erkennen, translated as ·recognizance,· here implicitly connotes re-cogniz-
ing [wiedererkennen], the identification of familiar markers in what is experienced 
to be alien territory. Hence, it is finite knowledge. 

The Self-Concept (214-215) 
219 
Here we have the idea of spirit itself, but at first [only] as finite 
spirit. Subjectivity has reached universality, pure oneness within it-
self. The idea as referring simply to itself is the subjective idea, but the 
idea is also the activity of distinguishing, judgment [or division-Ur-
teil], repelling itself in its totality from itself [§223]. This is the mo-
ment of otherness, of difference. The movement is that of positing both 
[subjective and objective] ideas within one. The idea as subjective, as 
enclosed within its simple oneness, is merely its activity of intuiting 
what lies already within itself. This is the abstract idea within the 
form of one-sidedness. It is the idea unmuddied and unconscious, 
since to consciousness belongs the differentiation of an object. 
The subjective idea is not yet the activity of distinguishing under-
stood as an opposition falling within it, but rather only distinguishes 
the object as its other. The universe, the world generally, is the subjec-
tive idea outside itself. So the idea as the world lies out there presup-
posed by the subjective idea, as something immediately present, a world 
that is immediate. Yet the idea as the subjective idea has, within the 
world, a being for itself. Within the subjective idea, then, the external-
ity of reality is already negated. The universe is at first a negation over 
against the subjective idea. Yet the negation is already upon itself lifted. 
The idea is upon itself subjective. Subjectivity is for the idea itself a 
lack-it is the need, the drive to raise its subjectivity up beyond itself, 
and at once to lift up beyond itself the one-sidedness of what is objec-
tive, the idea in its externality. Subjectivity is the certainty that such 
externality is pure show. Subjectivity is reason-it has the certainty of 
being, upon itself, reason itself [§224]. 
Reason enters the world with absolute faith in itself, with the drive 
to lift its self-certainty to the level of truth. Certainty is subjective, while 
the truth is the idea as objective. This is the drive behind [Kantian] fi-
nite knowing [Erkennen] [§225]. It has two sides. It is impulse, fini-
tude-where finitude lies in the fact that the total process falls apart 
into the double process in which subjectivity and objectivity are distin-
guished. The process is one of raising the one-sidedness of each side, of 
subjectivity and objectivity, up beyond itself. In one direction the im-
pulse is directed toward what is objective [taken] as what ought to be, 
while in the other direction it is directed toward what is subjective. (The 
opposition [between the two impulses] is to be lifted up beyond itself.) 
The other is what is, what is immediate, what has validity. On the 
one hand, being as external is the standard of validity, and what is sub-
jective has to bring itself into conformity with being. On the other hand, 
conversely, what lies in the subject is valid, is what ought to be, so that 
objectivity has its one-sided validity removed. These are the two sides of 
finite knowing. They respectively go by the name of theoretical and prac-
tical activity. 

Lectures on Logic (215-216) 
220 
Rationality is the possibility inherent in finite knowing, it is the idea 
within its simplicity. The idea ought to be given fulfillment, but in such a 
way that the very ideality of the idea nonetheless remains. But where is 
the content of the idea to come from? If the content is to be taken from 
the world. it is the latter that will pass as valid in its being. The subject is 
then deficient and ought to be filled with being. This is finite knowing 
[Erkennen] in the strict [theoretical] sense, [implying] curiosity and in-
quisitiveness. Inquisitiveness consists in filling the I. taken as simple. 
with content. My certainty of self remains unperturbed. The true knower 
[Wissende] makes him- or herself into a universe. into an infinite mani-
fold of content. The idea remains within the ideality [of thought con-
tents]. and the I is still this simple being even if a fullness of content exists 
in this well of the world. A fullness of content. buried out in the world, is 
there to be mined. I must be the master of it, I must have true knowledge 
[ wissen] of it. This is theoretical reason. Reason is certain of its ability to 
know the world. Reason proceeds from this conviction. the conviction 
that the world is there to be apprehended by it. Certainty is filled with the 
content of the world-I come to know the matter as it truly is. 
The other [impulse] is known as practical reason. which shows the 
reverse relationship. The individual's own determinations now hold va-
lidity for that individual as the true determinations. I believe in myself 
over against whatever is external. What is practical are ends. self-deter-
minations that are valid for themselves. The absolutely valid end is in 
general the good. What now holds validity is what is subjective over 
against the external world. The practical direction consists in going out 
to fulfill the subject's aims and to carry out the good. The impulse to the 
good alters the world in order to make it conform to what is subjective. 
III.C.b.l. Recognizance as such 
[The analytical method] 
The starting point of all [theoretical] knowing as such is the pre-
supposition that nothing is to be alien to us. Rather. every content is 
to belong to us, and is not be an independent content of its own. But 
all material comes to be assimilated to us. This is our basic relationship 
[with the world], and to this extent our knowledge of it is finite. in 
that a [still unassimilated] content is always posited as fixed some-
where beyond us [§236]. Finite knowing. however, is at once active. 
and its first activity is the analytical method [§237]. 
The world is infinite both within its external expanse and within the 
singularization of its every content. But now the world is touched by the 
simplicity of the I. What is outside me can enter into me only insofar as 
I bestow upon it the form of simplicity that we call Nuniversality" or 
Nabstraction." To the extent that I take up the material of the world. I am 

The Self-Concept (216-217) 
221 
I. and I then become active over against its externality. My action is one 
of simplifying whatever is external. This doing of mine has only the 
form of self-identity, the [abstract self-]identity [of A with A] as seized 
upon by the understanding. What is given to me as concrete must be 
dissolved in its concreteness, and it is this that is known as ·analyzing." 
the dissolution of whatever is manifold, which is an unconscious [activ-
ity of mine]. 
But to analyze is not just to abstract [universal determinations]. It 
is also to separate, but to separate in the sense of isolating something 
that, prior to its abstraction from other items, was already there as a 
single item bearing reference to itself. 
Color lies upon the surface of a body. In analyzing a body, I consider its 
color for itself. I pick out, one from another, determinations previously 
bound up with one another, and posit each determination for itself. Uni-
versality has two modes: either a universal is entirely formal[, i.e., ab-
stract]. or it is apprehended as determinate within itself[, i.e., concrete, 
synthetic]. I intuit the object. I make an image of it for myself, and in so 
doing I have already abstracted it from its [original] space and time [loca-
tion]. and have already negated its singularity. Moreover, even if the 
image is still fresh, the singular traits of the object grow fainter. This is the 
generalizing [activity] of the I. Each determination is still [in fact] bound 
up with all the others. Each determination as particular bears reference 
to others, and yet I lift it out [by abstraction] in isolation from them. More 
exactly, I do not lift out the more particular determinations. Rather, these 
I simply leave to the side, and abstract the universal from all this, which 
yields its various genera and species. This abstracting is what makes up 
what is called the analytical method. 
[The synthetic method] 
Next [within re-cognizing as such] comes the synthetic method 
[§228]. The analytical method has a universal. the universal genus, as 
its point of arrival. This universal. the result of analysis [as abstraction], 
is now rather the point of departure for the synthetic method. This is 
the method that goes after the particular, which analysis has left aside. 
The end presupposed by the method [of finite knowing, Erkennen] is to 
truly know [wissen] the universe to be the idea. The first direction taken 
by finite knowing was to give the form of universality to what is exter-
nal. That is what we have called analysis [as abstraction]. In whatever 
is empirically concrete, one particular will be alongside another. What 
comes first is to give this form of universality in general to the object. 
Finite knowing [as contrasted to Wissen] is finite, and its finitude 
lies in the fact that it still holds the moments of the self-concept out-
side one another. But the self-concept itself is the driving force. It leads 
the way. What the object is upon itself comes consciously to be real-

Lectures on Logic (217-218) 
222 
ized [within the self-concept]. The manner in which the object is real-
ized is finite, since determinations united within the idea still fall out-
side one another within finite knowing. The first action, we said, is 
analytical [or abstractive]. yielding merely the single form of univer-
sality. Each universal is essentially one among the determinations of 
form within the self-concept, and the finitude of knowing lies in the 
fact that these determinations of form [which are in fact unseparated] 
are invoked in isolation from one another. 
The analytical method uncovers genera and species. Only the given 
content is taken up. But mathematical analysis is a special case. It is said 
that, when we proceed analytically, we start with what is known and 
move toward what is unknown. We always start with what is known. 
A [known] equation contains unknown magnitudes. Certain relations 
between such magnitudes are known: xis given with a certain arithme-
tic ratio assigned to it. Thus xis completely determinate-as determinate 
as it is will ever be. But xis still to be discovered [as a numerical con-
stant]. This is simply done by freeing x of all connections of equality 
with a ratio[, e.g., ofyto some number]. The entire content of xis given, 
but [in the course of solving the equation for x] it comes to be posited 
within a different form. The variable x takes for itself the form of self-
reference according to the underlying determination of the equation. 
The start is always made from what is known[, i.e., a ratio]. We can also 
start from the unknown [and proceed to the numerical constant as the 
solution], and as long as it remains unknown the operation we perform 
is directed to making the unknown known. 
The form of universality has a content, it is determinate. We have 
proceeded [in analysis] from singularity to universality. This operation 
effects a transformation. What is singular is no longer as it was in its 
original immediacy, but now is in the form universality. What is singu-
lar in its original immediacy is incomplete, since it does not correspond 
to its concept. The self-concept only demands what is its right, the right 
to have the content of what is singular fall within the determinations of 
the self-concept itself. The self-concept proceeds from universality back 
toward singularity-and precisely this is the synthetic method. It proceeds 
from universality to particularity, to explication within the self-con-
cept. This method is called synthetic insofar as the universal comes to 
be developed within its [particular] determinations. But when these 
determinations are developed, something new comes to be added-a 
synthesis. The whole is itself synthetic. 
The right-angle triangle is explicated by laying out its determina-
tions, setting them outside one another. When I come to re-cognize 
the triangle as the unity of its determinations, I know it completely. 
That to which I come [by the synthetic method] is not immediately 
given. This is also the case with the analytical method, in which the 

The Self-Concept (218-219) 
223 
universal I find was not yet given. [Scientific] laws are not immedi-
ately given, and to this extent there is also something synthetic in 
them. The synthesis goes from universality toward singularity. 
[Definition] 
What comes first [as we move from universality toward singularity] is 
the genus. The self-concept requires definition [§229] of its species, and 
the determinations [contained in a definition] themselves come forth as 
[analytically] required. The self-concept is the universal presented in an 
understandable manner. What is understandable is that the genus of an 
object be given along with the other determination, which is the species' 
differentia specifica. Particularity [as the specific difference] is delivered by 
analysis, it comes from what is given. Fashion nowadays has strayed from 
the logic of definitions, much as it has also strayed from that of syllo-
gisms. But in definition we strive to lead determinations back to their 
simple components. Gold is metaL and that is the genus. The specific dif-
ference is its weight. It is nineteen times heavier than water. But gold has 
still many other determinations. The definition of it would be that it is 
metal of a specific weight. If all its other determinations could be led back 
to the one determination of specific weight, that would be the one defini-
tion. The entire wealth of determinations reduced to one determination, 
that is what is demanded of definition, and this demand conforms to the 
requirements of the self-concept. 
In abstract objects like those of geometry, which have their being 
only in abstract space, such definitions [in which everything is derived 
and nothing is accidental] can be given. A determination is sometimes 
called an ·earmark" [i.e., a criterion]. But the term is poorly chosen, 
sugges.ting that the determination lies only in the fact I am able to re-
mark it, which would mean that it is not essential to the thing itself. The 
synthetic method begins [as we have seen] with what has been yielded 
by the analytical method. The equation of the ellipse is the result of ge-
ometry. From this equation particular determinations are derived, and 
with that the universal is delivered by analysis. 
[Classification] 
What comes second [after definition] is classification. Division [§230]. 
the specific difference within the genus, particularization, essentially has 
its more exact meaning over against another particular. Classification is 
a completion of the definition. The triangle comes to be classified into 
right-angle, acute, and obtuse triangles. But the question is: how does 
one get from the universal to its particularization? In finite re-cognizing 
the procedure is understood, so to speak, as an external one. The particu-
larizations are simply found, they are come upon as externally given. 
Law is classified and divided into civil law, criminal law, church law, and 

Lectures on Logic (219-220) 
224 
so on. The word Hchurch" comes to be added externally to the determina-
tion Hlaw." A ground for classification will here be demanded. This ground 
is the universality of the particularization. The equality or non-equality 
of the sides is the ground for classifying triangles, but the classification is 
interpreted externally. The principle of classification is found. But true 
classification through the self-concept would have to proceed from that 
self-concept in its determinateness, from the fact that out of that determi-
nation itself the different species could be developed. 
Color is a genus. It is a perturbation of light and dark. That is what de-
fines the genus. Now as for the various particular colors-they are yielded 
through the relation of light and dark. If darkness is the basis and what is 
light is drawn over into it, we have blue. Or, conversely, if light is laid 
down as the basis and is then perturbed, we have yellow. Thus the differ-
ences between colors follow from the determination of the genus. If the 
calor yellow is intensified to the level of individuality, we have red. But if 
the intense individuality of red is peacefully neutralized, we have green. 
Here we see reason itself at work within the process of classification.20 
[Proof] 
The right-angle triangle is perfectly determinate within the Pythago-
rean theorem-an example of one great and true theorem [§231]. The 
mediation of a conclusion ~sits proof[§231]. The mediation of this Py-
thagorean conclusion includes a third statement containing the equal-
ity of triangles-or whatever the determination may be in which this 
equality of triangles is contained. To prove the Pythagorean theorem 
we must draw lines. It is never said why just these lines should be 
drawn, the task is simply externally laid down of drawing them in such 
and such a manner. A swarm of possible figures arises, only a few of 
which are selected as usable for the proof. The procedure is entirely ex-
ternal. an external construction. Only after this construction do we see 
into the ground for the conclusion.21 
The mediation of a conclusion is its proof. A proof exhibits the neces-
sity of the conclusion. But the full necessity of a conclusion contradicts 
the presupposition [of unproven immediate premises] made by finite re-
cognizing, by finite knowledge. This presupposition thus now yields to 
the subjective idea wanting to fill whatever immediately is with its own 
subjective content. May this subjective content, this object, have being! 
May I give being to the subjective truth by taking the material of being up 
20. This paragraph illustrates the disjunction of determinations within the 
genus by drawing on Goethe's theory of color. 
21. The arbitrary postulation of figures by the proof's author makes the proof 
the result of subjective volition. The following paragraph introduces objectively 
realized volition into proof. which thus becomes truly necessary and hence free. 

The Self-Concept (220-221) 
225 
within myself! May the subject set what has being in correspondence 
with itself, so that the subject may be this very being! The full necessity 
of proof contradicts the presupposition that what is simply is, the contra-
diction that reason is allowed to set itself in conformity with what is. 
What passes as true in proof is merely what has been yielded by media-
tion. But a presupposition was whatever immediately is, while the neces-
sity of what is immediate becomes immediacy mediated by the striving of 
the subject. Therein lies the transition to will [§232]. 22 
III.C.b.2. The will 
The idea as subject has reached the threshold of the truth. The truth 
lies, not within the given object, but rather within what is both upon 
itself [potentially] and for itself[, in reflection on its actualized poten-
tial,] self-determining. In volition, finite theoretical knowledge has 
pulled back from its prejudice[, namely the prejudice that reason and 
intelligibility can be found theoretically as already present in the 
world]. In willing, the idea as subject first knows reason to lie within 
itself, not yet outside itself in the world. The idea as subject knows it-
self as the positing of the determinations internal to it for which it is 
destined. These internal determinations of the willing subject, not 
22. If proof starts with unproven, unmediated premises to which we must 
merely submit, the proof fails to make the conclusion truly necessary, where "true 
necessity" means freedom. "The moon is a blue cheese, and all blue cheeses are 
dairy products, so the moon is a dairy product" is inferentially necessary. But be-
cause it is not sound, the proof confronts alien necessity in the hard facts. Freedom, 
true necessity, occurs when the premises are supplemented by corresponding as-
sumptions postulated by the will: "May all men be mortal, may Cassius be a man, 
and lo and behold all men are mortal and Cassius is a man. Hence, Cassius is mor-
tal." Only a sound argument enjoys the true necessity of freedom. "May all men be 
mortal" expresses the consent or will of the argument's author that all men be mor-
tal. We then distinguish realized and unrealized acts of will. A master of ceremo-
nies who says "May the curtain rise" normally makes his or her will effective, but 
it is also possible to will what is already the case. "May I leap over the moon" ex-
presses an unsuccessful volition. When our proofs begin with willed assumptions 
that are also factual, they do not begin with unmediated statements to which we 
involuntarily submit. The assumptions will correspond to the facts, which thus 
cease to embody alien necessity. The assumptions are mediated by our will. But if 
our will is unsuccessful, the mediation of assumptions by the will still finds unme-
diated necessity in the facts. Only when our assumptions are correct, only when 
our will is successful and knows itself to succeed, are the facts fully mediated and 
necessitated. And only then is our conclusion fully proven with a necessity that sets 
us free. Our conclusion lifts the hard necessity of the premises into the freedom of 
the will's self-objectification in the world. This coincidence of what we will and 
what we know to be the case will constitute the transition to the "absolute idea" in 
the next and final section of the lectures. 

Lectures on Logic (221-222) 
226 
what is objectively given, now pass muster as the truth. What is objec-
tive, far from being true by itself, first attains to truth by being deter-
mined by acts of will. The idea as subject, volition as self-determining 
for itself, in which necessity [as encountered in the logic of essence] as-
sumes the form of freedom as the self-determining subjective concept, 
brings forth the thought determination of the good as lying there before 
itself [§233]. The good is to be realized, and so it is not walled off 
merely in itself, but is the end that willing holds in view. 
The will, with its end in view, attains certainty as to the nullity of the 
object as presupposed independently of itself. Inasmuch as the good still 
remains a finite good, the will for its part still remains a merely subjec-
tive will. Its own activity likewise remains finite [§234]. The will is a 
finite will by harboring the contradiction of the good, realizing itself 
within the objective world and not being realized within it. The will as 
both realizing itself and yet not fully realizing itself makes for the infi-
nite and endless progress of the will. The good is the will insofar as it 
goes beyond being walled off in itself by at once being for itself [in re-
flection on its own self-actualization]. The will is always the will of a 
single subject, of a particular singular being. This singular will is the 
will upon which the good is potentially to be realized objectively. 
For Kant, such infinite progress carries with it the postulate of the 
immortality of the soul. If the striving, willing subject were ever to be-
come perfectly good, no willing would exist any longer. There would no 
longer be any activity, any struggle, any opposition of a willing that 
runs up against the sensory obstacle. Yet this doing of the will, this ac-
tivity, is itself the refutation of its presupposition that such an obstacle 
exists. The contradiction of the will lies only in the fact that the two 
sides, the will on the one hand and the good that is willed on the other, 
are presupposed to be independent of each other, each being merely for 
itself on its own account. Yet the activity of willing on behalf of the 
good is the refutation of this presupposition that the good and the will 
are independent of each other. The activity of the will is always that of 
raising subjectivity beyond itself into the realization of the good. This 
doing of the will is unconscious-it has being for us but not for itself. But 
the very doing of it, the very raising of subjectivity up beyond itself into 
realization of the good, contradicts the initial presupposition of the in-
dependence of the good and the will. Reason is first merely walled off 
in itself, separated from nature. But, in the form of externalized reason, 
reason assumes the being of nature itself, of the world itself and of all 
that goes with it. The essence of both, of both reason merely in itself and 
reason in the world, is the connection between them. 
Theoretical reason presupposes that whatever has being is as such 
true. But what theoretical reason merely presupposes here comes to be 
actualized only through practical reason. Yet practical reason is as one-

The Self-Concept (222) 
227 
sided as theoretical reason, and as the one-sidedness of both is lifted, 
the good is actualized not only potentially upon itself but equally for it-
self [in reflection on its actualized potential]. The [absolute] idea is thus 
realized, but such that it still lapses into positing itself anew as an end 
in view whose actualization is to be brought forth again and again, for-
ever. The idea is this game of differentiating oneself from oneself, and 
thus falling into finitude by virtue of this differentiation. The idea is the 
activity of forever carrying out finitude into execution. Here we arrive 
at the speculative idea [§235), the abstract logical truth in general. The 
difficulty is to gain re-cognition of it. When matters get serious, when 
we come to speak of God, we must [from the practical standpoint] have 
faith that the world is powerless to prevail over him, but that he eter-
nally realizes himself within the world and is realized by the world. The 
difference between God and the world exists only for the consciousness 
which makes such a distinction. It must also be conceptually grasped 
that the good is not merely abstract or untrue. Rather, the world con-
tains within itself the absolute idea, the unity of the idea as subjective 
and as objective. But the objective world itself at once contains the very 
subject that differentiates itself from the world as object. 
III.C.c. The Absolute Idea 
The absolute idea is the subjective absolute idea for which the objective 
world is that same idea [§236). Through the subjective idea the objective 
world comes to be known. Such knowledge of the world by the subject 
is the absolute philosophical idea. The absolute idea, as the oneness of 
the same idea both as subject and as object, is the idea as the concrete 
self-concept, subjectively conceiving itself in its object. To this concrete 
self-concept the absolute idea now has being at once as object and not 
merely as subject. Here we have absolute truth [conceived as fully as the 
science of logic can conceive it]. i.e., as God above. 
Aristotle says that. for God, theory, theoretical contemplation, is 
what is most excellent. As surely as God is, just as surely is he blessed 
and most excellent. Yet for Aristotle God is eternally blessed, while we 
human beings are blessed only now and again. Here, at the end of the 
science of logic, we return to the standpoint in which we found our-
selves at the beginning of this science. For us, as practitioners of this sci-
ence, the self-concepts have thus far been treated as external objects for 
our own subjective contemplation. But it is now the absolute idea as 
subject which, in and through our human scientific thinking, thinks 
the logical content. The two sides of the absolute idea, both subject and 
object as self-identical under these two determinations, now come to be 
the object of our contemplation-they become the absolute idea with a 
being for itself in and through us. We reach here the self-concept raised 
to the level of the absolute idea. 

Lectures on Logic (222-223) 
228 
We surmise that it is here with the absolute idea that matters first in 
earnest truly begin, that here alone do we find ourselves lodged within 
the very heart of truth. Yet what we have is the absolute beginning [in 
its potential] as much as the absolute end [in its actualization]. More 
precisely, we have in the absolute idea, not something with a being for 
something other than itself, but with a being for itself. Within its very 
own being the absolute idea enjoys the simple being of being at home 
with itself. In having being for itself, the absolute idea is its own object, 
and thus is also at once differentiated from itself. The absolute idea is the 
judgment by which it self-divisively distinguishes itself from itself, and 
this judgment is the eternal creation of the world posited as differenti-
ated from itself. 
Posited as self-differentiating, the absolute idea will now fall [exter-
nally] outside its simple oneness with itself, and inaugurate the process 
of raising this differentiated being of the created world [nature] up be-
yond itself back into oneness with itself [as spirit]. The absolute idea 
upon itself falls into being other than itself. It therefore exhibits the ab-
solute drive to raise its being other than itself up beyond such external 
being. The absolute idea is unto itself its own object [ Gegenstand], it is 
the object for which the subjective idea has being as being for itself. The 
process of the objective idea [objective Idee] consists in negating its being 
for what is other than itself. in its restoration of its identity with itself. 
This negation of its otherness and restoration of its identity with itself 
make up the full content of the absolute idea. The absolute idea is object 
unto itself, and is the process of negating its external objectivity [ Gegen-
stiindlichkeit]. But the absolute idea fallen [internally] outside itself, 
along with its drive to lift its being other than itself up beyond other-
ness, is what we have already beheld even prior to the creation of the 
world throughout the science of logic. All along we have beheld no more 
than the absolute idea distinguishing itself from itself. 
The content of the absolute idea lies in all that has now preceded it 
in the science of logic. The absolute idea repels itself from itself, and its 
process at once restores itself to itself in what is other than itself. This 
is the system of logic. In that the absolute idea is for itself in being for 
its own object, the object is its manifestation, its differentiation of it-
self from itself, the sphere of external beings holding forth with a 
being for one another. Lying within this sphere of external beings 
with being for one another is differentiation in general, where to dif-
ferentiate is to bestow determination. The posited determinate forms 
deposited along this process are themselves the content as retained 
within the absolute idea. The absolute idea, when taken as objective, 
is being [within the objective logic]. But this being is at once different 
from its other standing over against it, which is its essence [also within 
the objective logic]. 

The Self-Concept (223-224) 
229 
So the absolute idea as object unto itself is being, while its essence is 
being's difference from itself, differentiation. The logic of essence is that 
of difference, the activity of differentiating being taken as the absolute 
object from itself. The spheres of being and essence are [upon them-
selves, potentially] the absolute idea [in which the subjective logic of 
the self-concept culminates]. The logic of being lifts itself up beyond it-
self, and so passes into the logic of its essence. Yet the essence of being 
remains, within itself, different from being taken as immediate. These 
spheres of being and essence have laid out the absolute idea in its con-
tent. Within the third sphere, the logic of the self-concept, the essence 
of being lifts its show of being other than being up beyond itself and de-
termines itself as the self-concept. Necessity [in the logic of the essence] 
now becomes true freedom in the logic of the self-concept, the self-con-
cept as posited. The self-concept developing upon itself into its totality is 
the absolute idea, the absolute idea as objective unto itself. Here in this 
objectification we have the full content of the absolute idea. Mere being, 
we now come to truly know [wissen]. arises from the primordial inter-
nal judgment or self-sundering of the absolute idea. Mere being is pos-
ited within the absolute idea. Potentially it is upon itself that very idea, 
but it at once sets itself forth over against the idea. 
(§237) The above objective content is the system of all that is logical. 
What remains for the absolute idea is only to supply the form for that 
content. Whatever was content [in the objective logic of being and es-
sence] is now destined to be but a formal moment deposited within the 
absolute idea. The Platonic absolute idea or form has the defect, which Ar-
istotle exposed, of being devoid of self-movement. For Plato the absolute 
idea fails to encompass what Aristotle highlights as energy, entelechy, 
dialectic, in contrast to mere motion [Dynamis]. These determinations 
of energy, entelechy, and dialectic are posited by Aristotle as forms 
within the absolute idea itself. Aristotle tells us that thinking, for God, 
is the thinking of that which is thought. Thinking here has itself [vorp:6v] 
for its object, and so is set free of anything other than itself. Such thought 
thinking itself is unmoved, but what is unmoved, as something that 
persists immovably in being, has only itself for its object. Yet what is 
unmoved is, for Aristotle, also the mover. This one, being for itself with 
solely itself as its object, implies that no unintelligible darkness survives 
in the object. Perfect clarity immovably reigns within it, with nothing 
to muddy itY Its content is to be apprehended merely as the determin-
ing of form, as the activity of the absolute idea, not merely as any one 
form among its formal determinations, but as the determining of form 
in its infinite activity. 
23. This is to say, in Aristotelian language, that the absolute idea, as thought 
thinking itself, has no unactualized potentiality in need of further illumination. 

Lectures on Logic (224) 
230 
This unmoved form is the universal activity of the absolute idea. 
The self-activation of the absolute idea occurs within all of its mo-
ments, in the logic of being as within that of essence. Each of these 
two circles is within itself a circle of circles, each such circle contains 
the whole larger circle imprinted upon itself. Within each moment the 
very same activity occurs, and the universal form of this activity we 
call the [dialectical] method.24 We already re-cognize this method, 
since it has been implicitly active in each of the circles we have already 
traversed in the science of logic. We call the universal form of this ac-
t'ivity "the method" to distinguish it from its variable particular con-
tent. Yet the form exhibited by the method has a content of its own. 
What we call "method" is distinguished from the variable particular 
content so that the [continuing] form of the method has its own con-
tent. The method is not the form as it comes to be explicated upon any 
particular empirically given material. The method is rather the uni-
versal inner life of every self-concept, it is the dialectical process of de-
velopment as subjectively re-enacted. 
(§238) Being is the immediate beginning of the science of logic. This 
being is immediate. We have already seen being's one-sidedness when 
taken as immediate. The absolute idea has being for itself, is an object 
unto itself. What is objective within the absolute idea starts with what 
merely has being. The absolute idea primordially divides itself, and is 
self-determining as absolute negativity[, negation of the negation]. In 
other words, [as a concrete) universal it is not anything abstract, but is 
absolute concrete self-reference [under different determinations]. Ne-
gation of the negation is the living nub of the absolute idea. The inescap-
able conclusion, the conclusion that everything is the infinite activity of 
negation of the negation, has arisen upon the given determinations. 
Immediate being as posited being is determinate. As immediate, it is 
mediated by what is not immediate. Immediate being is upon itself, po-
tentially, the self-concept. Mere being is the still indeterminate self-
concept. It is the universal. but is the universal understood as abstract. 
What comes in the second place, beyond being, is the original internal 
self-division of the absolute idea in judgment [§239]. If we start out 
24. The dialectical method in which the subjective logic of the self-concept cul-
minates is thus the subjective re-enactment at the end of the history of philosophy 
of the objective logics of being and the essence of being in the prior history of phi-
losophy. If the dialectic is the original self-moving, self-constructive development of 
history, including the past history of philosophy. the dialectic in the sense of the di-
alectical method at the end of the history should be understood as our subjective 
re-enactment or reconstruction. as speculative logicians, of the self-constructive 
dialectic of objective history. The objective success of practical striving is crowned 
only by subjective knowledge of that very success. Victory in the objective play of 
such striving in history is consummated by the enjoyment of a subjective replay. 

The Self-Concept (224-225) 
231 
with mere being, we must take judgment merely as it comes to be im-
printed upon being itself, we must not take it at the start as proceeding 
from the absolute idea. Being bears this judgment within itself. We 
begin with the immediate being which being first gives itself out to be, 
since being is merely upon itself [or potentially, for the science of logic,] 
what is living. Being reduces itself to being only a determination of 
form, one moment within the whole. Being is not thereby refuted, but 
rather remains as one determination, as an essential ingredient, within 
the further progression. Yet being does lose its initial status of being ul-
timate. The moment of reflection comes in the second place in relation 
to being, and is the sphere of essence in general. 
(§240) In the logic of being, the progression is a transition from 
something to something else, which is a matter of alteration. In the logic 
of the essence of being [§241], the progression is a showing forth of this 
essence within what is set over against it, and what shows forth within 
what is set over against this essence also in turn shows forth as what is 
set over against itself. What is set over against the other is in each case 
the showing forth of the one within the other. Within the logic of the 
self-concept, the progression is posited as judgment, where the self-con-
cept is internally self-divided into a singular subject and universal pred-
icate. The singular subject A continues into B, the other which is predi-
cated of it, and so they are posited as unseparated: A is B-which is the 
continuation of A into B. The development within this sphere of the 
self-concept, within the logic of judgment, is a reverse movement from 
the self-concept back into the first sphere of being [walled off in itself as 
the subject of predication], a prevailing current which is quite the op-
posite of the self-development of being into the self-concept, a doubling 
back on itself of the forward movement. 
It is not enough to say that we pass dialectically from one thing to 
the next, for the second thing is also the first. The other is the one-sid-
edness of both raised up beyond itself. Infinite progress enters with 
the transition from the second to the third, which are distinguished 
even while bearing reference to each other. Their mutual reference is 
what they share in common. Contradiction takes the form of [ordinal] 
infinite progress to ever new members of the series, where the repeti-
tion of ever new members is impotent to bring any two members to-
gether [§242]. Indeed, such infinite progress is a quite thoughtless 
mode in which to proceed. What is at issue is bringing the [successive] 
thought determinations together. Bringing them together is the third 
moment, the self-concept in its concrete self-determination. The unity 
within which the distinguished moments have their being as lifted up 
beyond themselves, i.e., as preserved, is the realized self-concept, this 
unity as posited. The unity of these moments is this very positing of 
unity. It is what we have already witnessed: the unifying activity con-

Lectures on Logic (225-226) 
232 
sisting in negating the differences [in their separation from one an-
other by negation of the negation]. 
That activity of negating differences precisely as different from one 
another is being for itself. The transition of one into the other lies im-
printed upon the first, it is its very being upon itself. But the first being's 
being for itself lies in the fact that the determinations are the activity of 
each in negating the other as other. The object [for which the subject 
has being as for itself] is the collapse of the object into the subject. In 
positing what being is potentially upon itself, we are always jumping 
ahead of ourselves. We posit what being is upon itself, after which, as 
we have seen, the self-concept also comes to be posited through what it 
upon itself potentially is. What we then have is the self-concept not only 
as it initially is upon itself, but also for itself. The method is the soul-
the Jiving self-activation-of the material itself [§243]. But, considering 
the method precisely as method [from the standpoint of the absolute 
idea in which the objective success of practical striving is completed by 
subjective contemplation of that very success], it is essential for us to 
truly know that nothing can withstand the self-concept. 25 The self-con-
cept is absolutely all-penetrating. It prevails over and annihilates what-
ever would be other than it. Within whatever is at first externally off-
putting, the self-concept still comes to itself. 
(§244) The absolute idea is this internal self-judgment. From this 
idea's self-differentiation come the spheres of being and essence. But 
what is even more concrete than the absolute idea, however, is for this 
idea to pursue its self-judgment [or self-division] beyond itself into na-
ture.26 The [self-]reflection of the absolute idea within nature is then 
spirit. The absolute idea considered in its immediate oneness with itself 
25. Hegel has previously said that we have only faith (Glauben) that the advance 
of the self-concept's all-penetrating negation of the negation is irresistible. But that 
claim was made from the practical standpoint of volition before the end of history. 
From the end-of-history standpoint of the absolute idea, which is the standpoint 
from which the objective historical achievement of attaining the object of will (uni-
versal freedom) is crowned by subjective knowledge that it has indeed been at-
tained, the dialectical method of re-enacting the achievement allows knowledge, 
not just faith, that every negation of otherness, and every negation by the other of 
what is first given, yields to negation of the negation. But this insight leaves open 
the question of whether history has now ended only in general but not yet in 
particular. 
26. We have seen Hegel side with Aristotle's purportedly non-Platonic view of 
the absolute idea as the rest of purely actual activity, devoid of anything lying 
upon it as a potential for further self-development. Hegel now diverges from Aris-
totle in taking the absolute idea, Aristotle's thought thinking itself, to bear upon 
itself a potential for self-alienation in nature as "created,· and self-recuperation in 
spirit, in the infinite Incarnation of the Word (Christ) in the world. 

The Self-Concept (226) 
233 
is the act of its self-intuition in pure thought, in its simplicity, the abso-
lute idea in its immediacy. Here in nature we have the absolute idea in 
its fallen state. The absolute idea as given in the form of [sensory] intu-
ition is nature. But within nature the absolute idea comes forth only 
under a one-sided determination. In fact, the absolute idea is not simply 
given immediately [in the sensory world], but is the infinite a.ctivity of 
positing itself. The absolute idea is the Word [Logos, Christ] that re-
leases itself freely from itself into nature. 27 The absolute idea does not 
simply pass within nature over into life, but has resolved to freely re-
lease itself from itself as nature. Nature is then what is immediate, it is 
being-except that this content of the consummated absolute idea has 
being displaced outside itself. But nature itself, as we have already seen 
to be anticipated in the purely logical category of life, is its own rise up 
beyond itself into spirit. Nature thus bears upon itself the mark of its 
own self-nullification, and passes over into infinite spirit as the truth of 
nature. Yet it does not do so without first passing over into finite spirit, 
which only then will lift itself into infinite spirit. 
27. One of Hegel's formulations in paragraph §85 of his introduction, as noted, 
suggests theism: the logic is an exposition of the eternal essence of God prior to 
creation. But the meaning of this statement is explicitly shown, in this final para-
graph of the lectures, to contrast with the orthodox claim that God created the 
world by the Word, by Christ, hence by what Hegel calls the absolute self-thinking 
logical idea. Hegel's less orthodox language here implies that the absolute idea, 
Christ himself, is the creator, and not merely the instrument of creation. His ref-
erence in this final paragraph to the absolute idea as fallen in its passage into cre-
ation also poses a challenge to an orthodox classical theistic interpretation of cre-
ation. God needs us to actualize his self-knowledge: he attains to knowledge of 
himself only in and through our knowledge of him. We read in Hegel's last essay 
on theology, published just a year before the present lectures, that "God is not 
merely eternal being (substance) but also self-knowledge .... [A]s being in the 
other [in nature and in spirit]. God is self-knowledge outside itself-God's con-
sciousness in the world, in individual beings as the creatures of God .... If God is 
actual only in and with His creatures-and this is what Scripture teaches-God's 
knowledge is also in them-since He is only insofar as He knows Himself. • See 
G. W. F. Hegel. "Review of K. F. Goschel's Aphorisms, • trans. Clark Butler. in Mis-
cellaneous Writings of G. W F. Hegel, ed. Jon Stewart (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern 
University Press, 2000), pp. 413-414. 


