
HEGEL'S 
PHILOSOPHY OF 
RIGHT 
TRANSLATED WITH NOTES BY 
T. M. KNOX 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON 
OXFORD 
NEW YORK 

First published by the Clarendon Press, 1952 
First issued as an Oxford University Press paperback, 1967 
This reprint, 1978 
Printed in the United States of America 

TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD 
§ I 
THIS book is a translation of the work which Hegel published in 
1821* under the double title: Naturrecht und Staatswissenschaft im 
Grundrisse and Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts (Natural Law 
and Political Science in Outline; Eiements of the Philosophy of 
Right). The text of that edition is the basis of the translation, but 
reference has also been made to the editions of Gans (Berlin, 1833 
and 1854-the first and third editions of Hegels Werke, vol. viii), 
Bolland (Leyden, 1902), and Lasson (Leipzig, 1921). Lasson has 
recorded in his edition the results of his collation of previous 
editions. The translator has tacitly accepted Lasson's corrections 
of misprints in the first edition and has confined his textual notes 
to recording (a) Hegel's own corrections of his published text 
(which are printed in Hegels eigenhiindige Randbemerkungen zu 
seiner Reclztsphilosophie, hrsg. von G. Lasson, Leipzig, 1930), (b) 
some of Lasson's emendations, and (c) certain emendations of his 
mvn, most of which are corrections of Hegel's cross-references. 
In his editions of the book, Gans intercalated into Hegel's 
text a number of Additions culled from notes taken at Hegel's 
lectures; these have been translated here (from Cans's 1833 
edition, except where otherwise stated), but in order to distinguish 
them from what Hegel published himself, they have been relegated 
to an Appendix. The point in the text where Gans inserted an 
Addition is here indicat~d by [A.]. 
The use of square brackets in the translation indicates that the 
matter enclosed between them is the translator's. 
Hegel subjoins to many of his Paragraphs explanatory notes 
which are here printed in smaller type and referred to throughout 
as 'Remarks' in order to distinguish them from the translator's 
'Notes'. The latter are exegetical and illustrative only; they fall 
short of a full commentary and provide no criticism of Hegel's 
argument. 
§z 
The translator is specially indebted to previous workers in this 
field, first to F. Messineo, t whose translation has been a valuable 
• Not 1820, as many writers state. For the circumstances of its publication, see 
an article on 'Hegel and Prussianism' by the translator in Philosophy, January 1940. 
t Hegel: Lineamenti di filosojia del diritto, tradotti da Francesco Messineo 
(Bari, 1913). 

TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD 
guide, secondly to J. M. Sterrett• and S. W. Dydet. The excellent 
synopsis of Hegel's work by T. C. Sandars in Oxford Essays, 1855, 
is wrongly described in Croce's bibliography as a 'translation'. 
Mr. H. A. Reyburn's Hegel's Ethical Theory (Oxford, 1921) pro-
vides a summary of the whole of Hegel's argument. Many of 
Hegel's critics misrepresent or misapprehend him, but there is one 
critic whose work on the Philosophy of Right the student of this book 
will find indispensable, namely Mr. M. B. Foster. See the follow-
ing books and articles of his: Die Geschichte als Schicksal des Geistes 
(Ttibingen, 1929), 'Hegel und die Politik' (in Die Idee, 1933), 'The 
opposition between Hegel and the philosophy of empiricism' (in 
V erhandlungen des dritten Hegel-Kongresses in Rom-Ttibingen and 
Haarlem, 1934), and The Political Philosophies of Plato and Hegel 
(Oxford, 1935). 
§ 3 
The difficulties of translating the Philosophy of Right begin with 
the title. Recht is the German equivalent of jus, droit, and diritto as 
distinct from lex, loi, and Iegge. There is no corresponding dis-
tinction in English. 'Right' has been selected almost everywhere as 
perhaps the least confusing rendering of Hegel's meaning, although 
this leads at times to phrases unnatural in English. For instance. 
'science of right' (Paragraph I) sounds strange to an English ear, 
but to use the more natural 'jurisprudence' would be to restrict 
Hegel's meaning unduly. He says (Addition to Paragraph 33) that 
by Recht he means not only civil law, but also morality, ethical life, 
and world history. The associations of the word 'right' perhaps 
make it the best equivalent of a term given so wide a sense. 
Hegel distinguishes sharply between wirklich and real (see Note 
27 to the Preface) and also between moralisch and sittliclt (see Note 
75 to Paragraph 33), and these distinctions must be preserved in 
the translation. No natural equivalents are available, and some 
more or less arbitrary choice of rendering must be made. Hence 
wirklich is translated 'actual' and real 'real', while moralisch is 
translated 'moral' and sittliclz 'ethical', even though English usage 
would require 'real' and 'moral' in certain contexts where, in order 
to retain Hegel's distinctions, 'actual' and 'ethical' have been used. 
• The Ethics of Hegel-translated selections from his Rechtsphilosophie, with an 
mt oduction by J. Macbride Sterrett, D.D. (Boston, 1893). 
·• Hegel's Philosophy of Right translated by S. W. Dyde, M.A., D.Sc. 
(London, 181)6). 

TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD 
vn 
One further avoidance of an obvious English usage may require 
explanation. Hegel speaks of Stiinde as divided into two Houses. 
Stiinde in its political meaning has here been translated 'Estates' 
and not 'Parliament', chiefly because Hegel insists so strongly on 
the connexion between parliament and the Estates of the Realm, or 
the social classes, of which it is composed. 
Where there is available a well-known English translation of 
German books cited by Hegel, the title of that translation has been 
given here in place 0f the German one. 
§4 
Hegel's terminology causes difficulty to a beginner, and he takes 
for granted in the Philosophy of Right the general conception of 
philosophy and the general mode of argument expounded in his 
Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. The best introduction 
to the study of any part of his philosophy is probably the smaller 
Logic, i.e. the first part of the Enc., and of this there is an English 
translation by W. Wallace (Oxford, 1892). The first five chapters 
of Mr. Reyburn's Hegel's Ethical Theory expound the presup-
positions of the Philosophy of Right. The translator has appended 
notes on many of Hegel's technicalities as they arise in the text, but 
it may be useful to supplement these here by adapting and amplify-
ing the exposition of some of his chief terms which Hegel prefixed 
to his lectures on the history of philosophy and which has recently 
been published from one of his manuscripts (see Hegels Geschichte 
der Philosophie, hrsg. von J. Hoffmeister-Le1pzig, 1938-Lief. I, 
pp. 96 ff.). 
(i) The thought (Gedanke) of a thing. 
Philosophy is thinking, the thinking of the universal. The pro-
duct of thinking is a thought, and this, viewed objectively, we call 
the 'universal'. But we know that the universal in this sense is 
abstract and different from the particular. The universal is a form, 
and its content, the particular, stands contrasted with it. 
Now if we go no further than the thought of a thing, than this 
abstract universal, we remain at the level of the Understanding 
(Verstand), the level of reflection (see Note 61 to Paragraph 21), 
and the categories of 'essence' (see Note 5 to Paragraph 108). The 
Understanding ( spelt with a capital letter in this translation because 
it is a technicality which Hegel often uses to mean 'those who 
remain at the level of the understanding and limit themselves to its 

viii 
TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD 
categories') is abstract or formal thinking, the thinking character-
istic of the mathematical and empirical sciences or of formal logic, 
as well as of those philosophies which adhere to scientific method 
instead of abandoning it in favour of reason ( V ernunft) and the 
philosophic method of 
(ii) The concept (Begriff). 
(Wallace, Reyburn, and others translate Begriff by 'notion'.) 
The defect of the Understanding is that while it correctly dis-
tinguishes between form and content, essential and inessential, uni-
versal and particular, it fails to synthesize these opposites. Held 
apart from one another, however, each of these opposites becomes 
an abstraction, and the living whole of reality has not been ex-
plained but explained away and killed by being so analysed into its 
constituents. What the Understanding fails to recognize is that a-
'thought' is not something empty or abstract; it is a determinant, 
a determinant of itself. The essence of thought is its concreteness. 
and the concrete thought is what Hegel calls the concept. When the 
thought of a thing is handled philosophically instead of scientific-
ally, it is seen to be inherently concrete, i.e. not a mere abstract 
form, but possessed of a content which it has given to itself. In a 
sense it is right enough to say that philosophy deals with abstrac-
tions, with thoughts abstracted from the sense-perceptions which 
are sometimes called 'concrete'; but in another sense this is quite 
false, because when the sensuous content is separated from its 
universal form, it also becomes an abstraction. Philosophy has to 
do not with these two abstractions, held apart from one another, 
but with their concrete synthesis, the concept. Its constituents are 
not self-subsistent entities, which is what the Understanding takes 
them to be, but only 'moments' in an organic whole. 
The concept is the thought in so far as the thought determines 
itself and gives itself a content; it is the thought in its vivacity and 
activity. Again, the concept is the universal which particularizes 
itself, the thought which actively creates and engenders itself. 
Hence it is not a bare form for a content; it forms itself, gives itself 
a content and determines itself to be the form. What is meant bv 
'concrete' is the thought which does not remain empty but which 
is self-determining and self-particularizing. 
The concept is thus the inward living principle of all reality. 
(The background of Hegel's thought is theological, and the con-
cept is his philosophical equivalent for the wisdom and so for the 

TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD 
ix 
creative power of God.) It follows that it is one and the same 
concept whose self-determining activity the philosopher studies 
whether in logic (which is the thought of God 'before the creation 
of nature and a finite spirit'-Science of Logic, i. 6o), or nature, or 
man, or human institutions. 
(iii) The Idea (Idee). 
(This word is spelt throughout the translation with a capital letter 
in order to distinguish it from 'idea' (Vorstellung), i.e. from 'what-
soever is the object of the understanding when a man thinks'.) 
Just as the thought of a thing, when viewed concretely, is the 
concept, so the concept, viewed concretely (i.e. in its truth, in its 
full development, and so in synthesis with the content which it 
gives to itself), is the Idea. The Idea is the concept in so far as the 
concept gives reality and existence to itself. To do this, the con-
cept must determine itself, and the determination is nothing ex-
ternal, but is the concept itself, i.e. it is a self-determination. The 
Idea, or reason, or truth, is the concept become concrete, the unity 
of subject and object, of form and content. 
(iv) Development. 
Since the concept determines itself, it is alive and active, and its 
life is a development. The nature of mind is an immanent restless 
process; mind is self-productive and exists in and through this 
self-production. Development is from implicit (an sich, potentia, 
8vvafttS') to explicit (fur sich, actus, lv£pyna). To illustrate this 
process, Hegel frequently uses the analogy of organic growth. The 
tree-trunk, branches, and fruit-is present in germ in the seed. 
The seed is the whole life of the tree in its 'immediacy', and that 
life becomes explicit as its immediacy is mediated through the 
different stages in the tree's history. Hence as the tree grows, all 
that happens is that what is implicit becomes explicit; but the 
development is a genuine development and change, because trunk, 
branches, &c., do not exist rea/iter in the seed-even a microscope 
will not detect them there. As the seed grows, it differentiates itself 
into trunk, branches, leaves, &c., but when its growth is complete, 
it is a concrete unity (the tree as a whole) and not, as the seed was, 
an abstract unity, because it is now a differentiated and not an im-
mediate, undeveloped, immature, unity. 
It is a development of this sort which we study in the Philosophy 
of Right, and the process is always from immediate, undifferenti-
ated, unity (i.e. bare abstract universality), through difference and 

X 
TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD 
particularization, to the concrete unity and synthesis of universal 
and particular, subject and object, form and content. This syn-
thesis is individuality or concrete universality, or the concept in its 
truth as Idea. Since the process of its life is a single process, the 
determinations or particularizations which the concept gives to it-
self are an organically connected series, and they follow one another 
in stages of gradually increasing concreteness. The later stages 
cancel the earlier ones, and yet at the same time the earlier ones are 
absorbed within the later as moments or elements within them. 
Hence, although 'ethical life' supersedes 'abstract right' and 
'morality', both of these are absorbed into ethical life as its con-
stituents, just as family and civil society are both superseded by 
and incorporated in the state. 
A beginner may perhaps be warned that Hegel's introductory 
matter, whether his Preface and Introduction or the first few Para-
graphs of the three parts of the book, is seldom intelligible without 
some knowledge of that which it is meant to introduce. 
§ 5 
Hegel's conception of civil society has given rise to misunder-
standings. 'Civil society' is used by eighteenth-century writers in 
contexts where we would now normally speak of 'the state', and 
Hegel has had his share in this change of linguistic usage. The 
popularity of the expression 'civil society' in Hegel's Germany was 
largely due to a translation of Adam Fergus<Jn's Essay on the History 
of Civil Society (1767)-or so Rosenzweig says (Hegel und der 
Staat, Munich and Berlin, 1920, vol. ii, p. 118)-but Hooker uses 
the expression and it is a commonplace of English writers on 
political theory after him. 
Just as the family is an immature kind of state (i.e. a patriarchal 
community), so civil society is also a kind of state, though one less 
immature than the family, because particular differences are ex-
plicit within it. It is, for example, an eighteenth-century despotism, 
under which the citizen, unless he were a civil servant, was con-
scious of the state, if at all, only as something external to him. His 
interests were civil and economic, not political, and he felt himself 
to be not a participant in public affairs, but the subject of his 
prince. His private affairs had no concern with politics, and 
political difficulties did not concern him. Universal and particular 
interests were thus distinct, and hence from the point of view of 

TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD 
xi 
the Understanding, civil society is the state. It is an abstract 
universal which rules and commands the particular. 
Civil society is not only a kind of state, the kind about which the 
Understanding's political theories are true enough, it is a moment 
in the state proper. It grows up into the state, because the educa-
tive influence of civil life (especially the life of trade and com-
merce) makes men realize that they are by nature not self-seeking 
individualists but creatures of reason; they have a universal side 
and so can aline themselves with the universal without sacrifice of 
freedom. So long as men regard freedom as freedom to pursue 
selfish whims, society is possible only if external checks are placed 
on this freedom ; government is then an external organization to 
meet men's necessities. But if they realize that their true freedom 
consists in the acceptance of principles, of laws which are their 
own, a synthesis of universal and particular interests becomes 
possible. It can be actualized, however, only in and through the 
political institutions whereby the state proper is distinguished from 
civil society, notably limited monarchy, parliament, and freedom of 
press and public opinion. In civil society, the law which defends 
security of property and enforces contracts is regarded as an ex-
ternal force; in the state the law receives its content from parlia-
ment and so is the law of the citizens themselves. 
-
Hence the transition from civil society to the state is due to 
education. When men realize that the cleavage between universal 
and particular which is characteristic of civil society is only an 
appearance, or in other words when they realize the concrete unity 
of universal and particular in their own nature, then this leads at 
once to the objectification of this concrete though differentiated 
unity in the political institutions which make the state an organic 
whole. Civil life then remains as an element in the state, but only 
as a subordinate moment of it (see, e.g., Paragraphs 287, 314, and 
the third footnote to Paragraph 270). The acquisition of political 
interests does not mean that economic interests cease. 
§6 
The translation has greatly benefited from the criticisms and 
suggestions of Mr. G. R. G. Mure, Mr. M. B. Foster, Professor 
Richard Kroner, and Mr. J.I. McKie. To these and to many other 
friends who answered his queries on points of translation and 
exegesis, the translator wishes to record his gratitude. He is solely 
responsible for any errors that remain. He has tried to be literal 

xii 
TRANSLATOR'S FOREWORD 
and so to allow Hegel to speak for himself; but Hegel prided him-
self on teaching philosophy to speak German, and the translator 
is aware that he has been able to make Hegel's philosophy speak 
English only at the expense of some awkward sentences and 
cumbersome expressions. Even so, there may be those who will 
object that his renderings of certain technicalities, such as an sich 
and fur sich, have not been literal enough. 
§ 7 
The translator thanks the Delegates of the Clarendon Press for 
undertaking to publish his work, and especially for persevering 
with the publication amidst the difficulties of the present time. 
In recognition of a pupil's debt to a tutor, and in gratitude for 
a friendship of twenty years, the translator dedicates his work to 
R. G. Collingwood, Fellow of the British Academy, sometime 
Waynflete Professor of Metaphysical Philosophy in the University 
of Oxford. 
UNITED COLLEGE, ST. ANDREW~, 
August 1942 
POSTSCRIPT 
T. :\I. K. 
(i) The reference to Croce's bibliography of Hegel in§ 2 of this 
Foreword is to the French translation. See Ce qui est ·vivant et ce 
qui est mort de Ia philosophie de Hegel (Paris, 1910), p. 194. 
(ii) References in the Notes to 'all editions' are to all the editions 
and translations which the translator has seen, i.e. to those 
enumerated in this Foreword. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ABBREVIATIONS 
XV 
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT: 
PREFACE 
INTRODUCTION: Concept of the Philosophy of Right, of the Will, 
Freedom, and Right . 
14 
FIRST PART: ABSTRACT RIGHT 
37 
(i) Property 
40 
(a) Taking possession 
46 
(b) Use of the Thing 
49 
(c) Alienation of Property 
52 
(ii) Contract 
57 
(iii) Wrong . 
64 
(a) Non-malicious Wrong . 
65 
(b) Fraud 
65 
(c) Coercion and Crime 
66 
SECOND PART: MORALITY 
75 
(i) Purpose and Responsibility 
79 
(ii) Intention and Welfare 
81 
(iii) Good and Conscience 
86 
THIRD PAnT: ETHICAL LIFE . 
105 
(i) The Family 
uo 
(a) Marriage 
III 
(b) The Family Capital 
u6 
(c) The Education of Children and the Dissolution of 
the Family 
. 
II7 
(ii) Civil Society . 
122 
(a) The System of Needs . 
126 
(ex) The Kind of Need and Satisfaction 
127 
({3) The Kind of Work 
128 
(y) Capital and Class-Divisions 
129 
(b) The Administration of Justice 
134 
(ex) Right as Law 
134 
({3) Law determinately existent 
138 
{y) The Court of Justice 
. 
140 

xiv 
CONTENTS 
(c) The Police and the Corporation 
I4S 
(a<) Police 
146 
({3) The Corporation 
152 
(iii) The State 
ISS 
(a) Constitutional Law 
16o 
1. The Constitution (on its internal side only) 
174 
(a<) The Crown 
179 
({3) The Executive 
r88 
(y) The Legislature 
193 
2. Sovereignty vis-a-vis foreign states 
208 
(b) International Law 
212 
(c) World History . 
216 
ADDITIONS TO HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT 
224 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
298 
INDEX 
377 

ABBREVIATIONS 
KEY TO ABBREVIATED REFERENCES TO BOOKS CITED 
Abbreviation 
Full title 
(A) HEGEL'S WORKS 
Aesthetic 
Hegel's Philosophy of Fine Art, translated by 
F. P. B. Osmaston, 4 vols., London, 1916. 
Enc. 
Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. See 
Note 2 to the Preface. 
Hegels e. R. 
Hegels eigenhiindige Randbemerkungen :ru seiner 
Rechtsphilosophie, hrsg. von G. Lasson, Leip-
zig, 19JO. 
History of Philosophy 
Hegel's History of Philosophy, translated by E. S. 
Haldane, 3 vols., London, I Sgz. 
Phe11omenology 
Hegel's Phenomenology of Mind, translated by 
Sir J. B. Baillie, znd edn., London, 1931. 
Philosophy of History 
Hegel's Philosophy of History, translated by 
J. Sibree, 2nd edn., New York, Igoo. 
Philosophy of Religion 
Hegel's Philosophy of Reiigion, translated by the 
Rev. E. B. Speirs and J. Burdon Sanderson, 
3 vols., London, 1895· 
Science of Logic 
Hegel's Science of Logic, translated by W. H. 
Johnston and L. G. Struthers, 2 vols., 
London, 1929. 
Werke1 or • 
Hegels siimtliche Werke, neu hrsg. von H. 
Glockner, Stuttgart, 1927 ff. The pagination 
quoted is that of the original edition, which is 
given in the margin of Glockner's reprint. 
(B) EDITIONS AND TRANSLATIONS OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT 
Bolland 
Hegels Grundlinien der Philosophic des Recht.s, 
Gans 
Lasson 
k!essineo 
Sterrett 
hrsg. von G. J.P. J. Bolland, Leyden, 1902. 
Hegels siimtliche Werke, vol. viii, Berlin, 1st edn. 
1833. Jrd edn. 1854• 
llegels Grundlinien der Philosophu des Rechts, 
neu hrsg. von G. Lasson, znd edn., Leipzig, 
1921. 
Hegel: Lineammti di filosofia del diritto, tradotti 
da Francesco Messineo, Bari, I9IJ. 
The Ethics of Hegel, translated selections from 
his Rechtsphilosophie, with an introduction by 
J. Macbride Sterrett, D.O., Boston, 1893· 

xvi 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Abbreviation 
Full titlt 
(c) OTHER WORKS 
Scienct of Knowledge 
Fichte's Science of Knowledge (Wissensch4fts-
lehre), translated by A. E. Kroeger, London, 
188g. 
Science of Rights 
Fichte's Science of Rights (Grundlage tks 
Naturrechts), translated by A. E. Kroeger, 
London, 
I 889. 
References to numbered 
sections are omitted in Kroeger's translation, 
and they are inserted here from J. G. Fichte. 
Werke, hrsg. von F. Medicus, Leipzig, I908, 
vol. ii. 
Philosophy of Law 
Kant's Philosophy of Law (the first part of his 
Metaphysik tkr Sitten), translated by W. 
Hastie, Edinburgh, 1887. 
Kant's Theory of Ethics Kant's Theory of Ethics, translated by T. K. 
Abbott, 6th edn., London, 1923. 
In quoting from translations of Hegel, the translator in his Notes has 
made modifications here and there in order to bring the terminology into 
accordance with that used here. 

HEGEL'S 
PHILOSOPHY OF 
RIGHT 


l
HEGEL'S PHILOSOPHY OF RIGHT 
PREFACE 
T
HE immediate inducement to publish this manual is the need 
for putting into the hands of my audience a text-book for 
the lectures on the Philosophy of Right which I deliver in the 
course of my professional dutieR. 1* This compendium is an en-
larged and especially a more systematic exposition of the same 
fundamental concepts which in relation to this part of philosophy 
are already contained in a book of mine designed previously for my 
lectures-the Eucyclopaedia of Philosophical Sciences (Heidelberg, 
1817).2 
But this manual was to appear in print and therefore it now 
o;mes before the general public; and this was my inducement to 
amplify here a good many of the Remarks which were primarily 
meant in a brief compass to indicate ideas akin to my argument or 
at nriance with it, further inferences from it, and the like, i.e. 
material which would receive its requisite elucidation in my 
lectures. The object of amplifying them here was to clarify 
occasionally the more abstract parts of the text and to take a more 
comprehensive glance at current ideas widely disseminated at the 
present time. Hence the result has been a number of Remarks 
rather more extensive than is usually consistent with the style and 
aim of a compendium. Apart from that, howevL"r, a compendium 
proper has as its subject-matter what is taken to be the closed circle 
of a science; and what is appropriate in it, except perhaps for a 
small addition here and there, is principally the assembly and 
arrangement of the essential factors in a content which has long 
been familiar and accepted, just as the form in which it is arranged 
has its rules and artifices which have long been settled. Philo-
sophical manuals are perhaps not now expected to conform to such 
a pattern, for it is supposed that what philosophy puts together is 
a work as ephemeral as Penelope's web, one which must be begun 
afresh every morning. 
I need hardly say that the chief difference between this manual 
and an ordinary compendium lies in the method which constitutes 
their guiding principle. But in this book I am presupposing that 
philosophy's mode of progression from one topic to another and 
" [Numerals so inset refer throughout to the Translator's Notes.] 

2 
PREFACE 
its mode of scientific proof-this whole speculative way of know-
ing-is essentially distinct from any other way of knowing. It is 
only insight into the necessity of such a difference that can rescue 
philosophy from the shameful decay in which it is immersed at the 
present time. It is true that the forms and rules of the old logic, 
of definition, classification, and syllogism, which include the rules 
of discursive thinking, have become recognized as inadequate for 
speculative science; or rather their inadequacy has not been recog-
nized; it has only been felt, and then these rules have been thrown 
off as if they were mere fetters in order to allow the heart, the imagi-
nation, and casual intuition to say what they pleased. 1 And since 
reflection and connexions of thought have after all to come on the 
scene as well, there is an unconscious relapse into the despised 
method of commonplace deduction and argumentation. 
Since I have fully expounded the nature of speculative knowing 
in my Science of Logic, 4 in this manual I han: only added an ex-
planatory note here and there about procedure and method. In 
dealing with a topic which is concrete and intrinsically of so varied 
a character, I have omitted to bring out and demonstrate the chain 
of logical argument in each and every detail. For one thing, to 
have done this might have been regarded as superfluous where 
acquaintance \l·ith philosophical method is presuppnsed; for 
another, it will be obvious from the work itself that the whole, like 
the formation of its parts, rests on the logical spirit. It is also from 
this point of view above all that I should like my hook to be taken 
and judged. \\"hat we have to do with here is philosophical science, 
and in such science content is essentially hound up with form. 
We may of course hear from those who seem to he taking a pro-
found view that the form is something external and indifferent to 
the subject-matter, that the latter alone is important; further, the 
task of a writer, especially a \Hiter on philosophy, may be said to 
lie in the diswvery of truth, the statement of truth, the dissemina-
tion of truth and sound concepts. But if\\ e consider ho\v this task 
is as a rule actually discharged, \\hat \le find in the first place is 
that the same old stew is continually warmed up again and again 
arid served round to everybody-a task that\'- ill e\·en he meritorious 
in educating and stimulating me!1 's hearts, though it might pr('fer-
ably be regarded as the superfluous labour of a husybody-'They 
ha\·e :\·Ioses and the Prophets, let them hear them.'s In particular, 
we have ample opportunity to marvel at the pretcntwus tune 
recognizable in these busybodies when they talk as if the \I orld had 

PREFACE 
3 
wanted for nothing except their energetic dissemination of truths, 
or as if their rechauffe were productive of new and unheard-of 
truths and was to be specially taken to heart before everything else 
'to-day' and every day. llut in this situation we also find one party 
giving out truths of this sort only to have them dislodged and 
brushed aside by truths of just the same sort purveyed by other 
parties. In this press of truths, there is something neither new nor 
old but perennial; yet how else is this to be lifted out of these re-
flections \\·hich oscillate from this to that without method, how else 
is it to be separated from them and proved, if not by philosophic 
science? 
After all, the truth about Right, Ethics, and the state is as old as 
its public recognition and formulation in the law of the land, in the 
morality of everyday life, and in religion. What more docs this 
truth require-since the thinking mind is not content to possess it 
in this ready fashion? It requires to be grasped in thought as well; 
the content which is already rational in principle must win the 
form of rationality and so appear well-founded to untrammelled 
thinking. Such thinking does not remain statwnary at the given, 
whether the given be upheld by the external positlve 6 authority of 
the state or the consensus hommum, or by the authority of inward 
feelinr.; and emotion and by the ·\vitne~s of the spirit' which 
directly concurs \Vith it. On the contrarv, thought which is free 
starts out from itself and thereupon claims to know itself as united 
in its innermost being with the truth. 
The unsophisticated heart takes the simple liiil' of adhering with 
trustful com·iction to what is publicly accepted as true and then 
building on this firm foundation its conduct and 1b set position in 
life. Against thts simple line of conduct there may at once be raised 
the alleged difficulty of ho\\. it is possible, in an infinite variety of 
opinions, to distinguish and discover what IS uni\·ersally recognized 
and valid. Thts perplexity may at first sight be taken fur a right and 
really serious attitude to the thing, but in fact those \vho boast of 
this perplnity are in the position of not being able to see the mJOd 
for the trees; the only perplexity and difficulty they arc in is one of 
their own making. Indeed, this perplexity and difficulty of theirs 
is proof rather that they want as the substance of the right and the 
etnical not\\ hat is universally recognized and valid, but something 
else. If they had been serious \\·ith \\hat is universally accepted in-
stead of busying themselves with the vanity and particularity of 
opmwns and things, they would ha\·e clung to what is substantively 

4 
PREFACE 
right, namely to the commands of the ethical order and the state, 
and would have regulated their lives in accordance with these. 
A more serious difficulty arises, however, from the fact that man 
thinks and tries to find in thinking both his freedom and the basis 
of ethical life. But however lofty, however divine, the right of 
thought may be, it is perverted into wrong if it is only this [opining] 
which passes for thinking and if thinking knows itself to be free 
only when it diverges from what is universally recognized and valid 
and ''hen it has discovered how to invent for itself some particular 
character. 
At the present time, the idea that freedom of thought, and of 
mind generally, evinces itself only in divergence from, indeed in 
hostility to, what is publicly recognized, might seem to be most 
firmly rooted in connexion with the state, and it is chiefly for this 
reason that a philosophy of the state might seem essentially to have 
the task of discovering and promulgating still another theory, and 
a special and original one at that. In examining this idea and the 
activity in conformity with it, we might suppose that no state or 
constitution had ever existed in the world at all or was even in being 
at the present time, but that nowadays-and this 'nowadays' lasts 
for ever-we had to start all m·er again from the beginning, and that 
the ethical world had just been waiting for such present-day pro-
jects, proofs, and investigations. So far as nature is concerned, 
people grant that it is nature as it is which philosophy has to bring 
within its ken, that the philosopher's stone lies concealed some-
where, somewhere within nature itself, that nature is inherently 
rational, and that what knowledge has to investigate and grasp in 
concepts is this actual reason present in it; not the formations and 
accidents evident to the superficial observer, but nature's eternal 
harmony, its harmony, however, in the sense of the law and essence 
immanent within it. The ethical world, on the other hand, the 
state (i.e. reason as it actualizes itself in the element of self-con-
sciousness), is not allowed to enjoy the good fortune which springs 
from the fact that it is reason which has achieved power and mastery 
within that element and which maintains itself and has its home 
there.• The universe of mind is supposed rather to be left to the 
mercy of chance and caprice, to be God-forsaken, and the result is 
that if the ethical world is-Godless, truth lies outside it, and at the 
same time, since even so reason is supposed to be in it as well, truth 
becomes nothing but a problem. But it is this also that is to 
• [A.) [See Translator's Foreword, § 1.] 

PREFACE 
5 
authorize, nay to oblige, every thinker to take his own road, though 
not in search of the philosopher's stone. for he is saved this search 
by the philosophizing of our contemporaries, 7 and everyone now-
adays is assured that he has this stone in his grasp as his birthright. 
Now admittedly it is the case that those who live their lives in the 
state as it actually exists here and now and find satisfaction there 
for their knowledge and volition (and of these there are many, more 
in fact than think or know it, because ultimately this is the position 
of everybody), or those at any rate who consciously find their satis-
faction in the state, laugh at these operations and affirmations and 
regard them as an empty game, sometimes rather funny, sometimes 
rather serious, now amusing, now dangerous. Thus this restless 
activity of empty reflection, together with its popularity and the 
welcome it has received, would be a thing on its own, developing 
in privacy in its own way, were it not that it is philosophy itself 
which has earned all kinds of scorn and discredit by its indulgence 
in this occupation. The worst of these kinds of scorn is this, that, as 
I said just now, everyone is convinced that his mere birthright puts 
him in a position to pass judgement on philosophy in general and 
to condemn it. No other art or science IS subjected to this last 
degree of scorn, to the supposition that we are masters of it 
without ado. 
In fact, what we have seen recent philosophical publications8 
proclaiming with the maximum of pretensiOn abotlt the state has 
really justified anybody who cared to busy himself'' 1th the subject 
in this conviction that he could manufacture a philosophy of this 
kind himself without ado and so give himself proof oi his possession 
of philosophy. Besides, this self-styled 'philosophy' has expressly 
stated that 'truth itself cannot be known',9 that that only is true 
which each individual allows to rise out of his heart, emotion, and 
inspiration about ethical institutions, especially about the state, the 
government, and the constitution. In this conne:\.ion what a lot of 
flattery has been talked, especially to the young!'° Certainly the 
young have listened to it willingly enough. 'He giveth to his own 
in sleep'rr has been applied to science and hence every sleeper has 
numbered himself among the elect, but the concepts he has acquired 
in sleep are themselves of course only the wares of sleep. 
A ringleader 12 of these hosts of superficiality, of these self-styled 
'philosophers', Herr Fries,• did not blush, on the occasion of a 
• I have borne witness before to the superfic1ahty of his philosophy-see 
Sc1ence of Log1c (!';uremberg, 1812), lntroductwn, p. xvi1 [Eng. tr. val. 1, p. 63]. 

6 
PREFACE 
public festiva[IJ which has become notorious, to express the follow-
ing ideas in a speech on 'The state and the constitution': 'In the 
people ruled by a genuine communal spirit, life for the discharge of 
all public business would come from below, from the people itself; 
living associations, indissolubly united by the holy chain of friend-
ship, would be dedicated to every single project of popular educa-
tion and popular service', and so on. This is the quintessence of 
shallow thinking, to base philosophic science not on the develop-
ment of thought and the concept but on immediate sense-per-
ception and the play of fancy; to take the rich inward articulation 
of ethical life, i.e. the state, the architectonic of that life's ration-
ality-which sets determinate limits to the different circles of public 
life and their rights, uses the strict accuracy of measurement which 
holds together every pillar, arch, and buttress and thereby pro-
duces the strength of the whole out of the harmony of the parts-
to take this structure and confound the completed fabric in the 
broth of'heart, friendship, and inspiration'. Accordmg to a \·iew of 
this kind, the world of ethics (Epicurus, 14 holding a similar view, 
would have said the 'world in general') should be given over-as in 
fact of course it is not-to the subjective accident of opinion and 
caprice. By the simple family remedy of ascribing to feeling the 
labour, the more than millenary labour, of reason and its intellect, 
all the trouble of rational insight and knowh:dge directed by specu-
lative thinking is of course saved. On this point, Goethe's :\1ephis-
topheles, a good authority!, says something like this, a quotation I 
have used elsewhere 15 already: 'Do but despise intellect and know-
ledge, the highest of all man's gifts, and thou hast surrendered thy-
self to the devil and to perdition art doomed.' The next thing is 
that such sentiments assume even the guise of piety, for this 
bustling activity has used any and every expedient in its endeavour 
to give itself authority. With godliness and the Bible, however, it 
has arrogated to itself the highest of justifications for despising the 
ethical order and the objectivity of law, since it is piety too which 
envelops in the simpler intuition of feeling the truth which is 
articulated in the world into an orga'nic realm. But if it is piety of 
the right sort, it sheds the form of this emotional region so soon as 
it leaves the inner life, enters upon the daylight of the Idea's 
development and revealed riches, and brings \Yith it, out of its inner 
worship of God, reverence for law and for an absolute truth exalted 
above the subjective form of feeling.'6 
The particular form of guilty conscience reyealed by the type of 

--
PREFACE 
7 
eloquence in which such superficiality flaunts itself may be brought 
to your attention here and above all if you notice that when it is 
furthest from mind, superficiality speaks most of mind, when its 
talk is the most tedious dead-and-alive stuff, its favourite \Yards are 
'life' and 'vitalize', and when it gives evidence of the pure selfish-
ness of baseless pride, the word most on its lips is 'people'. But the 
special mark which it carries on its brow is the hatred oflaw. Right 
and ethics, and the actual world of justice and ethical life, are 
understood through thoughts; through thoughts they are invested 
with a rational form, i.e. with universality and determinacy. This 
form is Ia\\.; and this it is which the feeling that stipulates for its own 
whim, the conscience that places right in subjective conviction, has 
reason to regard as its chief foe. The formal character of the right 
as a duty and a law it feels as the letter, cold and dead, as a shackle; 
for it docs not recognize itself in the law and so does not recognize 
itself as free there, because law is the reason of the thing, and reason 
refuses to allow fcding to warm itself at its own private hearth. 
Hence law, as I have remarked somewhere17 in the course of this 
text-hook, is par excellence the shibboleth which marks out these 
false friends and comrades of what they call the 'people'. 
At the present time, the pettifoggery of caprice has usurped the 
name of philosophy and succeeded in giving a wiue public the 
opinion that such triflings are philosophy. The result of this is that 
it has now become almost a disgrace to go on speaking in philo-
sophical terms about the nature of the state, and law-abiding men 
cannot be blamed if they become impatient so soon as they hear 
mention of a philosophical science of the state. :-\ttl! less is it a 
matter for surprise that governments have at last Jirected their 
attention to this kind of philosophy, since, apart from anything 
else, philosophy with us is not, as it was with the Greeks for in-
stance, pursued in private like an art, but has an existence in the 
open, in contact with the public, and especially, or even only, in the 
service of the statL .18 Governments have proved their trust in 
their scholars who have made philosophy their chosen field by 
leaving entirely to them the construction and contents of philo-
sophy-though here and there, if you like, it may not have been so 
much confidence that has been shown as indifference to learning 
itself, and professorial chairs of philosophy have been retained only 
as a tradition (in France, for instance, to the best of my knowledge, 
chairs of metaphysics at least have been allowed to lapse). Their 
confidence, however, has very often been ill repaid, or alternatively, 

8 
PREFACE 
if you preferred to see indifference, you would have to regard the 
result, the decay of thorough knowledge, as the penalty of this in-
difference. Prima facie, superficiality seems to be extremely 
accommodating, one might say, at least in relation to public peace 
and order, because it fails to touch or even to guess at the substance 
of the things; no action, or at least no police action, 19 would thus 
have been taken against it in the first instance, had it not been that 
there still existed in the state a need for a deeper education and in-
sight, a need which the state required philosophical science to 
satisfy. On the other hand, superficial thinking about the ethical 
order, about right and duty in general, starts automatically from 
the maxims which constitute superficiality in this sphere, i.e. from 
the principles of the Sophists which are so clearly outlined for our 
information in Plato.zo What is right these principles locate in 
subjective aims and opinions, in subjective feeling and particular 
conviction, and from them there follows the ruin of the inner 
ethical life and a good conscience, of love and right dealing between 
private persons, no less than the ruin of public order and the law of 
the land. The significance which such phenomena must acquire 
for governments is not likely to suffer any diminution as a result of 
the pretentiousness which has used that very grant of confidence 
and the authority of a professorial chair to support the demand that 
the state should uphold and give scope to what corrupts the ulti-
mate source of achievement, namely universal principles, and so 
even to the defiance of the state as if such defiance were v.hat it 
deserved. 'If God gives a man an office, he also gives him brains' 
is an old joke which in these days surely no one will take wholly 
in earnest. 
In the fresh importance which circumstances have led govern-
ments to attach to the character of philosophical work, there is one 
element which we cannot fail to notice; this is the protection and 
support which the study of philosophy now seems to have come 
to need in several other directions. Think of the numerous pub-
lications in the field of the positive sciences, 21 as well as ed1fying 
religious works and vague literature of other kinds, which reveal to 
their readers the contempt for philosophy I have already men-
tioned, in that, although the thought in them i,;; immature to the 
last degree and philosophy is entirely alien to them, they treat it as 
something over and done with. More than this, they expressly rail 
against it and pronounce its content, namely the speculative know-
ledge of God, nature, and mind, the knowledge of truth, to be a 

PREFACE 
9 
foolish and ~ven sinful presumptuousness, while reason, and again 
reason, and reason repeated ad infinitum is arraigned. disparaged, 
and condemned. At the very least such writings reveal to us that, 
to a majority of those engaged in activities supposedly scientific, 
the claims of the concept are an embarrassment which none the less 
they cannot escape. 
I venture to say that anyone with such 
phenomena before him may very well begin to think that, if they 
alone are considered, tradition is now neither worthy of respect nor 
sufficient to secure for the study of philosophy either tolerance or 
existence as a public institution.* The arrogant declamations 
current in our time against philosophy present the singular 
spectacle, on the one hand of deriving their justification from the 
superficiality to which that study has been degraded, and, on the 
other, of being themselves rooted in this element against which they 
turn so ungratefully. For by pronouncing the knowledge of truth 
a wild-goose chase, this self-styled philosophizing has reduced all 
thoughts and all topics to the same level, just as the despotism of 
the Roman Empire abolished the distinction between free men and 
slaves, virtue and vice, honour and dishonour, learmng and ignor-
ance. The result of this levelling process is that the concepts of 
what is true, the laws of ethics, likewise become nothing more than 
opinions and subjective convictions. The maxims of the worst of 
criminals, since they too are convictions, arc put on the same level 
of value as those laws; and at the same time any object, however 
sorry, however accidental, any material however mstpid, is put on 
the same level of value as what constitutes the tntci c't of all think .. 
ing men and the bonds of the ethical world. 
It is therefore to be taken as a piece of luck for philosophic 
science-though in actual fact, as I have said/3 it ts the necessity 
of the thing-that this philosophizing which like an exercise in 
scholasticism might have continued to spin its web in seclusion, has 
now been put into closer touch and so into open variance with 
actuality, in which the principles of rights and duties are a serious 
matter, and which lives in the light of its consciousness of these. 
" I came across a similar view m a letter of Joh. von l\luller (We, he," Part \li, 
p. 57). In talkmg of the state of Rome m 1803 when the City was under French 
control, he says: 'Asked how the public educatiOnal mst1tut10ns were fanng, a 
professor replied On /es to/ere comme /e; bordels.' The so-called 'Doctnnc ot 
Reason', logic namely, we can mdeed still hear recommended, perhaps with the 
conv1ctwn that It IS such a dry and profitless science that nobody will busy him-
self With It, or that 1f here and there a man does take It up, he will thereby acqUire 
mere empty formulae, unproductive and innocuous, and that therefore m either 
case the recommendatiOn will do no harm, even if It does no good. 

IO 
PREFACE 
It is just this placing of philosophy in the actual world which 
meets with misunderstandings, and so I revert to what I have said 
before,24 namely that, since philosophy is the exploration of the 
rational, it is for that very reason the apprehension of the present 
and the actual, not the erection of a beyond, supposed to exist, God 
knows where, or rather which exists, and we can perfectly well say 
where, namely in the er:or of a one-s1ded, empty, ratiocination. In 
the course of this book, 2 s I have remarked that even Plato's Re-
public, which passes proverbially as an empty ideal, is in essence 
nothing but an interpretation of the nature of Greek ethical life. 
Plato was conscious that there was breaking into that life in his own 
time a deeper principle which could appear in it directly only as a 
longing still unsatisfied, and so only as something corruptive. To 
combat it, he needs must have sought aid from that very longing 
itself. But this aid had to come from on High and all that Plato 
could do was to seek it in the first place in a particular external form 
of that same Greek ethical life. By that means he thought to master 
this corruptive invader, and thereby he did fatal injury to the 
deeper impulse which underlay it, namely free infinite personality. 
Still, his genius is proved by the fact that the principle on which 
the distinctive character of his Idea of the state turns is precisely 
the pivot on which the impending world revolution turned at that 
time.26 
What is rational is actual and what is actual is rational.27 On this 
conviction the plain man like the philosopher takes his stand, and 
from it philosophy starts in its study of the universe of mmd as well 
as the universe of nature. If reflection, feeling, or ,,·hatever form 
subjective consciousness may take, looks upon the present as some-
thing vacuous and looks beyond it with the eyes of superior wisdom, 
it finds itself in a vacuum, and because it is actual only in the 
present, it is itself mere vacuity. If on the other hand the Idea 
passes for 'only an Idea', for something represented in an opinion, 
philosophy rejects such a view and shows that nothing is actual 
except the Idea. Once that is granted, the great thing IS to appre-
hend in the show of the temporal ar .. d transient the substance which 
is immanent and the eternal which is present. For since rationality 
(which is synonymous with the Idea) enters upon external exist-
ence simultaneously with its actualization, 2 8 it emerges with an 
infinite wealth of forms, shapes, and appearances. Around its heart 
it throws a motley covering with which consciousness is at home to 
begin with, a covering '' hich the concept has first to penetrate 

PREFACE 
II 
before it can find the inward pulse and feel it still beating in the out-
ward appearances. But the infinite variety of circumstance which 
is developed in this externality by the light of the essence glinting 
in it-this endless material and its organization-this is not the 
subject matter of philosophy. To touch this at all would be to 
meddle with things to which philosophy is unsuited; on such 
topics it may save itself the trouble of giving good advice. Plat029 
might have omitted his recommendation to nurses to keep on the 
move \vith infants and to rock them continually in their arms. And 
Fichte.1" too need not have carried what has been called the 'con-
struction' of his passport regulations to such a pitch of perfection 
as to require suspects not merely to sign their passports but to have 
their likenesses painted on them. Along such tracks all trace of 
philosophy is lost, and such super-eruditiOn it can the more readily 
disclaim since its attitude to this infinite multitude of topics should 
of course be most liberal. In adopting this attitude, philosophic 
science shows itself to be poles apart from the hatred with which 
the folly of superior \\·isdom regards a vast number of affairs and 
institutions, a hatred in ,,·hich pettiness takes the greatest delight 
because only by venting it does it attain a feeling of its self-hood. 
This book, then, containing as it does the science of the state, is 
to be nothing other than the endeavour to apprehend and portray 
the state as somet~ing inherently rational. As a work of philo-
sophy, it must be poles apart from an attempt to construct a state 
as it ought to be. The instruction which It may contain cannot 
consist in teaching the state what it ought to be; It can only show 
how the state, the ethical universe, is to be understood. 
'121ov 'P621os i21ov Ko:i To TTT'j21fli-!O:. 
Hie Rhodus, hie saltus.Jl 
To comprehend what is, this is the task of philosophy, because 
what is, is reason. Whatever happens, every individual is a child of 
his time; so philosophy too is its own time apprehended in 
thoughts. 32 It is just as absurd to fancy that a philosophy can 
transcend its contemporary world as it is to fancy that an individual 
can overleap his own age, jump over Rhodes. If his theory really 
goes beyond the world as it is and builds an ideal one as it ought to 
be, that world exists indeed, but only in his opinions, an unsub-
stantial element where anything you please may, in fancy, be built. 
With hardly an alteration, the proverb just quoted would run: 
Here is the rose, dance thou here.JJ 

12 
PREFACE 
What lies between reason as self-conscious mind and reason as an 
actual world before our eyes, what separates the former from the 
latter and prevents it from finding satisfaction in the latter, is the 
fetter of some abstraction or other which has not been liberated 
[and so transformed] into the concept. To recognize reason as the 
rose in the cross of the presentH and thereby to enjoy the present, 
this is the rational insight which reconciles us to the actual, the 
reconciliation which philosophy affords to those in whom there has 
once arisen an inner voice bidding them to comprehend, not only 
to dwell in what is substantive while still retaining subjective 
freedom, but also to possess subjective freedom while standing not 
in anything particular and accidental but in what exists ahsolutely . .>s 
It is this too which constitutes the more concrete meaning of 
what was described aboveJ 6 rather abstractly as the unity of form 
and content; for form in its most concrete signification is reason as 
speculative knowing, and content is reason as the substantial 
essence of actuality, whether ethical or natural. The knm\ n 
identity of these two is the philosophical Idea. It is a sheer 
obstinacy, the obstinacy which does honour to mankind, to refuse 
to recognize in conviction anything not ratified by thought. This 
obstinacy is the characteristic of our epoch, besides being the 
principle peculiar to Protestantism. What Luther37 initiated as 
faith in feeling and in the witness of the spirit, is precisely what 
spirit, since become more mature, has striven to apprehend in the 
concept in order to free and so to find itself in the world as it exists 
to-day. The sayingJB has become famous that 'a half-philosophy 
leads away from God'-and it is the same half-philosophy that 
locates knowledge in an 'approximation' to truth.1 9-'while true 
philosophy leads to God'; and the same is true of philosophy and 
the state. Just as reason is not content with an approximation 
which, as something 'neither cold nor hot', it will 'spue out of its 
mouth ·.~ 0 so it is just as little content \Vith the cold despair which 
submits to the view that in this earthly life things are truly bad or 
at best only tolerable, though here they cannot be improved and 
that this is the only reflection which can keep us at peace with the 
world: There is less chill in the peace with the world which know-
ledge supplies. 
One word more about giving instruction as to what the world 
ought to be. Philosophy in any case always comes on the scene too 
late to give it. As the thought of the world, it appears only when 
actuality is already there cut and dried after its process of forma-

PREFACE 
13 
tion has been completed. The teaching of the concept, which is 
also history's inescapable lesson, is that it is only when actuality is 
mature that the ideal first appears over against the real and that the 
ideal apprehends this same real world in its substance and builds it 
up for itself into the shape of an intellectual realm. When philo-
sophy paints its grey in grey,4 ' then has a shape of life grown old. 
By philo;;ophy's grey in grey it cannot be rejuvenated but only 
understood. The owl of l\linen·a spreads its wings only with the 
falling of the dusk. 
But it is time to close this preface. After all, as a preface, its only 
business has heen to make some external and subjective remarks 
about the standpoint of the book it introduces. If a topic is to be 
discussed philosophically, it spurns any but a scientific and 
objective treatment, and so too if criticisms of the author take any 
form other than a scientific discussion of the thing itself, they can 
count only as a personal epilogue and as capricious assertion, and 
he must treat them with indifference. 
BERLIN, June zsth, x8zo. 

INTRODUCTION 
[Concept of the Philosophy of Right, of the Will, Freedom, and Right.'] 
1. The subject-matter of the philosophical science of right is the 
Idea of right, i.e. the concept of right together with the actualiza-
tion of that concept. 
Philosophy has to do with Ideas, and therefore not with what are 
commonly dubbed 'mere concepts'. On the contrary, it exposes such 
concepts as one-sided and false, while showing at the same time that it is 
the concept alone (not the mere abstract category of the understanding 
which we often hear called by the name) which has actuality, and further 
that it gives this actuality to itself. All else, apart from this actuality 
established through the working of the concept itself, is ephemeral 
existence, external contingency, opinion, unsubstantial appearance, 
falsity, illusion, and so forth. The shapes which the concept assumes in 
the CQUrse of its actualization are indispensable for the knowledge of the 
concept itself. They are the second essential moment of the Idea, in 
distinction from the first, i.e. from its form, from its mode of being as 
concept alone.Z [A.] 
2. The science of right is a section of philosophy. Consequently, 
its task is to develop the Idea-the Idea being the rational factor in 
any object of study-out of the concept, or, what is the same thing, 
to look on at the proper immanent development of the thing itself. 
As a section, it has a definite starting-point, i.e. the result and the 
truth of what has preceded, and it is what has preceded which con-
stitutes the so-called 'proof' of the starting-point. Hence the 
concept of right, so far as its coming to be is concerned, falls out-
side the science of right; it is to be taken up here as given and its 
deduction is presupposcd.l 
According to the abstract, non-philosophical, method of the sciences, 
the first thing sought and demanded is a definition, or at any rate this 
demand is made for the sake of preserving the external form of scientific 
procedure. (But the science of positive law at least cannot be very intim-
ately concerned with definitions since it begins in the first place by 
stating what is legal, i.e. what the particular legal provisions are, and for 
this reason the warning has been given: omnis definitw in jure civili peri-
culosa.4 In fact, the more disconnected and inherently contradictory are 
the provisions giving determinate character to a right, the less are any 
definitions in its field possible, for definitions should be stated in uni-
versal terms, while to use these immediately exposes in all its nakedness 

INTRODUCTION 
I~ 
J 
what contradicts them-the wrong in this instance. Thus in Roman law, 
for example, there could be no definition of 'man', since 'slave' could not 
he brought under it -the very status of slave indeed is an outrage on the 
conception of man; it would appear just as hazardous to attempt a 
definition of 'property' and 'proprietor' in many cases.) But the deduc-
tion of the definition is derived, it may be, from etymology, or especially 
by abstraction from particular cases, so that it is based on human feelings 
and ideas. The correctness of the definition is then made to lie in its 
correspondencc with current ideas. This method neglects what is all-
essential for scicncc--i.e. in respect of content, the absolute necessity of 
the thing (right, in this instance), and, in respect of form, the nature of 
the concept. 
The truth is that in philosophical knowledge the necessity of a con-
cept is the principal thing; and the process of its production as a result is 
its proof and deduction. Then, once its content has been shown in this 
¥.ay to be nccessary on its own account, the second step is to look round 
for\'. hat corresponds to it in our ideas and language. But this concept as 
it actually is in its truth not only may be different from our common 
idea of It, but in fact must be different from it in form and outline. If, 
howevcr, the common idea of it is not false in content also, the concept 
may be exhibited as implicd in it and as essentially present in it. In 
other words, the common idea may be raised to assume the form of the 
concept. But the common idea is so far from being the standard or 
critenon of the concept (which is necessary and true on its own account) 
that it must rather derive its truth from the latter, adjust itself to it, and 
recognize its own nature by its aid. 
But while the above-mentioned abstract way of knowing with its 
formal definitions, syllogisms, proofs, and the like, IS more or less a thing 
of the past, still it is a poor substitute which a different artifice has pro-
vided, namely to adopt and uphold Ideas in general (and in particular 
the Idea of right and its further specifications) as immediate 'facts of 
consciousness's and to make into the source of right our natural or our 
worked up feelings and the inspirations of our own hearts. This method 
may he the handiest of all, but it is also the most unphilosophical--not to 
mention here other aspects of such an outlook, which has a direct bear-
ing on actwn and not. simply on knowledge. 6 While the old method, 
abstract as it is, docs at least insist on the form of the concept in its 
delimtion and the form of necessary knowledge in its demonstration, the 
artifice of fcding and immediate awareness elevates into a guiding prin-
ciple the suhjecti\·ity, contingency, and arbitrariness of sapience. What 
crJllstitutcs scicntific procedure in philosophy is expounded in philo-
sophical logic and IS here presupposed. 7 [A.] 
3. 1\n.!:ht is positive 3 in general (a) when it has the form of being 
'ahd In a particular state, and this legal authority is the guiding 

!6 
INTRODUCTION 
principle for the knowledge of right in this positive form, i.e. for 
the science of positive law. (b) Right in this positive form acquires 
a positive element in its content 
( et) through the particular national character of a people, its stage 
of historical development, and the whole complex of relations 
connected with the necessities of nature ;9 
(/3) because a system of positive law must necessarily involve the 
application of the universal concept to particular, externally 
given, characteristics of objects and cases. 10 This applica-
tion lies outside speculative thought and the development of 
the concept, and is the subsumption by the Understanding 
[of the particular under the universal]; 
(y) through the finally detailed provisions requisite for actually 
pronouncing judgement in court. 1r 
If inclination, caprice, and the sentiments of the heart are set up in 
opposition to positive right and the laws, philosophy at least cannot 
recognrze authorities of that sort.-That force and tyranny may be an 
element in law is accidental to law and has nothing to do with its nature. 
Later on in this book, in Paragraphs 2II-14, it will be shown at what 
point right must become positive. Th<: details to be expounded there 
are being mentioned here only to indicate the limits of the philosophical 
study of law and to obviate at once any possible supposition, let alone 
demand, that the outcom<: of its systematic development should be a 
code of positive law, i.e. a code like the one an actual state requires. 
Natural law, or law from the philosophical point of view, is distinct 
from positive law; but to pervert their difference into an opposition and 
a contradiction would be a gross misunderstanding. The relation be-
tween them is much more like that between Institutes and Pandects.'2 
As for the historical element in positive law, mentioned above in 
Paragraph 3, Montesquieu 13 proclaimed the true historical view, the 
genuinely philosophical position, namely that legislation both in general 
and in its particular provisions is to be treated not as something isolated 
and abstract but rather as a subordinate moment in a whole, intercon-
nected with all the other features which make up the character of a nation 
and an epoch. It is in being so connected that the various laws acquire 
their true meaning and therewith their justification. To consider par-
ticuhir laws as they appear and develop in time is a purely historical task. 
Like acquaintance with what can be logically deduced from a comparison 
of these laws with previously existing legal principles, this task is 
appreciated and rewarded in its own sphere and has no relation what-
ever to the philosophical study of the subject-unless of course the 
derivation of particular laws from historical events is confused with their 
derivation from the concept, and the historical explanation and justifica-

INTRODUCTION 
tion is stretched to become an absolutely valid justification. This differ-
ence, which is very important and should be firmly adhered to, is also 
\"ery obvious. A particular lav.· may be shown to be wholly grounded in 
and consistent with the circumstances and with existing legally established 
institutions, and yet it may be wrong and irrational in its essential 
character, like a number of provisions in Roman private law which fol-
lowed quite logically from such institutions as Roman matrimony and 
Roman patria potcstas." But even if particular laws arc both right and 
reasonable, still it is one thing to prove that they have that character-
which cannot be truly done except by means of the concept-and quite 
another to describe their appearance in history or the circumstances, con-
tingencies, needs, and events \vhich brought about their enactment. 
That kind of exposition and (pragmatic)'s knowledge, based on proxi-
mate or remote historical causes, is frequently called 'explanation' or 
preferably 'comprehension'16 by those who think that to expound 
history in this way is the only thing, or rather the essential thing, the 
only important thing, to be done in order to comprehend law or an 
established institution; whereas what is really essential, the concept of 
the thing, they have not discussed at all. From the same point of view, 
reference is commonly made 17 also to the Roman or the German 'con-
cepts' of law, i.e. concepts of law as they might be defined in this or that 
legal code, whereas what is meant is not concepts but only general legal 
principles, propositions of the Understandmg, maxims, positive laws, 
and the like. 
By dint of obscuring the difference between the historical and the 
philosophical study of law, it becomes possible to shift the point of view 
and slip over from the problem of the true JUStification of a thing to a 
justification by appeal to circumstances, to deductions from presupposed 
conditions which in themselves may have no higher validity, and so 
forth. To generalize, by this means the relative is put in place of the 
absolute and the external appearance in place of the true nature of the 
thing. When those who try to justify things on historical grounds con-
found an origin in external circumstances with one in the concept, they 
unconsciously achieve the very opposite of what they intend. Once the 
origination of an institution has been shown to be wholly to the purpose 
and necessary in the circumstances of the time, th(· d~mands of history 
have been fulfilled. But if this is supposed to pass for a general justifica-
tion of the thing itself, it turns out to be the opposite, because, since 
those circumstances are no longer present, the institution so far from 
being justified has by their disappearance lost its meaning and its right. 
Suppose, for example, that we accept as a vindication of the monasteries 
their service in cultivating wildernesses and populating them, in keeping 
learning alive by transcnbing manuscripts and giving instruction, &c., 
and suppose further that this service has been deemed to be the ground 
and the purpose of their continued existence, then what really follows 

INTRODUCTION 
from considering this past service is that, since circumstan<es have now 
entirely altered, the monasteries are at least in this respect superfluous 
and inappropriate. 
Now that the historical meaning of coming to be--the historical 
method of portraying it and making it comprehensible-is at home in a 
different sphere from the philosophical survey of the concept of the 
thing and of a thing's coming to be too, I 8 philosophy and history are able 
to that extent to preserve an attitude of mutual indifference. But they 
are not always at peace in this way, even in scientific circles, and so I 
quote something, relevant to their contact, which appears in Herr Hugo's 
Lehrbuch der Geschichte des rijnzisclzen Reclzts, I 9 and which will at the 
same time cast further light on the affectation 20 that they are opposed. 
Herr Hugo says* that 'Cicero praises the Twelve Tables with a side-
glance at the philosophers ... but the philosopher Favorinus treats them 
exactly as many a great philosopher since his day has treated positive 
law'. In the same context Herr Hugo makes the final retort to a treat-
ment of the subject like Fa\·urinus' when he gives as the reason for it 
that 'Favorinus understood the Twelve Tables just as little as these 
philosophers have understood positive law'.zi 
The correction of the philosopher Favorinus hy the jurist Sextus 
Caecilius in Aulus Gclliust is primanly an expression of the permanent 
and true principle for justifying what is purely positive in its mtnnsic 
worth. l\'on ... ignoras, Caecilius happily retorts to Favorinus, legum 
opp01tunitates et medelas pro tempmum mrmbus et pro rnum puhlzcarum 
genenbus, ac pro utzlttatum praesmtzum ratwnibus, proqur ntzmz11n, qwhus 
medendum est, fer·Doribus, mutarz ac fiectz, neque uno statu cons1stcre, <!lllll, 
ut facies coeli et mans, ita rerum atque fortunae tempestatibus ~·anentur. 
Quid salubrius z·isum est rogatwne dla Stolom's ... , quid utzlius plelnscito 
Voconio ... ? Quid tam necessarwm existimatum est ... quam Lex /,zcinw 
... ? Omnia tam en haec obliterata et operta sun! civitatis opulentia. 22 These 
laws are positive in so far as they have their meaning and appropriate-
ness in contemporary conditions, and therefore their sole value is 
historical and they are of a transitory nature. The wisdom of what legis-
lators and administrators did in their day or settled to meet the needs of 
the hour is a separate matter and one properly to be assessed by history. 
History's recognitiOn of It will he all the deeper the more its assessment 
is supported hy a philosophical outlook. 
Of Caecilius's further arguments in justification of the Twelve Tables 
against Favorinus, however, l will gi\·e an example, because he intro-
duces in them the eternally deceptive method and argumentation of the 
Understanding, I mean the production of a good reason for a bad thing 
and the supposition that the had thing has thereby been justified. Caeci-
lius IS discussing the horrible law that gave a cn.:ditor the right after a 
fixed period of time to kill his clehtor or sell him into sla\cr\', or, if there 
'" 5th edn , § 53· 
t Xoctes Attzcae, x..-..:. 1. 

INTRODUCTION 
were several creditors, to cut pieces off their debtor and divide him up 
amongst themselves; and there was eYen a further proviso that if one of 
them cut off too much or too little, no action was for that reason to lie 
against him-a clause which would have benefited Shakespeare's Shy-
lock in the cUerclzant of Venice and of which he would most gratefully 
have availed himself. For this law Caecilius adduces the good reason 
that it rendered trust and credit all the more secure and that because of 
its horrible character there was never to have been any question of its 
application. In his thoughtlessness not only does the reflection escape 
him that if the law could never ha\·e been applied, then the aim of 
securing trust and credit by it was frustrated, but he even goes on 
directly aftcn\'ards to g1ve an example of how the law concerning false 
witness was made meflective owing to its immoderate penalties. 
There is no knowing, however, what Herr Hugo means when he says 
that Favorinus did not understand the law. Any schoolboy is perfectly 
capable of understanding it, ami Shylock would have understood better 
than anyone else the clause, cited above, which \vould have been so 
advantageous to him. By 'understand' Herr Hugo must have meant only 
that level oi understanding \\hich in the case of such a law 1s content if it 
can find a good reason for 1t. 
Still, another misunderstanding of which F:nonnus ''as convicted by 
Caecilius 111 the same context is one to''- hich a plllin'-''l'her may surely 
confess \\idwut exactly blushing; I mc.m the failure· to understand that 
jwntnlum (\Yhich 'as distinct from arena' ~o, ac-c<;rdlnt; tu the law, the 
only CO!l\'C\'ancc to be provided for a s1ck man '' !Jc> !J<b to appear in 
court) IS to be interpreted to mean not only a hmst hut also a carriage or 
wagon. From th1s legal provtso Caecil!Us was ahlc to derive a further 
proof of the excellencl' and precis1on of the old ]a,,., h\ pr11nting out that, 
in fixing the tcrrns of a summons to a SJck man to app• .rr Ill court, they 
even earned precisiOn so far as to d1stinglllsh not onlv between a horse 
and a \\ agon, hut e\·en bet\vcen one wagon and another, between one 
covered in and 'upholstcrcd', 23 according to Caecilius' interpretatiOn, 
and one not so comfortable. I !ere we would have the choice between the 
sc\·entv of the ongmal Lm and the tnnahty of such distmctwns, but to 
describe such thltlgs, and stdl more their learned interpretation, as 
'trivial' would he one of the worst of insults to erudition of th1s kind and 
others! 
But in the same Lehrburh Herr Hugo goes on to speak of rationality in 
connexion with Roman ]a,,·, and what has struck me m his 1 emarks is the 
following. In h1s treatment of the 'period from the origin of the state to 
the Tw.::kc Tables' he says* that (in Rome) 'men had many wants and 
''ere compelled to work and hence needed the assistance of draught and 
pack ammals, such as we arc famitar with ourselves; that in Roman 
territory IHlls and \·alln·s altcrn~1tecl and that the city was built on a hill' 
" §§ 38-9 [1b1d. In 7th edn.]. 

zo 
INTRODUCTION 
and so forth-disquisitions which were perhaps intended to carry out 
Montesquieu's ideas, but in which one will hardly find that his spirit has 
been caught. Then he goes on to say" that 'the legal position was still 
very far from satisfying the highest demands of reason'. That is quite 
right, Roman law m respect of the family, slavery, &c., fails even to 
satisfy reason's most modest demands. But in dealing with later periods 
of Roman history, Herr Hugo forgets to tell us whether in any of them, 
and if so in which, Roman law did 'satisfy the highest demands of 
reason'. However, of the classical jurists in the period of the 'highest 
maturity of Roman law as a science', Herr Hugo writcs:t 'It has long 
since been observed that the classical jurists were educated through 
philosophy', yet 'few know' (though more know now, thanks to the 
numerous editions of Herr Hugo's Lehrbuch) 'that no class of \Hitcrs is 
so well entitled as these same Roman jurists to be compared with mathe-
maticians in respect of the rigorous logic of their deducti\·e reasoning or 
with the new founder of metaphysics in respect of their quite strikingly 
distinctive method of developing their concepts-a contention sup-
ported by the curious fact that nowhere arc there to be found so many 
trichotomies as there are in the classical jurists and in Kant'. Logical 
deduction, a method commended by Leibniz,H is certainly an essential 
characteristic of the study of positive law, as of mathematics and any 
other science of the lT nderstanding, but this deductive method of the 
Understanding has nothing whatever to do \\ ith the satisfaction of the 
demands of reason or with philosophical science. But apart from that It 
is the zllogicality of the Roman jurists and praetors that must he regarded 
as one of their chief virtues, for by dint of being Illogical they evaded un-
just and detestable laws, though in the process they found themselves 
compelled callid~'; to devise empty verbal distmctions (e.g. to call 
bonorum possessio what was nevertheless hereditas) and downright foolish 
subterfuges (and folly also is illogicality) in order to preserve the letter of 
the Twelve Tables (e.g. by the fictio, imoKp<ac>, that a fi!ia' 6 was a filius). t 
It is ludicrous though to see the classical jurists compared with Kant 
because of a few trichotomous divisions, especially those cited as ex-
amplesn in the fifth note to Herr I !ugo's paragraph, and to ste that kind 
of thing called 'development of concepts'. 
4. The basis of right is, in general, mind; its precise place and 
point of origin is the \\ill. The \\ill is free, so that fn:cdom is both 
the substance of right and its goal, while the sy~tem of right is the 
realm of freedom made actual, the \\·orld of mind brought forth 
out of itself like a second nature. 's 
• § 40 [1lwl. m 7th cdn ]. 
j- § 289 [§314m 7th edn ]. 
! J (; 
l-IclnL'CC!Us 
Antzqu;'nfum Rnma11a: IPU J!tnsprwlrutu1m t!lll~trrmfutm 
Synta IWI [Basel, 1752]. Jib. 1, ·<it. 11, § 2~. 

INTRODUCTION 
21 
In considering the freedom of the will, we may recall the old method 
of cognition. The procedure was to presuppose the idea of the will and 
to attempt to establish a definition of the will by deriving it from that 
idea; then the so-called 'proof' of the will's freedom was extracted, in 
the manner of the old empirical psychology, from the various feelings 
and phenomena of the ordinary consciousness, such as remorse, guilt, 
and the like, by maintaining that they were to be explained only in the 
light of a will that was free. But it is more convenient of course to arrive 
at the same point hy taking the short cut of supposing that freedom is 
given as a 'fact of consciousness' and that we must simply belie•u in it! 
The proof that the will is free and the proof of the nature of the will 
and freedom can be established (as has already been pointed out in 
Paragraph z) only as a link in the whole chain [of philosophy]. The 
fundamental premisses of this proof arc that mind to start with is intelli-
gence, that the phases through which it passes in its development from 
feeling, through representative thinking, to thinking proper, are the road 
along which it produces itself as will, and that will, as practical mind in 
general, is the truth of intelligence, the stage next above it. These 
premisses I have expounded in my Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical 
Sciences* and I hope by and hy to be able to elaborate them still further. 29 
There is all the more need for me by so doin!S to make my contribution 
to what I hope is the deeper knowledge of the nature of mind in that, as 
I have said in the Encyclopaedia,t scarcely any philosophical science is 
so neglected and so ill off as the theory of mmd, usually called 'psycho-
logy'. The moments in the concept of the \\'Ill which are dealt with in 
this and the following Paragraphs of the Introduction result from the 
premisses to which 1 have just referred, but in addition anyone may 
find help towards forming an idea of them by calling on his own self-
consciousness. In the first place, anyone can disCo\·er in himself ability 
to abstract from everything whatever, and in the same way to determine 
himself, to posit any content in himself by his own efTort; and similarly 
the other specific characteristics of the will arc exemplified for him in his 
own consciousness. [A.] 
5. The will contains (ex) the element of pure indeterminacy or that 
pure reflection of the ego into itself which involves the dissipation 
of every restriction and every content either immediately presented 
by nature, by needs, desires, and impulses, or given and determined 
by any means whatever. This is the unrestricted infinity of 
absolute abstraction or universality, the pure thought of oneself. 
Those who regard thinking as one special faculty, distinct from the 
will as another special faculty, and who even proceed to contend that 
• Heidelberg, 181 j, §§ J6J-<J'l [Jrd edn. §§ 440-82]. 
t [1st edn.) Remark to§ 367 [3rd edn. § 444 and cf. § 378). 

zz 
INTRODUCTION 
thinking is prejudicial to the \\'ill, especially the good will, reveal at the 
very outset their complete ignorance of the nature of the will-a remark 
we shall have to make rather often when dealing with this same subject. 
In Paragraph 5, it is only one side of the will which is described, 
namely this unrestricted possibility of abstraction from every determi-
nate state of mind which I may find in myself or which I may have set up 
in myself, my flight from every content as from a restriction. When the 
will's self-determination consists in this alone, or when representative 
thinking regards this side by itself as freedom and clings fast to it, then 
we have negative freedom, or freedom as the Understanding conceives 
it. This is the freedom of the void which rises to a passion and takes 
shape in the world; while still remaining theoretical, it takes shape in 
religion as the Hindu fanaticism of pure contemplation, but when it 
turns to actual practice, it takes shape in religion and politics alike as the 
fanaticism of destruction-the destruction of the whole subsisting social 
order-as the elimination of individuals who are objects of suspicion to 
any social order, and the annihilation of any organization which tries to 
rise anew from the ruins.l 0 Only in destroying something does this 
negative will possess the feeling of itself as existent. Of course it imagines 
that it is willing some positive state of affairs, such as universal equality 
or universal religious life, but in fact it does not will that this shall be 
positively actualized, and for this reason: such actuality leads at once to 
some sort of order, to a particularization of organizations and individuals 
alike; while it is precisely out of the annihilation of particularity and 
objective characterization that the self-consciousness of this negative 
freedom proceeds. Consequently, what negative freedom intends to will 
can never be anything in itself but an abstract idea, and giving effect to 
this idea can only be the fury of destruction. [A.] 
6. (/3) At the same time, the ego is also the transition from un-
differentiated indeterminacy to the differentiation, determination, 
and positing of a determinacy as a content and object. Now further, 
this content may either be given by nature or engendered by the 
concept of mind. Through this positing of itself as something 
determinate, the ego steps in principle into determinate existence. 
This is the absolute moment,l' the finitude or particularization of 
the ego. 
This second moment-determination-is negativity and cancellation 
like the first, i.e. it cancels the abstract negativity of the first. Since it is 
the general rule that the particular is contained in the universal, it 
follows that this second moment is already contained in the first and is 
simply an explicit positing of what the first already was implicitly. The 
first moment, I mean-because by itself it is only the first--is not true 
infinity or concrete universality, not the concept, but only something 

I~TRODUCTION 
determinate, one-sided; i.e., being abstraction from all determinacy, it 
is itself not without determinacy; and to be something abstract and one-
sided constitutes its determinacy, its defectiveness, and its finitude. 
The determination and differentiation of the two moments which have 
been mentioned is to be found in the philosophies of Fichte, Kant, and 
others; only, in Fichte-to confine ourselves to his exposition-the ego, 
as that which is without limitation, is taken (in the first propositionl 2 of 
his Sczence uf Knowledge) purely and simply as something positive and 
so as the universality and identity of the Understanding. The result is 
that this abstract ego by itself is supposed to be the whole truth, and 
therefore the restriction-the negative in general, whether as a given 
external barrier or as an activity of the ego itself-appears (in the second 
proposition)JJ as an addition merely. 
To apprehend the negativity immanent in the universal or self-
identical, e.g. in the ego, was the next step which speculative philosophy 
had to take-a step of whose necessity they have no inkling who hold 
to the dualism of infinite and finite and do not even grasp it in that 
immanence and abstraction in which Fichte did.H [A.] 
7. (y) The will is the unity of both these moments. It is par-
ticularity reflected into itself and so brought back to universality, 
i.e. it is individuality. It is the self-determination of the ego, which 
means that at one and the same time the ego posits itself as its own 
negative, i.e. as restricted and determinate, and yet remains by 
itself, i.e. in its self-identity and universality. It determines itself 
and yet at the same time binds itself together with itself. The ego 
determines itself in so far as it is the relating of negativity to itself.Js 
As this self-relation, it is indifferent to this determmacy; it knows 
it as something which is its own, something which is only ideai,J6 
a mere possibility by which it is not constrained and m which it is 
confined only because it has put itself in it.-This is the freedom of 
the will and it constitutes the concept or substantiality of the will, 
its weight, so to speak, just as weight constitutes the substantiality 
of a body. 
Every self-consciousness knows itself (i) as universal, as the potentiality 
of abstracting from everything determinate, and (ii) as particular, with 
a determinate object, content, and aim. Still, both these moments are 
only abstractions; what is concrete and true (and everything true is con-
crete) is the univ€rsality which has the particular as its opposite, but the 
particular which by its reflection into itself has been equalized with the 
universal. This unity is individuality, not individuality in its immediacy 
as a umt, our first idea of individuality, but individuality in accordance 
with its concept ;• indeed, individuality in this sense is just precisely the 
• Enc., [1st edn.] §§ II2-I4 [3rd edn. §§ 163-s]. 

INTRODUCTION 
concept itself. The first two moments-(i) that the will can abstract 
from everything, and (ii) that it is also determined in some specific way 
either by itself or by something else--are readily admitted and grasped 
because, taken independently, they are false and moments of the 
Understanding. But the third moment, which is true and speculative 
(and everything true must be thought speculatively if it is to be com-
prehended) is the one into which the Understanding declines to advance, 
for it is precisely the concept which it persists in calling the inconceiv-
able. It is the task of logic as purely speculative philosophy to prove and 
explain further this innermost secret of speculation, of infinity as 
negativity relating itself to itself, this ultimate spring of all activity, life, 
and consciousness. Here attention can only be drawn to the fact that if 
you say 'the will is universal, the will determines itself', the words you 
use to describe the will presuppose it to be a subject or substratum from 
the start.37 But the will is not something complete and universal prior 
to its determining itself and prior to its superseding and idealizing this 
determination. The will is not a will until it is this self-mediating 
activity, this return into itself. (A.] 
8. The more detailed process of particularization (see Paragraph 
6) constitutes the difference between the forms of the will: (a) If 
the will's determinate character lies in the abstract opposition of its 
subjectivity to the objectivity of external immediate existence, then 
this is the formal will of mere self-consciousness which finds an 
external world confronting it. As individuality returning in its 
determinacy into itself, it is the process of translating the sub-
jective purpose into objectivity through the use of its own activity 
and some external means. Once mind has developed its potenti-
alities to actuality (wie er an und fur sich ist), its determinate 
character is true and simply its own.* At that stage, the relation of 
consciousness constitutes only the appearance of the will,J8 an 
aspect which is not separately considered any further here. [A.] 
9. (b) In so far as the specific determinations of the will are its own 
or, in general, its particularization reflected into itself, they are its 
content. This content, as content of the will, is, in accordance 
with the form of will described in (a), its purpose,J9 either its in-
ward or subjective purpose when the will merely images its object, 
or else its purpose actualized and achieved by means of its activity 
of translating its subjective purpose into objectivity. 
10. This content, or the will's determination on something 
specific, is in the first place immediate. Consequently the will is 
• Enc., [1st edn.] § 363 [3rd edn. § 440]. 

INTRODUCTION 
then free only in itself or for an external observer, or, to speak 
generally, it is the will in its concept. It is not until it has itself as 
its object40 that the will is for itself what it is in itself.41 
Finitude consists therefore in this, that what something is in itself or 
in accordance with its concept is one phenomenon or exists in one way, 
while what it is for itself is a different phenomenon or exists in another 
way; so, for example, in itself the abstract reciprocal externality charac-
teristic of nature is space, but for itself it is timeY In this connexion, 
two things are to be noticed: (i) The true is the Idea and the Idea alone, 
and hence if you take an object or a category only as it is in itself or in its 
concept, you have not yet grasped it in its truth. (ii) A thing which is in 
itself or as concept is also existent in some way and its existence in such 
a way is a shape proper to the thing itself (as space is in the example just 
given). The gulf present in the sphere of the finite between 'in-itself-
ness' and 'for-itself-ness' constitutes at the same time that sphere's mere 
existential or phenomenal character. (Examples of this-the natural will 
and then formal rights, &c.-will be forthcoming directly.)4J 
The Understanding goes no further than the purely implicit character 
of a thing and consequently calls the freedom which accords with this 
implicit character a 'potency', because if freedom is only implicit it is 
indeed mere potentiality. But the Understanding looks upon this im-
plicit character as absolute and perennial; and it takes the relation of 
freedom to what it wills, or in general to the object in which it is realized, 
as merely a matter of its application to a given material, not belonging to 
the essence of freedom itself. Thus it has to do w•th the abstract only, 
not with its Idea and its truth. [A.] 
11. The will which is but implicitly free is the Immediate or 
natural will. The specific characteristics of the difference which 
the self-determining concept44 sets up within the will appear in the 
natural will as an immediately existing content, i.e. as the impulses, 
desires, inclinations, whereby the will finds itself determined in the 
course of nature. This content, together with the specific differ-
ences developed within it, arises from the rationality of the will 
and so is implicitly rational; but, poured out in this way into the 
mould of immediacy, it still lacks the form of rationality. It is true 
that this content has for me the general character of being mine; 
but this form is still different from the content, and hence the 
will is still a will finite in character. 
Empirical psychology details and describes these impulses and in-
clinations, and the needs arising from them, as it finds them, or pre-
sumes it finds them, in experience, and it proceeds in the usual way to 
classify this given material. Consideration is given below4s to the 

INTRODUCTION 
objective element in these impulses, both to its true character stripped 
of the form of irrationality which it possesses as impulse and also to the 
manner in which at the same time it is shaped externally. [A.] 
12. The whole of this content, as we light upon it in its im-
mediacy in the will, is there only as a medley and multiplicity of 
impulses, each of which is merely 'my desire' but exists alongside 
other desires which are likewise all 'mine', and each of which is at 
the same time something universal and indeterminate, aimed at 
all kinds of objects and satiable in all kinds of ways. 
When, in 
this twofold indeterminacy,40 the will gives itself the form of indi-
viduality (see Paragraph 7), this constitutes the resolution of the 
will, and it is only in so far as it resolves that the will is an 
actual will at all. 
To resolve on something is to cancel the state of indeterminacy in 
which one content is prima facie just as much of a possibility as any 
other. 
As an alternative to etwas beschliessen (to resolve on something) 
the German language also contains the expression sich entschlzessen.47 
This expresses the fact that the indeterminate character of the will itself, 
as itself neutral yet infinitely prolific, the original seed of all determinate 
existence, contains its determinations and aims within itself and simply 
brings them forth out of itself. 
13. By resolving, the will posits itself as the will of a specific 
individual and as a will separating itself off against another in-
dividual. But apart from this finitude as consciousness (sec Para-
graph 8), the immediate will is on account of the difference between 
its form and its content (see Paragraph I I) a will only in form. The 
decision which belongs to it as such is only abstract and its content 
is not yet the content and product of its freedom. 
In so far as intelligence thinks,4 8 its object and content remains 
something universal, while its own behaviour consists of a universal 
activity. In the will, 'the universal' also means in essence 'mine', 'indi-
viduality'; and in the immediate will~the will which is will in form only 
~it means abstract individuality, individuality not yet filled with its free 
universality. Hence it is in the will that the intrinsic finitude of intel-
ligence has its beginning; and it is only by raising itself to become 
thought again,49 and endowing its aims with immanent universality, that 
the will cancels the difference of form and content and makes itself the 
objective, infinite, will. Thus theyso understand little of the nature of 
thinking and willing who suppose that while, in willing as such, man is 
infinite, in thinking, he, or even reason itself, is restricted. In so far as 
thinking and willing are still distinguished, the opposite is rather the 
truth, and will is thinking reason resolving itself to finitude. [A.] 

INTRODlTCTION 
27 
14. The finite will as, in respect of its form, though only its form, 
the self-reflecting, independent, and infinite ego (see Paragraph 5), 
stands over its content, i.e. its various impulses, and also over the 
further separate ways in which these are actualized and satisfied. 
At the same time, since it is infinite in form only, it is tied to this 
content (see Paragraphs () and I I) as to the specific determinations 
of its nature and its external actuality; though since it is indeter-
minate, it is not tied to this or that specific content. From the 
point of vie\v of the ego reflected into itself, this content is only a 
possible one, i.e. it may be mine or it may not; and the ego 
similarly is the possibility of determining myself to this or to 
something else, of choosing between these specific determinations, 
which at this point I regard as external to me. 
15. At this stage, the freedom of the will is arbitrariness (Will-
kiir) and this involves two factors: (a) free reflection, abstracting 
from everything, and (b) dependence on a content and material 
given either from within or from without. Because this content, 
implicitly necessary as purpose, 5 ' is at the same time qualified in 
the face of free reflection as possible, it follo'.vs that arbitrariness is 
contingency manifesting itself as will. ' 2 
The idea which people most commonly have of freedom is that it is 
arbitrariness-the mean, chosen by abstract reflection, between the will 
wholly determined by natural impulses, and the will free absolutely. If 
we hear it said that the definition of freedom is ability to do what we 
please, such an idea can only be taken to reveal an utter immaturity of 
thought, for it contains not even an inklmg of the absolutely free will, of 
right, ethieallife, and so forth. Reflection, th<: form,d universality and 
unity of self-consciousness, is the will's abstract certainty of its freedom, 
but it is not yet the truth of freedom, because it has not yet got itself as 
its content and aim, and consequently the subjective side is still other 
than the objective; the content of this self-determination, therefore, also 
remains purely and simply finite. Instead of being the will in its truth, 
arbitrariness is more like the will as contradiction. 
In the controversy carried on especially at the time of V.'olff's meta-
physics3 as to whether the will were really free or whether the conviction 
of its freedom were only a delusion, it was arbitrariness which was in 
view. In opposition to the certitude of this abstract self-determination, 
determinism has rightly pointed to the content which, as something met 
with, is not contained in that certitude and so comes to it from outside, 
although 'outside' in this case means impulses, ideas, or, in general, con-
sciousness so filled in one way or another that its content is not intrinsic 
to its self-determining activity as such. Since, then, arbitrariness has 

28 
INTRODUCTION 
immanent in it only the formal element in willing, i.e. free self-dete:--
mination, while the other element is something given to it, we may 
readily allow that, if it is arbitrariness which is supposed to be freedom, 
it may indeed be called an illusion. In every philosophy of reflection, 
like Kant's, and Kant's deprived of all its depth by Fries, freedom is 
nothing else hut this empty self-activity. [A.) 
16. What the will has decided to choose (see Paragraph 14) it 
can equally easily renounce (see Paragraph 5). But its ability to go 
beyond any other choice which it may substitute, and so on ad 
infinitum, never enables it to get beyond its own finitude, because 
the content of every such choice is something other than the form 
of the will and therefore something finite, while the opposite of 
determinacy, namely indeterminacy, i.e. indecision or abstraction 
from any content, is only the other, equally one-sided, moment of 
the wi!J.s4 
17. The contradiction which the arbitrary will is (see Paragraph 
I 5), comes into appearance as a dialectic of impulses and inclina-
tions; each of them is in the way of every other-the satisfaction of 
one is unavoidably subordinated or sacrificed to the satisfaction of 
another, and so on. An impulse is simply a uni-directional urge 
and thus has no measuring-rod in itself, and so this determination 
of its subordination or sacrifice is the contingent decision of the 
arbitrary will which, in deciding, may proceed either by using in-
telligence to calculate which impulse will give most satisfaction, or 
else in accordance with any other optional consideration. 
[A.] 
18. In connexion with the judgement of impulses, this dialectic 
appears in the following form: (a) As immanent and so positive, 
the determinations of the immediate will are good; thus man is 
said to be by nature good. (b) But, in so far as these determinations 
arc natural and thus are in general opposed to freedom and the 
concept of mind, and hence negative, they must be uprooted, and 
so man is said to be by nature evii.-At this point a decision in 
favour of either thesis depends equally on subjective arbitrariness. 
[A.] 
19. In the demand for the purification 55 of impulses there lies 
the general notion that they should be freed both from their form 
as immediate and natural determinations, and also from the sub-
jecti\"ity and contingency of their content, and so brought back to 
their substJntial essence. The truth behind this vague demand is 

INTRODUCTION 
29 
that the impulses should become the rational system of the will's 
volitions. To grasp them like that, proceeding out of the concept 
of the will, is the content of the philosophical science of right. 
The content of this science through every single one of its moments, 
e.g. right, property, morality, family, state, and so forth, may be ex-
pounded in the form: man has by nature the impulse towards right, also 
the impulse to property and morality, also the impulse of love between 
the sexes, the impulse to sociability, &c. This form is to be found in 
empirical psychology. But if in its stead the greater dignity of a philo-
sophical dress is desired, then according to what, as was remarked 
before,s6 has passed in recent times, and still passes, for philosophy, this 
dress may he had cheap hy the simple device of saying that man dis-
covers within himself as a 'fact of his consciousness' that right, property, 
the state, &c., are objects of his volition. Later in the text,s 7 this same 
subject-matter, which appears here in the shape of impulses, will come 
on the scene in another form, i.e. in the shape of duties. 
20. When reflection is brought to bear on impulses, they are 
imaged, estimated, compared with one another, with their means 
of satisfaction and their consequences, &c., and with a sum of satis-
faction (i.e. with happiness). In this way re~cctwn invests this 
material with abstract universality and in this nternal manner 
purifies it from its crudity and barbarity. Thts growth of the 
universality of thought is the absolute value in educ:-~tion 58 (corn-
pare Paragraph 187). [A.] 
21. The truth, however, of this abstract untvcrsality, which is 
indeterminate in itself and finds its determtnacv in the material 
mentioned in Paragraph 20, is self-determining untversality, the 
will, freedom. In having universality, or itself qua infinite form, 59 
for its object, content, and aim, the will is free not only in itself but 
for itself also; it is the Idea in its truth. 
(i) When the will's self-consciousness takes the form of desire and 
impulse, this consciousness is sense-consciousness, just as sensation in 
general denotes externality and therefore the condition in which self-
consciousness is self-external. 60 (ii) When the will is reflective, it con-
tains two elements-this sense-consciousness and the universality of 
thought. (iii) \Vhen the will's potentialities have become fully explicit, 
then it has for its object the will itself as such, and so the will in its sheer 
universality-a universality which is what it is simply because it has 
absorbed in itself the immediacy of instinctive desire and the particu-
larity which is produced by reflection and with which such desire eo tpso 
becomes imbued. But this process of absorption in or elevation to 

30 
INTRODUCTION 
universality is what is called the activity of thought. The self-conscious-
ness which purifies its object, content, and aim, and raises them to this 
universality effects this as thinking getting its own way in the will. Here 
is the point at which it becomes clear that it is only as thinking intel-
ligence that the will is genuinely a will and free. The slave does not 
know his essence, his infinity, his freedom; he does not know himself as 
human in essef\ce ;6' and he lacks this knowledge of himself because he 
does not think himself. This self-consciousness which apprehends itself 
through thinking as essentially human, and thereby frees itself from the 
contingent and the false, is the principle of right, morality, and all ethical 
life. Philosophic utterances about right, morality, and ethical life from 
those who would banish thought and have recourse instead to feeling, 
enthusiasm, the heart and the breast, are expressive of the utterly con-
temptible position into which thought and philosophic science have 
fallen, because what this amounts to is that even philosophic science 
itself, plunged in self-despair and extreme exhaustion, is taking as its 
prtnciple barbarity and absence of thought, and would do its best to rob 
mankind of all truth, worth, and dignity. [A.] 
22. It is the will whose potentialities have become fully explicit 
which is truly infinite, because its object is itself and so is not in its 
eyes an 'other' or a barrier; on the contrary, in its object this will 
has simply turned backward into itself. Further this will is not 
mere potentiality, capacity, potency (potentia), hut the infinite 
in actuality (infinitum actu), since the concept's existence or its 
objective externality is inwardness itsel£.62 
Thus, if anyone speaks simply ot the 'free will' as such, without 
specifically referring to the will which is free absolutely, he is speaking 
only of the capacity for freedom, or of the natural and finite will (see 
Paragraph I I), and not by any means therefore of the free will, despite 
his intention and the words he uses. 
Since tht: Understanding takes the infinite only as something negative 
and so as something 'beyond', it supposes that it is doing all the more 
honour to the infinite, the more it pushes it into the distance a\vay from 
itself and removes it from itself as something alien. In the free\\ ill, the 
truly infinite becomes actual and present; the free will itself is this Idea 
whose nature it is to be present here and now. [A.] 
23. Only in freedom of this kind is the will by itself \\ithout 
qualification, because then it is related to nothing except itself and 
so is released from every tie of dependence on anything else. The 
will is then true, or rather truth itself, because its self-determina-
tion consists in a correspondence hetwt:cn what it is in its existence 
(i.e, what it is as objective to itself) and its concept; or in other 

INTRODUCTION 
31 
words, the pure concept of the will has the intuition of itself for 
its goal and its reality. 
24. The will is then universal, because all restriction and all 
particular individuality have been absorbed within it. These lie 
only in the difference between the concept and its content or object, 
or, to put it otherwise, in the difference between its implicit 
character and its subjective awareness of itself, or between its 
universality and its exclusive individuality, the individuality which 
resolves. 
The various types of universality develop in logic.* In connexion 
with this word 'universality', what strikes representative thinking first is 
the idea of abstract and external universality; hut in connexion with 
absolute universality-and the universality here in question is of this 
character-we have to think neither of the universality of reflection, i.e. 
'all-ness' or the universal as a common characteristic, nor of the abstract 
universality which stands outside and over against the individual, the 
abstract identity of the Understanding (see Remark to Paragraph 6). It 
is the universality concrete in character and so explicitly universal which 
is the substance of self-consciousness, its immanent generic essence, or 
its immanent Idea. This-the concept of the free will--is the universal 
which overlaps its object, penetrates its particular determination through 
and through and therein remains identical with itself. 6J The absolutely 
universal is definable as what is called the 'rational', and it can be appre-
hended only in this speculative way. 
25. The subjective, in relation to the \\ill in general, means the 
will's self-conscious side, its individuality (sec Par~1graph 7) in dis-
tinction from its implicit concept. The subjecti\Jty of the will 
means therefore 
( o.) the pure form of the will, the absolute unity of self-conscious-
ness with itself (a unity in which self-consciousness, as I= I, is 
purely and simply inward and abstractly self-dependent), the pure 
certainty, as distinguished from the truth, of indl\·iduality; 
({3) the particular will as the arbitrary will and the contingent 
content of optional aims; 
(y) in general, the one-sided form of the will (sec Paragraph 8) 
for \vhich the thing willed, whatever its content, is hut a content 
belonging to self-consciousness and an aim unfulfilled. 
26. (••) The will is purely and simply objective in so far as it has 
itself for 1ts determination and so is in correspondence with its 
concept and genuinely a will; 
• Ellc., [1st edn.] §§ 118-26 [3rd edn. §§ 169-78]. 

32 
INTRODUCTION 
({3) but the objective will, b;;ir:g without the infinite form of self-
consciousness, is the \Yill absorbed in its object or condition, what-
ever the content of these may be; it is the will of the child, the 
ethical will, 64 also the will of the slave, the superstitious man, &c.; 
(y) objectivity, finally, is the one-sided form opposed to the sub-
jective volition, and hence it is the immediacy of existence as 
external reality; the will first becomes objective to itself in this 
sense through the fulfilment of its aims. 
These logical categories-subjectivity and objectivity-have been set 
forth in detail here primarily with a view to pointing out expressly in 
relation to them, since they are often used in the sequel, that they, like 
other distinctions and opposed categories of reflection, pass over into 
their opposites as a result of their finitude and their dialectical character. 
In other cases of opposition between two categories, each opposite re-
tains a hard and fast meaning for representative thinking and the Under-
standing, because the identity of the opposites is still only something 
inward. In the will, on the other hand, these opposed aspects are sup-
posed to be at one and the same time abstractions and yet determinations 
of the will, which can be known only as something concrete, and they 
lead automatically to their identity and to the confusion of their mean-
ings-a confusion into which the Understanding slips quite uncon-
sciously. Thus, for example, the will as inwan.l freedom is subjectivity 
itself; subjectivity therefore is the concept oft he will and so its objectivity. 
But it is its subJectivity, contrasted with objectivity, which is finitude, 
and yet, because of this very contrast, the will is not by itself but is 
entangled with its object, and so its finitude consists quite as much in 
the fact that it is not subjective-and so on. Hence the meaning to he 
attributed in what follo\YS to 'subjective' or 'objective' in respect of the 
will must each time appear from the context, which supplies the data for 
inferring their position in relation to the will as a whole. [A.l 
27. The absolute goal, or, if you like, the absolute impulse, of 
free mind (see Paragraph 21) is to make its freedom its object, i.e. 
to make freedom objective as much in the sense that freedom shall 
be the rational system of mind, as in the sense that this system shall 
be the world of immediate actuality (see Paragraph z6). In making 
freedom its object, mind's purpose is to be explicitly, as Idea, what 
the will is implicitly. The definition of the concept of the \Viii in 
abstraction from the Idea of the will is 'the free will which wills the 
free will'. 6s 
28. The will's activity consists in annulling the contradiction 
between subjectivity and objectivity and giving its aims an objective 
instead of a subjective character, while at the same time remaining 

INTRODUCTION 
33 
by itself even in objectivity. Outside the formal mode of willing 
(i.e. consciousness, see Paragraph 8) where objectivity is present 
only as immediate actuality, this activity is in essence the develop-
ment of the substantive content of the Idea (see Paragraph 21)-a 
development through which the concept determines the Idea, itself 
at first abstract, until it becomes a systematized whole. This whole, 
as what is substantive, is independent of the opposition between a 
merely subjective aim and its realization and is the same in both 
despite their difference in form. 
29. An existent of any sort embodying the free will, this is what 
right is. Right therefore is by definition freedom as Idea. 
The crucial point in both the Kantian and the generally accepted 
definition of right (see the Introduction to Kant's Philosophy of Law)66 
is the 'restriction which makes it possible for my freedom or self-will to 
co-exist with the self-will of each and all according to a universal law'. 
On the one hand, this definition contains only a negative category, re-
striction, while on the other hand the positive factor-the universal law 
or the so-called 'law of reason', the correspondence of the self-will of 
one individual with that of another-is tantamount to the principle of 
contradiction and the familiar notion of abstract identity. The definition 
of right which I have quoted involves that way of looking at the matter, 
especially popular since Rousseau,67 according to which what is funda-
mental, substantive, and primary is supposed to be the will of a single 
person in his own private self-will, not the absolute or rational will, and 
mind as a particular individual, not mind as it is in its truth. Once this 
principle is adopted, of course the rational can come on the scene only 
as a restriction on the type of freedom which this principle involves, and 
so also not as something immanently rational but only as an external 
abstract universal. This view is devoid of any speculative thinking and 
is repudiated by the philosophic concept. And the phenomena which it 
has produced both in men's heads and in the world6B are of a frightful-
ness parallel only to the superficiality of the thoughts on which they are 
based. 
30. It is only because right is the embodiment of the absolute 
concept or of self-conscious freedom that it is something sacrosanct. 
But the exclusively formal character of right (and duty also, as 
we shall see)69 arises at a distinct stage in the development of the 
concept of freedom. By contrast with the right which is com-
paratively formal (i.e. abstract) and so comparatively restricted, a 
higher right belongs to the sphere and stage of mind in which mind 
has determined and actualized within itself the further moments 
contained in its Idea ;70 and it belongs to this sphere as the sphere 

34 
INTRODUCTION 
which is concreter, intrinsically richer, and more genuinely Uni-
versal. 
Every stage in the development of the Idea of freedom has its own 
special right, since it is the embodiment of freedom in one of its proper 
specific forms. When there is said to be a clash between the moral or 
the ethical and the right, the right in question is only the elementary, 
formal, right of abstract personality. lVIorality, ethical life, the interest 
of the state, each of these is a right of a special character because each of 
them is a specific form and embodiment of freedom. They can come into 
collision with each other only in so far as they are all on the same footing 
as rights. If mind's moral attitude were not also a right, or freedom in 
one of its forms, it could not possibly come into collision with the right 
of personality or with any other right, because any right whatever has 
inherent in it the concept of freedom, i.e. the highest category of mind, 
in contrast with which any other thing is without substance. Yet at 
the same time collision involves another moment, namely the fact that 
it is restrictive, and so if two rights collide one is subordinated to the 
other. It is only the right of the world-mind which is absolute without 
qualification. 
31. The method whereby, in philosophic science, the concept 
develops itself out of itself is expounded in logic and is here like-
wise presupposed.7 1 Its development is a purely immanent progress, 
the engendering of its determinations. Its advance is not effected 
by the assertion that various things exist and then by the applica-
tion of the universal to extraneous material of that sort culled from 
elsewhere. 
The concept's moving principle, which alike engenders and dis-
solves the particularizations of the universal, I call 'dialectic', though I 
do not mean that dialectic which takes an object, proposition, &c., given 
to feeling or, in general, to immediate consciousness, and explains it 
away, confuses it, pursues it this way and that, and has as its sole task 
the deduction of the contrary of that with which it starts-a negative 
type of dialectic commonly appearing even in Plato. Dialectic of this 
kind may regard as its final result either the contrary of the idea with 
which it begins, or, if it is as incisive as the scepticism of the ancients, 
the contradictory of this idea, or again, it may be feeble enough to be 
content with an 'approximation' to the truth, a modern half-measure. 72 
The loftier dialectic of the concept consists not simply in producing the 
determination as a contrary and a restriction, but in producing and 
seizing upon the positive content and outcome of the determination, 
because it is this which makes it solely a development and an immanent 
progress. Moreover, this dialectic is not an activity of subjective think-
ing applied to some matter externally, but is rather the matter's very 

INTRODUCTION 
35 
soul putting forth its branches and fruit organically. This development 
of the l de a is the proper activity of its rationality, and thinking, as some-
thing subjective, merely looks on at it without for its part adding to it 
any ingredient of its own. To consider a thing rationally means not to 
bring reason to bear on the object from the outside and so to tamper 
with it, but to find that the object is rational on its own account; here it 
is mind in its freedom, the culmination of self-conscious reason, which 
gives itself actuality and engenders itsdf as an existing world. The sole 
task of philosophic science is to bring into consciousness this proper 
\Vork of the reason of the thing itself. 
32. The determinations of the concept in the course of its 
den·lopmcllt arc from one point of view themselves concepts, but 
from another they take the form of existents, since the concept is 
in essence Idea. The series of concepts which this development 
yields is therefore at the same time a series of shapes of experience, 
and philosophic science must treat them accordingly. 
In a more speculative sense, a concept's determinacy and its mode of 
existenn: an: one and the same thing. But it is to be noticed that the 
moments, \\hose result is a further determined form of the concept, 
precede it in the philosophical development of the Idea as determina-
tions of the concept, hut they do not go in advance of it in the temporal 
development as shapes of experience. Thus. for instance, the Idea 
determined as the family, presupposes the determinations of the con-
cept from which the family will later on in this work be shown to result. 
But the explicit existence of these inner presuppositions as shapes ot 
experience also, e.g. as the right of property, contract, morality, and so 
forth, is the other aspect of the development, and 1t is only in a higher 
and more complete civilization that the development has gone so far as 
to endow its moments with this appropriately shaped existence. n [A.) 
Diz·ision of the Subject 
33. In correspondence with the stages in the development of the 
Idea of the absolutely free will, the will is 
A. immediate; its concept therefore is abstract, namely person-
ality, and its embodiment is an immediate external thing-
the sphere of Abstract or Formal Right; 
B. reflected from its external embodiment into itself-it is then 
characterized as subjective individuality in opposition to the 
univer~al. The universal here is characterized as something 
imYard, the good, and also as something outward, a world 
presented to the will; both these sides of the Idea are here 
mediated only by each other. This is the Idea in its division 

INTRODUCTION 
or in its existence as particular; and here we have the right 
of the subjective will in relation to the right of the world and 
the right of the Idea, though only the Idea implicit-the 
sphere of ]\I orality; 
C. the unity and truth of both these abstract moments-the Idea 
of the good not only apprehended in thought but so realized 
both in the will reflected into itself and in the external world 
that freedom exists as substance, as actuality and necessity, 
no less than as subjective will; this is the Idea in its absolutely 
universal existence-Ethical Life. 
But on the same principle the ethical substance is 
(a) natural mind, the Family; 
(b) in its division and appearance, Civil Society; 
(c) the State as freedom, freedom universal and objective 
even in the free self-subsistence of the particular will. 
This actual and organic mind ( '1) of a single nation ({3) 
reveals and actualizes itself through the inter-relation 
of the particular national minds until (y) in the process 
of world-history it reveals and actualizes itself as the 
universal world-mind whose right is supreme. 
The fact that when a thing or a content is posited first of all in 
accordance with its concept or as it is implicitly, it then has the form of 
immediacy or pure being, is the doctrine of speculative logic, here pre-
supposed; the concept which confronts itself in the form of the concept 
is a different thing and no longer something immediate. 
The principle which determines the division of the subject is like\~ ise 
here presupposed.74 The division may also be looked upon as a pre-
declaration in historical form of the parts of the book, since the various 
stages must engender themselves out of the subject-matter itself as 
moments in the development of the lch:a. A philosophical division is far 
from being an external one, i.e. it is not an external classification of a 
given material in accordance with one or more borrowed bases of division, 
but, on the contrary, is the immanent self-differentiation of the concept. 
'Morality' and 'ethicallife',7s which perhaps usually pass current as 
synonyms, are taken here in essentially different senses. Yet even com-
monplace thinking seems to he distinguishing them; Kant generally 
prefers to use the word 'morality' and, since the principles of action in 
his philosophy are always limited to this conception, they make the 
standpoint of ethical life completely impossible, in fact they explicitly 
nullify and spurn it. But even if 'moral' and 'ethical' meant the same 
thing by derivation, that would in no way hinder them, once they had 
become different words, from being used for different conceptions. [A.] 

FIRST PART 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
34. The absolutely free will, at the stage when its concept is 
abstract, has the determinate character of immediacy. Accordingly 
this stage is its negative actuality, an actuality contrasted with the 
real world, only an abstractly self-related actuality-the inherently 
single will of a subject. Pursuant to the moment of the particu-
larity of the will, it has in addition a content consisting of deter-
minate aims and, as exclusive individuality, it has this content at 
the same time as an external world directly confronting it. 1 [A.] 
35. The universality of this consciously free will is abstract 
universality, the self-conscious but otherwise contentless and 
simple relation of itself to itself in its individuality, and from this 
point of view the subject is a person. Personality implies that as 
this person: (i) I am completely determined on every side (in my 
inner caprice, impulse, and desire, as well as by immediate external 
facts) and so finite, yet (ii) none the less I am s1mply and solely 
self-relation, and therefore in finitude I knmy myself as something 
infinite, universal, and free. 
Personality begins not with the subject's mere general consciousness 
of himself as an ego concretely determined in some way or other, but 
rather with his consciousness of himself as a compktely abstract ego in 
which every concrete; restriction and value is negated and without 
validity. In personality, therefore, knowledge is kncm ledge of oneself as 
an object, but an object raised by thinking to the level of simple infinity 
and so an object purely self-identicaJ.z Individuals and nations have no 
personality until they have achieved this pure thought and knowledge of 
themselves. !\lind fully explicit differs from the phenomenal mind in 
this, that at the same level at which the latter is only self-consciousness-
a consciousness of self but only one pursuant to the natural will and its 
still external oppositions~'-the former has itself, as the abstract and free 
ego, for its object and aim, and so is personality.' [A.] 
36. (I) Personality essentially involves the capacity for rights 
and constitutes the concept and the basis (itself abstract) of the 
system of abstract and therefore formal right. Hence the imperative 
of right is: 'Be a person and respect others as persons.' 
• See Phenomenology (Bamberg and V."i.irzburg, 1~07), pp. 101 fl. [Eng. tr. 
pp. :n 8 ff.], and Enc. [1st edn.], § 344 [3rd edn. § 424). 

38 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
37. (2) The particularity of the will is a moment in the con-
sciousness of the will as a whole (see Paragraph 3+), but it is not 
yet contained in abstract personality as such. Therefore, it is pre-
sent at this point, but as still sundered from personality, from the 
character of freedom, present as desire, need, impulse, casual 
whim, and so forth. In formal right, therefore, there is no question 
of particular interests, of my ad-,antage or my welfare, any more 
than there is of the particular motive behind my volition, of insight 
and intention.4 [A.] 
38. In relation to action in the concrete and to moral and ethical 
ties, abstract right is, in contrast \\·ith the further content which 
these involve, only a possibility, and to have a right is therefore to 
have only a permission or a warrant. The unconditional com-
mands of abstract right are restricted, once again becaus~ of its 
abstractness, to the negative: 'Do not infringe personality and what 
personality entails.' The result is that there are only prohibitions 
in the sphere of right, and the positive form of any command in this 
sphere is based in the last resort, if we examine its ultimate content, 
on prohibition. 
39. (3) As immediate individuality, a person in making decisions 
is related to a world of nature directly confronting him, and thus 
the personality of the will stands over against this world as some-
thing subjective. For personality, however, as inherently infinite 
and universal, the restriction of being only subjective is a contra-
diction and a nullity. Personality is that which struggles to lift 
itself above this restriction and to give itself reality, or in other 
words to claim that external world as its own. 
40. Right is in the first place the immediate embodiment which 
freedom gives itself in an immediate way, i.e. (a) possession, which 
is property-ownership. Freedom is here the freedom of the abstract 
will in general or, eo ipso, the freedom of a single person related 
only to himself. (b) A person by distinguishing himself from him-
self relates himself to another person, 5 and it is only as owners that 
these two persons really exist for each other. Their implicit 
identity is realized through the transference of property from one 
to the other in conformity with a common will and without detri-
ment to the rights of either. This is contract. (c) The will which is 
differentiated not in the sense of (b) as being contrasted with 
another person, but in the sense of (a) as related to itself, is as a 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
39 
particular will at variance with and opposed to itself as an absolute 
will. This opposition is wrongdoing and crime. 
The classification6 of the system of rights into jus ad personam and jus 
ad rem on the one hand, and jus ad actiones on the other, like the many 
other similar classifications, has as its primary aim the imposition of an 
external order on the mass of unorganized material confronting the 
classifier. The striking thing about this classification is the confusion in 
it due to the disorderly intermixture of rights which presuppose sub-
stantial ties, e.g. those of family and political life, and rights which only 
concern abstract personality as such. This confusion is exemplified in 
the classification of rights (adopted by Kant and since favoured by 
others) into jus reate, jus personate, and jus reatiter personate. 7 
To develop the perversity and lack of speculative thought in the 
classification of rights into jus ad personam and jus ad rem, which lies at 
the root of Roman law (jus ad actiones concerns the administration of 
justice and is of a different order altogether), would take us too far afield. 8 
Here this much at least is clear: it is personality alone which can confer 
a right to things and therefore jus ad personam in its essence is jus ad rem, 
rem being taken here in its general sense as anything external to my 
freedom, including even my body and my life. In this sense, jus ad rem 
is the right of personality as such. But from the point of view of what is 
called jus ad personam in Roman law, a man is reckoned a person only 
when he is treated as possessing a certain status." Hence in Roman law, 
even personality itself is only a certain standing or status contrasted with 
slavery. The so-called Roman law of 'personal' rights, then, is con-
cerned with family relationships, though it excludes the nght over slaves 
(and 'slaves' almost includes children too) as well as the status (called 
capitis diminutio) of having lost one's rights.9 (In Kant, by the way, 
family relationships are the jura rea liter personalia.' 0 ) The Roman jus ad 
personam is therefore not the right of the person as person but at most the 
right of a person in his particular capacity. (Later on in this book," it 
will be shown that the substantial basis of family relationships is rather 
the sacrifice of personality.) Now it must be obvious that it is perverse 
to treat the right of a specific person in his particular capacity before the 
universal right of personality as such. 
Kant's jura persuJ:alia 12 are the rights issuing from a contract whereby 
I undertake to give something or to perform something-the jus ad rem 
conferred hy an obligatio in Roman law. To be sure, it is only a person 
who is required to execute the covenants of a contract, just as it is also 
only a person who acquires the right to their execution. But a right of 
this sort cannot for this reason be called a 'personal' right; rights of 
whatever sort belong to a person alone. Objectively considered, a right 
arising from a contract is never a right over a person, hut only a right 
• J. G. I Icmeccius: Elementa juns ci<"ilis [Bonn, 1763], § lxxv. 

fO 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
over something external to a person or something which he can alienate, 
always a right over a thing. 
SUB-SECTION I 
PROPERTY 
41. A person must translate his freedom into an external sphere 
in order to exist as Idea. Personality is the first, still wholly 
abstract, determination of the absolute and infinite will, and there-
fore this sphere distinct from the person, the sphere capable of 
embodying his freedom, is likewise determined as what is im-
mediately different and separable from him. [A.] 
42. What is immediately different from free mind is that which, 
both for mind and in itself, is the external pure and simple, a thing, 
something not free, not personal, without rights. 
'Thing', like 'the objective', has two opposed meanings. If we say 
'that's the thing' or 'the thing is what matters, not the person', 'thing' 
means what is substantive. On the other hand, when 'thing' is con-
trasted with 'person' as such, not with the particular subject, it means 
the opposite of what is substantive, i.e. that whose determinate charac-
ter lies in its pure externality. From the point of view of free mind, 
which must, of course, be distinguished from mere consciousness, the 
external is external absolutely, and it is for this reason that the 
determinate character assigned to nature by the concept is inherent 
externality.IJ [A.] 
43. As the concept in its immediacy, and so as in essence a unit, 
a person has a natural existence partly within himself and partly of 
such a kind that he is related to it as to an external world.-It is 
only these things' 4 in their immediacy as things, not what they are 
capable of becoming through the mediation of the will, i.e. things 
with determinate characteristics, which are in question here where 
the topic under discussion is personality, itself at this point still in 
its most elementary immediacy. 
Mental aptitudes, erudition, artistic skill, even things ecclesiastical 
(like sermons, masses, prayers, consecration of votive objects), inven-
tions, and so forth, become subjects of a contract, brought on to a parity, 
through being bought and sold, with things recognized as things. It 
may be asked whether the artist, scholar, &c., is from the legal point of 
view in possession of his art, erudition, ability to preach a sermon, sing 
a mass, &c., that is, whether such attainments are 'things'. We may 
hesitate to call such abilities, attainments, aptitudes, &c., 'things', for 

... 
PROPERTY 
while possession of these may be the subject of business dealings and 
contracts, as if they were things, there is also something inward and 
mental about it, and for this reason the Understanding may be in per-
plexity about how to describe such possession in legal terms, because its 
field of vision is as limited to the dilemma that this is 'either a thing or 
not a thing' as to the dilemma 'either finite or infinite'. Attainments, 
erudition, talents, and so forth, are, of course, owned by free mind and 
are something internal and not external to it, but even so, by expressing 
them it may embody them in something external and alienate them (see 
below),rs and in this way they are put into the category uf 'things'. 
Therefore they are not immediate at the start but only acquire this 
character through the mediation of mind which reduces its inner 
possessions to immediacy and externality. 
It was an unjustifiable and unethical proviso of Roman law that 
children were from their father's point of view 'things'. Hence he was 
legally the owner of his children, although, of course, he still also stood to 
them in the ethical relation of love (though this relation must have been 
much weakened by the injustice of his legal position). Here, then, the 
two qualities 'being a thing' and 'not being a thing' were united, though 
quite wrongly. 
In the sphere of abstract right, we are concerned only with the person 
as person, and therefore with the particular (which is indispensable if 
the person's freedom is to have scope and reality) only in so far as it is 
something separable from the person and immediately different from 
him, no matter whether this separability constitutes the essential nature 
of the particular, or whether the particular receives it only through the 
mediation of the subjective will. Hence in this sphere we are concerned 
with mental aptitudes, erudition, &c., only in so far a:, they are posses-
sions in a legal sense; we have not to treat here the possession of our 
body and mind which we can achieve through education, study, habit, 
&c., and which exists as an inward property of mind. But it is not until 
we come to deal with alienation16 that we need begin to speak of the 
transition of such mental property into the external world where it falls 
under the category of property in the legal sense. 
44. A person has as his substantive end the right of putting his 
will into any and every thing and thereby making it his, because it 
has no such end in itself and derives its destiny and soul from his 
will. This is the absolute right of appropriation which man has 
over all 'things'. 
The so-called 'philosophy' which attributes reality in the sense of self-
subsistence and genuine independent self-enclosed existence to un-
mediated single things, to the non-personal, is directly contradicted by 
the free will's attitude to these things. The same is true of the other 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
philosophy which assures us that mind cannot apprehend the truth or 
know the nature of the thing-in-itst:lf. 17 While so-called 'external' 
things have a show of self-subsistence for consciousness, intuition, and 
representative thinking, the free will idealizes that type of actuality and 
so is its truth. 1B [A.] 
45. To have power over a thing ah extra constitutes possession. 
The particular aspect of the matter, the fact that I make something 
my own as a result of my natural need, impulse, and caprice, is the 
particular interest satisfied by possession. But I as free will am an 
object to myself in what I possess and thereby also for the first time 
am an actual will, and this is the aspect which constitutes the 
category of property, the true and right factor in possession. 
If emphasis is placed on my needs, then the possession of property 
appears as a means to their satisfaction, but the true position is that, 
from the standpoint of freedom, property is the first embodiment of 
freedom and so is in itself a substantive end. 
46. Since my will, as the will of a person, and so as a single will, 
becomes objective to me in property, property acquires the 
character of private property; and common property of such a 
nature that it may be owned by separate persons acquires the 
character of an inherently dissoluble partnership in which the 
retention of my share is explicitly a matter of my arbitrary prefer-
ence. 
The nature of the elements' 9 makes it impossible for the use of them 
to become so particularized as to be the private possession of anyone. 
In the Roman agrarian laws' 0 there was a clash between public and 
private ownership of land. The latter is the more rational and therefore 
had to be given preference even at the expense of other rights. 
One factor in family testamentary trusts'' contravenes the right of 
personality and so the right of private property. But the specific charac-
teristics pertaining to private property may have to be subordinated to a 
higher sphere of right (e.g. to a society or the state), as happens, for in-
stance, when private property is put into the hands of a so-called 'artificial' 
person22 and into mortmain. Still, such exceptions to private property 
cannot be grounded in chance, in private caprice, or private advantage, 
but only in the rational organism of the state. 
The general pnnciple that underlies Plato's ideal state violates the 
right of personality by forbidding the holding of private property. 2J The 
idea of a pious or friendly and even a compulsory brotherhood of men 
holding their goods in common and rejecting the principle of private 
property may readily present itself to the disposition which mistakes the 

PROPERTY 
43 
true nature of the freedom of mind and right and fails to apprehend it in 
its determinate moments. As for the moral or religious view behind this 
idea, when Epicurus's friends proposed to form such an association 
holdmg goods in common, he forbade them, precisely on the ground 
that thcrr proposal betrayed distrust and that those who distrusted each 
other were not friends.* [A.] 
47. As a person, I am myself an immediate individual; if we give 
further precision to this expression, it means in the first instance 
that I am alive in this bodily organism which is my external 
existcnce, universal in content and undivided, the real pre-condi-
tion of every further determined mode of existence. 24 But, all the 
same, as person, I possess my life and my body, like other things, 
only in so far as my will is in them. 
The fact that, considered as existing not as the concept explicit but 
only as the concept in its immediacy, I am alive and have a bodily 
organism, depends on the concept of life and on the concept of mind as 
soul-on moments which are taken over here from the Philosophy of 
Naturet and from Anthropology.! 
I possess the members of my body, my life, only so long as I will to 
possess them. An animal cannot maim or de,troy itself, but a man can. 
[A.] 
48. In so far as the body is an immedwte existent, it is not in 
conformity \\ith mind. If it is to be the ,,j]hng organ and soul-
endowed instrument2s of mind, it must first be taken into posses-
sion by mind (see Paragraph 57). But from the point of view of 
others, I am in essence a free entity in my bod) '' hik my possession 
of it is still immediate. 
It is only because I am alive as a free entrty in my body that this living 
existent ought not to be misused by being made a beast of burden. 
While I am alive, my soul (the concept and, to usc a higher term, 
the free entity) and my body are not separated; my body is the 
embodiment of my freedom and it is with my body that I fed. It is 
therefore only ahstract sophistical reasonmg which can so distinguish 
body and soul as to hold that the 'thing-in-itself', the soul, is not touched 
or attacked if the body is maltreated and the existent embodiment of 
personality is subjected to the power of another. I can withdraw into 
myself out of my bodily existence and make my body something external 
to myself; particular feelings I can regard as something outside me and 
• Diogenes Laert1us, x. 6. 
t Enc.[rstedn],§§zs9ff. Cf.§§r6r,164,298. (3rdedn.§§336ff. Cf.§§zr3, 
zr6, 376]. 
t Enc. [rst edn.], § 318 [Jrd edn. §§ 388 ff.]. 

44 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
in chains I can still be free. But this is my will; so far as others are con-
cerned, I am in my body. To be free from the point of view of others26 
is identical with being free in my determinate existence.* If anothe1 
does violence to my body, he does violence to me. 
If my body is touched or suffers violence, then, because I feel, I am 
touched myself actually, here and now. This creates the distinction 
between personal injury and damage to my external property, for in such 
property my will is not actually present in this direct fashion. 
49. In relation to external things, the rational aspect is that I 
possess property, but the particular aspect comprises subjective 
aims, needs, arbitrariness, abilities, external circumstances, and so 
forth (see Paragraph 45). On these mere possession as such de-
pends, but this particular aspect has in this sphere of abstract per-
sonality not yet been established as identical with freedom. What 
and how much I possess, therefore, is a matter of indifference so 
far as rights are concerned. 
If at this stage we may speak of more persons than one, although no 
such distinction has yet been made, then we may say that in respect of 
their personality persons are equal. But this is an empty tautology, for 
the person, as something abstract, has not yet been particularized or 
established as distinct in some specific way. 
'Equality' is the abstract identity of the Understanding; reflective 
thought and all kinds of intellectual mediocrity stumble on it at once 
when they are confronted by the relation of unity to a difference.n At 
this point, equality could only be the equality of abstract persons as such, 
and therefore the whole field of possession, this terrain of inequality, falls 
outside it. 
The demand sometimes made28 for an equal division of land, and other 
available resources too, is an intellectualism all the more empty and 
superficial in that at the heart of particular differences there lies not only 
the external contingency of nature but also the whole compass of mind, 
endlessly particularized and differentiated, and the rationality of mind 
developed into an organism. 29 
We may not speak of the injustice of nature in the unequal distribution 
of possessions and resources, since nature is not free and therefore is 
neither just nor unjust. That everyone ought to have subsistence enough 
for his needs is a moral wish and thus vaguely expressed is well enough 
meant, but like anything that is only well meant it lacks objectivity. On 
the other hand, subsistence is not the same as possession and belongs to 
another sphere, i.e. to civil society.Jo [A.] 
• See my Sczence of Logic [1st edn.], \ol. 1, pp. 49 ff. [Eng. tr. val. i, pp. 127-
35, but this is a translatwn of the second editiOn, m which the passage m questiOn 
was much altered, as Lasson pomts out]. 

PROPERTY 
45 
50. The principle that a thing belongs to the person who 
happens to be the first in time to take it into his possession is im-
mediately self-explanatory and '>uperfluous, because a second per-
son cannot take into his possession what is already the property of 
another ,31 [A.] 
51. Since property is the embodiment of personality, my in-
ward idea and will that something is to be mine is not enough 
to make it my property; to secure this end occupancy is requisite. 
The embodiment which my willing thereby attains involves its 
recognizability by others.-The fact that a thing of which I can 
take possession is a res nullius is (see Paragraph 50) a self-explan-
atory negative condition of occupancy, or rather it has a bearing on 
the anticipated relation to others.' 2 [A.] 
52. Occupancy makes the matter of the thing my property, since 
matter in itself does not belong to itself. 
l\Iatter offers resistance to me-and matter is nothing except the 
resistance it offers to me-that is, it pn:scnts itself to my mind as some-
thing abstractly independent only when my mine! L: tak<:n abstractly as 
sensation.JJ (Sense-perception perversely takes mmd as sensation for 
the concrete and mind as reason for the abstract.) In relation to the will 
and property, however, this independence "f matter has no truth. 
Occupancy, as an external activity whereby IH' actualize our universal 
right of appropriating natural objects, comes to be conditioned by 
physical strength, cunning, dexterity, the means of nne· kind or another 
whereby we take physical possession of things. 0\\ In~ to the qualitative 
differences between natural objects, mastery and ucn1p.mcy of these has 
an infinite variety of meanings and involves a rcstnctw11 and contingency 
that is just as infinite. Apart from that, a 'kind' of thing, or an element 
as such, is. not the correlative object of an individual person. Before it 
can become such and be appropriated, it must first be individualized into 
single parts, into a breath of air or a drink of water. In the fact that it is 
impossible to take possession of an external 'kind' of thing as such, or of 
an element, it is not the external physical impossibility \\ hich must be 
looked on as ultimate, but the fact that a person, as will, is characterized 
as individual, while as person he is at the same time zmmtdwte individu-
ality; hence as person he is related to the external world as to single 
things (see Remark to Paragraph 13 and Paragraph 43). 
Thus the mastery and external possession of things becomes, in ways 
that again arc infinite, more or less indeterminate and incomplete. Yet 
matter is never without an essential form of its own and only because it 
has one is it anything. The more I appropriate this form, the more do I 
enter into actual possession of the thing. The consumption of food is an 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
out and out alteration of its qualitative character, the character on the 
strength of which it was what it was hefore it was eaten. The training of 
my body in dexterity, like the training of my mind, is like\\ isc a more or 
less complete occupancy and penetration of it. It is my mind which of 
all things I can make most completely my own. Yet this actual occupancy 
is different from property as such because property is complete as the 
work of the free will alone.H In face of the free'' ill, the thing retains no 
property in itself even though there still remains in possession, as an 
external relation to an ohjeet, something external. The empty abstrac-
tion of a matter without properties which, when a thing is my property, 
is supposed to remain outside me and the property of the thing, is one 
which thought must master. [ A.l 
53. Property has its modifications determined in the course of 
the will's relation to the thing. This relation is 
(A) taking possession of the thing directly (here it is in the thing 
qua something positive that the will has its embodiment); 
(B) use (the thing is negative in contrast with the will and so it is 
in the thing as something to be negated that the \Yill has its 
embodiment); 
(C) alienation, the reflection of the will back from the thing into 
itself. 
These three are respecti,·ely the positive, negative, and infinite 
judgementsJs of the will on the thing. 
A. Taking Possession 
54. We take possession of a thing {il:) by directly grasping it 
physically, (~) by forming it, and (y) by merely marking it as 
ours. [A.] 
55. {il:) From the point of view of sensation, to grasp a thing 
physically is the most complete of these modes, because then I am 
directly present in this possession, and therefore my \\·ill is recog-
nizable in it. But at bottom this mode is only subjective, temporary, 
and seriously restricted in scope, as well as by the qualitative 
nature of the things grasped.-As a result of the connexion \\·hich 
I may effect between something and things which have already be-
come my property in other ways, or into which something may 
otherwise be accidentally brought, the scope of this method is 
somewhat enlarged, and the same result is produced by other 
means also. 
1\lechanical forces, weapons, tools, extend the range of my power. 
Connexions between my property and something else may be regarded 

PROPERTY 
47 
as making it more easily possible for me than for another owner, or 
sometimes possible for me alone, to take possession of something or to 
make use of it. Instances of such connexions are that my land may be on 
the seashore, or on a river bank; or my estate may march with hunting 
country or pasture or land useful for some other purpose; stone or other 
mineral deposits may be under my fields; there may be treasure in or 
under my ground, and so on. The same is true of connexions made 
by chance and subsequent to possession, like some of what are called 
'natural accessions',-' 6 such as alluvial deposits, &c., and jetsam. (Fetura 
is an accession to my wealth too, hut the connexion here is an organic 
one, it is not a case of a thing being added ab extra to another thing 
already in my possession; and therefore fetura is of a type quite differ-
ent from the other accessions.) Alternatively, the addition to my property 
may he looked upon37 as a non-self-subsistent accident of the thing to 
which it has been added. In every case, however, these are external 
conjunctions whose bond of connexion is neither life nor the concept. 
It devolves, therefore, on the Understanding to adduce and weigh their 
pros and cons, and on positive legislation to make decisions about them 
in accordance with the extent to which the relation between the things 
conjoined has or has not any essentiality. [A.] 
56. (/3) \Vhen I impose a form on something, the thing's deter-
minate character as mine acquires an independent externality and 
ceases to be restricted to my presence here and now and to the 
direct presence of my awareness and will. 
To impose a form on a thing is the mode of taking possession most in 
conformity with the Idea to this extent, that it implies a union of subject 
and object, although it varies endlessly with the qualJtativc character of 
the objects and the variety of subjective aims. 
Under this head there also falls the formation of the organic. What I 
do to the organic docs not remain external to it but is assimilated by it. 
Examples are the tilling of the soil, the cultivation of plants, the taming 
and feeding of animals, the preservation of game, as well as contrivances 
for utilizing raw materials or the forces of nature and processes for 
making one material produce effects on another, and so forth. [A.] 
57. :Vlan, pursuant to his immediate existence within himself, is 
something natural, external to his concept. It is only through the 
development of his own hody and mind, essentially through his self-
consciousness's apprehension of itself as free, that he takes posses-
sion of himself and becomes his own property and no one else's. 
This taking possession of oneself, looked at from the opposite point 
of view, is the translation into actuality of what one is according to 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
one's concept, i.e. a potentiality, capacity, potency. In that trans-
lation one's self-consciousness for the first time becomes established 
as one's own, as one's object also and distinct from self-conscious-
ness pure and simple, and thereby capable of taking the form of 
a 'thing' (compare Remark to Paragraph 43). 
The alleged justification of slavery (by reference to all its proximate 
beginnings through physical force, capture in war, saving and preserva-
tion of life, upkeep, education, philanthropy, the slave's own acqui-
escence, and so forth), as well as the justification of a slave-ownership as 
simple lordship in general, and all historical views of the justice of 
slavery and lordship, depend on regarding man as a natural entity pure 
and simple, as an existent not in conformity with its concept (an existent 
also to which arbitrariness is appropriate). The argument for the 
absolute injustice of slavery, on the other hand, adheres to the concept of 
man as mind, as something inherently free. This view is one-sided in· 
regarding man as free by nature, or in other words it takes the concept as 
such in its immediacy, not the Idea, as the truth. This antinomy rests, 
like all others, on the abstract thinking which asserts both the moments 
of an Idea in separation from one another and clings to each of them in 
its independence and so in its inadequacy to the Idea and in its falsity. 
Free mind consists precisely (see Paragraph 21) in its being no longer 
implicit or as concept alone, but in its transcending this formal stage of 
its being, and eo ipso its immediate natural existence, until the existence 
which it gives to itself is one which is solely its own and free. The side 
of the antinomy which asserts the concept of freedom therefore has the 
merit of implying the absolute starting-point, though only the starting-
point, for the discovery of truth, while the other side goes no further 
than existence without the concept and therefore excludes the outlook of 
rationality and right altogether. The position of the free will, with which 
right and the science of right begin, is already in advance of the false 
position at which man, as a natural entity and only the concept implicit, 
is for that reason capable of being enslaved. This false, comparatively 
primitive, phenomenon of slavery is one which befalls mind when mind 
is only at the level of consciousness. The dialectic of the concept and of 
the purely immediate consciousness of freedom brings about at that 
point the fight for recognition and the relationship of master and slave." 
But that objective mind, the content of the right, should no longer be 
apprehended in its subjective concept alone, and consequently that 
man's absolute unfitness for slavery should no longer be apprehended as 
a mere 'ought to be', is something which does not come home to our 
minds until we recognize that the Idea of freedom is genuinely actual 
only as the state. [A.] 
• See Phenomenology [Ist edn.], pp. I IS ff. 
[Eng. tr. pp. 229 ff.], and Enc. 
[Ist edn.], §§ 352 ff. [3rd edn. §§ 430 ff.]. 

PROPERTY 
49 
58. (y) The mode of taking possession which in itself is not 
actual but is only representative of my will is to mark the thing, and 
the meaning of the mark is supposed to be that I have put my will 
into the thing. In its objective scope and its meaning, this mode of 
taking possession is very indeterminate. [A.] 
B. Use of the Thing 
59. By being taken into possession, the thing acquires the predi-
cate 'mine' and my will is related to it positively. Within this 
identity, the thing is equally established as something negative,JS 
and my will in this situation is a particular will, i.e. need, inclina-
tion, and so forth. Yet my need, as the particular aspect of a single 
will, is the positive element which finds satisfaction, and the thing, 
as something negative in itself, exists only for my need and is at its 
service.-The use of the thing is my need being externally realized 
through the change, destruction, and consumption of the thing. 
The thing thereby stands revealed as naturally self-less and so 
fulfils its destiny.J9 
The fact that property is realized and actualized only in use floats be-
fore the minds of those who look upon property as derelict and a res 
nullius if it is not being put to any use, and who excuse its unlawful 
occupancy on the ground that it has not been used hy its owner. But the 
owner's will, in accordance with which a thing is his, is the primary sub-
stantive basis of property; use is a further modification of property, 
secondary to that universal basis, and is only its manifestation and par-
ticular mode. [A.] 
60. To use a thing by grasping it directly is in Itself to take 
possession of a single thing here and now. But if my use of it is 
grounded on a persistent need, and if I make repeated use of a 
product which continually renews itself, restricting my use if 
necessary to safeguard that renewal, then these and other circum-
stances transform the direct single grasp of the thing into a mark, 
intended to signify that I am taking it into my possession in a 
universal way, and thereby taking, possession of the elemental or 
organic basis of such products, or of anything else that conditions 
them.4° 
61. Since the substance of the thing which is my property is, if 
we take the thing by itself, its externality, i.e. its non-substantiality41 
-in contrast with me it is not an end in itself (see Paragraph 42)-
and since in my use or employment of it this externality is realized, 

so 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
it follows that my full use or employment of a thing is the thing in 
its entirety, so that if I have the full use of the thing I am its owner. 
Over and above the entirety of its use, there is nothing left of the 
thing which could be the property of another. [A.] 
62. l\Iy merely partial or temporary use of a thing, like my 
partial or temporary possession of it (a possession which itself is 
simply the partial or temporary possibility of using it) is therefore 
to be distinguished from ownership of the thing itself. If the whole 
and entire use of a thing were mine, while the abstract ownership 
was supposed to be someone else's, then the thing as mine would be 
penetrated through and through by my will (see Paragraphs 52 and 
61), and at the same time there would remain in the thing some-
thing impenetrable by me, namely the will, the empty will, of 
another. As a positive will, I would be at one and the same time 
objective and not objective to myself in the thing-an absolute 
contradiction. Ownership therefore is in essence free and com-
plete. 
To distinguish between the right to the whole and entire use of a 
thing and ownership in the abstract is the work of the empty Under-
standing for which the Idea-i.e. in this instance the unity of (a) owner-
ship (or even the person's will as such) and (b) its realization--is not the 
truth, but for which these two moments in their separation from one 
another pass as something which is true. This distinction, then, as a 
relation in the world of fact, is that of an overlord to nothing, and this 
might be called an 'insanity of personality' (if we may mean by 'insanity' 
not merely the presence of a direct contradiction between a man's purdy 
subjective ideas and the actual facts of his life), because 'mine' as applied 
to a single object would have to mean the direct presence in it of both 
my single exclusive will and also the single exclusive will of someone 
else. 
In the Institutes* we read: 'ususfructus est jus aliems rebus utendzfmendz 
sal·va rerum substantza . ... :\"e tame!? in unh·crsum inutzles essrnt propri-
etates, semper abscedcnte usuj1urtu, placzat ce1 tis modis txtingui usum-
fructum et ad proprietatem rnwti.' 4 " Placzut! :\s if it \\-ere in the first 
instance a whim or a fiat to make this proviso and thereby give some 
sense to that empty distinction! A proprzetas SE:\IPER absadentc usufructu 
would not merely he inutzlis, it would he no propnctas at all. 
To examine other distinctions in property itself, e.g. between res 
mancipi and nee mancipi, domzmum quiritanum and bmutanum,43 &c., is 
inappropriate here since they have no bearin~ on any of the modifica-
tions of property determined by the concept and are merely tit-hits 
" [Of Just1man.] !!. 4· 

PROPERTY 
culled from the history of the right of property. The empty distinction 
discussed above, however, is in a way contained in the relations of 
dommium directum and dominium utlle,44 in the contractus emphyteuticus, 
in the further relations involved in estates in fee with the ground rents 
and other rents, dues, villeinage, &c., entailed in their sundry modifica-
tions, in cases where such burdens arc irredeemable. But from another 
point of view, these relations preclude that distinction. They preclude 
it in so far as burdens are entailed in dommwm utile, with the result that 
dominium directum becomes at the same time a domznium utzle. V\'ere 
there nothin.Q; in these two relationships except that distinction in its 
rigid abstraction, then in them we would not have two overlords (domini) 
in the strict sense, hut an owner on the one hand and an overlord who 
was the overlord of nothing on the other. But on the score of the bur-
dens imposed there are two owners standing in relation to each other. 
Although their relation is not that of being common owners of a property, 
still the transition from it to common O\\·ncrship is very easy--a transi-
tion\\ hich has aln:ady he gun in dom111ium dzrectum when the yield of the 
property is calculated and looked upon as the essential thing, while that 
incalculable factor in the overlordship of a property, the factor which 
has perhaps been regarded as the honourable thing about property, is 
subordinated to the utile \\ hich here is the ratwnal fdctor.• 5 
It Is about a millennium and a half 'IIJCe the freedom of personality 
began through the spread of Christianitv to blossom and gain recogni-
tion as a universal principle from a part, though still a small part, of the 
human rac.c. But it was only yesterday,\\ c might say, that the principle 
of the freedom of property became recognized in some places.4 6 This 
example from history may serve to rchuke the impatience of opinion and 
to show the length of time that mind requires for progress in its self-
consciOusness. 
63. A thing in use is a single thing determined quantitatively 
and qualitati,·ely and related to a specific need. But its specific 
utility, being quantitatively determinate, is at the same time com-
parable \\ ith [the specific utility of] other things of like utility. 
Similarly, the specific need \vhich it satisfies is at the same time 
need in general and thus is comparable on its particular side with 
other needs, \\ hile tht: thing in virtue of the same considerations is 
comparable '' ith things meeting other needs. This, the thing's 
universality, \\·hose simple determinate character arises from the 
particularity of the thing, so that it is eo ipso abstracted from the 
thing's specific quality, is tht: thing's value, \Vherein its genuine 
substantiality becomes determinate and an object of conscious-
ness.H :\s full owner of the thing, I am eo ipso 0\\·ner of its value as 
well as of its use. 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
The distinctive character of the property of a feudal tenant is that he 
is supposed to be the owner of the use only, not of the value of the 
thing. [A.] 
64. The form given to a possession and its mark arc themselves 
externalities but for the subjective presence of the will which alone 
constitutes the meaning and value of externalities. This presence, 
however, which is use, employment, or some other mode in which 
the will expresses itself, is an event in time, and what is objective in 
time is the continuance of this expression of the will. Without this 
the thing becomes a res nullius, because it has been deprived of the 
actuality of the will and possession. Therefore I gain or lose 
possession of property through prescription.48 
Prescription, therefore, has not been introduced into law solely from 
an external consideration running counter to right in the strict sense, i.e. 
with a view to truncating the disputes and confusions which old claims 
would introduce into the security of property. On the contrary, pre· 
scription rests at bottom on the specific character of property as 'real',49 
on the fact that the will to possess something must express itself. 
Public memorials are national property, or, more precisely, like works 
of art in general so far as their enjoyment is concerned, they have life and 
count as ends in themselves so long as they enshrine the spirit of re-
membrance and honour. If they lose this spirit, they become in this 
respect res nullius m the eyes of a nation and the private possession of the 
first comer, like e.g. the Greek and Egyptian works of art in Turkey. 
The right of private property which the family of an author has in his 
publications dies out for a similar reason; such publications become res 
nullius in the sense that like public memorials, though in an opposite 
way, so they become public property, and, by having their special hand-
ling of their topic copied, the private property of anyone. 
Yacant land consecrated for a burial ground, or even to lie unused in 
perpetuity, embodies an empty absent arbitrary will. If such a will is 
infringed, nothing actual is infringed, and hence respect for it cannot be 
guarantecd.s 1 [.-\.] 
C. Alienation of Property 
65. The reason I can alienate my property is that it is mine only 
in so far as I put my will into it. lienee I may abandon (derelin-
quere) as a res nullius anything that I ha,·e or yield it to the will of 
another and so into his possession, proYided al\\ ays that the thing in 
question is a thing external by nature. [:\.] 
66. Therefore those goods, or rather substantive characteristics, 
which constitute my own pnvate personality and the universal 
--

PROPERTY 
53 
essence of my self-consciousness are inalienable and my right to 
them is imprescriptible. Such characteristics are my personality as 
such, my universal freedom of will, my ethical life, my religion. 
The fact that what mind is in accordance with its concept or im-
plicitly it also should be explicitly and existentially (the fact that thus 
mind should be a person, be capable of holding property, should have an 
ethical life, a religion) is the Idea which is itself the concept of mind. As 
causa sui, i.e. as free causality, mind is thats 2 cuius natura non potest 
concipi nisi existens. * 
It is just in this concept of mind as that which is what it is only through 
its own free causality and through its endless return into itself out of the 
natural immediacy of its existence, that there lies the possibility of a 
clash: i.e. what it is potentially it may not be actually (see Paragraph 57), 
and vice versa what it is actually (e.g. evil, in the case of the will) may be 
other than what it is potentially. Herein lies the possibility of the aliena-
tion of personality and its substantive being, whether this alienation 
occurs unconsciously or intentionally. Examples of the alienation of 
personality are slavery, serfdom, disqualification from holding property, 
encumbrances on property, and so forth. Alienation of intelligence and 
rationality, of morality, ethical life, and religion, is exemplified in super-
stition, in ceding to someone else full power and authority to fix and 
prescribe what actions are to be done (as when an individual binds him-
self expressly to steal or to murder, &c., or to a course of action that may 
involve crime), or what duties are binding on one's conscience or what 
religious truth is, &c. 
The right to what is in essence inalienable is imprescriptible, since the 
act whereby I take possession of my personality, of my substantive 
essence, and make myself a responsible being, capable of possessing 
rights and with a moral and religious life, takes away from these 
characteristics of mine just that externality which alone made them 
capable of passing into the possession of someone else. When I have 
thus annulled their externality, I cannot lose them through lapse of time 
or from any other reason drawn from my prior consent or willingness to 
alienate them. This return of mine into myself, whereby l make myself 
existent as Idea, as a person with rights and moral principles, annuls the 
previous position and the wrong done to my concept and my reason by 
others and myself when the infinite embodiment of self-consciousnesssJ 
has been treated as something external, and that with my consent. This 
return into myself makes clear the contradiction in supposing that I have 
given into another's possession my capacity for rights, my ethical life 
and religious feeling; for either I have given up what I myself did not 
possess, or I am giving up what, so soon as I possess it, exists in essence 
as mine alone and not as something external. [A.] 
• Spinoza: Ethics, Part I, Definition i. 

54 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
67. Single products of my particular physical and mental skill 
and of my power to act I can alienate to someone clses4 and I can 
give him the use of my abilities for a restricted period, because, on 
the strength of this restriction, my abilities acquire an external re-
lation to the totality and universality of my being. By alienating 
the whole of my time, as crystallized in my work, and everything I 
produced, I would be making into another's property the substance 
of my being, my universal activity and actuality, my personality. 
The relation here between myself and the exercise of my abilities is 
the same as that between the substance of a thing and its use (sec Para-
graph 61 ). It is only when usc is restricted that a distinction between 
use and substance arises. So here, the use of my pm\ crs differs from my 
powers and therefore from myself, only in so far as it is quantitatively 
restricted. Force is the totality of its manifestations, substance of its 
accidents, the universal of its particulars. [A.] 
68. What is peculiarly mine in a product of my mind may, 
owing to the method whereby it is expressed, turn at once into 
something external like a 'thing' which eo ipso may then be pro-
duced by other people. The result is that by taking possession of a 
thing of this kind, its new owner may make his own the thoughts 
communicated in it or the mechanical invention which it contains, 
and it is ability to do this which sometimes (i.e. in the case of books) 
constitutes the value of these things and the only purpose of 
possessing them. But besides this, the new owner at the same time 
comes into possession of the universal methods of so expressing 
himself and producing numerous other things of the same sort. 
In the case of works of art, the form-the portrayal of thought in an 
external medium-is, regarded as a thing, so peculiarly the property of 
the individual artist that a copy of a work of art is essentially a product of 
the copyist's own mental and technical ability. In the case of a literary 
work, the form in virtue of which it is an external thing is of a mechanical 
kind, and the same is true of the invention of a machine; for in the first 
case the thought is presented not en bloc, as a statue is, hut in a series of 
separable abstract symbols, while in the second case the thought has a 
mechanical content throughout. The ways and means of producing 
things of that mechanical kind as things are commonplace accomplish-
ments. 
But between the work of art at one extreme and the mere journeyman 
production at the other there are transitional stages which to a greater or 
less degree partake of the character of one or other of the extremes. 
69. Since the owner of such a product, in owning a copy of tt, is 
in possession of the entire use and value of that copy qua a single 

' l 
.... 
PROPERTY 
55 
thing, he has complete and free ownership of that copy qua a single 
thing, even if the author of the book or the inventor of the machine 
remains the owner of the universal ways and means of multiplying 
such books and machines, &c. Qua universal ways and means of 
expression, he has not necessarily alienated them, but may reserve 
them to himself as means of expression which belong to him. 
The substance of an author's or an inventor's right cannot in the first 
instance be found in the supposition that when he disposes of a single 
copy of his work, he arbitrarily makes it a condition that the power to 
produce facsimiles as things, a power which thereupon passes into an-
other's possession, should not become the property of the other but 
should remain his own. The first question is whether such a separation 
between ownership of the thing and the power to produce facsimiles 
which is given with the thing is compatible with the concept of property, 
or whether it does not cancel the complete and free ownership (see Para-
graph 62) on which there originally depends the option of the original 
producer of intellectual work to reserve to himself the power to repro-
duce, or to part with this power as a thing of value, or to attach no value 
to it at all and surrender it together with the single exemplar of his work. 
I reply that this power to reproduce has a special character, viz. it is that 
in virtue of which the thing is not merely a possession but a capital asset 
(see Paragraphs I 70 ff.); the fact that it is such an asset depends on the 
particular external kind of way in which the thing is used, a way distinct 
and separable from the use to which the thing is directly destined (the 
asset 55 here is not, as has been said, an accessio natura/is like fetura). 
Since then this distinction falls into the sphere of that whose nature 
entails its divisibility, into the sphere of external use, the retention of part 
of a thing's [external] use and the alienation of another part is not the 
retention of a proprietorship without utile. 
The purely negative, though the primary, means of advancing the 
sciences and arts is to guarantee scientists and artists against theft and to 
enable them to benefit from the protection of their property, just as it 
was the primary and most important means of advancing trade and 
industry to guarantee it against highway robbery. 
Moreover, the purpose of a product of mind is that people other than 
its author should understand it and make it the possession of their ideas, 
memory, thinking, &c. Their mode of expression, whereby in turn they 
make what they have learnt (for 'learning' means more than 'learning 
things by heart', 'memorizing them'; the thoughts of others can be 
apprehended only by thinking, and this re-thinking the thoughts of 
others is learning too) into a 'thing' which they can alienate, very likely 
has some special form of its own in every case. The result is that they 
may regard as their own property the capital asset accruing from their 
learning and may claim for themselves the right to reproduce their 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
learning in books of their own. Those engaged in the propagation of 
knowledge of all kinds, in particular those whose appointed task is 
teaching, have as their specific function and duty (above all in the case of 
the positive sciences, the doctrine of a church, the study of positive law, 
&c.) the repetition of well-established thoughts, taken up ab extra and all 
of them given expression already. The same is true of writings devised 
for teaching purposes and the spread and propagation of the sciences. 
Now to what extent does the new form which turns up when something 
is expressed again and again transform the available stock of knowledge, 
and in particular the thoughts of others who still retain external property 
in those intellectual productions of theirs, S6 into a private mental property 
of the individual reproducer and thereby give him or fail to give him the 
right to make them his external property as well? To what extent is such 
repetition of another's material in one's book a plagiarism? There is no 
precise principle of determination available to answer these questions, 
and therefore they cannot be finally settled either in principle or by 
positive legislation. Hence plagiarism would have to be a matter of 
honour and be held in check by honour. 
Thus copyright legislation attains its end of securing the property 
rights of author and publisher only to a very restricted extent, though it 
does attain it within limitsY The ease with which we may deliberately 
change something in the form of what we are expounding or invent a 
trifling modification in a large body of knowledge or a comprehensive 
theory which is another's work, and even the impossibility of sticking to 
the author's words in expounding something we have learnt, all lead of 
themselves (quite apart from the particular purposes for which such 
repetitions are required) to an endless multiplicity of alterations which 
more or less superficially stamp someone else's property as our own. 
For instance, the hundreds and hundreds of compendia, selections, 
anthologies, &c., arithmetics, geometries, religious tracts, &c., show 
how every new idea in a review or annual or encyclopaedia, &c., can be 
forthwith repeated over and over again under the same or a different 
title, and yet may be claimed as something peculiarly the writer's own. 
The result of this may easily be that the profit promised to the author, 
or the projector of the original undertaking, by his work or his original 
idea becomes negligible or reduced for both parties or lost to all con-
cerned. 
But as for the effectiveness of honour in checking plagiarism, what ha~ 
happened is that nowadays we scarcely hear the word 'plagiarjsm', nor 
are scholars accused of stealing each other's results. It may be that 
honour has been effective in abolishing plagiarism, or perhaps plagiarism 
has ceased to be dishonourable and feeling against it is a thing of the 
past; or possibly an ingenious and trivial idea, and a change in external 
form, is rated so highly as originality and a product of independent 
thinking that the thought of plagiarism becomes wholly insufferable. 

I 
j --
PROPERTY 
57 
70. The comprehensive sum of external activity, i.e. life, is not 
external to personality as that which itself is immediate and a this. 
The surrender or the sacrifice of life is not the existence of this 
personality but the very opposite. There is therefore no unqualified 
right to sacrifice one's life. To such a sacrifice nothing is entitled 
except an ethical Ideass as that in which this immediately single 
personality has vanished and to whose power it is actually subjected. 
Just as life as such is immediate, so death is its immediate negation 
and hence must come from without, either by natural causes, or 
else, in the service of the Idea, by the hand of a foreigner. [A.] 
Transition from Property to Contract 
71. Existence as determinate being is in essence being for 
another (see Remark to Paragraph 48). One aspect of property is 
that it is an existent as an external thing, and in this respect 
property exists for other external things and is connected with their 
necessity and contingency. But it is also an existent as an embodi-
ment of the will, and from this point of view the 'other' for which 
it exists can only be the will of another person. This relation of 
will to will is the true and proper ground in which freedom is 
existent.-The sphere of contract is made up of this mediation 
whereby I hold property not merely by means of a thing and my 
subjective will, but by means of another person's will as well and 
so hold it in virtue of my participation in a common will. 
Reason makes it just as necessary for men to enter into contractual 
relationships-gift, exchange, trade, &c.-as to possess property (see 
Remark to Paragraph 45). While all they are conscious of is that they 
are led to make contracts by need in general, by benevolence, advantage, 
&c., the fact remains that they are led to do this by reason implicit 
within them, i.e. by the Idea of the real existence of free personality, 
'real' here meaning 'present in the will alone'.s9 
Contract presupposes that the parties entering it recognize each other 
as persons and property owners. It is a relationship at the level of mind 
objective, and so contains and presupposes from the start the moment of 
recognition (compare Remarks to Paragraphs 35 and 57). [A.] 
SUB-SECTION 2 
CONTRACT 
72. Contract brings into existence the property whose external 
side, its side as an existent, is no longer a mere 'thing' but contains 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
the moment of a will (and consequently the will of a second person 
also). Contract is the process in which there is revealed and 
mediated the contradiction that I am and remain the independent 
owner of something from which I exclude the will of another only 
in so far as in identifying my will with the will of another I cease to 
be an owner. 
73. I have power to alienate a property as an external thing (see 
Paragraph 65); but more than this, the concept compels me to 
alienate it qua property in order that thereby my will may become 
objective to me as determinately existent. In this situation, how-
ever, my will as alienated is at the same time another's will. 6° Con-
sequently this situation wherein this compulsion of the concept is 
realized is the unity of different wills and so a unity in which both 
surrender their difference and their own special character. Yet this 
identity of their wills implies also (at this stage) that each will still 
is and remains not identical with the other but retains from its own 
point of view a special character of its own. 
74. This contractual relationship, therefore, is the means where-
by one identical will can persist within the absolute difference 
between independent property owners. It implies that each, in 
accordance with the common will of both, ceases to be an owner 
and yet is and remains one. It is the mediation of the will to give up 
a property, a single property, and the will to take up another, i.e. 
another belonging to someone else; and this mediation takes place 
when the two wills are associated in an identity in the sense that 
one of them comes to its decision only in the presence of the other. 
75. The two contracting parties are related to each other as 
immediate self-subsistent persons. Therefore (a:) contract arises 
from the arbitrary will. ({3) The identical will which is brought 
into existence by the contract is only one posited by the parties, and 
so is only a will shared in common and not an absolutely universal 
will. (y) The object about which a contract is made is a single 
external thing, since it is only things of that kind which the parties' 
purely arbitrary will has it in its power to alienate (see Paragraphs 
65 ff.). 
To subsume marriage under the concept of contract is thus quite im-
possible; this subsumption-though shameful is the only word for it-is 
propounded in Kant's Philosophy of Law.• It is equally far from the 
• [§§ 24-7. Eng. tr. pp. I09-IJ.]. 

! 
l 
CONTRACT 
59 
truth to ground the nature of the state on the contractual relation, 
whether the state is supposed to be a contract of all with all, or of all 
with the monarch and the government. 
The intrusion of this contractual relation, and relationships concern-
ing private property generally, into the relation between the individual 
and the state has been productive of the greatest confusion in both con-
stitutional law and public life. Just as at one time 61 political rights and 
duties \\ere considered and maintained to be an unqualified private 
property of particular individuals, something contrasted with the right 
of the monarch and the state, so also in more recent times the rights of 
the monarch and the state have been regarded as the subjects of a con-
tract and as grounded in contract, as somethir.g embodying merely a 
common will and resulting from the arbitrariness of parties united into 
a state. However different these two points of view may be, they have 
this in common, that they have transferred the characteristics of private 
property into a sphere of a quite different and higher nature. (See 
below, 6 ~ Ethical Life and the State.) [A.] 
76. Contract is formal when the double consent whereby the 
common will is brought into existence is apportioned between the 
two contracting parties so that one of them has the negative 
moment-the alienation of a thing-and the other the positive 
moment-the appropriation of the thing. Such a contract is gift. 
But contract may he called real when each of the two contracting 
wills is the sum of these mediating moments and therefore in such 
a contract becomes a property owner and remains so. This is a 
contract of exrhange. [A.) 
77. Since in real contract each party retains the same property 
with which he enters the contract and which at the same time he 
surrenders, what thus remains identical throughout as the property 
implicit in the contract is distinct from the external things whose 
owners alter when the exchange is made. What remains identical is 
the value, in respect of which the subjects of the contract are equal 
to one another whatever the qualitative external differences of the 
things exchanged. Value is the universal in which the subjects of 
the contract participate (see Paragraph 63). 
The legal provision that laesio enormis6J annuls the obiigation arising 
out of the making of a contract has its source, therefore, in the concept 
of contract, particularly in this moment of it, that the contracting party 
by alienating his property still remains a property owner and, more pre-
cisely, an owner of the quantitative equivalent of what he alienates. But 
a laesio is not merely enormis (as it is taken to be if it exceeds one-half of 
the value) but infinite, if someone has entered on a contract or made a 

6o 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
stipulation of any sort for the alienation of inalienable goods (see Para-
graph 66). 
A stipulation, moreover, differs from a contract, first, in its content, 
because it signifies only some single part or moment of the whole con-
tract, and secondly, because it is the form in which the contract is 
settled (a point on which more will be said later).64 So far as its content 
is concerned, it comprises only the formal character of contract, i.e. the 
willingness of one party to give something and the willingness of the 
other to accept it; for this reason, the stipulation has been enumerated 
amongst so-called 'unilateral' contracts. The distinction between uni-
lateral and bilateral contracts, and distinctions in Roman law6S between 
other types of contract, are sometimes superficial juxtapositions made 
from an isolated and often external point of view such as that of the 
different types of contractual forms; or sometimes they confuse charac-
teristics intrinsic to contract itself with others which only arise later in 
connexion with the administration of justice (actiones) and the legal 
processes giving effect to positive laws, and which are often derived from 
quite external circumstances and contravene the concept of right. 
78. The distinction between property and possession, the sub-
stantive and external aspects of ownership (see Paragraph 45), 
appears in the sphere of contract as the distinction between a com-
mon will and its actualization, or between a covenant and its per-
formance. Once made, a covenant taken by itself in distinction 
from its performance is something held before the mind, something 
therefore to which a particular determinate existence must be given 
in accordance with the appropriate mode of giving determinate 
existence to ideas by symbolizing them.* This is done, therefore, 
by expressing the stipulation in formalities such as gestures and 
other symbolic actions, particularly by declaring it with precision 
in language, the most worthy medium for the expression of our 
mental ideas. 
The stipulation accordingly is the form given to the content of a con-
tract, i.e. to what is agreed in it, and thereby this content, previously 
only an idea, attains its determinate existence. But the idea which we 
have of the content is itself only a form which the content takes; to have 
an idea of the content does not mean that the content is still something 
subjective, a desire or a wish for so and so. On the contrary, the con-
tent is the will's ultimate decision on such subjective wishes. [A.] 
79. In contract it is the will, and therefore the substance of what 
is right in contract, that the stipulation enshrines. In contrast with 
this substance, the possession which is still being retained while 
• Enc., [1st edn.) §§ 379 ff. [3rd edn. §§ 458 ff.]. 
J

CONTRACT 
the contract remains unfulfilled is in itself only something external, 
dependent for its character as a possession on the will alone. By 
making the stipulation, I have given up a property and withdrawn 
my particular arbitrary will from it, and it has eo ipso become the 
property of another. If then I agree to stipulated terms, I am by 
rights at once bound to carry them out. 
The difference between a mere promise and a contract lies in the fact 
that a promise is a statement that I will give or do or perform something 
in the future, and a promise still remains a subjective volition which. 
because it is subjective I can still alter. A stipulation in a contract, on 
the other hand, is itself already the embodiment of the will's decision in 
the sense that by making the stipulation I have alienated my property, it 
has now ceased to he mine, and I already recognize it as the property of 
another. The distinction in Roman law between pactum and contractus 
is one of a false type. 66 
Fichtc at one time67 maintained that my obligation to keep a contract 
begins only when the other party starts fulfilling his side of it; his reason 
was that up to that point I am uncertain •vhether the other party's 
declarations arc seriously meant. In that case it would follow that the 
obligation to keep a contract before it was carried out would only be a 
moral one, not an obligation hy r(ghts.-But the expression of the stipula-
tion is not simply a declaration of a general character; it embodies a 
common will which has been brought into existence and which has 
superseded the arbitrary and alterable dispositwns of the parties. The 
question therefore is not whether the other party could have had different 
private intentions when the contract was made or afterwards, but 
whether he had any nKht to have them. Even if the other party begins to 
fulfil his side of the contract, it is equally open tq me tr, do 'Vrong if I 
like. The nullity of Fichte's view is also shown by the !Jet that it would 
base contractual rights on the false infinite, i.e. on the progress ad in-
fmitum involved in the infinite divisibility of time, things, action, &c. 68 
The embodiment of the will in formal gestures or in exphcit and precise 
language is already the complete embodiment of the will as an intelligent 
entity, and the performance of the covenant so embodied is only the 
mechanical consequence. 
It is true that in positive law there are so-called 'real' contracts as dis-
tinguished from 'consensual' contracts, in the sense that the former are 
looked upon as fully valid only when the actual perfonnance (res, traditio 
rei) of the undertaking supervenes upon willingness to perform it; but 
this has nothing to do \\ith the thing at issue. For one thing, these 'real' 
contracts cover particular cases where it is only this delivery by the other 
party which puts me in a position to fulfil my side of the bargain, and 
where my obligation to do my part relates only to the thing after it has 
come into my hands, as happens for instance in loans, pawning, .or 

62 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
deposits. (The same may also be the case in other contracts.) But this is a 
matter which concerns not the nature of the relation of the stipulation to 
performance but only the manner of performance.- For another thing, it 
is always open to the parties at their discretion to stipulate in any con-
tract that the obligation of one party to perform his side shall not lie in 
the making of the contract itself as such, hut shall arise only from the 
performance by the other party of his side. 
80. The classification of contracts and an intelligent treatment 
of their various species once classified is not here to he derived 
from external circumstances but from distinctions lying in the very 
nature of contract. These distinctions arc those between formal 
and realo9 contracts, between ownership and posses~ion and use, 
between value and specific thing, and they yield contracts of the 
following sorts :• 
A. Gift. 
(1) Gift of a thing-gift properly so called. 
(zr Loan of a thing-i.e. the gift of a portion of it or of restricted 
use and enjoyment of it; here the lender remains the owner 
of the thing (mutuum and commodatum'' \\ithout interest). 
Here the thing lent is either a specific thin.t!: or else, even if it 
be such, it may none the less be looked on as uni\ ersal, or it 
may be a thing which counts (like money) .:~sa thing uni\-crsal 
in itself. 
(3) Gift of service of any sort, e.g. the mere safe-keeping of a 
property (depositum). The gift of a thing on the special con-
dition that its recipient shall not become its owner until the 
date of the donor's death, i.e. the date at which he ceases in 
any case to be an owner of property, is testam<.:ntary dis-
position; this is not contained in tht: concept of contract 
but presupposes civil society and positive legislation. 7" 
B. Exchange. 
(I) Exchange as such: 
(n:) exchange of a thing pure and simple, i.e. exchange of 
one spt:cific thing for another of the sam<.: kind. 
({3) purchase or sale ( emtio, ~·enditio); exchange of a specific 
thing for one characterized as uni\·ersal, one which 
• The class1ficatwn gi' en here agrees on thew hole "llh Kant's (Plulosnphy nf 
Law [§ 31. Eng. tr. pp. 121 ff. ]). One would ha\e expccteJ that the usual hum-
drum classd1cat!On of contracts as real and consensual, non1matc and 1nnon11nate, 70 
&c., \\OUIJ ha\c been long smce abandoned m fa, our of a rat10nal class.ticatwn. 

J
CONTRACT 
counts as value alone and which lacks the other specifc 
character, utility-i.e. for money. 
(z) Letting (locatio, conductio); alienation of the temporary use 
of a property in return for rent: 
(ex) letting of a specific thing-letting strictly so called, or 
({J) letting of a universal thing, so that the lessor remains 
only the owner of this universal, or in other words of the 
value-loan (mutuum, or even commodatum, if interest is 
charged). The additional empirical characteristics of the 
thing (which may he, e.g., a flat, furniture, a house, res 
fzmgibilis or non fungibilis, &c.) entail (as in A. 2 above) 
other particular though unimportant subdivisions. 
(3) Contract for wages (locatio operae)-alienation of my pro-
ductive capacity or my services so far, that is, as these are 
alienable, the alienation being restricted in time or in some 
other way (see Paragraph 67). 
Counsel's acceptance of a brief is akin to this, and so are other con-
tracts whose fulfilment depends on character, good faith, or superior 
gifts, and where an incommensurability arises between the serviceS' 
rendered and a nlue in terms of cash. (In such cases the cash pay-
ment is called not 'wages' but 'honorarium'.) 
C. Completion of a contract (cautio) through givi11g a pledge. 
In the contracts whereby I part with the use of a thing, I am no longer 
in possession of the thing though I am still its owner, as for example 
when I let a house. Further, in gifts or contracts for exchange or pur-
chase, I may have become the owner of a thing without as yt.:t being in 
possession of it, and the same cleavage between ownership and posses-
sion arises in respect of the implementing of any undertaking which is 
Pot simply a cash or barter transaction. l'\ow what the pledge effects is 
that in the one case I remain, and in the other case I am put, in actual 
possession of the value as that which is still or has already become my 
property, without in either case being in possession of the specific thing 
which I am renouncing or which is to he mine. The pkdge is a specific 
thing but one \Yhich is my property only to the extent of the value of the 
property which I have renounced into another's possession or which is 
due to me; its specific character as a thing and any excess value it may 
have still belong to the person who gave the pledge. Giving a pledge, 
therefore, is not itself a contract but only a stipulation (see [Remark to] 
Paragraph 77), i.e. it is the moment which brings a contract to com-
pletion so far as the possession of the property is concerned. !\lortgage 
and surety arc particular forms of pledge. [A.] 

64 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
81. In the bare relation of immediate persons to one another, 
their \Vilis while implicitly identical, and in contract posited by 
them as common, are yet particular. Because they are immediate 
persons, it is a matter of chance whether or not their particular 
wills actually correspond with the implicit will, although it is only 
through the former that the latter has its real existence. If the par-
ticular will is explicitly at variance with the universal, it assumes a 
way of looking at things and a volition which are capricious and 
fortuitous and comes on the scene in opposition to the principle of 
rightness. This is wrong. 
The transition to wrong is made by the logical higher necessity that 
the moments of the concept-here the principle of rightness or the will 
as universal, and right in its real existence, which is just the particularity 
of the will-should be posited as explicitly different, and this happens 
when the concept is realized abstractly. But this particularity of the will, 
taken by itself, is arbitrariness and contingency, and in contract I have 
surrendered these only as arbitrariness in the case of a single thing and 
not as the arbitrariness and contingency of the will itself. [A.] 
SUB-SECTION 3 
WRONG 
82. In contract the principle of rightness is present as some-
thing posited, while its inner universality is there as something 
common in the arbitrariness and particular will of the parties. This 
appearance of right, in which right and its essential embodiment, 
the particular will, correspond immediately, i.e. fortuitously, pro-
ceeds in wrong to become a show, 73 an opposition between the prin-
ciple of rightness and the particular will as that in which right 
becomes particularized. But the truth of this show is its nullity 
and the fact that right reasserts itself by negating this negation of 
itself. In this process the right is mediated by returning into itself 
out of the negation of itself; thereby it makes itself actual and valid, 
while at the start it was only implicit and something immediate. 
[A.] 
83. When right is something particular and therefore manifold 
in contrast with its implicit universality and simplicity, it acquires 
the form of a show. 
(a) This show of right is implicit or im-
mediate-non-malicious wrong or a civil offence; (b) right is made 
a show by the agent himself-fraud; (c) the agent makes it a nullity 
altogether-crime. [A.] 
-

WRONG 
A. Non-malicious Wrong 
84. Taking possession (see Paragraph 54) and contract-both in 
themselves and in their particular species-are in the first instance 
different expressions and consequences of my willing pure and 
simple ; but since the will is the inherently universal, they are, 
through their recognition by others, grounds of title. Such grounds 
are external to one another and multiple, and this implies that 
different persons may have them in relation to one and the same 
thing. Each person may look upon the thing as his property on the 
strength of the particular ground on which he bases his title. It is 
in this way that one man's right may clash with another's. 
85. This clash which arises when a thing has been claimed on 
some single ground, and which comprises the sphere of civil suits 
at law, entails the recognition of rightness as the universal and 
decisive factor, so that it is common ground that the thing in dis-
pute should belong to the party who has the right to it. The suit 
is concerned only with the subsumption of the thing under the 
property of one or other of the parties-a straightforward negative 
judgement, where, in the predicate 'mine', only the particular is 
negated.74 
86. The recognition of rightness by the parties is bound up with 
their opposed particular interest and point of view. In opposition 
to this show of rightness, yet within this show itself (see the pre-
ceding Paragraph), the principle of rightness arises as something 
kept in view and demanded by the parties. But at first it arises only 
as an 'ought-to-be' because the will is not yet present here as a will 
so freed from the immediacy of interest as, despite its particularity, 
to have the universal will for its aim; nor is it yet at this point 
characterized as a recognized actuality of such a sort that in face of 
it the parties would have to renounce their particular interest and 
point of view. [A.] 
B. Fraud 
87. The principle of rightness, when distinguished from the 
right as particular and as determinately existent, is characterized as 
something demanded, as the essential thing; yet in this situation it 
is still only something demanded and from that point of view some-
thing purely subjective, and so inessential-something merely 
showing there. Thus we have fraud when the universal is set aside 
by the particular will and reduced to something only showing in 

66 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
the situation, primarily in contract, when the universal ''ill is 
reduced to a'" ill \vhich is common only from the outsider's point 
of view. [A.] 
88. In contract I acquire a property for the sake of its particular 
characteristics, and at the same time my acquisition of it is governed 
by the inner universality which it possesses partly in respect of its 
value and partly because it has been the property of another. If the 
other likes, a false disguise may be given to the thing I acquire, so 
that the contract is right enough so far as it is an exchange, volun-
tary on both sides, of this thing in its immediacy and uniqueness, 
but still the aspect of implicit universality is lacking. (Here we 
have an infinite judgement expressed positively 7 5 or as a tautology.*) 
89. Here again it is in the first instance only a demand that, in 
contrast \vith this acceptance of the thing simply as tlzis thing and 
with the mere intentions and arbitrariness of the will, objectivity or 
uni,·ersality should be recognizable as value and should prevail as 
right, and equally a demand only that the subjective arbitrary" ill, 
opposing itself to the right, should be superseded. [A.] 
C. Coercion and Crime 
90. In 0\ming property I place my ''ill in an external thing, and 
this implies that my will, just by being thus reflected in the object, 
may be seized in it and brought under compulsion. It may simply 
be forced in the thing unconditionally, or it may be constrained to 
sacrifice something or to do some action as a condition of retaining 
one or other of its possessions or embodiments-it may be coerced. 
[:\.] 
91. r\s a Ji,·ing thing man may be coerced, i.e. his body or any-
thing else external about him may be brought under the po\\·er of 
others; but the free" ill cannot be coerced at all (see Paragraph 5), 
except in so far as it fails to withdraw itself out of the external 
object in which it is held fast, or rather out of its idea of that object 
(see Paragraph 7). 76 Only the will which allows itself to be coerced 
can in any \\·ay be coerced. 
92. Since it is only in so far as the will has an existence in some-
thing determinate that it is Idea or actually free, and since the 
existent in which it has laid itself is freedom in being, it follows 
~ Enc [1st edn.], § IZI [3rd edn. § 173]. 

WRONG 
that force or coercion is in its very conception directly self-de-
structive because it is an expression of a will which annuls the ex-
pression or determinate existence of a will. Hence force or coercion, 
taken abstractly, is wrong. 
93. That coercion is in its conception self-destructive is ex-
hibited in the world of reality by the fact that coercion is annulled 
by coercion ;77 coercion is thus shown to be not only right under 
certain conditions but necessary, i.e. as a second act of coercion 
which is the annulment of one that has preceded. 
Breaking a contract by failing to carry out its stipulated terms, or 
neglect of duty rightly owed to family or state, or action in defiance of 
that duty, is the first act of coercion or at least force, in that it involves 
depriving another of his property or evading a ser;ice due to him. 
Coercion hy a schoolmaster, or coercion of savages and brutes, seems 
at first sight to he an initial act of coercion, not a second, following on 
one that has preceded. But the merely natural will is implicitly a force 
against the implicit Idea of freedom which must be protected against 
such an uncivilized will and be made to prenil in it. Either an ethical 
institution has already been established in family or government, and 
the natural will is a mere display of force against it; or else there is only 
a state of nature, a state of affairs where mere force prevails and against 
which the Idea establishes a right of Heroes. 78 [:\.] 
94. Abstract right is a right to coerce, because the wrong which 
transgresses it is an exercise of force against the existence of my 
freedom in an external thing. The maintenance of this existent 
against the exercise of force therefore itself tahs the form of an 
external act and an exercise of force annulling the force originally 
brought against it. 
To define abstract right, or right in the strict sense, at the very outset 
as a right in the name of which coercion may he used, means to fasten 
on it in a result which first comes on the scene by the indtrect route of 
wrong. [A.] 
95. The initial act of coercion as an exercise of force bv the free 
agent, an exercise of force \Yhich infringes the existence of freedom 
in its concrete sense, infringes the right as right, is crime-a 
negatively infinite judgement 79 in its full sense,* whereby not only 
the particular (i.e. the subsumption under my will of a single thing 
-see Paragraph 8;) is negated, but also the universality and infinity 
in the predicate 'mine' (i.e. my capacity for rights). Here the 
• See ffi) [Science of] Logic [rst edn.], vol. ri, p. 99 [Eng. tr. vol. I I, pp. 277-b]. 

68 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
negation does not come about with the co-operation of my thinking 
(as it does in fraud-see Paragraph 88) but in defiance of it. This is 
the sphere of criminal law. 
Right, the infringement of which is crime, has so far only those forma-
tions which we have seen in the preceding Paragraphs; hence crime also, 
to begin with, has its more precise significance in relation to these 
specific rights. But the substance of these forms is the universal which 
remains the same throughout its further development and formation, 
and consequently its infringement, crime, also remains the same and 
accords with its concept. Thus the specific characteristic of crime 
[in general] to be noticed in the next Paragraph is characteristic also of 
the particular, more determinate, content in e.g. perjury, treason, forgery, 
coining, &c. 
96. It is only the will existent in an object that can suffer injury. 
In becoming existent in something, however, the will enters the 
sphere of quantitative extension and qualitative characteristics, and 
hence varies accordingly. For this reason, it makes a difference to 
the objective aspect of crime whether the will so objectified and its 
specific quality is injured throughout its entire extent, and so in the 
infinity which is equivalent to its concept (as in murder, slavery, 
enforced religious observance, &c.), or whether it is injured only in 
a single part or in one of its qualitative characteristics, and if so, in 
which of these. 
The Stoic viewBo that there is only one virtue and one vice, the laws 
of Draco which prescribe death as a punishment for every offence, BI 
the crude formal code of Honour 82 which takes any insult as an offence 
against the infinity of personality, all have this in common, that they go 
no further than the abstract thought of the free will and personality and 
fail to apprehend it in the concrete and determinate existence which it 
must possess as Idea. 
The distinction between robbery and theft is qualitative ;83 when I am 
robbed, personal violence is done to me and I am injured in my character 
as consciousness existing here and now and so as this infinite subject. 
Many qualitative characteristics of crime, e.g. its danger to public 
safety, 84 have their basis in more concrete circumstances, although in 
the first instance they also are often fastened on by the indirect 
route as consequences instead of from the concept of the thing. For 
instance, the crime which taken by itself is the more dangerous in its 
immediate character is an injury of a more serious type in its range or 
its quality. 
The subjective, moral, quality of crime rests on the higher distinction 
implied in the question of how far an event or fact pure and simple is an 

WRONG 
action, and concerns the subjective character of the action itself, on 
which see below.ss [A.] 
97. The infringement of right as right is something that happens 
and has positive existence in the external world, though inherently 
it is nothing at all. The manifestation of its nullity is the appear-
ance, also in the external world, of the annihilation of the infringe-
ment. This is the right actualized, the necessity of the right 
mediating itself with itself by annulling what has infringed it. [A.] 
98. In so far as the infringement of the right is only an injury to 
a possession or to something which exists extt'rnally, it is a malum 
or damage to some kind of property or asset. The annulling of 
the infringement, so far as the infringement is productive of 
damage, is the satisfaction given in a civil suit, i.e. compensation for 
the wrong done, so far as any such compensation can be found. 
Apropos of such satisfaction, the universal character of the damage, 
i.e. its 'value', must here again take the place of its spt>cific qualitative 
character in cases where the damage done amounts to destruction and 
is quite irreparable. 
99. But the injury which has befallen the imp/zeit \vill (and this 
means the implicit will of the injuring party as well as that of the 
injured and everyone else) has as little positive existence in this 
implicit \\ill as such as it has in the mere state of affairs which it 
produces. In itself this implicit will (i.e. the nght or law implicit) is 
rather that which has no external existence and '' hich for that 
reason cannot be injured. Consequently, the injury from the point 
of view of the particular will of the injured party and of onlookers 
is only something negative. The sole positive existence which the 
injury possesses is that it is the particular ·w1ll of the criminal. 86 
Hence to injure [or penalize] this particular will as a'' ill detcrmin-
ately existent is to annul the crime, which otherwise would have 
been held valid, and to restore the right. 
The theory of punishment is one of the topics \\hich have come off 
worst in the recent study of the positive science of law, hecause m this 
theory the l; nderstanding is insufficient; the essence of the matter 
depends on the concept. 
If crime and its annulment (which later87 v. ill acquire the specific 
character of punishment) are treated as if they were unqualified enls, it 
must, of course, seem quite unreasonable to \\ill an evil merely because 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
'another evil is there already'.* To give punishment this superficial 
character of an evil is, amongst the various theories of punishment, the 
fundamental presupposition of those which regard it as a preventive, 
a deterrent, a threat, as reformative, &c., and what on these theories is 
supposed to result from punishment is characterized equally super-
ficially as a good. But it is not merely a question of an evil or of this, 
that, or the other good; the precise point at issue is wrong and the 
righting of it. If you adopt that superficial attitude to punishment, 88 
you brush aside the objective treatment of the righting of wrong, which 
is the primary and fundamental attitude in considering crime; and the 
natural consequence is that you take as essential the moral attitude, i.e. 
the subjective aspect of crime, intermingled with trivial psychological 
ideas of stimuli, impulses too strong for reason, and psychological 
factors coercing and working on our ideas (as if freedom were not 
equally capable of thrusting an idea aside and reducing it to something 
fortuitous!). The various considerations which arc relevant to punish-
ment as a phenomenon and to the bearing it has on the particular 
consciousness, and which concern its effects (deterrent, reformative, 
&c.) on the imagination, are an essential topic for examination in their 
place, especially 111 connexion with modes of punishment, but all these 
considerations presuppose as their foundation the fact that punishment 
is inherently and actually just. In discussing this matter the only 
important things are, first, that crime is to be annulled, not because it is 
the producing of an evil, but because it is an infringement of the right 
as right, and secondly, the question of what that positive existence is 
which crime possesses and which must be annulled; it is this existence 
which is the real evil to be removed, and the essential point is the 
question of v. here it lies. So long as the concepts here at issue are not 
clearly apprehended, confusion must continue to reign in the theory of 
punishment. [A.] 
100. The injury [the penalty] which falls on the criminal is not 
merely implicitly just-as just, it is eo ipso his implicit will, an em-
bodiment of his freedom, his right; on the contrary, it is also a right 
established within the criminal himself, i.e. in his objectively em-
bodied will, in his action. The reason for this is that his action is 
the action of a rational being and this implies that it is something 
universal and that by doing it the criminal has laid down a law 
which he has explicitly recognized in his action and under which in 
consequence he should be brought as under his right. 
As is well known, Beccaria89 denied to the state the right of inflicting 
capital punishment. His reason was that it could not be presumed that 
• [E F.] Klem: Grundsatze des pemlichen Rechts [Halle, 1796], §§ 9 ff. 

WRONG 
the readiness of individuals to allow themselves to he executed was in-
cluded in the social contract, and that in fact the contrary would have to 
be assumed. But the state is not a contract at all (see [Remark to] 
Paragraph 75) nor is its fundamental essence the unconditional protec-
tion and guarantee of the life and property of members of the public as 
individuals. On the contrary, it is that higher entity which even lays 
claim to this very life and property and demands its sacrifice. Further, 
what is involved in the action of the criminal is not only the concept of 
crime, the rational aspect present in crime as such whether the in-
dividual wills it or not, the aspect which the state has to vindicate, but 
also the abstract rationality of the individual's volztion. Since that is so, 
punishment is regarded as containing the criminal's right and hence by 
being punished he is honoured as a rational being. He docs not receive 
this due of honour unless the concept and measure of his punishment 
are derived from his O\\ n act. Still less does he receive it if he is treated 
either as a harmful animal who has to be made harmless, or with a view 
to deterring and reforming him. 
1\Ioreover, apart from these considerations, the form in \vhich the 
righting of wrong exists in the state, namely punishment, is not its only 
form, nor is the state a pre-condition of the principle of righting 
wrong. [A.] 
101. The annulment of the crime is retribuuon in so far as (a) 
retribution in conceptio11 is an 'injury of the tnjury'. and (b) since as 
existent a crime is something determinate in 1ts scope both qualita-
tively and quantitatively, its negation as exzstent 1s similarly deter-
minate. This identity rests on the concept, but it is not an equality 
between the specific character of the cnme and that uf 1ts negation; 
on the contrary, the two injuries arc equal only 111 respect of their 
implicit character, i.e. in respect of their 'value'. 
Empirical science requires that the defimtion of a class concept 
{punishment in this case) shall be drawn from ideas universally present 
to conscious psychological experience. This method would prove that 
the universal feeling of nations and individuals about cnmc is and has 
been that it deserves punishment, that as the criminal has done, so 
should it be done to him. (There is no understandmg how these 
sciences, which find the source of their class concepts in 1deas univer-
sally shared, come on other occasions to take for granted propos1t10ns 
contradictory of like 'facts of consciousness' also styled 'umversal'.) 
But a point of great difficulty has been introduced into the idea of 
retribution by the category of equality, though it is still true that the 
justice of specific types or amounts of punishment is a further matter, 
subsequent to the substance of the thing itself. Even if to determine 
the later question of specific punishments we had to look round for 

ABSTRACT RIGHT 
principles other than those determining the universal character of 
punishment, still the latter remains what it is. The only thing is that 
the concept itself must in general contain the fundamental principle for 
determining the particular too. But the determinate character given by 
the concept to punishment is just that necessary connexion between 
crime and punishment already mentioned; crime, as the will which is 
implicitly null, eo ipso contains its negation in itself and this negation is 
manifested as punishment. It is this inner identity whose reflection in 
the external world appears to the Understanding as 'equality'. The 
qualitative and quantitative characteristics of crime and its annulment 
fall, then, into the sphere of externality. 
In any case, no absolute 
determinacy is possible in this sphere (compare Paragraph 49); in the 
field of the finite, absolute determinacy remains only a demand, a 
demand which the Understanding has to meet by continually increasing 
delimitation-a fact of the greatest importance-but which continues 
ad infinitum and which allows only of perennially approximate satis-
faction. 
If we overlook this nature of the finite and then into the bargain 
refuse to go beyond abstract and specific equality, we are faced with the 
insuperable difficulty of fixing punishments (especially if psychology 
adduces in addition the strength of sensual impulses and consequea-
tially either the greater strength of the evil will or the greater weakness, 
or the restricted freedom, of the will as such-we may choose which we 
please). Furthermore, it is easy enough from this point of view to 
exhibit the retributive character of punishment as an absurdity (theft 
for theft, robbery for robbery, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth-
and then you can go on to suppose that the criminal has only one eye 
or no teeth). But the concept has nothing to do with this absurdity, 
for which indeed the introduction of this specific equality is solely to 
blame. Value, as the inner equality of things which in their outward 
existence are specifically different from one another in every way, is 
a category which has appeared already in connexion with contracts 
(see Paragraph 77), and also in connexion with injuries that are the 
subject of civil suits (see Remark to Paragraph g8) ;9° and by means of 
it our idea of a thing is raised above its immediate character to its 
universality. In crime, as that which is characterized at bottom by the 
infinite aspect9 1 of the deed, the purely external specific character 
vanishes all the more obviously, and equality remains the fundamental 
regulator of the essential thing, to wit the deserts of the criminal, 
though not for the specific external form which the payment of those 
deserts may take. It is only in respect of that form that there is a plain 
inequality between theft and rohbery on the one hand, and fines, 
imprisonment, &c., on the other. In respect of their 'value', however, 
i.e. in respect of their universal property of being injuries, they are 
comparable. Thus, as was said above, it is a matter for the Under-

WRONG 
73 
standing to look for something approximately equal to their 'value' in 
this sense. If the implicit interconnexion of crime and its negation, and 
if also the thought of value 'and the comparability of crime and punish-
ment in respect of their value are not apprehended, then it may become 
possible to see in a punishment proper only an 'arbitrary'* connexion 
of an evil with an unlawful action. [A.] 
102. The annulling of crime in this sphere where right is im-
mediate is principally revenge, which is just in its content in so far 
as it is retributive. But in its form it is an act of a subjective will 
which can place its infinity in every act of transgression and whose 
justification, therefore, is in all cases contingent, while to the other 
party too it appears as only particular. Hence revenge, because it is 
a positive action of a particular will, becomes a new transgression; 
as thus contradictory in character, it falls into an infinite progres-
sion and descends from one generation to another ad infinitum. 
In cases where crimes are prosecuted and punished not as crimina 
publica but as crimina privata (e.g. in Jewish law and Roman law, theft 
and robbery; in English law to this day, certain crimes,92 &c.) punish-
ment is in principle, at least to some extent, revenge. There is a difference 
between private revenge and the revenge of heroes, knights-errant, &c., 
which is part of the founding of states. [A.] 
103. The demand that this contradiction, \\'hich is present here 
in the manner in which wrong is annulled, be resoh·ed like contra-
dictions in the case of other types of wrong (see Paragraphs 86, 89), 
is the demand for a justice freed from subjectin· mterest and a 
subjective form and no longer contingent on mic;ht, i.e. it is the 
demand for justice not as revenge but as pum~h:11cnt. Funda-
mentally, this implies the demand for a will which, though particular 
and subjective, yet "·ills the universal as such. But this concept of 
Morality is not simply something demanded; it has emerged in the 
course of this movement93 itself. 
Transition from Right to !'.!orality 
104. That is to say, crime, and justice in the form of revenge, 
display (i) the shape which the will's development takes when it 
has passed over into the distinction between the uni \·ersal implicit 
will and the single will explicitly in opposition to the uni\·ersal; 
and (ii) the fact that the universal will, returning into itself through 
superseding this opposition, has now itself become actual and ex-
plicit. In this way, the right, upheld in face of the explicitly 
" Klem: op. cit.,§ 9· 

74 
ABSTRACT RIGHT 
independent single will, is and is recognized as actual on the score 
of its necessity. At the same time, however, this external formation 
which the will has here is eo ipso a step forward in the inner deter-
mination of the will by the concept. The will's immanent actualiza-
tion in accordance with its concept is the process whereby it 
supersedes its implicit stage and the form of immediacy in which it 
begins and \\ hich is the shape it assumes in abstract right (see 
[Remark to] Paragraph z r); this means that it first puts itself in the 
opposition between the implicit universal will and the single ex-
plicitly independent \\·ill; and then, through the supersession of 
this opposition (through the negation of the negation), it deter-
mines itself in its existence as a will, so that it is a free will not only 
in itself but for itself also, i.e. it determines Itself as self-related 
negativity. Its personality-and in abstract right the will is per-
sonality and no more-it now has for its object; the infinite sub-
jectivity of freedom, a subjectivity become explicit in this \vay, is 
the principle of the moral standpoint. 04 
Let us look hack more closely over the moments through which the 
concept of freedom develops itself from the will's determinate character 
as originally abstract to its character as self-related, and so at this point 
to its self-determination as subjectivity. In property this Jetermmate 
character is the abstract one, 'mine', and is therefore found in an external 
thing. In contract, 'mine' is mediated by the wills of the parties and 
means only something common. In wrong the will of the sphere of 
right has its ~bstract character of implicit bt>~ng or Immediacy posited 
as contingency through the act of a single \Yill, itself a contingent \\ dl. 
At the moral standpoint, the abstract determmacy of the \\ill in the 
sphere of right has hecn so far overcome that this contingency itself is, 
as reflected in upon itself and self-identical, the inward infinite con-
tingency of the will, i.e. its subjectivity. [A.] 
' . 
___,Ho.

SECO:;..;D PART 
l\IORALITY 
105. The standpoint of morality is the standpoint of the will 
\Yhich is infinite not merely in itself but for itself (see Paragraph 
IO..j.). In contrast with the will's implicit being, with its immeciiacy 
and the determinate characteristics developed within it at that level, 
this reflection of the \vill into itself and its explicit a\vareness of its 
identity makes the person into the subject. 
106. It is as subjectivity that the concept has now been deter-
mined, and since subjectivity is distinct from the concept as such, 
i.e. from the implicit principle of the will, and since furthermore it 
is at the same time the will of the subject as a single individual 
aware of himself (i.e. still has immediacy in him), it constitutes the 
determinate existence of the concept. In this way a higher ground 
has been assigned to freedom; the Idea's existential aspect, or its 
moment of reality, is no\V the subjectivitY of the mll. Only in the 
will as subjective can freedom or the 1mplictt principle of the will 
be actual. 1 
The second sphere, l\lorality, therefore throughout portrays the real 
aspect of the concept of freedom, and the movemtnt of this sphere is 
as follows: the will, which at the start is aware only of its independence 
and which before it is mediated is only Implicitly identical with the 
universal will or the principle of the will, IS raised beyond its [explicit] 
difference from the universal will, beyond tlus snuatwn in which it 
sinks deeper and deeper into itself, and is established as explicitly 
identical with the principle of the will." This process is accordingly 
the cultivation of the ground in which freedom is now set, i.e. sub-
jectivity. What happens is that subjectivity, which is abstract at the 
start, i.e. distinct from the concept, becomes likened to it, and thereby 
the Idea acquires its genuine realization. The result 1s that the sub-
jective will determines itself as objective too and so as truly concrete. 
[A.] 
107. The self-determination of the will is at the same time a 
moment in the concept of the will, and subjectivity is not merely its 
existential aspect but its own determinate character (see Paragraph 
104). The \Yill aware of its freedom and determined as subjective 
is at the start concept alone, but itself has determinate existence in 
order to exist as Idea. The moral standpoint therefore takes shape 

MORALITY 
as the right of the subjective wil!.J In accordance with this right, 
the will recognizes something and is something, only in so far as the 
thing is its own and as the will is present to itself there as some-
thing subjective. 
The same process through which the moral attitude develops (see the 
Remark to the preceding Paragraph) has from this point of view the 
form of being the development of the right of the subjective will, or of 
the mode of its existence. In this process the subjective will further 
determines what it recognizes as its own in its object (Gegenstand), so 
that this object becomes the will's own true concept, becomes objective 
(objektiv) as the expression of the will's own univcrsality. 4 [A.] 
108. The subjective will, directly aware of itself, and dis-
tinguished from the principle of the will (see Remark to Paragraph 
ro6), is therefore abstract, restricted, and formal. But not merely is 
subjectivity itself formal; in addition, as the infinite self-determina-
tion of the will, it constitutes the form of all willing. In this, its 
first appearance in the single will, this form has not yet been estab-
lished as identical with the concept of the will, and therefore the 
moral point of vie·w is that of relation, of ought-to-be, or demand. 
And since the self-difl"erence of subjectivity involves at the same 
.time the character of being opposed to objectivity as external fact, 
it follows that the point of view of consciousness comes on the 
scene here too (see Paragraph 8). The general point of view here is 
that of the will's self-difference, finitude, and appearance.s 
The moral is not characterized primarily by its having already been 
opposed to the immoral, nor is right directly characterized by its 
opposition to wrong. The point is rather that the general characteristics 
of morality and immorality alike rest on the subjectivity of the will. [A.) 
109. This form of all \villing primarily in\'olves in accordance 
with its general character (a) the opposition of subjectivity and 
objectivity, and (b) the activity (see Paragraph 8) related to this 
opposition. Now extstence and specific determinacy are identical 
in the concept of the will (see Paragraph IO+), and the will as sub-
jective is itself this concept. 6 Hence the moments of this activity 
consist more precisely in (a) distinguishing between objectivity and 
subjectivity and even ascribing independence to them both, and (b) 
establishing them as identical. In the will "hich is self-determin-
ing, (G.) its specific determinacy is in the first place established in 
the v.ill itself by itself as its inner particularization, as a content 
which it gives to itself. This is the first negation, and the formal 

MORALITY 
77 
limitation (Grenze) of this negation is that of being only something 
posited, something subjective. ({3) As infinitely reflected into itself, 
this limitation exists for the will, and the will is the struggle to 
transcend this barrier (Schranke), i.e. it is the activity of translating 
this content in some way or other from subjectivity into objectivity, 
into an immediate existence. (y) The simple identity of the will 
with itself in this opposition is the content which remains self-
identical in both these opposites and indifferent to this formal dis-
tinction of opposition. In short, it is my aim [the purpose willed].7 
110. But, at the standpoint of morality, where the will is aware 
of its freedom, of this identity of the will with itself (see Paragraph 
105), this identity of content acquires the more particularized 
character appropriate to itself. 
(a) The content as 'mine' has for me this character: by virtue of 
its identity in subject and object it enshrines for me my subjectivity, 
not merely as my inner purpose, but also inasmuch as it has ac-
quired outward existence. [A.] 
111. (b) Though the content does have in it something particu-
lar, whencesoever it may be derived, still it is the content of the will 
reflected into itself in its determinacy and thus of the self-identical 
and universal will; and therefore: 
(e1) the content is inwardly characterized as adequate to the 
principle of the will or as possessing the ohjectivity of the 
concept; 
({3) since the subjective will, as aware of itself, is at the same time 
still formal (see Paragraph 108), the content's adequacy to 
the concept is still only something demanded, and hence this 
entails the possibility that the content may not be adequate 
to the concept. 
112. (c) Since in carrying out my aims I retain my subjectivity 
(see Paragraph IIo), during this process of objectifying them I 
simultaneously supersede the immediacy of this subjectivity as well 
as its character as this my individual subjectivity. But the external 
subjectivity which is thus identical with me is the will of othersB (see 
Paragraph 73). The will's ground of existence is now subjectivity 
(see Paragraph ro6) and the will of others is that existence which I 
give to my aim and which is at the same time to me an other. The 
achievement of my aim, therefore, implies this identity of my will 
with the will of others, it has a positive bearing on the will of others. 

1\TORALITY 
The objectivity of the aim achieved thus involves three meanings, or 
rather it has three moments present withm it at once; it is: 
(o:) something existing externally and immediately (see Paragraph 
I09); 
({3) adequate to the concept (see Paragraph I I I) ;9 
(y) uni'Cersal subjectivity. 
The subjectivity which maintains itself in this objectivity consists: 
(o:) in the fact that the objective aim is mine, so that in 1t I maintain 
myself as this individual (see Paragraph I 1 o); 
({3) and (y), in moments which coincide with the moments ({3) and 
(y) above. 
At the standpoint of moraltty, subjectivity and objectivity are dis-
tinct from one another, or umted only by their mutual contradiction; 
it is this fact more particularly which constitutes the finitude of this 
sphere or its character as mere appearance (see Paragraph Io8), and the 
development of this standpoint is the development of these contradic-
tions and their resolutions, resolutions, however, which within this field 
can be no more than relative. [A.] 
113. The externalization of the subjecti\'e or moral will is 
action. Action implies the determinate characteristics here m-
dicated: 
(o:) in its externality it must be known to me as my action; 
(/3) it must bear essentially on the concept as an 'ought' [see 
Paragraph I 3 I]; 
(y) it must have an essential bearing on the will of others. 
It is not until we come to the externalization of the moral wtl] that we 
come to actwn. The existence which the will gives to itself in the sphere 
of formal rights is existence in an immediate thing and is itself im-
mediate; to start with, it neither has in itself any express bearing on 
the concept, which is at that point not yet contrasted\\ ith the subjective 
will and so is not d1stingu1shed from it, nor has It a posit1ve heanng on 
the will of others; in the sphere of nght, command in its fundamental 
character is only prohibition (see Paragraph 38). 
In contract and 
wrong, there is the beginning of a bearing on the \\tll of others; but 
the correspondence established in contract between one will and 
another is grounded in arbitranness, and the essential beanng \\ hich 
the will has there on the wdl of the other is, as a matter of nghts, 
something negative, i.e. one party retains his property (the value of it) 
and allows the other to retain his. On the other hand, cr1me in its 
aspect as issuing from the subjeCtive \Yill, and the question of the mode 
of its ex1stence 111 that \\·ill, come before us now for cons1deratwn for 
the first time. 

:\IORA.LITY 
79 
The contrnt of an action at law (actio), as something determined by 
legal enactment, is not imputable to me.' ° Consequently, such an 
action contains only some of the moments of a moral action proper, 
and contains them only incidentally. The aspect of an action in virtue 
of which it is properly moral is therefore distinct from its aspect as legal. 
114. The right of the moral wdl involves three aspects: 
(a) The abstract or formal right of action, the right that the 
content of the action as carried out in immediate existence, shall be 
in principle mine, that thus the action shall be the Purpose of the 
subjecti\·e will. 
(b) The particular aspect of the action is its inner content (:x) as 
I am aware of it in its general character; my awareness of this 
general character constitutes the worth of the action and the reason 
I think good to do it-in short my Intention. ({3) Its content is my 
special aim, the aim of my particular, merely individual, existence, 
i.e. Welfare. 
(c) This content (as something which is mward and which yet at 
the same tlme is raised to its universality as to ahsoli!te objectivity) 
is the absolute end of the will, the Good--\\ ,th the opposition in 
the sphere of reflectiOn, of subjecthe UCJ\ crsaht\·, \vhich is now 
wickedness and now conscience. 11 l :\ .. ] 
Sl'B-S[CT!O); I 
PLRPOSE ASD RE.')'PO\.'>'IB!!.i 
115. The finitude of the subject1ve \\rJl 1n tht 
,,mediacy of 
acting consists directly in this, that its actiOn presupposes an ex-
ternal object with a complex environment. The deeJ sets up an 
alteration in thrs state of affairs confronting the will, and my will 
has resprmsrbrlity 12 in general for its deed in so far as •he abstract 
predicate 'mine' belongs to the state of atTairs so alter·.·d. 
An rvent, a situation which has been produced, is a concrete external 
actuality which because of Its concreteness has in It an ll~,:~termmable 
multiplicity of factors. Any and every single element ,,.hie:; appears as 
the conditiOn, ground, or cause of one such factor, and so has contn-
huted Its share to the event in question, may be looked upon as respon-
sible for the event, or at least as sharing the responsibility for It. Hence, 
in the case of a complex event (e.g. the French RevolutiOn) it is open to 
the abstract l' nderstandmg to choose which of an endless number of 
factors it will maintain to be responsible for it. [:\.] 

So 
I\ !ORALITY 
116. It is, of course, not my own doing if damage is caused to 
others by things \vhose owner I am and which as external objects 
stand and are effective in manifold connexions with other thing-s (as 
may also be the case with my self as a bodily mechanism or as a 
living thing). This damage, however, is to some extent chargeable 
to me because the things that cause it are in principle mine, 
although it is true that they are subject to my control, vigilance, 
&c., only to an extent varying with their special character. 
117. The freely acting will, in directing its aim on the state of 
affairs confronting it, has an idea of the attendant circumstances. 
But because the will is finite, since this state of affairs is pre-
supposed, the objective phenomenon is contingent so far as the will 
is concerned, and may contain something other than what the will's 
idea of it contains. The will's right, however, is to recognize as its 
action, and to accept responsibility for, only those presuppositions 
of the deed of which it was conscious in its aim and those aspects of 
the deed which were contained in its purpose. The deed can be 
imputed to me only if my will is responsible for it-this is the right 
to know. [A.) 
118. Further, action is translated into external fact, and external 
fact has connexions in the field of external necessity through which 
it develops itself in all directions. Hence action has a multitude of 
consequences. These consequences are the outward form whose 
inner soul is the aim of the action, and thus they are the con-
sequences of the action, they belong to the action. At the same time, 
however, the action, as the aim posited in the external world, has 
become the prey of external forces which attach to it something 
totally different from vvhat it is explicitly and drive it on into alien 
and distant consequences. Thus the will has the right to repudiate 
the imputation of all consequences except the first, since it alone 
was purposed. 
To determine which results are accidental and which necessary is 
impossible, because the necessity implicit in the finite tomes into 
determinate existence as an external necessity, as a relation of single 
things to one another, things which as self-subsistent are conjoined in 
indifference to one another and externally. The maxim: 'Ignore the 
consequences of actions' and the other: 'Judge actions by their con-
sequences and make these the criterion of right and good' are both 
alike maxims of the abstract L'nderstanding. The consequences, as 
the shape proper to the action and immanent within it, exhibit nothing 

PURPOSE AND RESPONSIBILITY 
81 
but its nature and are simply the action itself; therefore the action can 
neither disavow nor i!?:nore them. On the other hand, however, among 
the consequences there is also comprised something interposed from 
without and introduced hy chance, and this is quite unrelated to the 
nature of the action itself. 
The development in the external world of the contradiction involved 
in the neccsstty of the finite is JUSt the conversion of necessity into 
contingency and vice versa. From this point of view, therefore, acting 
means surrendering oneself to this law. 13 It is because of this that it is 
to the advantage of the criminal if his action has comparatively few bad 
consequences (while a good action must be content to have had no 
consequences or very few), and that the fully developed consequences 
of a crime are counted as part of the crime. 
The self-consciousm:ss of heroes (like that of Oedipus and others in 
Greek tragedy) had not advanced out of its primitive simplicity either 
to reflection on the distinction between act and action, between the 
external event and the purpose and knowledge of the circumstances, 
or to the subdivision of consequences. On the contrary, they accepted 
responsibility for the whole compass of the deed. [A.) 
Sl'B-SECTI0::-1 2 
119. An action as an external event is a complex of connected 
parts which may be regarded as divided into umts ad infinitum, and 
the action may be treated as having touched in the first instance 
only one of these units. The truth of the sin!.dt however, is the 
universal; and what explicitly gives action its srt·uf;c character is 
not an isolated content limitrd to an external umt, hut a universal 
content, comprising in itself the complex of connected parts. Pur-
pose, as issuing from a thinker, comprises more than the mere unit; 
essentially it comprises that universal side of the action, i.e. the 
intention. 
Etymologically, Absiclzt (intention) implies abstraction, either the form 
of universality or the extraction of a particular aspect of the concrete 
thing. 14 The endeavour to JUStify an action by the intent1on behind it 
involves the Isolation of one or other of its single aspects which is 
alleged to be the essence of the action on its subjective side. 
To judge an actwn as an external deed without yet determining its 
rightness or wrongness is simply to bestow on it a universal predicate, 
i.e. to descnbe it as burning, killing, &c. 
The discrete character of the external world shows what the nature of 
that world is, namely a chain of external relations. Actuality is touched 

82 
!\!ORALITY 
in the first instance only at a single point {arson, for instance, directly 
concerns only a tiny section of the firewood, i.e. IS describable in a pro-
position, not a judgement),'; but the universal nature of this point 
entails its expansion. In a living thing, the single part is there in its 
immediacy not as a mere part, but as an organ in which the universal 
is really present as the universal; hence in murder, it is not a riece of 
flesh, as something isolated, which is injured, but life itself which is 
injured in that piece of flesh. It is subjective reflection, ignorant of the 
logical nature of the smgle and the universal, which indulges ad libztum 
in the subdivision of single parts and consequences; and yet it is the 
nature of the finite deed itself to contain such separable contingencies.-
The device of dolus indirectus 16 has its basis in these considerations. [A.] 
120. The right of intention is that the universal quality of the 
action shall not merely be implicit but shall be known by the agent, 
and so shall have lain from the start in his subjective will. \'ice 
versa, what may be called the right of the objectivity of action is 
the right of the action to evince itself as known and willed by the 
subject as a thinker. 
This right to insight of this kind entails the complete, or almost com-
plete, irresponsibility of children, imbeciles, lunatics, &c., for their 
actions.- But just as actions on their external side as e\·ents include 
accidental consequences, so there is involved in the subjective agent an 
indeterminacy whose degree depends on the strength and force of his 
self-consciousness and circumspection. This indeterminacy, however, 
may not be taken into account except in connexion with childhood or 
imbecility, lunacy, &c., since it is only such well marked states of mind 
that nullify the trait of thought and freedom of will, and permit us to 
treat the agent as devoid of the dignity of being a thinker and a will. 
121. The uni\·ersal quality of the action is the manifold content 
of the action as such, reduced to the simple form of uni\·ersality. 
But the subject, an entity reflected into himself and so particular in 
correlation with the particularity of his object, has in his end his 
own particular content, Jnd this content is the soul of the action 
and determmes its character. The fact that this moment of the 
particularity of the agent is contained and realized in the action 
constitutes subjective freedom in its more concrete sense, the nght 
of the subject to find his satisfaction in the action. [:\.] 
122. It is on the strength of this particular aspect that the action 
has subjective worth or interest for me. In contrast \Yith this end-
the content of the intention-the direct character of the action m 
its further content is reduced to a means. In so far as such an end is 

INTENTION AND WELFARE 
something finite, it may in its turn be reduced to a means to some 
further intention and so on ad infinitum. 
123. For the content of these ends nothing is available at this 
point except ( '~<) pure activity itself, i.e. the activity present owing 
to the fact that the subject puts himself into \vhatever he is to 
look upon and promote as his end. :\len are willing to be active in 
pursuit of what interests them, or should interest them, as some-
thing which is their own. ({3) A more determinate content, how-
ever, the still abstract and formal freedom of subjectivity possesses 
only in its natural subjective embodiment, i.e. in needs, inclina-
tions, passions, opinions, fancies, &c. The satisfaction of these is 
welfare or happiness, both in general and in its particular species-
the ends of the whole sphere of finitude. 
Here-the standpoint of relation (see Paragraph 108), when the 
subject is characterized by his self-difference and so counts as a par-
ticular-is the place where the content of the natural will (see Para-
graph 1 I) comes on the scene. But the will here is not as it is in its 
immediacy; on the contrary, this content no11· belongs to a will reflected 
into itself and so is elevated to become a universal end, the end of wel-
fare or happiness;" this happens at the level ul the thmking which does 
not yet apprehend the will in its freedom hut reflects on its content as 
on one natural and given-the level, for example, of the time of Croesus 
and Solon. 17 [:\.] 
124. Since the subjecti1·e satisfaction of the mdi,·idual himself 
(including the recognition which he recei1 es h1 11 av of honour an1l 
fame) is also part and parcel of the achiewment ()fends of absolut~~ 
worth, it follows that the demand that such an end alone shall 
appear as 1\·illed and attained, like the 1·te1v that, in willing, 
objective and subjective ends are mutually exclusiw, is an empty 
dogmatism of the abstract Understanding. And thts dogmatism is 
more than empty, it is pernicious if it passes into the assertion that 
because subjecti1·e satisfaction is present, as it ahays is when any 
task is brought to completion, it is 1vhat the agent intended in 
essence to secure and that the objective end \vas in his eyes only a 
means to that.-What the subject is, is the series of his actions. If 
these are a series of worthless productions, then the subjectivity of 
his willing is just as worthless. But if the series of hts deeds is of a 
substantive nature, then the same is true also of the individual's 
inner will. 
• Enc. [rst edn.], §§ 395 ff. [3rd edn. §§ 478 ff.]. 

MORALITY 
The right of the subJect's particularity, his right to be satisfied, or in 
other words the nght of subjective freedom, IS the pivot and centre of 
the difference bct\~·c.:n antiqu1ty and modern times. This right in its 
infimty is gl\·en expression m Chnstiamty and it has become the uni-
versal effective pnnC!ple of a new form of civ!h7.ation. Amongst the 
pnmary shapes \\ h1ch th1s right assumes are love, romantiCism, the 
quest for the eternal salvation of the individual, &c.; next come moral 
convictiOns and conscience; and, finally, the other forms, some of which 
come into prominence in what follo\\S as the pnnciple of civil society 
and as moments in the constitution of the state, \\ hile others appear in 
the course of h1story, particularly the history of art, sc1ence, and 
philosophy. 1s 
:\ow this principle of particularity is, to be sure, one moment of the 
antithesis, and in the first pla.::c at least it is JUSt as much identical with 
the umvcrsal as d1stmct from 1t. Abstract reflection, however, fixes this 
moment in its distmctJon from and opposition to the universal and so 
produces a viC\\" of morality as nothing hut a hmer, unending, struggle 
against self-satisfactiOn, as the command: 'Do \\ ith abhorrence what 
duty enJoins.' 19 
It is JUSt this type of ratiocination which adduces that familiar 
psycholopcal \·iew of history \\ hich understands how to belittle and 
d•sparage all great deeds and great men hy transforming mto the main 
intention and operative motive of actions the inclinations and passions 
\\ h1ch hkewise found their satisfaction from the achievement of some-
thing substantive, the fame and honour, &c., consequential on such 
actions, in a word their particular aspect, the aspect which it has decreed 
in advance to he something in itself pernicious. Such ratiocmation 
assures us that, \\ h1lc great actions and the efficiency which has subsisted 
through a series of them han produced greatness in the world and have 
had as their consequences for the mdividual agent power, honour, and 
fame, still \\hat belongs to the individual is not the greatness Itself but 
what has accrued to h1m from it, this purely particular and external 
result; because this result is a consequence, it is therefore supposed to 
have been the agent's end and even h1s sole end. ReflectiOn of th1s sort 
stops short at the subjective s1dc of great men, since it Itself stands on 
purely subjective ground, and consequently 1t overlooks \\hat is sub-
stantive in th1s emptiness of ns O\\ n making. Th1s is the new of those 
valet psychologists 'for \\hom there arc no heroes, not because there 
arc no heroes, hut because these psychologists are only valets'." (:\.] 
125. The subjective element of the will, with its particular con-
tent-welfare, is reflected mto itself and mfinite and so stands 
r lated to the uniwrsal element, to the pnnciple of the "·ill. This 
• Phenomenology (1st edn ], p. 616 [Eng. tr. p. 6iJ]. 

I~TE~TIO='l A:!'\D \VELF ARE 
ss 
moment of universality, posited first of all within this particular 
content itself, is the \velfare of others also, or, specified completely, 
though quite emptily, the \\elfare of all. 20 The \\·elfare of many 
other unspecified particulars is thus also an essential end and nght 
of subjectivity. But smce the absolutely universal, m distinction 
from such a particular content, has not so far been further deter-
mined than as 'the right', it folllms that these ends of particularity, 
differing as they do from the uni\ ersal, may be m conformity with 
it, but they also may not. 
126. :\ly particularity, howe\·er, like that of others, is only a 
right at all in so far as I am a free entity. Therefore it may not 
make claims for itself m contradiction to this its substantive basis, 
and an intention to secure my \Velfare or that of others (and it is 
particularly in this latter case that such an intention is called 
'moral') cannot justify an action which is wrong. 
It is one of the most prominent of the corrupt maxims of our time to 
enter a plea for the so-called 'moral' intention hdl!nd wrong actions 
and to Imagine had men \Yith \\dl-mcamng hc·.nts, 1 c. hearts willing 
their own \\elfare and perh<lps that of other, '"is<> 
Tills doctrine is 
rooted m the 'benevolence' (gut en ller:::tm) "t tilt" prt:- h.antian philo-
sophers"' and constitutes, e.g., the qlilntcssencc u•· '.\eli-known touching 
dramatic productions;" but to-day It has bn n n·,u:-,uuted in a more 
extravagant form, and inner enthusiasm ami the heart, I.e. the form of 
particularity as such, have been made the cntc-rum of n[!"ht, rationality, 
and excellence. The result is that cnme and the t :"' •'.t[!"hts that lead 
to it, be they fancies ho\\e\·er trite and empty, ,, 
·i'tinons however 
wild, are to be regarded as right, rational, and e>.:n·il·, .,. ,, •CJply because 
they issue from men's hearts and enthusiasms. (:-iec the Remark to 
Paragraph qo, where more details a1e given.) 
Incidentally, however, attention must be paid to the point of view 
from which nght and welfare are being treated here. We are con-
sidering right as abstract right and welfare as the parttcu'.tr welfare of 
the smgle agent. The so-called 'general good', the \\elfar•. of the state, 
i.e. the right of mind actual and concrete, is quae a dd-lcrent sphere, 
a sphere in which abstract right is a subordinate moment ];ke particular 
welfare and the happiness of the individual. As was rem~·ked a hove, '3 
it is one of the commonest blunders of abstract tnrnLing to make 
private rights and private welfare count as absulute in oppositiOn to the 
universality of the state. [A.) 
127. The particularity of the interests of the natural will, taken 
in thtir entirety as a single whole, is personal existence or life. In 

86 
MORALITY 
extreme danger and in conflict with the rightful property of some-
one else, this life may claim (as a right, not a mercy) a right of dis-
tress, because in such a situation there is on the one hand an infinite 
injury to a man's existence and the consequent loss of rights 
altogether, and on the other hand only an injury to a single re-
stricted embodiment of freedom, and this implies a recognition 
both of right as such and also of the injured man's capacity for 
rights, because the injury affects only this property of his. 
The right of distress is the basis of beneficium competentiae" whereby 
a debtor is allowed to retain of his tools, farming implements, clothes, 
or, in short, of his resources, i.e. of his creditor's property, so much as is 
regarded as indispensable if he is to continue to support life-to support 
it, of course, on his own social level. [A.] 
128. This distress reveals the finitude and therefore the con-
tingency of both right and welfare, 2s of right as the abstract em-
bodiment of freedom without embodying the particular person, 
and of welfare as the sphere of the particular will without the uni-
versality of right. In this way they are established as one-sided and 
ideal, the character which in conception they already possessed. 
Right has already (see Paragraph 106) determined its embodiment 
as the particular will; and subjectivity, in its particularity as a com-
prehensive whole, is itself the embodiment of freedom (see Para-
graph 127), while as the infinite relation of the will to itself, it is 
implicitly the universal element in freedom. The two moments 
present in right and subjectivity, thus integrated and attaining their 
truth, their identity, though in the first instance still remaining 
relative to one another, are (a) the good (as the concrete, absolutely 
determinate, universal), and (b) conscience (as infinite subjectivity 
inwardly conscious and inwardly determining its content). 
SUB-SECTION 3 
GOOD AND CONSCIENCE 
129. The good is the Idea as the unity of the concept of the will 
with the particular will. In this unity, abstract right, welfare, the 
subjectivity of knowing and the contingency of external fact, have 
their independent self-subsistence superseded, though at the same 
time they are still contained and retained within it in their essence. 
The good is thus freedom realized, the absolute end and aim of the 
world. [A.] 

GOOD AND CONSCIENCE 
130. In this Idea, welfare has no independent validity as the 
embodiment of a single particular will but only as universal welfare 
and essentially as universal in principle, i.e. as according with 
freedom. Welfare without right is not a good. Similarly, right 
without welfare is not the good; fiat justitia should not be followed 
by pereat mundus. Consequently, since the good must of necessity 
be actualized through the particular will and is at the same time its 
substance, it has absolute right in contrast with the. abstract right 
of property and the particular aims of welfare. If either of th<.!se 
moments becomes distinguished from the good, it has validity only 
in so far as it accords with the good and is subordinated to it. 
131. For the subjective will, the good and the good alone is the 
essential, and the subjective will has value and dignity only in so 
far as its insight and intention accord with the good. Inasmuch as 
the good is at this point still only this abstract Idea of good, the 
subjective will has not yet been caught up into it and established as 
according with it. Consequently, it stands in a relation to the good, 
and the relation is that the good ought to be substantive for it, i.e. 
it ought to make the good its aim and realize it completely, while 
the good on its side has in the subjective will its only means of 
stepping into actuality. [A.] 
132. The right of the subjective will is tha1: whatever it is to 
recognize as valid shall be seen by it as good, and that an action, as 
its aim entering upon external objectivity, shall be imputed to it as 
right or wrong, good or evil, legal or illegal, m accordance with its 
knowledge of the worth which the action has in this obJectivity. 
The good is in principle the essence of the will in Its substantiality 
and universality, i.e. of the will in its truth, and therefore it exists 
simply and solely in thinking and by means of thinking. Hence asser-
tions such as 'man cannot know the truth but has to do only with 
phenomena', or 'thinking injures the good will' are dogmas depriving 
mind not only of intellectual but also of all ethical worth and dignity. 
The right of giving recognition only to what my insight sees as 
rational is the highest right of the subject, although owmg to its sub-
jective character it remains a formal right; against it the right which 
reason qua the objective possesses over the subject remains firmly 
established. 
On account of its formal character, insight is capable equally of 
being true and of being mere opinion and error. The individual's 
acquisition of this right of insight is, on the principles of the 
sphere which is still moral only, part and parcel of his particular 

88 
MORALITY 
subjective education. I may demand from myself, and regard it as one 
of my subjective rights, that my insight into an obligation shall be based 
on good reasons, that I shall be convinced of the obligation and even 
that I shall apprehend it from its concept and fundamental nature. 
But whatever I may claim for the satisfaction of my conviction about 
the character of an action as good, permitted, or forbidden, and so about 
its imputability in respect of this character, this in no way detracts from 
the right of objectivity. 
This right of insight into the good is distinct from the right of insight 
in respect of action as such (see Paragraph rr;) ;z 6 the form of the right 
of objectivity which corresponds to the latter is this, that since action is 
an alteration which is to take place in an actual world and so will haYe 
recognition in it, it must in general accord with what has validity there. 
Whoever wills to act in this world of actuality has eo ipso submitted 
himself to its laws and recognized the right of objectivity. 
Similarly, in the state as the objectivity of the concept of reason, 
legal responsibility cannot be tied down to what an individual may hold 
to be or not to be in accordance with his reason, or to his subjective 
insight into what is right or wrong, good or evil, or to the demands 
which he makes for the satisfaction of his conviction. In this objective 
field, the right of insight is valid as insight into the legal or illegal, qzN 
into what is recognized as right, and it is restricted to its elementary 
meaning, i.e. to knowledge in the sense of acquaintance with what is 
legal and to that extent obligatory. By means of the publicity of the 
laws and the universality of manners, 2 7 the state removes from the right 
of insight its formal aspect and the contingency which it still retains for 
the subject at the level of morality. The'subjeoct's right to know action 
in its specific character as good or evil, legal or illegal, has the result 
of diminishing or cancelling in this respect toozs the responsibility of 
children, imbeciles, and lunatics, although it is impossible to delimit 
precisely either childhood, imbecility, &c., or their degree of irrespon-
sibility. But to turn momentary blindness, the goad ot passion, in-
toxication, or, in a word, what is called the strength of sensual impulse 
(excluding impulses which are the basis of the right of distress-see 
Paragraph 127)' 9 into reasons when the imputation, specific character, 
and culpability of a crime are in question, and to look upon such cir-
cumstances as if they took away the criminal's gurlt, again means 
(compare Paragraph roo and the Remark to Paragraph rzo)J 0 failing to 
treat the crimmal m accordance with the right and honour due to him 
as a man; for the nature of man consists precisely in the fact that he is 
essentially something universal, not a bCing whose knmdedge is an 
abstractly momentary and piecemeal affair. 
Just as what the incendiary really sets on fire is not the isolated 
square inch of wooden surface to which he applies his torch, but the 
universal in that square inch, e.g. the house as a whole, so, as subject, 

GOOD A~D CO~SCIENCE 
he is neither the single existent of this moment of time nor this isolated 
hot feeling of revenge. If he were, he would be an animal which would 
have to be knocked on the head as dangerous and unsafe because of its 
liability to fits of madness. 
The cla1m is made that the criminal in the moment of his action 
must have had a 'clear idea' of the wrong and its culpability before it 
can be imputed to him as a crime. At first sight, this claim seems to 
preserve the right of his subjectivity, hut the truth is that it deprives 
him of his md\\ c11ing nature as intelligent, a nature \\hose effective 
presence 1s not confined to the 'clear ideas' of \Yolff's psychology,JI and 
only in cases of lunacy is it so deranged as to be divorced from the 
knowing and doing of isolated things. 
The sphere in wh1ch these extenuating circumstances come into 
consideration as grounds for the mitigation of pumshment is a sphere 
other than that of rights, the sphere of pardon.JZ 
133. The particular subject is related to the good as to the 
essence of his will, and hence his will's obligation arises directly in 
this relation.JJ Since particularity is distinct from the good and 
falls w1thm the subjectiYe \\ill, the good is characterized to begin 
with only as the universal abstract essenti.ll:n of the will, i.e. as 
duty. Smce duty is thus abstract and um\ e!sal in character, it 
should be done for duty's sake. [A.] 
134. Because every action explicitly c.!lb f,Jr a particular 
content and a specific end, \\ hile duty a:-. an abstra, tion entails 
nothing of the kind, the question arises: '' lw 1' nn duty? As an 
answer nothing is so far available except: (al tc ,l, the right, and 
(b) to strive after welfare, one's O\\ n \\ clt .11' 
. - •._, \\·elfare in 
universal terms, the welfare of others (sec l',lr.lr;r..:pl. 
I9).H [A.] 
135. These specific duties, however, are not conl..,;ned in the 
definition of duty itself; but since both of them arc L·onditioned 
and restricted, they eo ipso bring about the transttton t • the higher 
sphere of the unconditioned, the sphere of duty. Dut\ :tself in the 
moral self-consciousness is the essence or the umversality of that 
consciousness, the way in \vhich it is im\ardly related to Itself 
alone; all that is left to it, therefore, is abstract uuin·r~J':ty, and for 
its determinate character it has identity without content, or the 
abstractly positi\·c, the indeterminate. 
However essential it IS to give prommence to the pure unconditioned 
self-determination of the will as the root of dutv, and to the \\a\' 111 
which knO\dedge of the will, thanks to Kant's philosophy, has wo~ Its 
firm founJatio:1 and starting-point for the first time O\\ing to the thou~ht 

MORALITY 
of its infinite autonomy, still to adhere to the exclusively moral position, 
without making the transition to the conception of ethics, is to reduce 
this gain to an empty formalism, and the science of morals to the 
preaching of duty for duty's sake. From this point of view, no immanent 
doctrine of duties is possible; of course, material may be brought in 
from outside and particular duties may be arrived at accordingly, but 
if the definition of duty is taken to be the absence of contradiction, 
formal correspondence with itself-which is nothing but abstract in-
determinacy stabilized-then no transition is possible to the specification 
of particular duties nor, if some such particular content for acting comes 
under consideration, is there any criterion in that principle for deciding 
whether it is or is not a duty. On the contrary, by this means any 
wrong or immoral line of conduct may be justified. 
Kant's further formulation,Js the possibility of visualizing an action 
as a uni~·ersal maxim, does lead to the more concrete visualization of 
a situation, but in itself it contains no principle beyond abstract identity 
and the 'absence of contradiction' already mentioned. 
The absence of property contains in itself just as little contradiction 
as the non-existence of this or that nation, family, &c., or the death of 
the whole human race. But if it is already established on other grounds 
and presupposed that property and human life are to exist and be 
respected, then indeed it is a contradiction to commit theft or murder; 
a contradiction must be a contradiction of something, i.e. of some con-
tent presupposed from the start as a fixed principle. It is to a principle 
of that kind alone, therefore, that an action can be related either by 
correspondence or contradiction. But if duty is to be willed simply for 
duty's sake and not for the sake of some content, it is only a formal 
identity whose nature it is to exclude all content and specification. 
The further antinomies and configurations of this never-ending 
ought-to-be, in which the exclusively moral way of thinking-thinking 
in terms of relation-just wanders to and fro without being able to 
resolve them and get beyond the ought-to-be, I have developed in my 
Phenomenology of Mind.• [A.] 
136. Because of the abstract characterization of the good, the 
other moment of the Idea-particularity in general-falls within 
subjectivity. Subjectivity in its universality reflected into itself is 
the subject's absolute imvard certainty (Gewij3heit) of himself, that 
which establishes the particular and is the determining and decisive 
element in him, his conscience (Gewissen).J6 [A.] 
137. True conscience is the disposition to will what is absolutely 
good. It thereforeJ7 has fixed principles and it is aware of these as 
• [1st edn.] pp. 550 ff. [Eng. tr. pp. 615 ff.]. Cf. Enc. [1st edn.], §§ 420 ff. 
[3rd edn. §§ 507 ff.], 

GOOD AND CONSCIENCE 
its explicitly objective determinants and duties. In distinction 
from this its content (i.e. truth), conscience is only the formal side 
of the activity of the will, which as this will has no special content 
of its own. 38 But the objective system ofthese principles and duties, 
and the union of subjective knowing with this system, is not pre-
sent until we come to the standpoint of ethical life. Here at the 
abstract standpoint of morality, conscience lacks this objective 
content and so its explicit character is that of infinite abstract self-
certainty, which at the same time is for this very reason the self-
certainty of this subject. 
Conscience is the expression of the absolute title of subjective self-
consciousness to know in itself and from within itself what is right and 
obligatory, to give recognition only to what it thus knows as good, and 
at the same time to maintain that whatever in this way it knows and 
wills is in truth right and obligatory. Conscience as this unity of sub-
jective knowing with what is absolute is a sanctuary which it would be 
sacrilege to violate. But whether the conscience of a specific individual 
corresponds with this Idea of conscience, or whether what it takes or 
declares to be good is actually so, is ascertainable only from the content 
of the good it seeks to realize. What IS right and obligatory is the 
absolutely rational element in the will's volitions and therefore it is not 
in essence the particular property of an individual, and its form is not 
that of feeling or any other private (i.e. sensuous) tn•c of knowing, but 
essentially that of universals determined by thought, i.e. the form of 
laws and principles. Conscience is therefore subject to the judgement 
of its truth or falsity, and when it appeals only to itself for a decision, it 
is directly at variance with what it wishes to he, namely the rule for 
a mode of conduct which is rational, absolutely valid, and universal. 
For this reason, the state cannot give recognition to conscience in its 
private form as subjective knowing, any more than science can grant 
·:alidity to subjective opinion, dogmatism, and the appeal to a subjective 
opinion. In true conscience, its elements are not different, but they 
may become so, and it is the determining element, the subjectivity of 
willing and knowing, which can sever itself from the true content of 
conscience, establish its own independence, and reduce that content to 
a form and a show. The ambiguity in connexion with conscience lies 
therefore in this: it is presupposed to mean the identity of subjective 
knowing and willing with the true good, and so is claimed and recog-
nized to be something sacrosanct; and yet at the same time, as the mere 
subjective reflection of self-consciousness into itself, it still claims for 
itself the title due, solely on the strength of its absolutely valid rational 
content, to that identity alone. 
At the level of morality, distinguished as it is in this book from the 

l\IORALITY 
Ievd of ethics, it is only formal conscience that is to be found. True 
conscience has been mentioned onlv to indicate its distinction from the 
other and to obviate the possible ~isunderstanding that here, where it 
is only formal conscience that is under consideration, the argument is 
about true conscience. The latter is part of the ethical disposition 
which comes before us for the first time in the following section. 30-
The religious conscience, however, does not belong to this sphere at 
all. [A.] 
138. This subjectivity, qua abstract self-determination and pure 
certainty of oneself alone, as readily evaporates into itself the whole 
determinate character of right, duty, and existence, as it remains 
both the power to judge, to determine from within itself alone, 
what is good in respect of any content, and also the power to which 
the good, at first only an ideal and an ought-to-be, owes its 
actuality. 
The self-consciousness which has attained this absolute reflection into 
itself knows itself in this reflection to be the kind of consciousness 
which is and should be beyond the reach of every existent and given 
specific determination. As one of the commoner features of history 
(e.g. in Socrates,4° the Stoics, and others), the tendency to look deeper 
into oneself and to know and determine from within oneself what is 
right and good appears in ages when what is recognized as right and 
good in contemporary manners cannot satisfy the will of better men. 
When the existing world of freedom has become faithless to the will of 
better men, that will fails to find itself in the duties there recognized and 
must try to find in the ideal world of the inner life alone the harmony 
which actuality has lost. Once self-consciousness has grasped and 
secured its formal right in this way, everything depends on the character 
of the content which it gives to itself. [A.] 
139. Once self-consciousness has reduced all otherwise valid 
duties to emptiness and itself to the sheer inwardness of the will, it 
has become the potentiality of either making the absolutely uni-
versal its principle, or equally ,,·ell of ele,·ating above the universal 
the self-will of private particularity, taking that as its principle and 
realizing it through its actions, i r. 1t has become potentially evil. 
To have a conscience, if conscience is only formal subjectivity, is 
simply to be on the verge of slipping into evil; in independent self-
certainty, with its independence of knowledge and decision, both 
morality and evil have their common root. 
The origin of evil in general is to be found in the mystery of freedom 
(i.e. in the speculative aspect of freedom), the mystery whereby freedom 

L
GOOD Ai\D CONSCIENCE 
93 
of necessity arises out of the natural level of the will and is something 
inward in comparison with that level.4 1 It is this natural level of the 
will which comes into existence as a self-contradiction, as incompatible 
with itself in this opposition, and so it is just this particularity of the will 
which later makes itself evil. That is to say, particularity is always 
duality; here it is the opposition of the natural level and the inwardness 
of the w1ll. In this opposition, the hater is only a relative and abstract 
subjectivity which can draw its content only from the determinate 
content of the natural will, from des1re, impulse, inclination, &c. Now 
it is said of these desires, impulses, &c., that they may be either good or 
evil. But since the w1ll here makes intu a determinant of its content 
both these impulses in this contingent character which they possess as 
natural, and also, therefore, the form which it has at this point, the form 
of particularity itself, it follows that it is set in opposition to the universal 
as inner objectivity, to the good, which comes on the scene as the 
opposite extreme to immediate objectivity, the natural pure and simple, 
as soon as the will is reflected into itself and consciousness is a knozdng 
consciousness. It is in this opposition that this inwardness of the will 
is evil. :\Ian is therefore evil by a conjunction between his natural 
or unde,·eloped character and his reflection into himself; and therefore 
evil belongs neither to nature as such by itself-unless nature were sup-
posed to be the natural character of the'' ill \1 hKh rests m its particular 
content-nor to introverted reflection by itself. i.e. co~nition in general, 
unless this were to maintain itself in that opposition to the universal. 
With th1s facet of evil, its neccsstty, then: IE 1nn It.1hly combined the 
fact that this same evil is condemned to ht: that wlw:h of necessity 
ought not to be, i.e. the fact that evil ought to he annulled. It is not 
that there ought never to he a diremption of an~ ~ort Ir1 the will-on the 
contrary, it is just this level of diremption "h!Ch JI:;tmguishes man 
from the unreasoning animal; the point is that tht.: '' Jll should not rest 
at that level and cling to the particular as if that and not the universal 
were the essential thing; it should overcome the diremption as a nullity. 
Further, as to this necessity of evil, it is subjectivity, as infinite self-
reflection, \\ hich is present in and confronted by this opposition of 
universal and particular; if it rests in this opposition, i e. if it is evil, 
then it is eo ipso independent, regarding itself as isolated, and is itself 
this self-will.4l Therefore if the individual subject as such does evil, 
the evil is purely and simply his own responsibility. [A.] 
140. In every end of a self-conscious subject, there is a positive 
aspect (see Paragraph 135) necessarily present because the end is 
what is purposed in an actual concrete action. This aspect he 
knows how to elicit and emphasize, and he may then proceed to 
regard it as a duty or a fine intention. By so interpreting it, he is 
enabled to pass off his action as good in the eyes both of himself and 

94 
MORALITY 
others, despite the fact that, owing to his reflective character and 
his knowledge of the universal aspect of the will, he is aware of the 
contrast between this aspect and the essentially negative content of 
his action. To impose in this way on others is hypocrisy; while to 
impose on oneself is a stage beyond hypocrisy, a stage at which 
subjectivity claims to be absolute. 4J 
This final, most abstruse, form of evil, whereby evil is perverted into 
good and good into evil, and consciousness, in being aware of its power 
to effect this perversion, is also made aware of itself as absolute, is the 
highwater mark of subjectivity at the level of morality; it is the form 
into which evil has blossomed in our prest>nt epoch, a result due to phi-
losophy, i.e. to a shallowness of thought which has twisted a profound 
concept into this shape and usurped the name of philosophy, just as it 
has arrogated to evil the name of good. 
In this Remark I will indicate briefly the chief forms of this sub-
jectivity which have become current. 
(a) In hypocrisy the following moments are contained: (") know-
ledge of the true universal, whether knowledge in the form merely of 
a feeling for right and duty, or of a deeper cognition and apprehension 
of them; (/3) volition of the particular which conflicts with this universal; 
(y) conscious comparison of both moments (") and ({3), so that the 
conscious subject is aware in willing that his particular volition is evil 
in character. 
These points arc descriptive of acting with a bad conscience; hypo-
crisy proper involves something more. 
At one time great importance was attached to the question whether 
an action was evil only in so far as it was done with a bad consCience, 
i.e. with explicit knowledge of the three moments just specifinl. The 
inference from an affirmative answer is admirably dra\m by Pascal: 
Ils seront taus damnes ces demi-pecheurs, qui ant que/que amour pour Ia 
vertu. 
Aim's pour ces franc-pecheurs, pecheurs endurczs, peclzezm sans 
melange, pleins et achezes, l'enfer ne les tient pas; !Is ont trompe le diah/e 
a force de s'y abandonner.* 
• Lettres pro1 i11cia/es, j,. In the same context, Pascal also quotes Chnst's 
mtercesswn on the Cross for h1s eneml<'S 'Father, forgl\ e them. forth<·~ know 
not what they do'-a superfluous pra\ er 1f the fact that the\· d1d not kno\\ "hat 
they did made the1r act1on lnnoc<'nt and so touk a\\ av the need of forgl\ cness. 
Pascal quotes there too Anstotle's d1stmctwn (Sit. Eth. IIIO h 2-t)'" bet\\ een 
the man who acts oVK £L8rV-; and the one \\ ho acts dyl'DLVv; 1n the forn1er t) pe of 
Ignorance. hts actiOn i<; not freely\\ dleJ (here the arnorance depends on external 
Circum~tances, sec abo\ e, Pnraf.!:raph I 17) and hts act ton 1s not tmrut;Jhk to hm1 
But of the latter .-\nstotle s"' s 'E' ery \\ 1cked man IS Ignorant of" hat he ought to 
do and what he ought to refram from dom<!: and rt IS this k1nd of failure (d1,apTia) 
\\ h1ch makes men unJUSt and m general had .... 
-\n Ignorant choice' het\\een 
good and e\11 '1s the cause not of the act1on's be1ng Imoluntan' (of bemg non-
Imputable) 'but only of 1ts berng \\ 1cked'. Anstotle eYidentl> had a deeper m-

GOOD AND CONSCIENCE 
95 
The subjective right of self-consciousness to know whether an action 
is truly good or evil in character must not he thought of as so colliding 
with the absolute right of the objectivity of this character that the two 
rights are represented as separable, indifferent to one another, and 
related only accidentally. It was such a conception of their relation 
that lay in particular at the root of the old qutstions about efficacious 
grace.4s On its formal side, evil is most peculiarly the individual's own, 
since (a) it is precisely his subjectivity establishing itself purely and 
simply for itself. and for that reason it is purely and simply the in-
dividual's own responsibility (see Paragraph 139 and the Remark there-
to); (b) on his objective side man accords with his concept inasmuch as 
he is mind, in a word a rational entity, and has in his own nature as 
such the character of self-knowing universality. Therefore it means 
failing to treat him with the respect due to his concept if his good side 
is divorced from him, so that the character of his evil action as evil is 
divorced from him too and is not imputed to him as evil. How deter-
minate is the consciousnc>ss of these moments in distinction from one 
another, or to what extent it has developed or failed to develop in clarity 
so as to become a recognition of them, and to what degree an evi! action 
has been done with a conscience more or less downright evil-all these 
questions are the more trivial aspect of the matter, the aspect mainly 
concerned with the empirical. 
(b) Evil and doing evil with a bad conscience, ho\\ever, is not quite 
hypocrisy. Into hypocrisy there enters m addttlon the formal character 
of falsity, first the falsity of holding up cvtl as good m the eyes of others, 
of setting oneself up to all appearance as good, conscientious, pious, 
and so on-conduct which in these circumstances Is only a trick to 
deceive others. Secondly, however, the had man rna\ find in his good 
conduct on other occasions, or in h1s piety, or, m a word, in good 
reasons, a justification in his own eyes for the evil he dues, because he 
can use these reasons to pervert its apparent character from evil into 
good. His ability to do this depends on the subjectinty which, as 
abstract negativity, knows that all determinations are subordinate to 
itself and issue from its own will. 
(c) In this perversion of evil into good we may pnma facie include 
the form of subjectivism known as Probabilism. 46 Its gutding principle 
is that an action is permissible, and may he done with an easy con-
science, provided that the agent can hunt out any single good reason for 
it, be it only the authority of a sin~le theologian, and cn:n if other 
theologians are known by the agent to dissent ever so \\ tdcly from that 
authority. Even in this idea there is still present the correct appre-
hension that authority and a reason based on authority gtns probability 
SIJ:!ht mto the connexwn het\\een knowml( and" 1lhng than has become cnmmon 
m a superficml ph1losophy wh1ch teaches that the oppos1te of knowledge. the 
heart and enthus1asm, are the true pnnc1ples of eth1cal action. 

l\IORALITY 
only, although this is supposed to be enough to produce an easy con-
science; it is granted in Probahi!Jsm that a good reason is inevitably of 
such a character that there may exist along with It ditlcrent reasons at 
least as good. Even here we must recognize a \Tstige of ohjectinty in 
the admission that it is a reason '' hich should he the determining 
factor. But since the discrimination between good and evil is made to 
depend on all those good reasons, including theological authorities too, 
despite the fact that they are so numerous and contradictory, the 
implicatiOn is that it is not this objectivity of the thing, hut subjectivity, 
which has the last \Yord. This means that caprice and self-,vill are 
made the arbiters of good and evil, and the result is that ethics as well 
as religious feeling is undermined. 13ut the fact that it is private sub-
jectivity to \vhich the decision falls is one which Prohabilism does not 
openly avow as its principle; on the contrary, as has already been 
stated, it gives out that it is some reason or other which is decisive, 
and Probahilism IS to that extent still a form of hypocrisy. 
(d) In the stages of subjectivism, the next m ascending order is the 
vie\v that the goodness of the will consists in its willing the good ;4 7 this 
u·illing of the abstract good is supposed to suffice, in fact to be the sole 
requisite, to make its action good. As the \villing of something deter-
minate, action has a content, hut good in the abstract determines 
nothing, and hence it devolves on particular subjectivity to give this 
content its character and constituents. Just as in Prohabilism any-
one" ho is not himself a learned Rcnirend Pere may have the subsump-
tion of a determinate content under the universal predicate 'good' 
effected for him by the sole 48 authonty of one such theologian, so here 
every subject, without any further qualification, is invested with this 
honour of giving a content to good in the abstract, or in other words 
subsuming a content under a universal. This content is only one of the 
many elements in an action as a concrete whole, and the others may 
perhaps entail its description as 'criminal' and 'bad'. That determmate 
content which I, as subject, give to the good, however, is the good 
known to me in the action, i.e. it is my good intention (sel! Paragraph 
I Lf).49 Thus there arises a contradiction between descriptiOns: accord-
ing to one the action is good, according to the other it is criminal. 
Hence also there seems to arise, in connexion with a concrete action, 
the question \\·hether in such circumstances the intention behind it is 
actually good. It may generally be the case that the good is what is 
actually intended; but this in fact must always he the case if it is held 
that good in the abstract is the subject's determining motive. \Vhere 
wrong is done through an action which is well intentioned but in other 
respects criminal and had, the wrong so done must, of course, also he 
good, and the important question \~ould seem to be: which of these 
sides of the action is really the essential ore' This objective question, 
however, is here out of place, or rather it is the subjective consciousness 

GOOD AND CONSCIENCE 
97 
alone \\hose decision constitutes objectivity at this point. Besides, 
'essential' ami 'good' mean the same thing; one is just as much an 
abstraction as the other. Good is that which is essential in respect of 
the will; and the essential in this respect should he precisely this, that 
my actwn he characterized as good in my eyes. But the subsumption 
under the good of any content one pleases is the direct and explicit 
result of the fact that this abstract good is totally devoid of content and 
so is simply reduced to meaning anything positive, i.e. to something 
which is valid from some single pomt of view and which in its immediate 
character may even he valid as an essential end, as for example to do 
good to the poor, to take thought for myself, my life, my family, and 
so forth. Further, just as the good is the abstract, so the bad too must 
be without content and derive its specification from my subjectivity; 
and it is in this way also that there arises the moral end of hating and 
uprooting the had, the nature of the bad being left unspecified. 
Theft, cowardice, murder, and so forth, as actions, i.e. as achieve-
ments of a subjective will, have the immediate character of being 
satisfactions of such a will and therefore of being something positive. 
In order to make the action a good one, it is only a question of recogniz-
ing this positive aspect of the action as my intention, and this then 
becomes the essential aspect in virtue of which the action is made good, 
simply because I recognize it as the good in my intention. Theft in 
order to do good to the poor, theft or flight from battle for the sake of 
fulfilling one's duty to care for one's life or one's family (a poor family 
perhaps into the bargain), murder out of hate or revenge (i.e. in order 
to satisfy one's sense of one's own ri,ghts or of right in general, or one's 
sense of another's wickedness, of wrong done by him to oneself or to 
others or to the world or the nation at large, hy cxttrpatmg this wicked 
individual who is wickedness incarnate, and thcrchv contributing at 
least one's quota to the project of uprooting the bad)-all these actions 
are made wc11 intentioned and therefore good by this method of taking 
account of the positive aspect of their content. Only the bare minimum 
of inte11igence is required to discover in any action, as those learned 
theologians can, a positive side and so a good reason for it and a good 
intention behind it. Hence it has been said that in the strict sense there 
are no wicked men, since no one wills evil for the sake of evil, i.e. no 
one wills a pure negative as such. On the contrary, everyone always 
wills something positive, and therefore, on the view we are considering, 
something good. In this abstract good the distinction between good 
and evil has vanished trJgether with al1 concrete duties; for this reason, 
simply to will the good and to have a good intention in acting is more 
like evil than good, because the good willed is only this abstract form 
of good and therefore to make it concrete devolves on the arbitrary 
will of the subject. 
To this context there also belongs the notorious maxim: 'The end 

MORALITY 
justifies the means.' In itself and prima facie this expression is trivial 
and pointless. Quite so, one may retort in terms equally general, a just 
end of course justifies the means, while an unjust end does not. The 
phrase :so 'If the end is right, so is the means' is a tautology, since the 
means is precisely that which is nothing in itself but is for the sake of 
something else, and therein, i.e. in the end, has its purpose and worth-
provided of course it be truly a means. 
But when someone says that the end justifies the means, his purport 
is not confined to this bare tautology; he understands by the words 
something more specific, namely that to use as means to a good end 
something which in itself is simply not a means at all, to violate some-
thing in itself sacrosanct, in short to commit a crime as a means to a good 
end, is permissible and even one's bounden duty. (i) There floats be-
fore the minds of those who say that the end justifies the means a vague 
consciousness of the dialectic of the aforesaid 'positive' element in 
isolated legal or ethical principles, or of such equally vague general 
ma"Xims as: 'Thou shalt not kill', or 'Thou shalt tak~ thought for thy 
welfare and the welfare of thy family'. Executioners and soldiers have 
not merely the right but the duty to kill men, though there it has been 
precisely laid down what kind of men and what circumstances make the 
killing permissible and obligatory. So also my welfare and the welfare 
of my family must be subordinated to higher ends and so reduced to 
means to their attainment. (ii) And yet what bears the mark of crime is 
not a general maxim of that kind, left vague and still subject to a dia-
lectic; on the contrary, its specific character is already objectively fixed. 
Now what is set up against such a determinate crime, what is supposed 
to have deprived the crime of its criminal nature, is the justifying end, 
and this is simply subjective opinion about what is good and better. 
What happens here is the same as \\hat happens when the will stops at 
willing good in the abstract, i.e. the absolute and valid determinate 
character assigned to good and evil, right and wrong, is entirely swept 
away and the determination of them is ascribed instead to the in-
dividual's feeling, imagination, and caprice. 
(e)s' Subjective opinion is at last expressly given out as the measur-
ing-rod of right and duty and it is supposed that the conviction which 
holds something to be right is to decide the ethical character of an 
action. Since the good we will to do is here still without content, the 
principle of conviction only adds the information that the suhsumption 
of an action under the category of good is purely a personal matter. If 
this be so, the very pretence of an ethical objectivity has totally dis-
appeared. A doctrine like this is directly connected with the self-
styled philosophy, often mentioned already, which denies that the 
truth is knowable-and the truth of mind qua will, the rationality of 
mind in its self-actualizing process, is the laws of ethics. Asserting, as 
such philosophizing does, that the knowledge of the true is an empty 

GOOD AND CONSCIENCE 
99 
vanity, transcending the territory of science (which is supposed to be 
mere appearance), it must in the matter of action at once find its 
principle also in the apparent; thereby ethics is reduced to the special 
theory of life held by the individual and to his private conviction. The 
degradation into which philosophy has thus sunk appears doubtless 
at a first glance to be only an affair of supreme indifference, an 
occurrence confined to the trivial field of academic futilities; but the 
view necessarily makes itself a home in ethics, an essential part of 
philosophy; and it is then that the true meaning of these theories makes 
its first appearance in and is apprehended by the world of actuality. 
The result of the dissemination of the view that subjective conviction, 
and it alone, decides the ethical character of an action is that the charge 
of hypocrisy, once so frequent, is now rarely heard; you can only qualify 
wickedness as hypocrisy on the assumption that certain actions are 
inherently and actually misdeeds, vices, and crimes, and that the 
defaulter is necessarily aware of them as such, because he is aware of 
and recognizes the principles and outward acts of piety and honesty 
even in the pretence to which he misapplies them. In other words, it 
was generally assumed as regards evil that it is a duty to know the good 
and to be aware of its distinction from evil. In any case, however, it 
was an absolute injunction which forbade the commission of vicious 
and criminal actions and which insisted on such actions being imputed 
to the agent, so far as he was a man and not a beast. But if a good 
heart, a good intention, a subjective conviction arc set forth as the 
sources from which conduct derives its worth, then there is no longer 
any hypocrisy or immorality at all; for whatever a man does, he can 
always justify by the reflection on it of good intentions and motives, and 
by the influence of that conviction it is good.* Thus there is no longer 
anything absolutely vicious or criminal; and instead of the above-
mentioned sJ frank and free, hardened and unperturbed sinner, we 
have the man who is conscious of being fully justified by intention and 
conviction. l\'Iy good intention in my action and my conviction of its 
goodness make it good. \V e speak of judging and estimating an action; 
but on this principle it is only the intention and conviction of the 
agent, his faith, by which he ought to be judged. Not, however, his 
" 'That he feels completelv com·inced I have not the least doubt. But how 
many men are led by such feelings of conviCtiOn mto the worst of misdeeds! Be-
sides, if everythinf( may be excused on this ground, then that terminates the 
rational judgement of good and wicked, honourable and shameful, resolutwns. 
Lunacy m that case would have equal nghts With reason; or m other words 
reason would have no nghts whatever, Its judgement would cease to have any 
validity. Its VOICe \\ould be a mmus quantity; truth would be the possesswn of 
the man with no doubts 1 I tremble at the results of such toleratiOn, for it would 
be exclusl\·ely to the ad,·antage of unreason.' (F. H. Jacobi to Count Holmer, on 
Count Stolberg's change of faith, Eutm, August sth, I 8oo. Brennus, Berlm, 
August I Boz.)'" 

180 
MORALITY 
faith in the sense in which Christ requires faith in objective truth, so 
that on one who has a false faith, i.e. a conviction had in its content, 
the judgement to he pronounced must be a condemnation, i.e. one in 
conformity with this content. On the contrary, faith here means 
fidelity to conviction, and the question to he asked ahout action is: 
'Has the agent in his acting kept true to his conviction?' Fidelity to 
formal subjective conviction is thus made the sole measuring-rod of 
duty. 
This principle, under which conviction is expressly made something 
subjective, cannot but thrust upon us the thought of possible error, 
with the further implied presupposition of an absolute la\v. But the 
law is no agent; it is only the actual human being who acts. And, on 
the aforesaid principle, the only question, in estimating the worth of 
human actions, is how far he has taken up the law into h1s conviction. 
But if on this theory it is not actions which are to be judged, i.e. measured 
generally, by that law, it is impossible to see what the law is for and 
what end it is to serve. Such a law is degraded to a mere external 
letter, in fact to an empty word, if it IS only my conviction which makes 
it a law and invests it with obligatory force. 
Such a law may claim its authority from God or the state. It may 
even have behind it the authority of tens of centuries during which it 
was the bond which gave men, with all their deeds and destiny, coherence 
and subsistence. And these are authorities which enshrine the com·ic-
tions of countless individuals. Now if I set against these the authority 
of my single conviction-for as my subjective conviction its sole 
validity is authority-that at first seems a piece of monstrous self-
conceit, but in virtue of the principle that subjective conviction is to 
be the measuring-rod, it is pronounced not to he scli-conceit at all. 
Even if reason and conscience-which shallO\\ science and had 
sophistry can never altogether expel-admit \Vith a noble illogicality 
that error is possible, still by describing crime, and evil generally, as 
only an error, we minimize the fault. To err is human-who has not 
been mistaken on one point or another, whether he had fresh or pickled 
cabbage for dinner yesterday, and about innumerable other things of 
more or less importance? But the difference between importance and 
triviality nnishes if everything turns on the subjectivity of conviction 
and on persistence in it. The said noble illogicality \\·hich admits the 
possibility of error is inevitable then in the nature of the case, but when 
it comes round to say that a wrong conviction is only an error, it only 
falls into a further tllogicality, the illogicality of dishonesty. At one 
moment conv1ctwn is made the hasis of ethics and of man's supreme 
value, and is thus pronounced the supreme and the sacrosanct; at 
another, all we have to do with is error, and my conviction is something 
trivial and casual, in fact something strictly external, which may turn 
out this way or that. Really, my being convinced is something supremely 

GOOD AND CONSCIENCE 
IOI 
trivial if I cannot know the truth; for then it is a matter of indifference 
how I think, and all that is left to my thinking is that empty good, the 
abstraction to wh1ch the Understanding reduces the good. 
One other point. It follows further, on this principle of justification 
by conviction, that logic requires me, in dealing with the way others 
act against my action, to admit that they are quite in the right-so far 
at any rate as they maintain with faith and conviction that my action 
is criminal. On such logic, not merely do I gain nothing, I am even 
deposed from the post of liberty and honour into a situation of slavery 
and dishonour. Justice, which in the abstract is mine as well as theirs, 
I feel only as a foreign subjective conviction, and when it is executed 
on me, I fancy myself to be treated only by an external force. 
(/) Finally, the supreme form in which this subjectivism is com-
pletely comprised and expressed is the phenomenon which has been 
called by a name borrowed from Plato-'Irony'. The name alone, 
however, is taken from Plato; he used it to describe a way of speaking 
\\ ll!ch Socrates employed in conversation when defending the Idea of 
truth and justice against the conceit of the Sophists and the uneducated. 54 
\\'hat he treated ironically, however, was only their type of mind, not 
the Idea itself. Irony is only a manner of talking against people. Except 
as directed against persons, the essential movement of thought is 
dialectic, and Plato was so far from regardmg the dialectical in itself, 
still less irony, as the last \\ord in thought and a substitute for the 
Idea, that he terminated the flux and reflux of thmk1ng, let alone of 
a subjective opinion, and submerged;; 1t l!1 the substantiality of the 
Idea.* 
• ;\j,· colleague, the late Professor Solger,l'' adnpted the \\ord '1rony' \\hich 
Fnednch \On Schlegel brought mt>J use at a cump.lr.lt1\> l' t·arl\' penod of his 
literary career and enhanced to C'ljUI\ alence "1th the ,.J,,I pm;c·tplc of subjecti' 1ty 
knO\\ 1ng Hself as supn"n1c. Uut Solger's finer mtnU \\as .. il•( '1 t' -;uch an exaggera-
tiOn; he had philosophic mstght and so se1zcJ upon. emphasized, anJ retamed 
only that part of Schlegel's \lew wh1ch was dialectiC 111 the stnct sense, i.e. 
dialectiC as the pulsatmg drl\ e of speculatl\ e mquiry. Ills L1.'t publicatiOn, a 
solid p1ece of \\Ork, a thorough Kntik uber die 
~·ar/esungC/l dn llom .,..Jugust 
U"r/he/m iOn Scltlege/ uber dramat!Slhe Kunst und Literatur (\\",cncr Jahrbuch. 
\OI. \II, pp. lJO ff). I find somewhat obscure, howe,er, and I c.mnot a~ree with 
the argument whiCh he Je,elops 'True Irom·', he 'a\S lp ')21, ai!SCS from the 
\ 1ew that so lung as man II\ es Ill this present \\orld, 1t IS onJ, m thts \\ orld that he 
can fultll hts "appointed task" no matter ho\\· elnated a sense \\e gl\e to this 
expressiOn 
An\' hope v.c may ha\ L' of transcending fin1te end, IS foolish and 
emptv concctt. E\·cn the highest 1s existent fur our conduct nnh 111 a shape that 
IS limited and finite ' R1ghtl 0 understood, this IS Platomc doctnne, and a true 
remark 111 rejeCtion of\\ hat he has referred to earlier, the empt: stnvmg towards 
the (abstract) mfimte. But to say that the highest 1s u.1stcnt 111 a limited and 
finite shape, ld;e the ethical order (and that order IS 111 essence actual life and 
actwn), is Hr) different f10m sa) tng that the highest thmg IS a fimte end. The 
outward shape, the form of timtuJe, 111 no\\ a\· depn' cs the content of ethical life 
of 1ts substantiality and the intimty mhercnt \\ 1thm It. Solger contmues. 'And 
JUSt for this reason the highest IS m us as negligible as the lowest and penshes of 

102 
MORALITY 
The culminating form of this subjectivity which conceives itself as 
the final court of appeal-our topic here-can be nothing except what 
was implicitly present already m its preceding forms, namely sub-
jectivity knowing itself as the arbiter and judge of truth, right, and 
duty. It consists then in this, that it knows the objective ethical prin-
ciples, but fails in self-forgetfulness and self-renunciation to immerse 
itself in their seriousness and to base action upon them. Although 
related to them, it holds itself aloof from them and knows itself as that 
which wills and decides thus, although it may equally well will and 
decide othcnvise. You actually accept a law, 1t says, and respect it as 
absolute. So do I, but I go further than you, because I am beyond this 
law and can make it to suit myself. It is not the thing that is excellent, 
but I who am so; as the master of law and thing alike, I simply play 
with them as with my caprice; my consciously ironical attitude lets the 
highest perish and I merely hug myself at the thought. This type of 
subjectivism not merely substitutes a void for the whole content of 
necess1ty w1th us and our nugatory thoughts and feelmgs. The highest is truly 
ex1stent m God alone, and as 1t penshes m us 1t 1s transfigured mto something 
d1vme, a d1Vm1ty m which we would have had no share but for 1ts Immediate 
presence re,ealed m the \ ery disappearance of our actuality; now the mood to 
which this process d1rectly comes home in human affa1rs IS tragic irony.' The 
arbitrary name 'irony' would be of no 1mportance, but there IS an obscurity here 
when 1t is sa1d that 1t IS 'the highest' which penshes w1th our nothingness and 
that 1t 1s m the dtsappearance of our actuality that the di,·ine is first revealed; e.g. 
again (ibid., p. 91)· '\\'e see heroes begmnmg to wonder whether they have erred 
in the noblest and finest elements of the1r feelings and sentiments, not only m 
regard to thetr successfultssue, but also to the1r source and the1r "orth; indeed, 
what ele\ates us IS the de3truct1on of the best itself.' (The just destructiOn of 
utter scoundrels and cnmmals \\ho flaunt thetr villamy-the hero of a modern 
tragedy, Die Schuld, 57 ts one-has an mterest for crimmallaw, but none at all for 
art proper \\htch IS what 1s tn quest1on here.) The tragi< destructiOn of figures 
whose ethical life 1s on the highest plane can mterest and ele,·ate us and reconcile 
us to its occurrence only m so far as they come on the scene m opposition to one 
another together w1th equally justified but different ethical po\\ers which h.-e 
come into colhs10n through misfortune, because the result is that then these 
figures acquue gutlt through theu opposmon to an ethtcal law. Out of th1s 
situation there anses the nght and "rong of both parttes and therefore the true 
ethical Idea, which, punfied and m tnumph O\ er thts one-sidedness, is thereby 
reconciled in us. Accordmgly, It ts not the highest m us wh1ch penshes; \\e are 
elevated not by the destructiOn of the best but by the tnumph of the true. This 
1t is which constitutes the true, purely ethical, Interest of anctent tragedy (in 
romantic tragedy the character of the mterest undergoes a certam mod1ficat10n).'8 
All this I h.--e worked out m detatl m my Phenomenology of .\lind (1st edn , pp. 
404 ff. Cf. pp. 683 ff. [Eng. tr. PP- 484 ff. Cf. pp. i36 ff.]). But the eth1cal Idea 
is actual and present 111 the world of soc1al mst1tut10ns w1thout the misfortune of 
tragtc clashes and the destructiOn of mdtviduals overcome by th1s mtsfortune. 
And this Idea's (the highest's) re\elat1on of ttseli m 1ts actualtty as anything but 
a nullity 1s what the external embodunent of ethtcal life, the state, purposes and 
effects, and what the ethical self-consciOusness possesses, mtutts, and kno\\s m 
the state and what the thinking mmd comprehends there. 

GOOD AND CONSCIENCE 
103 
ethics, right, duties, and laws-and so is evil, in fact evil through and 
through and universally-but in addition its form is a subjective void, 
i.e. it knows itself as this contentless void and in this knowledge knows 
itself as absolute. 
In my Phenomenology of Mind/' I have shown how this absolute self-
complacency fails to rest in a solitary worship of itself but builds up 
a sort of community whose bond and substance is, e.g., the 'mutual 
asseveration of conscientiousness and good intentions, the enjoyment 
of this mutual purity', but is above all 'the refreshment derived from 
the glory of this self-knowledge and self-expression, from the glory of 
fostering and cherishing this experience'. I have shown also huw what 
has been calleds9 a 'beautiful soul'-that still nobler type of sub-
jectivism which empties the objective of all content and so fades away 
until it loses all actuality-is a variation of subjectivism like other 
forms of the same phenomenon akin to the series of them here con-
sidered. What is said here may be compared with the entire section 
(C), 'Conscience', in the Phenomenology, especially the part dealing 
with the transition to a higher stage-a stage, however, there different 
in character.6o [A.] 
Transition from Morality to Ethical Life 
141. For the good as the substantial universal of freedom, but 
as something still abstract, there are therefore required determinate 
characteristics of some sort and the principle for determining them, 
though a principle identical with the good itself. For conscience 
similarly, as the purely abstract principle of determination, it is 
required that its decisions shall be universal and ohJeCtive. If good 
and conscience are each kept abstract and therelw elevated to in-
dependent totalities, then both become the indeterminate which 
ought to be determined.-But the integration of these two relative 
totalities into an absolute identity has already been implicitly 
achieved in that this very subjectivity of pure self-certainty, aware 
in its vacuity of its gradual evaporation, is identical with the abstract 
univer:>ality of the good. The identity of the good with the sub-
jective will, an identity which therefore is concrete and the truth of 
them both, is Ethical Life. 
The details of such a transition of the concept are made intelligible 
in logic. Here, however, it need only be said that it is the nature of the 
restricted and the finite (i.e. here the abstract good \Vhich only ought to 
be [but is not], and the equally abstract subjectivity which only ought 
to be good [but is not]) to have its opposite implicit within it, the bood 
• (1st cdn.] pp. 6o5 ff. [Eng. tr. pp. 663 ff.]. 

MORALITY 
its actuality, and subjectivity (the moment in which ethical life is 
actual) the good; but since they are one-sided they are not yet posited 
in accordance with their implicit nature. They become so posited in 
their negation. That is to say, in their onc-sidedness, when each is 
bent on declining to have in it what is in it implicitly-when the good 
is without subjectivity and a determinate character, and the determining 
principle, subjectivity, is without what is implicit within it-and when 
both build themselves into independent totalities, they are annulled and 
thereby reduced to moments, to moments of the concept which be-
comes manifest as their unity and, having acquired reality precisely 
through this positing of its moments, is now present as Idea-as the 
concept which has matured its determinations to reality and at the 
same time is present in their identity as their implicit essence. 
The embodiment of freedom which was (a) first of all immediate 
as right, is ({3) characterized in the reflection of self-consciousness as 
good. (y) The third stage, originating here, in its transition from ({3) to 
ethical life, as the truth of good and subjectivity, is therefore the truth 
both of subjectivity and right. Ethical life is a suhjective disposition, 
but one imbued with what is inherently right. The fact that this Idea 
is the truth of the concept of freedom is something which, in philosophy, 
must be proved, not presupposed, not adopted from feeling or else-
where. This demonstration is contained only in the fact that right and 
the moral self-consciousness both display in themselves their regression 
to this Idea as their outcome.6 1 Those who hope to be able to dispense 
with proof and demonstration in philosophy show thereby that they 
are still far from knowing the first thing about what philosophy is. On 
other topics argue they may, but in philosophy they have no right to 
join in the argument if they wish to argue without the concept. [A.] 

THIRD PART 
ETHICAL LIFE 
142. Ethical life is the Idea of freedom in that on the one hand 
it is the good become alive-the good endowed in self-conscious-
ness with knowing and willing and actualized by self-conscious 
action-while on the other hand self-consciousness has in the 
ethical realm its absolute foundation and the end which actuates 
its effort.' Thus ethical life is the concept of freedom developed 
into the existing world and the nature of self-consciousness. 
143. Since this unity of the concept of the will with its embodi-
ment-i.e. the particular will-is knowing, consciousness of the 
distinction between these two moments of the Idea is present, but 
present in such a way that now each of these moments is in its own 
eyes the totality of the Idea and has that totality as its foundation 
and content. 2 
144. (:x) The objective ethical order, which comes on the scene 
in place of good in the abstract, is substance made concrete by sub-
jectivity as infinite form.J Hence it posits within itself distinctions 
whose specific character is thereby determined by the concept,4 
and which endow the ethical order \\ith a stable content indepen-
dently necessary and subsistent in exaltation above subjective 
opinion and caprice. These distinctions are absolutdy valid laws 
and institutions. [A.] 
145. It is the fact that the ethical order is the system of these 
specific determinations of the Idea which constitutes its ration-
ality. Hence the ethical order is freedom or the absolute will as 
what is objective, a circle of necessity whose moments are the 
ethical powers which regulate the life of individuals. To these 
powers individuals are related as accidents t::> substance, and it is in 
individuals that these powers are represented, have the shape of 
appearance, and become actualized.s [A.] 
146. ({3) The substantial order, in the self-consciousness which 
it has thus actually attained in individuals, knows itself and so is an 
object of knowledge. This ethical substance and its laws and 
powers are on the one hand an object over against the subject, and 
from his point of view they are-'are' in the highest sense of sdf-

106 
ETHICAL LIFE 
subsistent being. This is an absolute authority and power infinitely 
more firmly established than the being of nature.6 
The sun, the moon, mountains, rivers, and the natural objects of all 
kinds by which we are surrounded, are. For consciousness they have the 
authority not only of mere being but also of possessing a particular 
nature which it accepts and to which it adjusts itself in dealing with them, 
using them, or in being otherwise concerned with them. The authority 
of ethical laws is infinitely higher, because natural objects conceal 
rationality under the cloak of contingency and exhibit it only in their 
utterly external and disconnected way. 
147. On the other hand, they are not something alien to the 
subject. On the contrary, his spirit bears witness to them as to its 
own essence, the essence in which he has a feeling of his selfhood, 
and in which he lives as in his own element which is not distin-
guished from himself. The subject is thus directly linked to the 
ethical order by a relation which is more like an identity than even 
the relation of faith or trust. 
Faith and trust emerge along with reflection; they presuppose the 
power of forming ideas and making distinctions. For example, it is one 
thing to be a pagan, a different thing to believe in a pagan religion. This 
relation or rather this absence of relation, this identity in which the 
ethical order is the actual living soul of self-consciousness, can no doubt 
pass over into a relation of faith and conviction and into a relation pro-
duced by means of further reflection, i.e. into an insight due to reasoning 
starting perhaps from some particular purposes interests, and considera-
tions, from fear or hope, or from historical conditions. But adequate 
knowledge of this identity depends on thinking in terms of the concept. 
148. As substantive in character, these laws and institutions 
are duties binding on the will of the individual, because as sub-
jective, as inherently undetermined, or determined as particular, 
he distinguishes himself from them and hence stands related to 
them as to the substance of his own being. 
The 'doctrine of duties' in moral philosophy (I mean the objective 
doctrine, not that which is supposed to be contained in the empty prin-
ciple of moral subjectivity, because that principle determines nothing-
see Paragraph I3+) is therefore comprised in the systematic development 
of the circle of ethical necesslty7 which follows in this Third Part. The 
difference between the exposition in this book and the form of a 'doctrine 
of dutics' 8 lies solely in the fact that, in what follows, the specific types 
of ethical life turn up as necessary relationships; there the expositiOn 
ends, without being supplemented in each case hy the addition th:J.t 
'therefore men have a duty to conform to this institution'. 

ETHICAL LIFE 
107 
A 'doctrine of duties' which is other than a philosophical science takes 
its matenal from existing relationships and shows its connexion with the 
moralist's personal notions or with principles and thoughts, purposes, 
impulses, feelings, &c., that are forthcoming everywhere; and as reasons 
for accepting each duty in turn, it may tack on its further consequences 
in their bearing on the other ethical relationships or on welfare and 
opinion. But an immanent and logical 'doctrine of duties' can be nothing 
except the serial exposition of the relationships which are necessitated 
by the Idea of freedom and arc therefore actual in their entirety, to wit 
in the state. 
149. The bond of duty can appear as a restriction only on 
indeterminate subjectivity or abstract freedom, and on the impulses 
either of the natural will or of the moral will which determines its 
indeterminate good arbitrarily. The truth is, however, that in duty 
the individual finds his liberation; first,liberation from dependence 
on mere natural impulse and from the depression which as a par-
ticular subject he cannot escape in his moral reflections on what 
ought to be and what might be; secondly, liberation from the 
indeterminate subjectivity which, never reaching reality or the 
objective determinacy of action, remains self-enclosed and devoid 
of actuality. In duty the individual acquires his substantive 
freedom. [A.] 
150. Yirtue 1s the ethical order reflected in the individual 
character so far as that character is determined by its natural 
endowment. When virtue displays itself solely as the individual's 
simple conformity with the duties of the station to which he 
belongs, it is rcctitude.9 
In an ethical community, it is easy to say what man must do, what are 
the duties he has to fulfil in order to be virtuous: he has s1mply to follow 
the well-known and explicit rules of his own situation. Rectitude is the 
general character which may be demanded of him by law or custom. 
But from the standpoint of morality, rectitude often seems to be some-
thing comparatively inferior, something beyond which still higher 
demands must be made on oneself and others, because the craving to be 
something special is not satisfied \\ith what is absolute and universal; it 
finds consciousness of peculiarity only in what is exceptwnal. 
The various facets of rectitude may equally well be called virtues, 
since they are also properties of the individual, although not specially 
of him in contrast with others. Talk about virtue, however, readily 
borders on empty rhetoric, because it is only about something abstract 
and indeterminate; and furthermore, argumentative and expository talk 
of the sort is addressed to the individual as to a being of caprice and 

xoS 
ETHICAL LIFE 
subjective inclination. In an existing ethical order in which a complete 
system of ethical relations has been developed and actualized, virtue in 
the strict sense of the word is in place and actually appears only in 
exceptional circumstances or when one obligatwn clashes with another. 
The clash, however, must be a genuine one, because moral reflection 
can manufacture clashes of all sorts to suit its purpose and give itself 
a consciousness of being something special and having. made sacrifices. 
It is for this reason that the phenomenon of virtue proper is commoner 
when societies and communities are uncivilized, since in those circum-
stances ethical conditions and their actualization are more a matter of 
private chmce or the natural genius of an exceptional individual. For 
instance, it was especially to Hercules that the ancients ascribed virtue.'" 
In the states of antiquity, ethical life had not grown into this free system 
of an objective order sclf-suhsistently developed, and consequently it 
was by the personal genius of individuals that this defect had to he made 
good. It follows that if a 'doctrine of virtues' is not a mere 'doctrine of 
duties', and if therefore it embraces the particular facet of character, 
the facet grounded in natural endowment, it will be a natural history of 
mind. 11 
Since virtues are ethical principles applied to the particular, and since 
in this their subjective aspect they arc something indeterminate, there 
turns up here for determining them the quantitati\·e principle of more or 
less. The result is that consideration of them introduces their corre-
sponding defects or vices, as in Aristotle, who defined each particular 
virtue as strictly a mean between an excess and a dcficiency.IZ 
The content which assumes the form of duties and then virtues is the 
same as that which also has the form of impulses (see Remark to Para-
graph 19). Impulses have the same basic content as duties and virtues, 
but in impulses this content still belongs to the immediate will and to 
instinctive feeling; it has not been developed to the point of becoming 
ethical. Consequently, impulses have in common with the content of 
duties and virtues only the abstract object on which they are directed, 
an object indeterminate in itself, and so devoid of anything to discriminate 
them as good or evil.IJ Or in other words, impulses, considered ab-
stractly in their positive aspect alone, are good, while, considered 
abstractly in their negative aspect alone, they are evil (see Paragraph x8). 
[A.] 
151. But when individuals are s1mply identified with the actual 
order, ethical life (das Sittliclze) appears as their general mode of 
conduct, i.e. as custom'' (Sitte), while the habitual practice of ethi-
cal living appears as a second nature which, put in the place of 
the initial, purely natural will, is the soul of custom permeating it 
through and through, the significance and the actuality of its 

ETHICAL LIFE 
109 
existence. It is mind living and present as a world, and the sub-
stance of mind thus exists now for the first time as mind. [A.] 
152. In this way the ethical substantial order has attained its 
right, and its right its validity. That is to say, the self-will of the 
individual has vanished together with his private conscience which 
had claimed independence and opposed itself to the ethical sub-
stance. For, when his character is ethical, he recognizes as the end 
which moves him to act the universal which IS itself unmoved but 
is disclosed in its specific determinations as rationality actualized. 
He knows that his own dignity and the whole stability of his par-
ticular ends are grounded in this same universal, and it is therein 
that he actually attains these. Subjectivity is itself the absolute 
form and existent actuality of the substantial order, and the dis-
tinction between subject on the one hand and substance on the 
other, as the object, end, and controlling power of the subject, is 
the same ag, and has vanished directly along with, the distinction 
between them in form. 
Subjectivity is the ground wherein the concept of freedom is realized 
(see Paragraph 106). At the level of morahty, ollhJectinty is still distinct 
from freedom, the concept of subjectn·1ty; but at the level of ethical life 
it is the realization of the com:ept m a way adequate to the concept 
itself. 
153. The right of individuals to be subjectively destined to 
freedom is fulfilled when they belong to an actual ethical order, 
because their conviction of their freedom finds Jb truth in such an 
objecti\·e order, and it is in an ethical order that the:- are actually in 
possession of their own essence or the1r own inner universality 
(see Paragraph qj). 
When a father inquired about the best method of educating his son 
in ethical conduct, a Pythagorean replied: ':\lake him a c1tizen of a state 
with good laws.' (The phrase has also been attributed to others.15) [A.] 
154. The right of individuals to their particular satisfaction is 
also contained in the ethical substantial order, since particularity 
is the outward appearance of the ethical order-a mode m which 
that order is existent.'6 
155. Hence in this identity of the universal will with the par-
ticular will, right and duty coalesce, and by being in the ethical 
order a man has rights in so far as he has duties, and duties in so 
far as he has rights. In the sphere of abstract right, I have the right 

110 
ETHICAL LIFE. 
and another has the corresponding duty. In the moral sphere, the 
right of my private judgement and \\·ill, as well as of my happiness, 
has not, but only ought to have, coalesced with duties and become 
objective. [A.) 
156. The ethical substance, as containing independent self-
consciousness united with its concept, is the actual mind of a 
family and a nation. [A.) 
157. The concept of this Idea has being only as mind, as some-
thing knowing itself and actual, because it is the objectification of 
itself, the movement running through the form of its moments. 17 
It is therefore 
(A) ethical mind in its natural or immediate phase-the Family. 
This substantiality loses its unity, passes over into division, 
and into the phase of relation, i.e. into 
(B) Civil Society-an association of members as self-subsistent 
individuals in a universality which, because of their self-
subsistence, is only abstract. Their association is brought 
about by their needs, by the legal system-the means to 
security of person and property-and by an external organi-
zation for attaining their particular and common interests. 
This external state 
(C) is brought back 1B to and welded into unity in the Constitution 
of the State which is the end and actuality of both the sub-
stantial universal order and the public life devoted thereto. 
SUB-SECTION I 
THE FAMILY 
158. The family, as the immediate substantiality of mind, is 
specifically characterized by love, which is mind's feeling of its 
own unity. Hence in a family, one's frame of mind is to have self-
consciousness of one's individuality within this unity as the abso-
lute essence of oneself, with the result that one is in it not as an 
independent person but as a member. [A.) 
159. The right which the individual enjoys on the strength of 
the family unity and which is in the first place simply the indi-
vidual's life within this unity, takes on the form of right (as the 
abstract moment of determinate individuality) only when the 
family begins to dissolve. At that point those who should be 

THE FAMILY 
III 
family-members both in their inclination and in actuality begin to 
be self-subsistent persons, and whereas they formerly constituted 
one specific moment within the whole, they now receive their share 
separately and so only in an external fashion by way of money, 
food, educational expenses, and the like. [A.] 
160. The family is completed in these three phases: 
(a) Marriage, the form assumed by the concept of the family in 
its immediate phase; 
(b) Family Property and Capital (the external embodiment of 
the concept) and attention to these; 
(c) The Education of Children and the Dissolution of the Family. 
A. Marriage 
161. Marriage, as the immediate type of ethical relationship, 
contains first, the moment of physical life; and since marriage is 
a substantial tie, the life involved in it is life in its totality, i.e. as 
the actuality of the race and its life-process.* But, secondly, in 
self-consciousness the natural sexual union-a union purely in-
ward or implicit and for that very reason existent as purely external 
-is changed into a union on the level of mind, into self-conscious 
love.I9 [A.] 
162. On the subjective side, marriage may have a more obvious 
source in the particular inclination of the two persons who are 
entering upon the marriage tie, or in the foresight and contrivance 
of the parents, and so forth. But its objective source lies in the free 
consent of the persons, especially in their consent to make them-
selves one person, to renounce their natural and individual per-
sonality to this unity of one with the other. From this point of 
view, their union is a self-restriction, but in fact it is their libera-
tion, because in it they attain their substantive self-consciousness. 
Our objectively appointed end and so our ethical duty is to enter the 
married state. The external origin of any particular marriage is in the 
nature of the case contingent, and it depends principally on the extent 
to which reflective thought has been developed. At one extreme, the 
first step is that the marriage is arranged by the contrivance of benevo-
lent parents; the appointed end of the parties is a union of mutual love, 
and their inclination to marry arises from the fact that each grows 
acquainted with the other from the first as a destined partner. At the 
other extreme, it is the inclination of the parties which comes first, 
• Cf. Enc. [1st edn.], §§ 167 ff. and§§ 288 ff. [3rd edn. §§ 220 ff. and§§ 366 ff.]. 

112 
ETHICAL LIFE 
appearing in them as these two infinitely panicularized individuals. The 
more ethical way to matrimony may be taken to be the former extreme 
or any way at all whereby the decision to marry comes first and the 
inclination to do so follows, so that in the actual wedding both decision 
and inclination coalesce. In the latter extreme, it is the uniq,1eness of 
the infinitely particularized which makes good its claims in accordance 
with the subjective principle of the modern world (see Remark to Para-
graph 124). 
But those works of modern art, dramatic and other, in which the love 
of the sexes is the main interest, are pervaded by a chill despite the heat 
of passion they portray, for they associate the passion with accident 
throughout and represent the entire dramatic interest as if it rested solely 
on the characters as these indi~·iduals; what rests on them may indeed be 
of infinite importance to them, hut is of none whatever in itself.20 [A.] 
163. The ethical aspect of marriage consists in the parties' con-
sciousness of this unity as their substantive aim, and so in their 
love, trust, and common sharing of their entire existence as indi-
viduals. When the parties are in this frame of mind and their 
union is actual, their physical passion sinks to the level of a physical 
moment, destined to vanish in its very satisfaction. On the other 
hand, the spiritual bond of union secures its rights as the substance 
of marriage and thus rises, inherently indissoluble, to a plane above 
the contingency of passion and the transience of particular caprice. 
It was noted above (in Paragraph 75) that marriage, so far as its 
essential basis is concerned, is not a contractual relation. On the con-
trary, though marriage begins in contract, it is precisely a contract to 
transcend the standpoint of contract, the standpoint from which persons 
arc regarded in their individuality as self-subsistent units. The identi-
fication of personalities, whereby the family becomes one person and its 
members become its accidents (though substance is in essence the rela-
tion of accidents to itself*), is the ethical mind. Taken by itself and 
stripped of the manifold externals of which it is possessed owing to its 
embodiment in these individuals and the mterests of the phenomenal 
realm, interests limited in time and numerous other ways, this mind 
emerges in a shape for representative thinking and has been revered as 
Penates, &c.; and in general it is in this mind that the religious character 
of marriage and the family, or pietas, 21 is grounded. It is a further abstrac-
tion still to separate the divine, or the substantive, from its body, and 
then to stamp it, together with the feeling and consciousness of mental 
unity, as what is falsely called 'Platonic' love. This separation is in 
keeping with the monastic doctrine which characterizes the moment of 
physical life as purely negative and wh1ch, precisely by thus separating 
• See Enc. (1St edn.], § 98 (3rd edn. § 150]. 

THE FAMILY 
IIJ 
the physical from the mental, endows the former by itself with infinite 
importance. [A.] 
164. Mere agreement to the stipulated terms of a contract in 
itself involves the genuine transfer of the property in question 
(see Paragraph 79). Similarly, the solemn declaration by the 
parties of their consent to enter the ethical bond of marriage, and 
its corresponding recognition and confirmation by their family and 
community,*' constitutes the formal completion and actuality of 
marriage. The knot is tied and made ethical only after this cere-
mony, whereby through the use of signs, i.e. of language (the most 
mental embodiment of mind-see Paragraph 78), the substantial 
thing in the marriage is brought completely into being. As a 
result, the sensuous moment, the one proper to physical life, is put 
into its ethical place as something only consequential and acci-
dental, belonging to the external embodiment of the ethical bond, 
which indeed can subsist exclusively in reciprocal love and support. 
If with a view to framing or criticizing legal enactments, the question 
is asked: what should be regarded as the chief end of marriage?, the 
question may be taken to mean: which single facet of marriage in its 
actuality is to be regarded as the most essential one? No one facet by 
itself, howe\'er, makes up the whole range of Its implicit and explicit 
content, i.e. of its ethical character, and one or other of its facets may be 
lacking in an existing marriage without dctnmcnt to the essence of 
marriage itself. 
It is in the actual conclusion of a marriage, i.e. in the wedding, that 
the essence of the tie is expressed and established beyond dispute as 
something ethical, raised above the contingency of feeling and private 
inclination. If this ceremony is taken as an external formality, a mere so-
called 'ci,·il requirement', it is thereby stripped of all significance except 
perhaps that of serving the purpose of edification and attesting the civil 
relation of the parties. It is reduced indeed to a mere fiat of a civil or 
ecclesiastical authority. As such it appears as something not merely 
indifferent to the true nature of marriage, but actually alien to it. The 
heart is constrained by the law to attach a value to the formal ceremony 
and the latter is looked upon merely as a condition which must precede 
the complete mutual surrender of the parties to one another. As such it 
appears to bring disunion into their loving disposition and, like an alien 
intruder, to thwart the inwardness of their union. Such a doctrine 
pretentiously claims to afford the highest conception of the freedom, 
inwardness, and perfection of love; but in fact it is a travesty of the 
• The fact that the church comes m in this connexion IS a further pomt, but 
not one for discussion here." 

ETHICAL LIFE 
ethical aspect of love, the higher aspect which restrains purely sensual 
impulse and puts it in the background. Such restraint is already present 
at the instinctive level in shame, and it rises to chastity and modesty as 
consciousness becomes more specifically intelligent. In particular, the 
view just criticized casts aside marriage's spet:ifically ethical character, 
which consists in this, that the consciousness of the parties is crystal-
lized out of its physical and subjective mode and lifted to the thought 
of what is substantive; instead of continually reserving to itself the 
contingency and caprice of bodily desire, it removes the marriage bond 
from the province of this caprice, surrenders to the substantive, and 
swears allegiance to the Penates; the physical moment it subordinates 
until it becomes something wholly conditioned by the true and ethical 
character of the marriage relation and by the recognition of the bond 
as an ethical one. It is effrontery and its buttress, the Understanding, 
which cannot apprehend the speculative character of the substantial tie; 
nevertheless, with this speculative character there correspond both 
ethical purity of heart and the legislation of Christian peoples. [A.] 
165. The differen..:e in the physical characteristics of the two 
sexes has a rational basis and consequently acquires an intellec-
tual and ethical significance. This significance is determined by 
the difference into which the ethical substantiality, as the concept, 
internally sunders itself in order that its vitality may become a 
concrete unity consequent upon this difference.lJ 
166. Thus one sex is mind in its self-diremption into explicit 
personal self-subsistence and the knowledge and volition of free 
universality, i.e. the self-consciousness of conceptual thought and 
the volition of the objective final end. The other sex is mind main-
taining itself in unity as knowledge and volition of the substantive, 
but knowledge and volition in the form of concrete individuality 
and feeling. In relation to externality, the former is powerful and 
active, the latter passive and subjective. It follows that man has 
his actual substantive life in the state, in learning, and so forth, as 
well as in labour and struggle with the external world and with 
himself so that it is only out of his diremption that he fights his 
way to self-subsistent unity with himself. In the family he has a 
tranquil intuition of this unity, and there he lives a subjective 
ethical life on the plane of feeling. Woman, on the other hand, has 
her substantive destiny in the family, and to be imbued with 
family piety is her ethical frame of mind. 
For this reason. family piety is expounded in Sophocles' Antigone-
one of the most sublime presentations of this virtue-as principally the 
j 

THE FA'\IILY 
IIS 
law of 11oman, and as the law of a substantiality at once subjective and on 
the plane of feeling, the la1v of the im1ard hk, a life \\hich has not yet 
attained its full actualization; as the Ia\\ of the annent g-ods, 'the ~ods 
of the unden\ orld ·; as 'an everlasting law, and no man knm1·s at \\hat 
time it \las first put forth'. 04 This Ia\\· is there lhsplayed as a Lm opposed 
to public Ia''· to the la11. of the land. This is the supreme oppositiOn in 
ethics and therefore m tragedy; and it is indl\·iduahzed 111 the same play 
in the opposm;i natures of man and woman.* [.\.] 
167. In essence marriage is monogamy because it is personality 
-tmmedtatc exclusive individuality-\\ htch enters mto this tic 
and surrenders itsdf to it; and hence the tie's truth and inwardness 
(i.e. the subjective form of its suhstanttality) proceeds only from 
the mutual, '' hole-hcJ.rted, surrender of this personality. Person-
ality attains its right of being conscious of itself in J.nother only in 
so far as the other is in thi:; identical relationshtp as a person, i.e. as 
an atomic indi1 idual. 
:\larriage, and especially monogamy, is one of the absolute principles 
on 11·hich the cthtcal life of a community dc·pcnds. Hence marriage 
comes to he recorded as one of the moment-; 111 the fe>unding of states 
hy gods or heroL'S. 
168. Further, marriage results from the free ,,um:ndcr by both 
sexes of their personality-a persona!ttY i!1 u crv posstble \\'ay 
unique in each of the parties. Conscqucnth·, 1t ou,ght not to be 
entered by t1vo people identical in stock\\ ho arc already acquainted 
and perfectly knmYn to OT"'e another; for md11 1,i11als in the same 
circle of relationship haYe no special personalit1 nt their own in 
contrast with that of others in the same CJrck. ( ln the contrary, 
the parties should be drawn from separate famtltes and their per-
sonalities should he different in origin. Since the n-ry concep~ion 
of marriage is that it is a freely undertaken ethical transactwn, not 
a tic directly grounded in the physical organism and Jt:o, desires, it 
follows that the marriage of blood-relations runs counter to thts 
conception and so also to genuine natural feeling. 
:\brriagc itself is sometimes said to he grounded not tn natural rights 
hut simplv in instinctive sexual impulses; or again 1t h tn·ated as a 
contract 11·ith an arbitrary basis. External ar;iumcnts m support of 
monogamy have been dra\\n from physical considerations such as the 
number of men and women. Dark feelings of repulsion are ad,·anced 
as the sole ground for prohibiting consanguineous marriage. The has1s 
" Cf. Phcnnmcno!nr<y [1st cdn ], pp. 383 ff., 417 ff [Eng. tr. pp ·11'6 ff, 
495 ff.]. 

II6 
ETHICAL LIFE 
of all these views is the fashionable idea of a state of nature and a natural 
origin for rights, and the lack of the concept of rationality and freedom. 
[A.) 
169. The family, as person, has its real external existence in 
property; and it is only when this property takes the form of 
capitalzs that it becomes the embodiment of the substantial per-
sonality of the family. 
B. The Family Capital 
170. It is not merely property which a family possesses; as a 
universal and enduring person, it requires possessions specifically 
determined as permanent and secure, i.e. it requires capital. The 
arbitrariness of a single owner's particular needs is one moment in 
property taken abstractly; but this moment, together with the 
selfishness of desire, is here transformed into something ethical, 
into labour and care for a common possession. 
In the sagas of the founding of states, or at least of a social and orderly 
life, the introduction of permanent property is linked with the introduc-
tion of marriage. The nature of this capital, however, and the proper 
means of its consolidation will appear in the section on civil society. 26 
171. The family as a legal entity in relation to others must be 
represented by the husband as its head. Further, it i~ his preroga-
tive to go out and work for its living, to attend to its needs, and to 
control and administer its capital. This capital is common pro-
perty so that, while no member of the family has property of his 
own, each has his right in the common stock. This right, however, 
may come into collision with the head of the family's right of 
administration owing to the fact that the ethical temper of the 
family is still only at the level of immediacy (sec Paragraph 158) 
and so is exposed to partition and contingency. 
172. A marriage brings into being a new family which is self-
subsistent and independent of the clans or 'houses' from which its 
members have been drawn. The tie between these and the new 
family has a natural basis-consanguinity, but the new family is 
based on love of an ethical type. Thus an indiv;dual's property 
too has an essential connexion with his conjugal relationship and 
only a comparatively remote one with his relation to his clan or 
'house'. 
fhe significance of marriage settlements which impose a restriction 
on the couple's common ownership of their goods, of arrangements to 

THE FAMILY 
I 17 
secure continued legal assistance for the woman, and so forth, lies in their 
being provisions in case of the dissolution of the marriage, either 
naturally by death, or by divorce, &c. They are also safeguards for 
securing that in such an eventuality the different members of the family 
shall secure their share of the common stock. [A.] 
C. The Education of Children and the Dissolution of the Family 
173. In substance marriage is a unity, though only a unity of 
inwardness or disposition; in outward existence, however, the 
unity is sundered in the two parties. It is only in the children that 
the unity itself exists externally, objectively, and explicitly as a 
unity, because the parents love the children as their love, as the 
embodiment of their own substance. From the physical point 
of view, the presupposition-persons immediately existent (as 
parents)-here becomes a result, 27 a process which runs away into 
the infinite series of generations, each producing the next and pre-
supposing the one before. This is the mode in which the single 
mind of the Penates reveals its existence in the finite sphere of 
nature as a race. [A.] 
174. Children have the right to maintenance and education at 
the expense of the family's common capital. The right of the 
parents to the service as service of their ch!ldren is based upon and 
is restricted by the common task of looking after the family gener-
ally. Similarly, the right of the parents over the wtshes of their 
children is determined by the object in view-discipline and edu-
cation. The punishment of children does not atm at justice as 
such; the aim is more subjective and moral in character, i.e. to 
deter them from exercising a freedom still in the toils of nature and 
to lift the universal into their consciousness and will. [A.] 
175. Children are potentially free and their life directly em-
bodies nothing save potential freedom. Consequently they are not 
things and cannot be the property either of their parents or ot!1ers. 
In respect of his relation to the family, the child's education has 
the positive aim of instilling ethical principles into him in the form 
of an immediate feeling for which differences arc not yet explicit, 
so that thus equipped with the foundation of an ethical life, his 
heart may live its early years in love, trust, and obedience. In 
respect of the same relation, this education has the negative aim 
of raising children out of the instinctive, physical, level on which 
they are originally, to self-subsistence and freedom of personality 

II8 
ETHICAL LIFE 
and so to the level on which they have power to leave the natural 
unity of the family. 
One of the blackest marks against Roman legislation is the law where-
by children were treated by their fathers as slaves. This gangrene of the 
ethical order at the tenderest point of its innermost life is one of the most 
important clues for understanding the place of the Romans in the history 
of the worl<.l and their tendency towards legal formalism. 2s 
The necessity for education is present in children as their own feeling 
of dissatisfaction with themselves as they are, as the desire to belong to 
the adult world whose superiority they divine, as the longing to grow up. 
The play theory of education29 assumes that what is childish is itself 
already something of inherent worth and presents it as such to the 
children; in their eyes it lowers serious pursuits, and education itself, 
to a form of childishness for which the children themselves have scant 
respect. The advocates of this method represent the child, in the 
immaturity in which he feels himself to be, as really mature and they 
struggle to make him satisfied with himself as he is. But they corrupt 
and distort his genuine and proper need for someching better, and create 
in him a blind indifference to the substantial ties of the intellectual 
world, a contempt of his elders because they have thus posed hefore him, 
a child, in a contemptible and childish fashion, and finally a vanity 
and conceit which feeds on the notion of its own superiority. [A.] 
176. l\Iarriage is but the ethical Idea in its immediacy and so has 
its objective actuality only in the inwardness of subjective feeling 
and disposition. In this fact is rooted the fundamental contingency 
of marriage in the world of existence. There can be no compulsion 
on people to marry; and, on the other hand, there is no merely 
legal or positive bond which can hold the parties together once 
their dispositions and actions have become hostile and contrary. 
A third3° ethical authority, however, is called for to maintain the 
right of marriage-an ethical substantiality-against the mere 
whims of hostile disposition or the accident of a purely passing 
mood, and so forth. Such an authority distinguishes these from 
the total estrangement of the two parties and may not grant divorce 
until it is satisfied that the estrangement is total. [A.] 
177. The ethical dissolution of the family consists in this, that 
once the children have been educated to freedom of personality, 
and have come of age, they become recognized as persons in the 
eyes of the law and as capable of holding free property of their own 
and founding families of their own, the sons as heads of new 
families, the daughters as wives. They now have their substantive 

THE FAMILY 
n9 
destiny in the new family; the old family on the other hand falls 
into the background as merely their ultimate basis and origin, 
while a fortiori the clan is an abstraction, devoid of rights. 
178. The natural dissolution of the family by the death of the 
parents, particularly the father, has inheritance as its consequence 
so far as the family capital is concerned. The essence of inheritance 
is the transfer to private ownership of property which is in prin-
ciple common. \Vhen comparatively remote degrees of kinship are 
in question, and when persons and families are so dispersed in civil 
society that they have begun to gain self-subsistence, this transfer 
becomes the less hard and fast as the sense of family unity fades 
away and as every marriage becomes the surrender of previous 
family relationships and the founding of a new self-subsistent 
family. 
It has been suggestedJ1 that the basis of inheritance lies in the fact 
that, by a man's death, his property becomes wealth without an owner, 
and as such falls to the first person who takes possession of it, because 
of course it is the relatives who are normally nearest a man's death-bed 
and so they are generally the first to take posscs~ion. Hence it is sup-
posed that this customary occurrence is made a rule by positive legisla-
tion in the interests of orderliness. This ingenious idea disregards the 
nature of family relationship. 
J 79. The result of this disintegration of the family is that a man 
may at will either squander his capital altogether, mainly in 
accordance with his private caprices, opinions, and ends, or else 
look upon a circle of friends and acquaintances, &c., as if they were 
his family and make a will embodying a declaration to that effect, 
with the result that they become his legal heirs. 
The ethical justification of freedom to dispose of one's property by 
will to a circle of friends would depend on the formation of such a circle ;Jz 
but there goes to its formation so much accident, arbitrariness, and 
shrewd self-seeking, &c.-especially since testamentary hopes have a 
bearing on readiness to enter it-that the ethical moment in it is only 
something very vague. Further, the recognition of a man's competence 
to bequeath his property arbitrarily is much more likely to be an occasion 
for breach of ethical obligations and for mean exertions and equally mean 
subservience; and it also provides opportunity and justification for the 
folly, caprice, and malice of attaching to professed benefactions and 
gifts vain, tyrannical, and vexatious conditions operative after the testa-
tor's death and so in any case after his property ceases to be his. 

IZO 
ETHICAL LIFE 
180. The principle that the members of the family grow up to 
be self-subsistent persons in the eyes of the law (see Paragraph 
177) lets into the circle of the family something of the same arbi-
trariness and discrimination among the natural heirs, though its 
exercise there must be restricted to a minimum in order to prevent 
injury to the basic family relationship. 
The mere downright arbitrariness of the deceased cannot he made the 
principle underlying the right to make a will, especially if it runs counter 
to the substantive right of the family. For after all no respect would be 
forthcoming for his wishes after his death, if not from the family's love 
and veneration for its deceased fellow-member. Such arbitrariness by 
itself contains nothing worthy of higher respect than the right of the 
family as such-on the contrary. 
The other ground for the validity of testamentary disposition would 
consist simply in its arbitrary recognition hy others.JJ But such an 
argument may prima facie be admitted only when family ties, to which 
testamentary disposition is intrinsic, become remoter and more in-
effective. If they are actually present, however, without being effective, 
the situation is unethical; and to give extended validity to arbitrary dis-
positions at the expense of family ties eo ipso weakens the ethical 
character of the latter. 
To make the father's arbitrary will within the family the main prin-
ciple of inheritance was part of the harsh and unethical legal system of 
Rome to which reference has been made already. That system even 
gave a father power to sell his son, and if the'Son was manumitted by a 
third party, he came under his father's potestas once more. Not until 
he was manumitted a third time was he actually and finally free. The son 
never attained his majority de jure nor did he become a person in law; 
the only property he could hold was booty won in war (peculium cas-
trense). If he passed out of his father's potestas after being thrice sold 
and manumitted, he did not inherit along with those who had continued 
in bondage to the head of the family, unless the will specifically so 
provided.H Similarly, a wife" remained attached to her family of origin 
rather than to the new family which by her marriage she had helped to 
found, and which was now properly her own, and she was therefore 
precluded from inheriting any share of the goods of what was properly 
her own family, for neither wife nor mother shared in the distribution of 
an estate. 
Later, with the growing feeling for rationality, the unethical provi-
sions of laws such as these and others were evaded in the course of their 
administration, for example with the help of the expression bonorum 
" 1.e. a matrona, not a wife who in manum convenit, in mancipio est, and whose 
marriage was a slavery to her husband. 35 

THE FAMILY 
121 
possessio* instead of hereditas, and through the fiction of nicknaming a 
filia a filius. This was referred to above (see Remark to Paragraph 3) 
as the sad necessity to which the judge was reduced in the face of bad 
laws-the necessity of smuggling reason into them on the sly, or at 
least into some of their consequences. Connected with this were the 
terrible instability of the chief political institutions and a riot of legis-
lation to stem the outbreak of resulting evils. 
From Roman history and the writings of Lucian and others,37 we are 
sufficiently familiar with the unethical consequences of giving the head 
of a Roman family the right to name whom he pleased as his heir. 
l\ Iarriage is ethical life at the level of immediacy; in the very nature of 
the case, therefore, it must be a mixture of a substantial tie with natural 
contingency and inner arbitrariness. Now when by the slave-status of 
children, by legal provisions such as those mentioned above as well as 
others consequential upon them, and in addition by the ease of Roman 
divorce, pride of place is given to arbitrariness instead of to the right of 
the substantial (so that even Cicero-and what fine writing about the 
Honestum and Decorum there is in his De Officiis and in all sorts of other 
places!-even Cicero divorced his wife as a business speculation in order 
to pay his debts with his new wife's dowry), then a legal road is paved to 
the corruption of manners, or rather the laws themselves necessitate 
such corruption. 
The institution of heirs-at-law with a view to preserving the family and 
its splendor hy means of fideicommissa and subsiltutwnesJB (in order to 
favour sons by excluding daughters from inhcnting, or to favour the 
eldest son hy excluding the other children) is an infringement of the 
principle of the freedom of property (see Paragraph 62 ), like the admis-
sion of any other inequality in the treatment of heirs. And besides, such 
an institution depends on an arbitrariness which in and hy itself has no 
right to recognition, or more precisely on the thought of wishing to 
preserve intact not so much this family but rather this clan or 'house'. 
Yet it is not this clan or 'house', but the family proper which is the Idea 
and which therefore possesses the right to recognition, and both the 
ethical disposition and family trees are much more likely to be preserved 
by freedom of property and equality of inheritance than by the reverse 
of these. 
Institutions of this kind, like the Roman, wholly ignore the right due 
to marriage, because by a marriage the foundation of a unique actual 
farnily is eo ipso completed (see Paragraph 172), and because what is 
called, in contrast with the new family, the family in the wide sense, i.e. 
the stirps or gens, becomes only an abstraction (see Paragraph r77) 
growing less and less actual the further it recedes into the background 
• The fact that there is a further distinction between this and possessio bono-
rum is a p1ece of the eruditiOn which constitutes the juristic expert.' 6 

122 
ETHICAL LIFE 
as one generation succeeds another. Love, the ethical moment in 
marriage, is by its very nature a feeling for actual living individuals, not 
for an abstraction. This abstraction of the l1 nderstanding [the gens J 
appears in history as the principle underlying the contribution of the 
Roman Empire to world history (see Paragraph 357). 39 In the higher 
sphere of the state, a right of primogeniture arises together with estates 
rigidly entailed; it arises, ho\\ever, not arbitrarily but as the inevitable 
outcome of the Idea of the state. On this point see below, Paragraph 
306. [A.] 
Transition of the Family into Civil Society 
181. The family disintegrates (both essentially, through the 
working of the principle of personality, and also in the course of 
nature) into a plurality of families, each of which conducts itself 
as in principle a self-subsistent concrete person and therefore as 
externally related to its neighbours. In other words, the moments 
bound together in the unity of the family, since the family is the 
ethical Idea still in its concept, must be released from the concept 
to self-subsistent objective reality. This i~ the stage of difference. 
This gives us, to use abstract language in the first place, the deter-
mination of particularity which is related to universality but in 
such a way that universality is its basic principle, though still only 
an inward principle; for that reason, the universal merely shows in 
the particular as its form.4° Hence this relation of reflection prima 
facie portrays the disappearance of ethical life or, since this life 
as the essence necessarily shows itself,* t~is relation constitutes 
the world of ethical appearance-civil society. 
The expansion of the family, as its transition into a new principle, is 
in the external world sometimes its peaceful expansion until it becomes 
a people, i.e. a nation, which thus has a common natural origin, or some-
times the federation of scattered groups of families under the influence 
of an overlord's power or as a result of a voluntary association produced 
by the tie of needs and the reciprocity of their satisfaction. [A.] 
SUB-SECTI0::-.1 2 
CIVIL SOCIETY 
182. The concrete person,4 1 who is himself the object of his 
particular aims, is, as a totality of wants and a mixture of caprice 
and physical necessity, one principle of civil society. But the par-
ticular person is essentially so related to other particular persons 
" Cf. Enc. [I>t edn.], §§ 64 ff., §§ 81 ff. [3rd edn. §§I IS ff., §§ IJI ff.]. 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
123 
that each establishes himself and finds satisfaction by means of the 
others, and at the same time purely and simply by means of the 
form of universality, the second principle here. [A.] 
183. In the course of the actual attamment of selfish ends-an 
attainment conditioned in th1s way by universality-there is 
formed a system of complete mtenlependence, wherem the liveli-
hood, happiness, and legal status of one man is interwoven with the 
li,·clihood, happiness, and rights of all. On this system, individual 
happiness, &c., depend, and only in this connected system are they 
actualized and secured. This system may be prima facie regarded 
as the external state,42 the state based on need, the state as the 
Understanding envisages it. 
184. The Idea in this its stage of division imparts to each of its 
moments a characteristic embodiment; to particularity it gives the 
right to develop and launch forth in all directions; and to univer-
sality the right to prove itself not only the ground and necessary 
form of particularity, hut also the authority standing o\·er it and 
its final end. It is the system of the ethical ord.:r, split into its 
extremes and lost, \vhich constitutes the Idea's abstract moment, 
its moment of reality. I-I ere the Idea is present only as a relative 
totahty-lJ and as the inner necessity bchmd this outward appear-
ance. [A.] 
185. Particularity by itself, given free rein in every direction 
to satisfy its needs, accidental capnces. and ~ubjective desires, 
destroys itself and its substantive concept In thiS process of grati-
fication. At the same time, the satisfaction of need, necessary and 
accidental alike, is accidental because 1t breeds new desires without 
end, is in thoroughgoing dependence on caprice and external 
accident, and is held in check by the power of universality. In 
these contrasts and their complexity, civil society affords a spec-
tacle of extravagance and want as well as of the physical and ethical 
degeneration common to them both. 
The development of particularity to self-subsistence (compare Re-
mark to Paragraph 124) is the moment which appeared in the ancient 
world as an invasion of ethical corruption and as the ultimate cause of 
that \\orld's downfall. Some of these ancient states were built on the 
patriarchal and religious principle, others on the principle of an ethical 
order which was more explicitly intellectual, though still comparatively 
simple; in either case they rested on primitive unsophisticated intuition. 
l Ience they could not withstand the disruption of this state of mind when 

124 
ETHICAL LIFE 
self-consciousness was infinitely reflected into itself; when this reflection 
began to emerge, they succumbed to it, first in spirit and then in sub-
stance, because the simple principle underlying them lacked the truly 
infinite power to be found only in that unity which allows both sides 
of the antithesisH of reason to develop themselves separately in all their 
strength and which has so overcome the antithesis that it maintains 
itself in it and integrates it in itself. 
In his Republic, Plato displays the substance of ethical life in its ideal 
beauty4s and truth; but he could only cope with the principle of self-
subsistent particularity, which in his day had forced its way into Greek 
ethical life, by setting up in opposition to it his purely substantial state. 
He absolutely excluded it from his state, even in its very beginnings in 
private property (see Remark to Paragraph 46) and the family, as well as 
in its more mature form as the subjective will, the choice of a social 
position, and so forth. It is this defect which is responsible both for the 
misunderstanding of the deep and substantial truth of Plato's state and 
also for the usual view of it as a dream of abstract thinking, as what is 
often called a 'mere ideal'. The principle of the self-subsistent in-
herently infinite personality of the individual, the principle of subjective 
freedom, is denied its right in the purely substantial form which Plato 
gave to mind in its actuality. This principle dawned in an inward form 
in the Christian religion and in an external form (and therefore in one 
linked with abstract universality) in the Roman world. It is historically 
subsequent to the Greek world, and the philosophic reflection which 
descends to its depth is likewise subsequent to the substantial Idea of 
Greek philosophy. [A.] 
186. But in developing itself independently to totality, the 
principle of particularity passes over into universality, and only 
there does it attain its truth and the right to which its positive 
actuality is entitled. This unity is not the identity which the 
ethical order requires, because at this level, that of division (see 
Paragraph 184), both principles are self-subsistent. It follows that 
this unity is present here not as freedom but as necessity, since it 
is by compulsion that the particular rises to the form of univer-
sality and seeks and gains its stability in that form. 
187. Individuals in their capacity as burghers46 in this state are 
private persons whose end is their own interest. This end is mediated 
through the universal which thus appears as a means to its realiza-
tion. Consequently, individuals can attain their ends only in so 
far as they themselves determine their knowing, willing, and acting 
in a universal way and make themselves links in thts chain of social 
connexions. In these circumstances, the interest of the Idea-an 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
IZ5 
interest of which these members of civil society are as such un-
conscious-lies in the process whereby their singularity and their 
natural condition are raised, as a result of the necessities imposed 
by nature as well as of arbitrary needs, to formal freedom and 
formal universality of knowing and willing-the process whereby 
their particularity is educated up to subjectivity. 
The idea that the state of nature is one of innocence and that there is 
a simplicity of manners in uncivilized (ungebildeter) peoples, implies 
treating education (Bildung) as something purely external, the ally of 
corruption. Similarly, the feeling that needs, their satisfaction, the 
pleasures and comforts of private life, and so forth, are absolute ends, 
implies treating education as a mere means to these ends. Both these 
views display lack of acquaintance with the nature of mind and the end 
of reason. Mind attains its actuality only by creating a dualism within 
itself, hy submitting itself to physical needs and the chain of these 
external necessities, and so imposing on Itself this harrier and this fini-
tude, and finally hy maturing (bzldtt) itself inwardly even when under 
this barrier until it overcomes it and attains its ohJ<:Ctive reality in the 
finite. The end of reason, therefore, is neither the manners of an 
unsophisticated state of nature, nor, as particulanty develops, the 
pleasure for pleasure's sake which cducatwn procure:;. On the contrary, 
its end is to banish natural simplicity, whether tht> pas,;n·ity which is the 
absence of the self, or the crude type of kno'' mg and willing, i.e. im-
mediacy and singularity, 111 which mmd is absorbed. It aims in the 
first instance at sccuring for this, its external condition, the rationality 
of which it is capable, i.e. the form of universahtv or the Understanding 
( Verstiindigkeit). By this means alone docs mmd bcunne at home with 
itself within this pure externality. There, then, rmnJ 's freedom is 
existent and mind becomes objective to itself in this clement which is 
implicitly inimical to mind's appointed end, freedom; tt has to do there 
only with what it has itself produced and stamped mth tts seal. It is in 
this way then that the form of umvcrsahty comes cxpltcitly into exis-
tence in thought, and this form is the only worthy element for the exis-
tence of the Idea. The final purpose of education, therefore, is liberatiOn 
and the struggle for a h1gher liberation still; education 1s the absolute 
transition from an ethical substantiality\\ hich is immed1ate and natural 
to the one which is intellectual and so both infinitely subjective and 
lofty enough to have attained universality of form. In the individual 
subject, this liberation is the hard struggle against pure subjecti\·ity of 
demeanour, against the immedmcy of desire, against the empty sub-
jectivity of feeling and the caprice of inclination. The disfavour 
showered on education is due in part to its being this hard struggle; but 
it is through this educational struggle that the subjective will itself 

126 
ETHICAL LIFE 
attains objectivity within, an objectivity in which alone it is for its part 
capable and worthy of being the actuality of the Idea. 
Moreover, this form of uni,·crsality-thc l'nderstanding, to which 
particularity has worked its way and developed itsdf, brings it about at 
the same time that particularity becomes individuality genuinely 
existent in its own C) es. And since it is from this particularity that the 
universal derives the content which fills it as well as its character as 
infinite self-determination, particularity itself is present in ethical life 
as infinitely independent free subjectivity. This is the position which 
reveals education as a moment immanent in the Absolute and which 
makes plam its infinite value. (.\.] 
188. Civil society contains three moments: 
(A) The mediation of need and one man's satisfaction through 
his work and the satisfaction of the needs of all others-the 
System of Seeds. 
(B) The actuality of the universal principle of freedom therein 
contained-the protection of property through the Admini-
stratioll of Justice. 
(C) Provision against contingencies still lurking- in systems (:\.) 
and (B), and care for particular interests as a common 
interest, by means of the Police and the C01poration. 
A. The System of Seeds 
189. Particularity is in the first instance characterized in general 
by its contrast with the uni\'crsal prin~iplc of the will and thus is 
subjective need (see Paragraph 59)Y This attains its ohjccti,·ity, 
i.e. its satisfaction, by means of ( 1) extcrnal things, "hich at this 
stage arc likewise the property and product of the needs and ''ills 
of others, and (f3) work and effort, the middle term between the 
subjective and the ohjectiYe. The aim here is the satisfaction of 
subjectiYe particularity, hut the uniYersal asserts itself in the hl·ar-
ing which this satisfaction has on the needs of others and their free 
arbitrary wills. The sho\\· of rationality thus produced in this 
sphere of finitude is the Cnderstanding, and this is the aspect 
which is of most importance in considering this sphere and which 
itself constitutes the reconciling dement\\ ithin it. 
Political economy is the science which starts from this \it'\\ of ncl'ds 
and labour but then has the task of explaining ma~s-relationships ami 
mass-movements in their complexity and their qualitative and quantita-
tive character. This is one of the sciences which have ari~l·n out of the 
conditions ofthe modem world. Its development affords the inten:stmg 
--

CIVIL SOCIETY 
127 
spectacle (as in Smith, Say, and Ricardo48) of thought working upon the 
endless mass of details which confront it at the outset and extracting 
therefrom the simple principles of the thing, the Understanding effective 
in the thing and directing it. It is to find reconciliation here to discover 
in the sphere of needs this show of rationality lying in the thing and 
effective there; hut if we look at it from the opposite point of view, this 
is the field in which the Understandin.g with its subjective aims and 
moral fancies vents its discontent and moral frustration. [A.] 
(a) The Kind of Need and Satisfaction [typical of civil society] 
190. An animal's needs and its ways and means of satisfying 
them are both alike restricted in scope. Though man is subject to 
this restriction too, yet at the same time he evinces his transcen-
dence of it and his universality, first by the multiplication of needs 
and means of satisfying them, and secondly by the differentiation 
and division of concrete need into single parts and aspects which 
in turn become different needs, particularized and so more abstract. 
In [abstract] right, what we had before us was the person; in the 
sphere of morality, the subject; in the family, the family-member; in 
civil society as a whole, the burgher or bourgrois. Here at the standpoint 
of needs (compare Remark to Paragraph 123) what we have before us is 
the composite idea which we call man. Thus this is the first time, and 
indeed properly the only time, to speak of man in this sense.49 [A.] 
191. Similarly, the means to particularized needs and all the 
various ways of satisfying these arc themselves dtnded and multi-
plied and so in turn become proximate ends and abstract needs. 
This multiplication goes on ad infinitum; taken as a whole, it is 
refinement, i.e. a discrimination between these multiplied needs, 
and judgement on the suitability of means to their ends. [A.] 
192. 
~eeds and means, as things existent reahter, become 
something ,,·hich has being for others by whose needs and work 
satisfaction for all alike is conditioned. When needs and means 
become abstract in quality (see Paragraph 191), abstraction is also a 
character of the reciprocai relation of indiYiduals to one another. so 
This abstract character, universality, is the character of being 
recognized and is the moment '' hich makes concrete, i.e. social, 
the isolated and abstract needs and their ways and means of satis-
faction. [A.] 
193. This social moment thus becomes a particular end-deter-
minant for means in themselves and their acquisition, as well as 

ETHICAL LIFE 
for the manner in which needs are satisfied. Further, it directly 
involves the demand for equality of satisfaction with others. The 
need for this equality and for emulation, which is the equalizing of 
oneself with others, as well as the other need also present here, the 
need of the particular to assert itself in some distinctive way, 
become themselves a fruitful source of the multiplication of needs 
and their expansion. 
194. Since in social needs, as the conjunction of immediate or 
natural needs with mental needs arising from ideas, it is needs of 
the latter type which because of their universality make themselves 
preponderant, this social moment has in it the aspect of liberation, 
i.e. the strict natural necessity of need is obscured and man is 
concerned \Yith his own opinion, indeed with an opinion which is 
universal, and with a necessity of his own making alone, instead of 
with an external necessity, an inner contingency, and mere caprice. 
The idea has been advanced that in respect of his needs man lived in 
freedom in the so-called 'state of nature' when his needs \Yere supposed 
to be confined to what are known as the simple necessities of nature, and 
when he required for their satisfaction only the means which the acci-
dents of nature directly assured to him. This view takes no account of 
the moment of liberation intrinsic to work, on \Yhich see the following 
Paragraphs. And apart from this, it is false, because to he confint>d to 
mere physical needs as such and their direct satisfaction would simply 
be the condition in \\ hich the mental is plunged in tl:e natural and so 
would be one of savagery and unfreedom, while freedom itself is to be 
found only in the reflection of mind into itself, in mind's distinction 
from nature, and in the reflex of mind in nature. 
195. This liberation is abstract since the particularity of the 
ends remains their basic content. \Vhen social conditions tend to 
multiply and subdivide needs, means, and enjoyments indefinitely 
-a process which, like the distinction between natural and refined'' 
needs, has no qualitative limits-this is luxury. In this same pro-
cess, however, dependence and want increase ad infinitum, and the 
material to meet these is permanently barred to the needy man 
because it consists of external objects with the special character of 
being property, the embodiment of the free will of others, and 
hence from his point of view its recalcitrance is absolute.sz [A.] 
(h) The Kind of Work [typical of civil society] 
196. The means of acquiring and preparing the particularized 
means appropriate to our s;milarly particularized needs is \\ ork. 

··---
CIVIL SOCIETY 
Through work the raw material directly supplied by nature is 
specifically adapted to these numerous ends by all sorts of different 
processes. Now this formative change confers value on means and 
gives them their utility, and hence man in what he consumes is 
mainly concerned with the products of men. It is the products of 
human effort which man consumes. [A.) 
197. The multiplicity of objects and situations which excite 
interest is the stage on which theoretical education develops. This 
education consists in possessing not simply a multiplicity of ideas 
and facts, but also a flexibility and rapidity of mind, ability to pass 
from one idea to another, to grasp complex and general relations, 
and so on. It is the education of the understanding in every way, 
and so also the building up of language. Practical education, 
acquired through working, consists first in the automatically re-
current need for something to do and the habit of simply being 
busy; next, in the strict adaptation of one's activity according not 
only to the nature of the material worked on, but also, and espe-
cially, to the pleasure of other workers; and finally, in a habit, 
produced by this discipline, of objective activity and universally 
recognized aptitudes. [A.) 
198. The universal and objective element in work, on the other 
hand, lies in the abstracting process which effects the subdivision 
of needs and means and thereby eo ipso subdivides production and 
brings about the division of labour. By this division, the work of 
the individual becomes less complex, and consequently his skill at 
his section of the job increases, like his output .. \t the same time, 
this abstraction of one man's skill and me~ns of production from 
another's completes and makes necessary everywhere the depen-
dence of men on one another and their reciprocal relation in the 
satisfaction of their other needs. Further, the abstraction of one 
man's production from another's makes work morf and more 
mechanical, until finally man is able to step aside and install 
machines in his place. 
(c) Capital [and class-divisions)S3 
199. When men are thus dependent on one another and reci-
procally related to one another in their work and the satisfaction 
of their needs, subjective self-seeking turns into a contribution to 
the satisfaction of the needs of everyone else. That is to say, by a 
dialectical advance,S4 subjective self-seeking turn:- mto the mediation 

130 
ETHICAL LIFE 
of the particular through the universal, with the result that 
each man in earning, producing, and enjoying on his own account 
is eo ipso producing and earning for the enjoyment of everyone 
else. The compulsion which brings this about is rooted in the 
complex interdependence of each on all, and it now presents 
itself to each as the universal permanent capital (see Paragraph 
170) which gives each the opportunity, by the exercise of his edu-
cation and skill, to draw a share from it and so be assured of his 
livelihood, while what he thus earns by means of his work main-
tains and increases the general capital. 
200. A particular man's resources, or in other words his oppor-
tunity of sharing in the general resources, are conditioned, how-
ever, partly by his own unearned principal (his capital), and partly 
by his skill; this in turn is itself dependent not only on his capital, 
but also on accidental circumstances whose multiplicity introduces 
differences in the development of natural, bodily, and mental 
characteristics, which were already in themselves dissimilar. In 
this sphere of particularity, these differences are conspicuous in 
every direction and on every level, and, together with the arbitrar:-
ness and accident which this sphere contains as well, they have as 
their inevitable consequence disparities of individual resources and 
ability. 
The objective right of the particularity of mind is contained in the 
Idea. Men are made unequal by nature, where inequality is in its 
element, and in civil society the right of particularity is so far from 
annulling this natural inequality that it produces it out of mind and 
raises it to an inequality of skill and resources, and even to one of moral 
and intellectual attainment. To oppose to this right a demand for equal-
ity is a folly of the Understanding which takes as real and rational its 
abstract equality and its 'ought-to-be'. 
This sphere of particularity, which fancies itself the universal, is still 
only relatively identical with the universal, and consequently it still 
retains in itself the particularity of nature, i.e. arbitrariness, or in other 
words the relics of the state of nature. Further, it is reason, immanent 
in the restless system of human needs, which articulates it into an 
organic whole with different members (see the following Paragraph). 
201. The infinitely complex, criss-cross, movements of reci-
procal production and exchange, and the equally infinite multi-
plicity of means therein employed, become crystallized, owing to 
the universality inherent in their content, and distinguished into 
general groups. As a result, the entire complex is built up into 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
131 
particular systems of needs, means, and types of work relative to 
these needs, modes of satisfaction and of theoretical and practical 
education, i.e. into systems, to one or other of which individuals 
are assigned-in other \\·ords, into class-divisions. 
[A.] 
202. The classes are specifically determined in accordance with 
the concept as (a) the substantial or immediate [or agricultural] 
class; (b) the reflecting or formal [or business] class; and finally, 
(c) the universal class [the class of civil servants].ss 
203. (a) The substantial [or agricultural] class has its capital 
in the natural products of the soil which it cultivates-soil which is 
capable of exclusively private ownership and which demands for-
mation in an objective way and not mere haphazard exploitation. 
In face of the connexion of [agricultural] work and its fruits with 
separate and fixed times of the year, and the dependence of har-
vests on the variability of natural processes, the aim of need in this 
class turns into provision for the future; but owing to the con-
ditions here, the agricultural mode of subsistence remains one 
which owes comparatively little to reflectiOn and independence of 
will, and this mode of life is in general such that this class has the 
substantial disposition of an ethical hfe which ts tmmediate, resting 
on family relationship and trust. 
The real beginning and original foundation of states has been rightly 
ascribed to the introduction of agriculture along \\Jtlt rmrriage, because 
the principle of agriculture brings with It the form.ltFlll of the land and 
consequentially exclusively private propcrtv (comp.trc Ecmark to Para-
graph 170); the nomadic life of sa,·ages, who seck thc1r livelihood from 
place to place, it brings back to the tranquillity of private rights and the 
assured satisfaction of their needs. Along with these changes, sexual 
love is restricted to marriage, and this bond in turn grows mto an endur-
ing league, inherently universal, while needs expand mto care for a 
family, and personal possessions into family goods. :-lecunty, consolida-
tion, lasting satisfaction of needs, and so forth-things which are the 
most obvwus recommendations of marriage and agriculture-are 
nothing but forms of uni,·ersality, modes in which rationality, the final 
end and aim, asserts itself in these spheres. 
In this matter, nothing is of more interest than the ingenious and 
learned explanations \Vhich my distinguished friend, Herr Creuzer, s6 
has given* of the agrarian festivals, images, and sanctuaries of the 
ancients. He shows that it was because the ancients themselves had 
~ l\'otably m the fourth ,·o!ume of hrs .Uythologie und s_, mbolzk. 

132 
ETHICAL LIFE 
become conscious of the divine origin of agriculture and other institu-
tions associated with it that they held them in such religious veneration. 
In course of time, the character of this class as 'substantial' undergoes 
modifications through the working of the civil law. in particular the 
administration of justice, as \Yell as through the working of education, 
instruction, and religion. These modifications, which occur in the other 
classes also, do not affect the substantial content of the class but only its 
form and the development of its power of reflection. [A.] 
204. (b) The business class has for its task the adaptation of 
raw materials, and for its means of livelihood it is thrown back on 
its work, on reflection and intelligence, and essentially on the 
mediation of one man's needs and work \Vith those of others. For 
what this class produces and enjoys, it has mainly itself, its own 
industry, to thank. The task of this class is subdivided into 
(o:) work to satisfy single needs in a comparatively concrete way 
and to supply single orders-craftsmanship; 
({3) work of a more abstract kind, mass-production to satisfy 
single needs, but needs in more universal demand-manu-
facture; 
(y) the business of exchange, whereby separate utilities are 
exchanged the one for the other, principally through the use 
of the universal medium of exchange, money, which actual-
izes the abstract value of all commodities-trade. [A.] 
205. (c) The universal class [the class of civil sen·ants] has for 
its task the universal interests of the community. It must therefore 
be relieved from direct labour to supply its needs, either by having 
private means or by receiving an allm\'ance from the state which 
claims its industry, with the result that printe interest finds its 
satisfaction in its \\ ork for the universal. 
206. It is in accordance with the concept that class-organization, 
as particularity become objective to itself, is split in this way into 
its general divisions. But the question of the particular class to 
which an individual is to belong is one on \\·hich natural capacity, 
birth, and other circumstances have their influence, though the 
essential and final determining factors arc subjective opinion and 
the individual's arbitrary will, which win in this sphere their right, 
their merit, and their dignity. Hence what happens here by inner 
necessity occurs at the same time by the mediation of the arbitrary 
will, and to the conscious subject it has the shape of being the work 
of his own will. 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
IJJ 
In this respect too there is a conspicuous difference, in relation to the 
principle of particularity and the subject's arbitrary will, between the 
political life of the east and the west, and also between that of the ancient 
and the modern world. In the former, the division of the whole into 
classes came about objectively of itself, because it is inherently rational; 
but the principle of subjective particularity was at the same time denied 
its rights, in that, for example, the allotment of individuals to classes was 
left to the ruling class, as in Plato's Republic, • or to the accident of birth, 
as in the IP..dian caste-system. Thus subjective particularity was not 
incorporated into the organization of society as a whole; it was not 
reconciled in the whole, and therefore-since as an essential moment 
it emerges there in any event-it shows itself there as something 
hostile, as a corruption of the social order (see Remark to Paragraph I85). 
Either it overthrows society, as happened in the Greek states and in the 
Roman Republic; or else, should society preserve itself in being as a 
force or as a religious authority, for instance, it appears as inner corrup-
tion and complete degeneration, as was the case to some extent in 
Sparta and is now altogether the case in India. 
But when subjective particularity is upheld by the objective order 
in conformity with it and is at the same time allowed its rights, then 
it becomes the animating principle of the entire civil society, of 
the development alike of mental activity, merit, and dignity. The 
recognition and the right that what is brought about by reason of 
necessity in civil society and the state shall at the same time be effected 
by the mediation of the arbitrary will is the more precise definition of 
what is primarily meant by freedom in common parlance (see Paragraph 
I 2I ). 
207. A man actualizes himself only in becoming something 
definite, i.e. something specifically particularized; this means re-
stricting himself exclusively to one of the particular spheres of 
need. In this class-system, the ethical frame of mind therefore is 
rectitude and esprit de corps, i.e. the disposition to make oneself a 
member of one of the moments of civil society by one's own act, 
through one's energy, industry, and skill, to maintam oneself in 
this position, and to fend for oneself only through this process of 
mediating oneself with the universal, while in this way gaining 
recognition both in one's own eyes and in the eyes of others. 
Morality has its proper place in this sphere where the paramount 
thing is reflection on one's doings, and the quest of happiness and 
private wants, and where the contingency in satisfying these makes 
into a duty even a single and contingent act of assistance. 
At first (i.e. especially in youth) a man chafes at the idea of resolving 
• Book m [415 a-d]. 

134 
ETHICAL LIFE 
on a particular social position, and looks upon this as a restriction on his 
universal character and as a necessity imposed on him purely ab extra. 
This is because his thinking is still of that abstract kind which refuses 
to move beyond the universal and so never reaches the actual. It does 
not realize that if the concept is to be determinate, it must first of all 
advance into the distinction between the concept and its real existence 
and thereby into determinacy and particularity (see Paragraph 7). It is 
only thus that the concept can win actuality and ethical objectivity. [A.] 
208. As the private particularity of knowing and willing, the 
principle of this system of needs contains absolute universality, 
the universality of freedom, only abstractly and therefore as the 
right of property. At this point, however, this right is no longer 
merely implicit but has attained its recognized actuality as the 
protection of property through the administration of justice. 
B. The Administration of Justice 
209. The relatedness arising from the reciprocal bearing on one 
another of needs and \vork to satisfy these is first of all reflected 
into itself as infinite personality, as abstract rightY But it is this 
very sphere of relatedness-a sphere of education-which gives 
abstract right the determinate existence of being something uni-
versally recognized, known, and willed, and having a validity and 
an objective actuality mediated by this known and willed character. 
It is part of education, of thinking as the consciousness of the single 
in the form of universality, that the ego comes to be apprehended as a 
universal person in which all are identical. A man counts as a man in 
virtue of his manhood alone, not because he is a Jew, Catholic, Pro-
testant, German, Italian, &c. This is an assertion which thinking 
ratifies and to be conscious of it is of infinite importance. It is defective 
only when it is crystallized, e.g. as a cosmopolitanism in opposition to 
the concrete life of the state. [A.] 
210. The objective actuality of the right consists, first, in its 
existence for consciousness, in its being known in some way or 
other; secondly, in its possessing the power which the actual 
possesses, in its being valid, and so also in its becoming known 
as universally valid. 
(a) Right as Law 
211. The principle of rightness becomes the law ( Gesetz) \\hen, 
in its objective existence, it is posited (gcsetzt), i.e. when thinking 
makes it determinate for consciousness and makes it knO\vn as 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
135 
what is right and valid; and in acquiring this determinate charac-
ter, the right becomes positive law in general. 
To posit something as universal, i.e. to bring it before consciousness 
as universal, is, I need hardly say, to think (compare Remarks to Para-
graphs I 3 and 2 I). Thereby its content is reduced to its simplest form 
and so is given its final determinacy. In becoming law, what is right 
acquires for the first time not only the form proper to its universality, 
but also its true determinacy. Hence making a law is not to be repre-
sented as merely the expression of a rule of behaviour valid for everyone, 
though that is one moment in legislation; the more important moment, 
the inner essence of the matter, is knowledge of the content of the law 
in its determinate universality. 
Since it is only animals which have their law as instinct, while it is man 
alone who has law as custom, even systems of customary law 58 contain the 
moment of being thoughts and being known. Their difference from 
positive law consists solely in this, that they are known only in a sub-
jective and accidental way, with the result that in themselves they are 
less determinate and the universality of thought is less clear in them. 
(And apart from this, knowledge of a system of law either in general or in 
its details, is the accidental possession of a few.) The supposition that 
it is customary law, on the strength of its character as custom, which 
possesses the privilege of having become part of life is a delusion, since 
the valid laws of a nation do not cease to be its customs by being written 
and codified-and besides, it is as a rule precisely those versed in the 
deadest of topics and the deadest of thoughts who talk nowadays of 
'life' and of 'becoming part of life'. When a nation begins to acquire 
even a little culture, its customary law must soon come to be collected 
and put together. Such a collection is a legal code. hut one which, as a 
mere collection, is markedly formless, indeterminate, and fragmentary. 
The main difference between it and a code properly so-called is that in 
the latter the principles of jurisprudence in their universality, and so in 
their determinacy, have been apprehended in terms of thought and ex-
pressed. English national law or municipallaws9 is contained, as is well 
known, in statutes (written laws) and in so-called 'unwritten' laws. 
This unwritten law, however, is as good as written, and knowledge of it 
may, and indeed must, be acquired simply by reading the numerous 
quartos which it fills. The monstrous confusion, however, which pre-
vails both in English law and its administration is graphically portrayed 
by those acquainted with the matter. 6o In particular, they comment on 
the fact that, sin<.:e this unwritten law is contained in court verdicts and 
judgements, the judges are continually legislators. The authority of 
precedent is binding on them, since their predecessors have done 
nothing but give expression to the unwritten law; and yet they are 
just as much exempt from its authority, because they are themselves 

ETHICAL LIFE 
repositories of the unwritte~: law and so have the right to cntlc1ze 
previous judgements and pronounce whether they accorded with the 
unwritten law or not. 
A similar confusion might have arisen in the legal system of the later 
Roman Empire owing to the different but authoritative judgements of 
all the famous jurists. An Emperor61 met the situation, however, by 
a sensible expedient when, by what was called the Law of Citations, he 
set up a kind of College of the jurists who,were longest deceased. There 
was a President, and the majority vote was accepted.* 
No greater insult62 could be offered to a civilized people or to its 
lawyers than to deny them ability to codify their law; for such ability 
cannot be that of constructing a legal system with a novel content, but 
only that of apprehending, i.e. grasping in thought, the content of 
existing laws in its determinate universality and then applying them tu 
particular cases. [A.] 
212. It is only because of this identity between its implicit and 
its posited character that positive law has obligatory force in 
virtue of its rightness. In being posited in positive law, the right 
acquires determinate existence. Into such existence there may 
enter the contingency of self-will and other particular circum-
stances and hence there may be a discrepancy between the content 
of the law and the principle of rightness. 
In positive law, therefore, it is the legal which is the source of our 
knowledge of what is right, or, more exactly, of our legal rights (Rech-
tens). Thus the science of positive law is to that extent an historical 
science with authority as its guiding principle. Anything over and above 
this historical study is matter for the Understanding and concerns the 
collection of laws, their classification on external principles, deductions 
from them, their application to fresh details, &c. When the Under-
standing meddles with the nature of the thing itself, its theories, e.g. of 
criminal law, show what its deductive argumentation can concoct. 
The science of positive law has not only the right, but even the ines-
capable duty, to study given laws, to deduce from its positive data their 
progress in history, their applications and subdivisions, down to the last 
detail, and to exhibit their implications. On the other hand, if, after all 
these deductions have been proved, the further question about the 
rationality of a specific law is still raised, the question may seem perverse 
to those who are busied with these pursuits, but their astonishment at 
it should at least stop short of dismay. 
With this Remark, compare what was said in the Remark to Paragraph 
3 about 'understanding' the law. 
• Hugo: Lehrbuclz der Geschichte des riimisi:hen Rechts, § 354 [§ 385 in the 7th 
edn.]. 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
137 
213. Right becomes determinate in the first place when it has 
the form of being posited as positive law; it also becomes deter-
minate in content by being applied both to the material of civil 
society (i.e. to the endlessly growing complexity and subdivision 
of social ties and the different species of property and contract 
within the society) and also to ethical ties based on the heart, on 
love and trust, though only in so far as these involve abstract right 
as one of their aspects (see Paragraph I 59). :Morality and moral 
commands concern the will on its most private, subjective, and 
particular side, and so cannot be a matter for positive legislation. 
Further material for the determinate content of law is provided by 
the rights and duties which have their source in the administration 
of justice itself, in the state, and so forth. [A.] 
214. But apart from being applied to particular instances, right 
by being embodied in positive law becomes applicable to the 
single case. Hence it enters the sphere where quantity, not the 
concept, is the principle of determination. This is the sphere of 
the quantitative as such, of the quantitative as that which deter-
mines the relative value in exchange of qualia. In this sphere, the 
concept merely lays down a general limit, v>ithin which vacillation 
is still allowed. This vacillation must be terminated, however, in 
the interest of getting something done, and for this reason there is 
a place within that limit for contingent and arbitrary decisions. 
The purely positive side of law lies chiefly in this focusing of the 
universal not merely on a particular instance, but on an isolated case, 
i.e. in its direct application. Reason cannot determme, nor can the con-
cept provide any principle whose application could decide whether 
justice requires for an ofi"ence (i) a corporal punishment of forty lashes 
or thirty-nine, or (ii) a fine of five dollars or four dollars ninety-three, 
four, &c., cents, or (iii) imprisonment of a year or three hundred and 
sixty-four, three, &c., days, or a year and one, two, or three days. And 
yet injustice is done at once if there is one lash too many, or one dollar 
or one cent, one week in prison or one day, too many or too few. 
Reason itself requires us to recognize that contingency, contradiction, 
and show have a sphere and a right of their own, restricted though it ce, 
and it is irrational to strive to resolve and rectify contradictions within 
that sphere. Here the only interest present is that something be actually 
done, that the matter be settled and decided somehow, no matter how 
(within a certain limit). This decision pertains to abstract subjectivity, 
to formal self-certainty, which may decide either by simply holding to 
its power (within that limit) of settling the matter by merely terminating 
deliberation and thereby dismissing it out of hand, or else by adopting 

ETHICAL LIFE 
some reason for decision such as keeping to round numbers or always 
adopting, say thirty-nine. 6J 
It is true that the law does not settle these ultimate decisions required 
by actual life; it leaves them instead to the judge's discretion, merely 
limiting him by a maximum and minimum. But this does not affect the 
point at issue, because the maximum and minimum are themselves in 
every instance only round numbers once more. To fix them, therefore, 
does. not exempt the judge from making a finite, purely positive, decision, 
since on the contrary such a decision is still left to him by the necessities 
of the case. [A.] 
(b) Law determinately existent 
215. If laws are to have a binding force, it follows that, in view 
of the right of self-consciousness (see Paragraph 132 and the 
Remark thereto) they must be made universally known. 
To hang the laws so high that no citizen could read them (as Diony-
sius64the Tyrant did) is injustice of one and the same kind as to bury them 
in row upon row of learned tomes, collections of dissenting judgements 
and opinions, records of customs, &c., and in a dead language too, so 
that knowledge of the law of the land is accessible only to those who havt> 
made it their professional study. Rulers who have given a national law 
to their peoples in the form of a well-arranged and clear-cut legal code-
or even a mere formless collection of laws, like Justinian 's6S-have been 
the greatest benefactors of their peoples and have received thanks and 
praise for their beneficence. But the truth is that their work was at the 
same time a great act of justice. [A.] 
216. For a public legal code, simple general laws are required, 
and yet the nature of the finite material to which law is applied 
leads to the further determining of general laws ad infinitum. On 
the one hand, the law ought to be a comprehensive whole, closed 
and complete; and yet, on the other hand, the need for further 
determinations is continual. But since this antinomy arises only 
when universal principles, which remain fixed and unchanged, are 
applied to particular types of case, the right to a complete legal 
code remains unimpaired, like the right that these simple general 
principles should be capable of being laid down and understood 
apart and in distinction from their application to such particular 
types. 
A fruitful source of complexity in legislation is the gradual intrusion 
of reason, of what is inherently and actually right, into primitive institu-
tions which have something wrong at their roots and so are purely 
historical survivals. This occurred in Roman law, as was remarked 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
139 
above (see Remark to Paragraph 1 So), in medieval feudal law, &c. 
It is essential to notice, however, that the very nature of the finite 
material to which law is applied necessarily entails an infinite progress 
in the application to it of principles universal in themselves and in-
herently and actually rational. 
It is misunderstandir1g which has given rise alike to the demand-a 
morbid craving of German scholars chiefly-that a legal code should be 
something absolutely complete, incapable of any fresh determination in 
detail, and also to the argument that because a code is incapable of such 
completion, therefore we ought not to produce something 'incomplete', 
i.e. we ought not to produce a code at all. The misunderstanding rests 
in both cases on a misconception of the nature of a finite subject-matter 
like private law, whose so-called 'completeness' is a perennial approxi-
mation to completeness, on a misconception of the difference66 between 
the universal of reason and the universal of the Understanding, and also 
on the application of the latter to the materiai of finitude and atomicity 
which goes on for ever.-Le plus grand ennemi du Bien, c'est le :11eilleur67 
is the utterance of true common sense68 against the common sense of 
idle argumentation and abstract reflection. [A.] 
217. The principle of rightness passes over in civil society into 
la\\·. :\I y individual right, whose embodiment has hitherto been 
immediate and abstract, now similarly becomes embodied in the 
existent will and kno\dedge of ewryone, in the sense that it 
becomes recognized. Hence property acq msi tions and transfers 
must no\v be undertaken and concluded only 111 the form which 
that embodiment gives to them. In civil societY, property rests 
on contract and on the formalities which make "\.\ ncrship capable 
of proof and valid in law. 
Original, i.e. direct, titles and means of acquisition (see Paragraphs 
5+ if.) are simply discarded in civil society and appear only as isolated 
accidents or as subordmated factors of property transactions. It is 
either feeling, refusing to move beyond the subjective, or reflection, 
clinging to its abstract essences, which casts formalities aside, while the 
dry-as-dust l'nderstanding may for its part cling to formalities instead 
of the real thing and multiply them indefinitely. 
Apart from this, however, the march of mental deYelopment is the 
long and hard struggle to free a content from its sensuous ~nd immediate 
form, endow it with its appropriate form of thought, and thereby give it 
simple and adequate expression. It is because this is the case that when 
the development of law is just beginning, ceremonies and formalities are 
more circumstantial and count rather as the thing itself than as its 
symbol. Thus even in Roman law, a number of forms and especially 
phrases were retained from old-fashioned ceremo'nial usages, instead of 

ETHICAL LIFE 
being replaced by intelligible forms and phrases adequately expressing 
them. 69 [A.) 
218. Since property and personality have legal recognition and 
validity in civil society, wrongdoing now becomes an infringement, 
not merely of what is subjectively infinite, but of the universal 
thing which is existent with inherent stability and strength. Hence 
a new attitude arises: the action is seen as a danger to society and 
thereby the magnitude of the wrongdoing is increased.7° On the 
other hand, however, the fact that society has become strong and 
sure of itself diminishes the external importance of the injury and 
so leads to a mitigation of its punishment. 
The fact that an injury to one member of society is an injury to all 
others does not alter the conception of wrongdoing, but it does alter it 
in respect of its outward existence as an injury done, an injury which 
now affects the mind and consciousness of civil society as a whole, not 
merely the external embodiment of the person directly injured. In 
heroic times, as we see in the tragedy of the ancients, 7I the citizens did 
not feel themselves injured by wrongs which members of the royal 
houses did to one another. 
Implicitly, crime is an infinite72 injury; but as an existent fact it must 
be measured in quantity and quality (see Paragraph 96), and since its 
field of existence here has the essential character of affecting an idea and 
consciousness of the validity of the laws, its danger to civil society is a 
determinant of the magnitude of a crime, or even one of its qualitative 
characteristics. 
Now this quality or magnitude varies with the state of civil society; 
and this is the justification for sometimes attaching the penalty of death 
to a theft of a few pence or a turnip, and at other times a light penalty to 
a theft of a hundred or more times that amount. 73 If we consider its 
danger to society, this seems at first sight to aggravate the crime; but in 
fact it is just this which has been the prime cause of the mitigation of its 
punishment. A penal code, then, is primarily the child of its age and the 
state of civil society at the time. [A.] 
(c) The Court of Justice 
219. By taking the form of law, right steps into a determinate 
mode of being. It is then something on its own account, and in 
contrast with particular willing and opining of the right, it is self-
subsistent and has to vindicate itself as something universal. This 
is achieved by recognizing it and making it actual in a particular 
case without the subjective feeling of private interest; and this is 
the business of a public authority-the court of justice. 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
The historical origin of the judge and his court may have had the form 
of a patriarch's gift to his people or of force or free choice; but this 
makes no difference to the concept of the thing. To regard the intro-
duction of a legal system as no more than an optional act of grace or 
favour on the part of monarchs and governments (as Herr von Haller74 
does in his Restauration der StaatsU'issenschaft) is a piece of the mere 
thoughtlessness which has no inkling of the point at is6ue in a discussion 
of law and the state. The point is that legal and political institutions are 
rational in principle and therefore absolutely necessary, and the question 
of the form in which they arose or were introduced is entirely irrelevant 
to a consideration of their rational basis. 
At the other extreme from Herr von Haller's point of view is the 
barbarous notion that the administration of justice is now, as it was in 
the days when might was right, an improper exercise of force, a sup-
pression of freedom, and a despotism. The administration of justice 
must be regarded as the fulfilment of a duty by the public authority, no 
less than as the exercise of a right; and so far as it is a right, it does not 
depend upon an optional delegation to one authority by the individual 
members of society. 
220. When the right against crime has the form of revenge (see 
Paragraph 102), it is only right implicit, not right in the form of 
right, i.e. no act of revenge is justified. Instead of the injured party, 
the injured universal now comes on the scene, and this has its 
proper actuality in the court of law. It takes over the pursuit and 
the avenging of crime, and this pursuit consequently ceases to be 
the subjective and contingent retribution of rewnge and is trans-
formed into the genuine reconciliation of right\\ nh itself, i.e. into 
punishment. Objectively, this is the reconciliatiOn ,,f the law with 
itself; by the annulment of the crime, the law is restored and its 
authority is thereby actualized. Subjectively, it is the reconciliation 
of the criminal with himself, i.e. with the law known by him as his 
own and as valid for him and his protection; when this law is 
executed upon him, he himself finds in this process the satisfaction 
of justice and nothing save his own act. 
221. A member of civil society has the right zn judicio stare75 
and, correspondingly, the duty of acknowledging the jurisdiction 
of the court and accepting its decision as final when his own rights 
are in dispute. [A.] 
222. In court the specific character which rightness acquires is 
that it must be demonstrable. When parties go to law, they are put 
in the position of having to make good their evidence and their 

142 
ETHICAL LIFE 
claims and to make the judge acquainted with the facts. These 
steps in a legal process are themselves rights, and their course must 
therefore be fixed by law. They also constitute an essential part of 
jurisprudence. [A.] 
223. These steps in a legal process are subdivided continually 
within no fixed limits into more and more actions, each being 
distinct in itself and a right. Hence a legal process, in itself in any 
case a means, now begins to be something external to its end and 
contrasted with it. This long course of formalities is a right of the 
parties at law and they have the right to traverse it from beginning 
to end. Still, it may be turned into an evil, and even an instrument 
of wrong, and for this reason it is by law made the duty of the 
parties to submit themselves to the simple process of arbitration 
(before a tribunal of arbitrators)7 6 and to the attempt to reconcile 
their differences out of court, in order that they-and right itself, 
as the substance of the thing and so the thing really at issue-may 
be protected against legal processes and their misuse. 
Equity involves a departure from formal rights owing to moral or 
other considerations and is concerned primarily with the content of th~ 
lawsuit. A court of equity, however, comes to mean a court which 
decides in a single case without insisting on the formalities of a legal 
process or, in particular, on the objective evidence which the letter of 
the law may require. Further, it decides on the merits of the single case 
as a unique one, not with a view to disposing of it in such a way as to 
create a binding legal precedent for the future. 
224. Amongst the rights of the subjective consciousness are not 
only the publication of the laws (see Paragraph 215) but also the 
possibility of ascertaining the actualization of the law in a parti-
cular case (the course of the proceedings, the legal argument, &c.) 
-i.e. the publicity of judicial proceedings. The reason for this is 
that a trial is implicitly an event of universal Yalidity, and although 
the particular content of the action affects the interests of the 
parties alone, its universal content, i.e. the right at issue and the 
judgement thereon, affects the interests of everybody. 
If the members of the bench deliberate amongst themselves about the 
judgement which they are to deliver, such deliberations express opinions 
and views still personal and so naturally are not public. [A.) 
225. By the judgement of the court, the law is applied to a 
single case, and the work of judgement has two distinct aspects: 
first, ascertainment of the nature of the case as a unique, single, 
'
~ 

II 
I 
CIVIL SOCIETY 
143 
occurrence (e.g. whether a contract, &c., &c., has been made, 
whether a trespass has been committed, and if so by whom) and, 
in criminal cases, reflection to determine the essential, criminal, 
character of the deed (see Remark to Paragraph I 19); secondly, 
the subsumption of the case under the law that right must be 
restored. Punishment in criminal cases is a conception falling 
under this law. Decisions on these two different aspects are given 
by different functionaries.n 
In the Roman judicial system, this distinction of functions appeared 
in that the Praetor pronounced judgement on the assumption that the 
facts were so and so, and then appointed a special judex to inquire into 
the facts. 78 
In English law, it is left to the insight or option of the prosecutor to 
determine the precise character of a criminal act (e.g. whether it is 
murder or manslaughter) and the court is powerless to alter the inaict-
ment if it finds the prosecutor's choice wrong. 79 
226. First, the conduct of the entire process of inquiry, secondly, 
the detailed stages of the action between the parties (these stages 
themselves being rights-see Paragraph 222 ), and then also the 
second of the aspects of the work of judgement mentioned in 
the previous Paragraph, are all a task which properly belongs to the 
judge at law. He is the organ of the law, and the case must be 
prepared for him in such a way as to make possible its subsumption 
under some principle; that is to say, it must be stripped of its 
apparent, empirical, character and exalted into a rt'lugnized fact of 
a general type. 
227. The first aspect of the work of judgement, i.e. the know-
ledge of the facts of the case as a unique, single, occurrence, and 
the description of its general character, involves in itself no pro-
nouncement on points of law. This is knO\vledge attainable by any 
educated man. In settling the character of an action, the sub-
jective moment, i.e. the agent's insight and intentiOn (see the 
Second Part8°), is the essential thing; and apart from this, the 
proof depends not on objects of reason or abstractions of the Under-
standing, but only on single details and circumstances, objects of 
sensuous intuition and subjective certainty, and therefore does not 
contain in itself any absolute, objective, probative factor. It follows 
that judgement on the facts lies in the last resort with subjective 
conviction and conscience (animi sententia8 1), while the proof, 
resting as it does on the statements and affidavits of others, receives 
its final though purely subjective verification from the oath. 

144 
ETHICAL LIFE 
In this matter it is of the first importance to fix our eyes on the type of 
proof here in question and to distinguish it from knowledge and proof of 
another sort. To establish by proof a rational category, like the concept 
of right itself, means to apprehend its necessity, and so demands a 
method other than that requisite for the proof of a geometrical theorem. 
Further, in this latter case, the figure is determined by the Understand-
ing and made abstract in advance according to a rule. But in the case of 
something empirical in content, like a fact, the material of knowledge is 
a given sensuous intuition and subjective sense-certainty, and state-
ments and affidavits about such material. It is then a question of draw-
ing conclusions and putting two and two together out of depositions of 
that kind, attestations and other details, &c. The objective truth which 
emerges from material of this kind and the method appropriate to it 
leads, when attempts are made to determine it rigidly and objectively, to 
half-proofs and then, by further sincere deductions from these-deduc-
tions which at the same time involve formal illogicality-to extraor-
dinary punishments.82 But such objective truth means something quite 
different from the truth of a rational category or a proposition whose 
content the Understanding has determined for itself abstractly in 
advance. To show that, since the strictly legal character of a court 
covers competence to ascertain this sort of truth about empirical events, 
it thereby properly qualifies a court for this task and so gives it an 
inherent exclusive right to perform it and lays on it the necessity of 
performing it-that is the best approach to settling the question of how 
far decisions on points of fact, as well as on points of law, should be 
ascribed to courts as strictly juristic bodies. [A.] 
228. When judgement is pronounced-so far as the function of 
judgement is the subsumption under the law of the case whose 
nature has been settled-the right due to the parties on the score of 
their self-consciousness is preserved in relation to the law because 
the law is known and so is the law of the parties themselves, and in 
relation to the subsumption, because the trial is public. But when 
a verdict is given on the particular, subjective, and external facts of 
the case r t{nowledge of which falls under the first of the aspects 
described in Paragraph 225), this right is satisfied by the confidence 
which the parties feel in the subjectivity of those who give the 
verdict. This confidence is based primarily on the similarity 
between them and the parties in respect of their particularity, 
i.e. their social position, &c. 
The right of self-consciousness, the moment of subjective freedom, 
may be regarded as the fundamental thing to keep before us in consider-
ing the necessity for publicity in legal proceedings and for the so-called 
jury-courts, and this in the last resort is the essence of whatever may be 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
advanced in favour of these institutions on the score of their utility. 
Other points of view and reasoning about their several advantages and 
disadvantages may give rise to an argumentative exchange, but reasoning 
of this kind, like all deductive reasoning, is either secondary and incon-
clusive, or else drawn from other and perhaps higher spheres than that 
of advantage. It may be the case that if the administration of justice 
were entirely in the hands of professional lawyers, and there were no lay 
institutions like juries, it would in theory be managed just as well, if not 
better. It may be so, but even if this possibility rises by general con-
sent to probability, or even certainty, it still does not matter, for on the 
other side there is always the right of self-consciousness, insisting on its 
claims and dissatisfied if laymen play no part. 
Owing to the character of the entire body of the laws, knowledge both 
of what is right and also of the course of legal proceedings may become, 
together with the capacity to prosecute an action at law, the property of 
a class which makes itself an exclusive clique by the use of a terminology 
like a foreign tongue to those whose rights are at issue. If this happens, 
the members of civil society, who depend for their livelihood on their 
industry, on their own knowledge and will, are kept strangers to the 
law, not only to those parts of it affecting their most personal and 
intimate affairs, but also to its substantive and rational basis, the right 
itself, and the result is that they become the wards, or even in a sense 
the bondsmen, of the legal profession. They may indeed have the right 
to appear in court in person and to 'stand' there (in judicio stare), but 
their bodily presence is a trifle 'if their minds are not to be there also, 
if they are not to follow the proceedings with their own knowledge, and if 
the justice they receive remains in their eyes a doom pronounced ab extra. 
229. In civil society, the Idea is lost in particularity and has 
fallen asunder with the separation of inward :md outward. In the 
administration of justice, however, civil society returns to its 
concept, to the unity of the implicit universal with the subjec-
tive particular, although here the latter is only that present in 
single cases and the universality in question is that of abstract 
right. The actualization of this unity through its extension to the 
whole ambit of particularity is (i) the specific function of the 
Police, though the unification which it effects is only relative; 
(ii) it is the Corporation which actualizes the unity completely, 
though only in a whole which, while concrete, is restricted. 83 [A.) 
C. The Police and the Cmporation 
230. In the system of needs, the livelihood and welfare uf every 
single person is a possibility whose actual attainment is just as much 

146 
ETHICAL LIFE 
conditioned by his caprices and particular endowment as by the 
objective system of needs. Through the administration of justice, 
offences against property or personality are annulled. But the right 
actually present in the particular requires, first, that accidental 
hindrances to one aim or another be removed, and undisturbed 
safety of person and property be attained; and secondly, that the 
securing of every single person's livelihood and welfare be treated 
and actualized as a right, i.e. that particular welfare as such be so 
treated. 
(a) Police [or the public authority] 
231. Inasmuch as it is still the particular will which governs the 
choice of this or that end, the universal authority by which security 
is ensured remains in the first instance, (a) restricted to the sphere 
of contingencies, and (b) an external organization. 
232. Crime is contingency as subjective willing of evil, and this 
is what the universal authority must prevent or bring to justice. 
But, crime apart, the subjective willing which is permissible in 
actions lawful per se and in the private use of property, also comes 
into external relation with other single persons, as well as with 
public institutions, other than law-courts, established for realizing 
a common end. This universal aspect makes private actions a 
matter of contingency which escapes the agent's control and which 
either does or may injure others and wrong them. 
233. There is here only a possibility of injury; but the actual 
non-occurrence of injury is at this stage not just another con-
tingency. The point is that the actions of individuals may always 
be wrongful, and this is the ultimate reason for police control and 
penal justice. 
234. The relations between external existents fall into the in-
rinite of the Understanding; there is, therefore, no inherent line of 
distinction between what is and what is not injurious, even where 
crime is concerned, or between what is and what is not suspicious, 
or between what is to be forbidden or subjected to supervision 
and what is to be exempt from prohibition, from surveillance and 
suspicion, from inquiry and the demand to render an account of 
itself. These details are determined by custom, the spirit of the rest 
of the constitution, contemporary conditions, the crisis of the hour, 
and so forth. [A.] 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
147 
235. In the indefinite multiplication and interconnexion of 
day-to-day needs, (a) the acquisition and exchange of the means to 
their satisfaction-a satisfaction which everyone confidently expects 
to be possible of attainment without hindrance, and (b) the en-
deavours made and the transactions carried out in order to shorten 
the process of attainment as much as possible, give rise to factors 
which are a common interest, and when one man occupies himself 
with these his work is at the same time done for all. The situation 
is productive too of contrivances and organizations84 which may be 
of use to the community as a whole. These universal activities and 
organizations of general utility call for the oversight and care of the 
public authority. 
236. The differing interests of producers and consumers may 
come into collision with each other; and although a fair balance 
betvveen them on the whole may be brought about automatically, 
still their adjustment also requires a control which stands above 
both and is consciously undertaken. The right to the exercise of 
such control in a single case (e.g. in the fixing of the prices of the 
commonest necessaries of life) depends on the fact that, by being 
publicly exposed for sale, ss goods in absolutely universal daily de-
mand are offered not so much to an individual as such but rather 
to a universal purchaser, the public; and thus both the defence of 
the public's right not to be defrauded, and also the management 
of goods inspection, may lie, as a common concern, with a public 
authority. But public care and direction are most of all necessary 
in the case of the larger branches of industry, because these are 
dependent on conditions abroad and on combinations of distant 
circumstances which cannot be grasped as a whole by the in-
dividuals tied to these industries for their living. 
At the other extreme to freedom of trade and commerce m civil 
society is public organization to provide for everything and determine 
everyone's labour-take for example in ancient times the labour on the 
pyramids and the other huge monuments in Egypt and Asia which were 
constructed for public ends, and the worker's task was not mediated 
through his private choice and particular interest. This interest 
invokes freedom of trade and commerce against control from above; 
but the more blindly it sinks into self-seeking aims, the more it 
requires such control to bring it back to the universal. Control is also 
necessary to diminish the danger of upheavals arising from clashing 
interests and to abbreviate the period in which their tension should be 

ETHICAL LIFE 
eased through the working of a necessity of which they themselves know 
nothing. [A.] 
237. Now while the possibility of sharing in the general wealth 
is open to individuals and is assured to them by the public 
authority, still it is subject to contingencies on the subjective side 
(quite apart from the fact that this assurance must remain incom-
plete), and the more it presupposes skill, health, capital, and so 
forth as its conditions, the more is it so subject. 
238. Originally the family is the substantive whole whose 
function it is to provide for the individual on his particular side by 
giving him either the means and the skill necessary to enable him 
to earn his living out of the resources of society, or else subsistence 
and maintenance in the event of his suffering a disability. But civil 
society tears the individual from his family ties, estranges the 
members of the family from one another, and recognizes them as 
self-subsistent persons. Further, for the paternal soil and the 
external inorganic resources of nature from which the individual 
formerly derived his livelihood, it substitutes its own soil and 
subjects the permanent existence of even the entire family to 
dependence on itself and to contingency. Thus the individual 
becomes a son of civil society which has as many claims upon him 
as he has rights against it. [A.] 
239. In its character as a universal family, civil society has the 
right and duty of superintending and influencing education, inas-
much as education bears upon the child's capacity to become a 
member of society. Society's right here is paramount over the 
arbitrary and contingent preferences of parents, particularly in 
cases where education is to be completed not by the parents but 
by others. To the same end, society must provide public educa-
tional facilities so far as is practicable. [A.] 
240. Similarly, society has the right and duty of acting as 
trustee to those whose extravagance destroys the security of their 
own subsistence or their families'. It must substitute for extrava-
gance the pursuit of the ends of society and the individuals con-
cerned. [A.] 
241. Not only caprice, however, but also contingencies, 
physical conditions, and factors grounded in external circumstances 
(s~e Pa1agraph zoo) may reduce men to poverty. The poor still 
have the needs common to civil society, and yet since society has 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
149 
withdrawn from them the natural means of acquisition (see Para-
graph 217) and broken the bond of the family-in the wider sense 
of the clan (see Paragraph r8r)-their poverty leaves them more or 
less deprived of all the advantages of society, of the opportunity of 
acquiring skill or education of any kind, as well as of the adminis-
tration of justice, the public health services, and often even of the 
consolations of religion, and so forth. The public authority takes 
the place of the family where the poor are concerned in respect not 
only of their immediate want but also of laziness of disposition, 
malignity, and the other vices which arise out of their plight and 
their sense of wrong. 
242. Poverty and, in general, the distress of every kind to which 
every individual is exposed from the start in the cycle of his natural 
life has a subjective side which demands similarl; subjective aid, 
arising both from the special circumstances of a particular case and 
also from love and sympathy. This is the place where morality 
finds plenty to do despite all public organization. Subjective aid, 
however, both in itself and in its operation, is dependent on con-
tingency and consequently society struggles to make it less neces-
sary, by discovering the general causes of penury and general 
means of its relief, and by organizing relief accordingly. 
Casual almsgiving and casual endowments, e.g. for the burning of 
lamps before holy images, &c., are supplemented by public alms-
houses, hospitals, street-lighting, 86 and so forth. There is still quite 
enough left over and above these things for charity to do on its own 
account. A false view is implied both when chanty insists on having 
this poor relief reserved solely to private sympathy and the accidental 
occurrence of knowledge and a charitable disposition, and also when it 
feels injured or mortified by universal regulations and ordinances which 
are obligatory. Public social conditions are on the contrary to be re-
gardt:d as all the more perfect the less (in comparison with what is 
arranged publicly) is left for an individual to do by himself as his private 
inclination directs. 
243. \Vhen civil society is in a state of unimpeded activity, it is 
engaged in expanding internally8 7 in population and industry. The 
amassing of wealth is intensified by generalizing (a) the linkage of 
men by their needs, and (b) the methods of preparing and dis-
tributing the means to satisfy these needs, because it is from this 
double process of generalization that the largest profits are derived. 
That is one side of the picture. The other side is the subdivision 
and restriction of particular jobs. This results in the dependence 

ETHICAL LIFE 
and distress of the class tied to work of that sort, and these again 
entail inability to feel and enjoy the broader freedoms and especially 
the intellectual benefits of civil society. 
244. When the standard of living of a large mass of people falls 
below a certain subsistence level-a level regulated automatically 
as the one necessary for a member of the society-and when there 
is a consequent loss of the sense of right and wrong, of honesty and 
the self-respect which makes a man insist on maintaining himself 
by his own work and effort, the result is the creation of a rabbleBB 
of paupers. At the same time this brings with it, at the other end of 
the social scale, conditions which greatly facilitate the concentra-
tion of disproportionate \vealth in a few hands. [A.] 
245. When the masses begin to decline into poverty, (a) the 
burden of maintaining them at their ordinary standard of living 
might be directly laid on the wealthier classes, or they might 
receive the means of livelihood directly from other public sources 
of wealth (e.g. from the endowments of rich hospitals, monasteries, 
and other foundations). In either case, however, the needy would 
receive subsistence directly, not by means of their work, and this 
would violate the principle of civil society and the feeling of 
individual independence and self-respect in its individual members. 
(b) As an alternative, they might be given subsistence indirectly 
through being given work, i.e. the opportunity to work. In this 
event the volume of production would be increased, but the evil 
consists precisely in an excess of production and in the lack of a 
proportionate number of consumers who are themselves also 
producers, and thus it is simply intensified by both of the methods 
(a) and (b) by which it is sought to alleviate it. It hence becomes 
apparent that despite an excess of wealth civil society is not rich 
enough, i.e. its own resources are insufficient to check excessive 
poverty and the creation of a penurious rabble. 
In the example of England we may study these phenomena on a 
large scale and also in particular the results of poor-rates, immense 
foundations, unlimited private beneficence, and above all the abolition 
of the Guild Corporations. In Britain, particularly in Scotland, the 
most direct measure against poverty and especially against the loss 
of shame and self-respect-the subjective bases of society-as well as 
against laziness and extravagance, &c., the begetters of the rabble, has 
turned out to be to leave the poor to their fate and instruct them to beg 
in the streets. so 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
246. This inner dialectic of civil society thus drives it-or at any 
rate drives a specific civil society-to push beyond its own limits 
and seek markets, and so its necessary means of subsistence, in 
other lands which are either deficient in the goods it has over-
produced, or else generally backward in industry, &c. 
247. The principle of family life is dependence on the soil, on 
land, terra firma. Similarly, the natural element for industry, 
animating its outward movement, is the sea. Since the passion for 
gain involves risk, industry though bent on gain yet lifts itself 
above it; instead of remaining rooted to the soil and the limited 
circle of civil life with its pleasures and desires, it embraces the 
element of flux, danger, and destruction. Further, the sea is the 
greatest means of communication,9° and trade by sea creates 
commercial connexions between distant countries and so relations 
involving contractual rights. At the same time, commerce of this 
kind is the most potent instrument of culture, and through it trade 
acquires its significance in the history of the world. 
Rivers are not natural boundaries of separation, which is what they 
have been accounted to be in modern times. On the contrary, it is 
truer to say that they, and the sea likewise, link men together. Horace is 
wrong when he says: 
deus abscidit 
prudens Oceano dissociabili 
terras."' 
The proof of this lies not merely in the fact that the basins of rivers are 
inhabited by a single clan or tribe, but also, for example, in the ancient 
bonds between Greece, Ionia, and Magna Graecia, between Brittany and 
Britain, between Denmark and Norway, Sweden, Finland, Livonia, &c., 
bonds, further, which are especially striking in contrast with the com-
paratively slight intercourse between the inhabitants of the littoral and 
those of the hinterland. To realize what an instrument of culture lies in 
the link with the sea, consider countries where industry flourishes and con-
trast their relation to the sea with that of countries which have eschewed 
sea-faring and which, like Egypt and India, have become stagnant and 
sunk in the most frightful and scandalous superstition. Notice also how 
all great progressive peoples press onward to the sea. 
248. This .far-flung connecting link affords the means for the 
colonizing activity-sporadic or systematic-to which the mature 
civil society is driven and by which it supplies to a part of its 
• Odes, I. i1i [11. 21-3, 'God of set purpose has sundered the lands by the 
estranging sea']. 

ETHICAL LIFE 
population a return to life on the family basis in a new land and so 
also supplies itself with a new demand and field for its industry. 
[A.] 
249. While the public authority must also undertake the higher 
directive function of providing for the interests which lead be-
yond the borders of its society (see Paragraph 246), its primary 
purpose is to actualize and maintain the universal contained within 
the particularity of civil society, and its control takes the form of an 
external system and organization for the protection and security of 
particular ends and interests en masse, inasmuch as these interests 
subsist only in this universal. This universal is immanent in the 
interests of particularity itself and, in accordance with the Idea, 
particularity makes it the end and object of its own willing and 
activity. In this way ethical principles circle back and appear in 
civil society as a factor immanent in it; this constitutes the speci-
fic character of the Corporation. 
(b) The Corporation 
250. In virtue of the substantiality of its natural and family life, 
the agricultural class has directly within itself the concrete uni-
versal in which it lives. The class of civil servants is universal in 
character and so has the universal explicitly a; its ground and as the 
aim of its activity. The class between them, the business class, is 
essentially concentrated on the particular, and hence it is to it that 
Corporations are specially appropriate. 
251. The labour organization of civil society is split, in accor-
dance with the nature of its particulars, into different branches. 
The implicit likeness of such particulars to one another becomes 
really existent in an association, as something common to its mem-
bers.91 Hence a selfish purpose, directed towards its particular self-
interest, apprehends and evinces itself at the same time as universal; 
and a member of civil society is in virtue of his own particular skill 
a member of a Corporation, whose universal purpose is thus wholly 
concrete92 and no wider in scope than the purpose involved in 
business, its proper task and interest. 
252. In accordance with this definition of its functions, a Cor-
poration has the right, under the surveillance of the public authority, 
(a) to look after its own interests within its own sphere, (b) to co-opt 
members, qualified objectively by the requisite skill and rectitude, 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
153 
to a number fixed by the general structure of society, (c) to protect 
its memhers against particular contingencies, (d) to provide the 
education requisite to fit others to become members. In short, its 
right is to come on the scene like a second family for its members, 
while civil society can only be an indeterminate sort of family 
because it comprises everyone and so is farther removed from 
individuals and their special exigencies. 
The Corporation member is to be distinguished from a day labourer 
or from a man who is prepared to undertake casual employment on a 
single occasion. The former who is, or will become, master of his craft, 
is a member of the association not for casual gain on single occasions but 
for the whole range, the universality, of his personal livelihood. 
Privileges, in the sense of the rights of a branch of civil society 
organized into a Corporation, are distinct in meaning from privileges 
proper in the etymological sense. 93 The latter are casual exceptions to 
universal rules; the former, however, are only the crystallization, as 
regulations, of characteristics inherent in an essential branch of society 
itself owing to its nature as particular. 
253. In the Corporation, the family has its stable basis in the 
sense that its livelihood is assured there, conditionally upon capa-
bility, i.e. it has a stable capital (see Paragraph 170). In addition, 
this nexus of capability and livelihood is a recognized fact, with 
the result that the Corporation member needs no external marks 
beyond his own membership as evidence of his skill and his regular 
income and subsistence, i.e. as evidence that he is a somebody.94 
It is also recognized that he belongs to a whole which is itself an 
organ of the entire society, and that he is actively concerned in 
promoting the comparatively disinterested end of this whole. Thus 
he commands the respect due to one in his social position. 
The institution of Corporations corresponds, on account of its assur-
ance of capital, to the introduction of agriculture and private property 
in another sphere (see Remark to Paragraph 203). 
When complaints are made about the luxury of the business classes 
and their passion for extravagance-which have as their concomitant 
the creation of a rabble of paupers (see Paragraph 244)-we must not 
forget that besides its other causes (e.g. increasing mechanization of 
labour) this phenomenon has an ethical ground, as was indicated above.95 
Unless he is a member of an authorized Corporation (and it is only by 
being authorized that an association becomes a Corporation), an indi-
vidual is without rank or dignity, his isolation reduces his business to 
mere self-seeking, and his livelihood and satisfaction become insecure. 
Consequently, he has to try to gain recognition for himself by giving 

I 54 
ETHICAL LIFE 
external proofs of success in his business, and to these proofs no limits 
can be set. He cannot live in the manner of his class, for no class really 
exists for him, since in civil society it is only something common to 
particular persons which really exists, i.e. something legally constituted 
and recognized. Hence he cannot achieve for himself a way of life 
proper to his class and less idiosyncratic. 
Within the Corporation the help which poverty receives loses its 
accidental character and the humiliation wrongfully associated with it. 
The wealthy perform their duties to their fellow associates and thus 
riches cease to inspire either pride or envy, pride in their owners, envy 
in others. In these conditions rectitude obtains its proper recognition 
and respect. 
254. The so-called 'natural' right of exercising one's skill and 
thereby earning what there is to be earned is restricted within the 
Corporation only in so far as it is therein made rational instead of 
natural. That is to say, it becomes freed from personal opinion and 
contingency, saved from endangering either the individual work-
man or others, recognized, guaranteed, and at the same time 
elevated to conscious effort for a common end. 
255. As the family was the first, so the Corporation is the second 
ethical root of the state, the one planted in civil society. The 
former contains the moments of subjective particularity and ob-
jective universality in a substantial unity. But these moments are 
sundered in civil society to begin with; o.n the one side there is the 
particularity of need and satisfaction, reflected ihto itself, and on 
the other side the universality of abstract rights. In the Corpora-
tion these moments are united in an inward fashion, so that in this 
union particular welfare is present as a right and is actualized. 
The sanctity of marriage and the dignity of Corporation membership 
are the two fixed points96 round which the unorganized atoms of civil 
society revolve. [A.] 
256. The end of the Corporation is restricted and finite, while 
the public authority was an external organization involving a 
separation and a merely relative identity of controller and controlled. 
The end of the former and the externality and relative identity of 
the latter find their truth in the absolutely universal end and its 
absolute actuality. Hence the sphere of civil society passes over 
into the state. 
The town is the seat of the civil life of business. There reflection 
arises, turns in upon itself, and pursues its atomizing task ;97 each man 
maintains himself in and through his relation to others who, like himself, 
I 
j 

CIVIL SOCIETY 
I 55 
are persons possessed of rights. The country, on the other hand, is the 
seat of an ethical life resting on nature and the family. Town and 
country thus constitute the two moments, still ideal98 moments, whose 
true ground is the state, although it is from them that the state springs. 
The philosophic proof of the concept of the state is this development 
of ethical life from its immediate phase through civil society, the phase 
of division, to the state, which then reveals itself as the true ground of 
these phases. A proof in philosophic science can only be a development 
of this kind. 
Since the state appears as a result in the advance of the philosophic 
concept through displaying itself as the true ground [of the earlier 
phases], that show of mediation is now cancelled and the state has 
become directly present before us. Actually, therefore, the state as such 
is not so much the result as the beginning. It is within the state that the 
family is first developed into civil society, and it is the Idea of the state 
itself which disrupts itself into these two moments. Through the 
development of civil society, the substance of ethical life acquires its 
infinite form, which contains in itself these two moments: ( 1) infinite 
differentiation down to the inward experience of independent self-
consciousness, and (2) the form of universality involved in education, 
the form of thought whereby mind is objective and actual to itself as 
an organic totality in laws and institutions which are its will in terms 
of thought. 
SUB-SECTION 3 
THE STATE 
257. The state is the actuality of the ethical Idea. It is ethical 
mind qua the substantial \vill manifest and revealed to itself, know-
ing and thinking itself, accomplishing what it knows and in so far 
as it knows it. The state exists immediately in custom, mediately 
in individual self-consciousness, knowledge, and activity, while 
self-consciousness in virtue of its sentiment towards the state finds 
in the state, as its essence and the end and product of its activity, 
its substantive freedom. 
The Penates are inward gods, gods of the underworld; the mind of a 
nation 1 (Athene for instance) is the divine, knowing and willing itself. 
Family piety is feeling, ethical behaviour directed by feeling; political 
virtue is the willing of the absolute end in terms of thought. 
258. The state is absolutely rational inasmuch as it is the 
actuality of the substantial will which it possesses in the particular 
self-consciousness once that consciousness has been raised to con-

ETHICAL LIFE 
sciousness of its universality. This substantial unity is an absolute 
unmoved end in itself, in which freedom comes into its supreme 
right. On the other hand this final end has supreme right against 
the individual, whose supreme duty is to be a member of the state. 
If the state is confused with civil society, and if its specific end is 
laid down as the security and protection of property and personal free-
dom, then the interest of the individuals as such becomes the ultimate 
end of their association, and it follows that membership of the state is 
something optional. But the state's relation to the individual is quite 
different from this. Since the state is mind objectified, it is only as one 
of its members that the individual himself has objectivity, genuine 
individuality, and an ethical life. Unification pure and simple is the 
true content and aim of the individual, and the individual's destiny is 
the living of a universal life. His further particular satisfaction, activity, 
and mode of conduct have this substantive and universally valid life as 
their starting point and their result. 
Rationality, taken generally and in the abstract, consists in the 
thorough-going unity of the universal and the single. Rationality, 
concrete in the state, consists (a) so far as its content is concerned, in the 
unity of objective freedom (i.e. freedom of the universal or substantial 
will) and subjective freedom (i.e. freedom of everyone in his knowing 
and in his volition of particular ends); and consequently, (b) so far as its 
form is concerned, in self-determining action on laws and principles 
which are thoughts and so universal. This Idea is the absolutely eternal 
and necessary being of mind? 
But if we ask what is or has been the historical origin of the state in 
general, still more if we ask about the origin of any particular state, of its 
rights and institutions, or again if we inquire whether the state originally 
arose out of patriarchal conditions or out of fear or trust, or out of Cor-
porations, &c., or finally if we ask in what light the basis of the state's 
rights has been conceived and consciously established, whether this 
basis has been supposed to be positive divine right, or contract, custom, 
&c.-all these questions are no concern of the Idea of the state. We are 
here dealing exclusively with the philosophic science of the state, and 
from that point of view all these things are mere appearance and there-
fore matters for history. So far as the authority of any existing state has 
anything to do with reasons, these reasons are culled from the forms of 
the law authoritative within it. 
The philosophical treatment of these topics is concerned only with 
their inward side, with the thought of their concept. The merit of 
Rousseau'sJ contribution to the search for this concept is that, by 
adducing the will as the principle of the state, he is adducing a principle 
which has thought both for its form and its content, a principle indeed 
which is thinking itself, not a principle, like gregarious instinct, for 
j 

THE STATE 
157 
instance, or divine authority, which has thought as its form only. 
Unfortunately, however, as Fichte4 did later, he takes the will only in a 
determinate form as the individual will, and he regards the universal 
will not as the absolutely rational element in the will, but only as a 
'general' will which proceeds out of this individual will as out of a con-
scious will. The result is that he reduces the union of individuals in the 
state to a contract and therefore to something based on their arbitrary 
wills, their opinion, and their capriciously given express consent; and 
abstract reasoning proceeds to draw the logical inferences which destroy 
the absolutely divine principle of the state, together with its majesty and 
absolute authority. For this reason, when these abstract conclusions 
came into power, they afforded for the first time in human history the 
prodigious spectacle of the overthrow of the constitution of a great 
actual state and its complete reconstruction ab iuitio on the basis of pure 
thought alone, after the destruction of all existing and given material. 
The will of its re-founders was to give it what they alleged was a purely 
rational basis, but it was only abstractions that were being used; the 
Idea was lacking; and the experiment ended in the maximum of fright-
fulness and terror.s 
Confronted with the claims made for the individual will, we must 
remember the fundamental conception that the objective will is ration-
ality implicit or in conception, whether it be recognized or not by 
individuals, whether their whims be deliberately for it or not. We must 
remember that its opposite, i.e. knowing and willing, or subjective 
freedom (the only thing contained in the principle of the individual will) 
comprises only one moment, and therefore a one-sided moment, of the 
Idea of the rational will. i.e. of the will which is rational solely because 
what it is implicitly, that it also is explicitly. 
The opposite to thinking of the state as something to be known and 
apprehended as explicitly rational is taking external appearances-i.e. 
contingencies such as distress, need for protection, force, riches, &c.-
not as moments in the state's historical development, but as its suo-
stance. Here again what constitutes the guiding thread of discovery is 
the individual in isolation-not, however, even so much as the thought 
of this individuality, but instead only empirical individuals, with 
attention focused on their accidental characteristics, their strength and 
weakness, riches and poverty, &c. This ingenious idea of ignoring the 
absolute infinity and rationality in the state and excluding thought from 
apprehension of its inward nature has assuredly never been put forward 
in such an unadulterated form as in Herr von Haller's Restauration der 
Staatswissenschaft. 6 I say 'unadulterated', because in all other attempts 
to grasp the essence of the state, no matter on what one-sided or super-
ficial principles, this very intention of comprehending the state rationally 
has brought with it thoughts, i.e. universal determinations. Herr von 
Haller, however, with his eyes open, has not merely renounced the 

ETHICAL LIFE 
rational material of which the state consists, as well as the form of 
thought, but he has even gone on with passionate fervour to inveigh 
against the form and the material so set aside. Part of what Herr von 
Haller assures us is the 'wide-spread' effect of his principles. this Re-
stauration undoubtedly owes to the fact that, in his exposition, he has 
deliberately dispensed with thought altogether, and has deliberately 
kept his whole hook all of a piece with its lack of thought. For in this 
way he has eliminated the confusion and disorder which lessen the force 
of an exposition where the accidental is treated along with hints of the 
substantial, where the purely empirical and external are mixed with a 
reminiscence of the universal and rational, and where in the midst of 
wretched inanities the reader is now and again reminded of the loftier 
sphere of the infinite. For the same reason again his exposition is con-
sistent. He takes as the essence of the state, not what is substantive but 
the sphere of accident, and consistency in dealing with a sphere of that 
kind amounts to the complete inconsistency of utter thoughtlessness 
which jogs along without looking behind, and is just as much at home 
now with the exact opposite of what it approved a moment ago.* [A.] 
" I have described the book sufficiently to show that it IS of an original kind. 
There might be something noble in the author's mdignat10n by itself, smce 1t was 
kindled by the false theones, mentioned above, emanatmg principally from 
Rousseau, and especially by the attempt to realize them in practice. But to save 
himself from these theones, Herr von Haller has gone to the other extreme by 
dispensing with thought altogether and consequently It cannot be said that there 
is anything of intrinsic value in his ,·irulent hatred of all laws and legislat;on, of 
all expressly and legally determmate nghts. The hatred of law, of ngh~ made 
determmate in law, IS the shibboleth whereby fanaticism, flabby-mmdedness, 
and the hypocrisy of good intentwns are clearly and infallibly recognized for 
what they are, disgUise themselves as they may. 
Originality like Herr von Haller's is ah,ays a curious phenomenon, and for 
those of my readers who are not yet acquainted with his book I will quote a few 
specimen passages. This is how he lays down (val. i, pp. 342 ff. [pp. 361 ff.]) his 
most important basic propositiOn: 'Just as, in the morgamc worid, the greater 
dislodges the less and the mighty the weak ... , so m the ammal kmgdom, and 
then amongst human bemgs, the same law appears in nobler' (often, too, surely 
in ignobler ?) 'forms', and [p. 375] 'this, therefore, is the eternal, unalterable, 
ordinaPce of God, that the mightier rules, must rule, and will always rule'. It 
is clear enough from this, let alone from what folio\\ s, m what sense 'might' is 
taken here. It IS not the might of justice and ethics, but only the irratiOnal power 
of brute force. Herr mn Haller then goes on (ibid., pp. 365 ff. [pp. 380 ff.]) to 
support this doctnne on 'ana us grounds, amongst them that 'nature with 
amazing \visdom has so ordered It that the mere sense of personal superiority 
irresistibl) ennobles the character and encourages the development of just those 
virtues which are most necessary for deal111g With subordinates'. He asks with 
a great elaboration of undergraduate rhetonc [ibid.] '"hether It ts the strong or 
the \\ eak 111 the k111gdom of sctence who more misuse thetr trust and thetr 
authority 111 order to a chien their petty selfish ends and the rum of the credulous; 
whether to be a past master 111 legal learning ts not to be a pettifogger, a legulezus, 7 
one who cheats the hopes of unsuspecting clients, who makes white black and 
black" hite, who misapplies the law and makes tt a vehicle for" rongdomg, who 

THE STATE 
159 
brings to beggary those who need his assistance and rends them as the hungry 
vulture rends the innocent lamb', &c., &c. Herr von Haller forgets here that the 
point of this rhetoric is to support his proposition that the rule of the mightier IS 
an everlasting ordinance of God; so presumably it is by the same ordmance that 
the vulture rends the innocent lamb, and that hence the mighty are quite right to 
treat their unsuspecting clients as the weak and to make use of knowledge of the 
law to empty their pockets. It would be too much, however, to ask that two 
thoughts should be put together where there is really not a smgle one. 
It goes Without saying that Herr von Haller IS an enemy of codes of law. In his 
view, the laws of the land, are on the one hand, in pnnc1ple 'unnecessary, because 
they spring self-explanatory from the laws of nature'. If men had remained 
satisfied with 'self-explanatory' as the basis of their thinking, then they would 
have been spared the endless labour devoted, since e,·er there were states, to 
legislatiOn and legal codes, and which is still de\ oted thereto and to the study of 
posit1ve law. 'On the other hand, laws are not exactly promulgated for pri\·ate 
individuals, but as instructwns to puisne judges, acquamting them with the will 
of the high court' [vol. ii, part i, chap. 32]. Apart from that, the proviswn of 
law-courts is (vol. i, p. 297 [pp. 309 ff.], vol. ii, part i, p. 254 [pp. 264-9] and ell 
over the place) not a state duty, but a favour, help rendered by the authont>es, 
and 'quite supererogatory'; 11 is not the most perfect method of guaranteeing 
men's rights; on the contrary, it is an insecure and uncertain method, 'the only 
one left to us by our modern lawyers. They have reft us of the other three 
methods, of just those which lead most swiftly and surely to the goal, those 
which, unlike law-courts .• fnendly nature has giYen to man for the safeguarding 
of his rightful freedom'. And these three methods are-what do you suppose?-
'(I) Personal acceptance and mculcation of the law of naturt, (2) Resistance to 
wrong; (3) Flight, when there is no other remedy'. Law)ers are unfriendly 
indeed, it appears, in companson with the fnendhness of nature! 'But' (vol. i, 
p. 292 [p. 305]) 'the natural, d1vme, law, gn en to everyone by nature the all-
bountiful, IS: Honour everyone as thine equal' (on the author's principles this 
should read 'Honour not the man who IS thine equal, but the one" ho IS mightier'); 
'hurt no man \\hO hurts thee not; demand from him nothmg but what he owes' 
(but what does he owe?); 'nay more, love thy ne>ghbour .md serve him when 
thou canst'. The '1mplantmg of this Ia\\' is to ma!;e a legt,!.Jtor .md a constitution 
superfluous. It would be cunous to see ho\\ Herr' on Halkr m.1kes 1t intelligible 
why leg>slators and constitutions have appeared 111 tne \\utld Jesp>te this 'im-
planting'. 
In vol. 1ii, pp. 362 [361] ff., the author comes to the 'so-called national liberties', 
by which he means the laws and constitUtiOns of nation states. £, ery legally con-
stituted nght is in this wide sense of the word a 'liberty'. Of these Ia\\ s he says, 
inter alia, that 'their content IS usually very insignificant, although in boolts a 
high value may be placed on documentarv liberties of that kmd'. \\'hen we then 
realize that the author is speaking here ~f the natwnal liberttes of the German 
Estates, of the English people (e.g. Magna Carta [p. 367] 'which ts httle read, and 
on account of >Is archa1c phraseology still less understood', the Btl! of Rtghts, and 
so forth), of the people of Hungary, &c., we are surpnsed to find that these 
possess1ons, formerly so highly pnzed, are only ms>gmficant; and no less sur-
pnsed to learn that 11 IS only m books that these natwns place a nlue on laws 
whose co-operatiOn has entered into every coat that IS worn :md e\ ery crust that 
is eaten, and still enters into e' ery day and hour of the hves of e,·eryone. 
To carry quotatiOn further, Herr von Haller speaks partlcularly ill (,·ol. i, pp. 
185 ff. [pp. 192-3]) of the Pruss1an General Legal Code, because of the 'mcred-
ible' mftuence on 11 of the errors of false philosophy (though m this mstance at 
any rate the fault cannot be ascribed to Kant's philosophy, a topic on wh1ch Herr 
\'On Haller is at his angnest), especially where it speaks of the state, the resources 

r6o 
ETHICAL LIFE 
259. The Idea of the state 
(a) has immediate actuality and is the individual state as a self-
dependent organism-the Constitution or Constitutional Law; 
(b) passes over into the relation of one state to other states-
International Law; 
(c) is the universal Idea as a genus and as an absolute power 
over individual states-the mind which gives itself its 
actuality in the process of World-History. [A.] 
A. Constitutional Law 
260. The state is the actuality of concrete freedom. But con-
crete freedom consists in this, that personal individuality and its 
particular interests not only achieve their complete development 
and gain explicit recognition for their right (as they do in the sphere 
of the family and civil society) but, for one thing, they also pass 
over of their own accord into the interest of the universal, and, for 
another thing, they know and will the universal; they even recog-
nize it as their own substantive mind; they take it as their end and 
aim and are active in its pursmt. The result is that the universal 
does not prevail or achieve completion except along with particular 
interests and through the co-operation of particular knowing and 
of the state, the end of the state, the head of the state, his duties, and those of 
civil servants, and so forth. Herr von Haller finds particularly mischievous [vol. 
i, pp. 198-9] 'the right of defraying the expenses of the state by levying taxes on 
the private wealth of individuals, on their businesses, on goods produced or 
consumed. Under those circumstances, neither the king himself (since the re-
sources of the state belong to the state and are not the private property of the 
king), nor the Prussian citizens can call anything their own, neither their person 
nor their property; and all subjects are bondslaves to the law, since they may not 
withdraw themselves from the service of the state.' 
In this welter of incredible crudity, what is perhaps most comical of all is the 
emotion with which Herr von Haller describes his unspeakable pleasure in his 
discoveries (vol. i, Preface [pp. xxv-xxvii])-'a joy such as only the friend of 
truth can feel when after honest search he has become confident that he has 
found as it were' (yes indeed~ 'as it were' is right!) 'the voice of nature, the very 
word of God'. (The truth is that the word of God very clearly distinguishes its 
revelations from the voices of nature and unregenerate man.) 'The author could 
have sunk to the ground in open amazement, a stream of joyful tears burst from 
his eyes, and living religious feeling sprang up in him there and then.' Herr von 
Haller might have discovered by his 'religious feeling' that he should rather 
bewail his condition as the hardest chastisement of God. For the hardest thing 
which man can experience is to be so far exciuded from thought and reason, from 
respect for the laws, and from knowing how infinitely important and divine it is 
that the duties of the state and the rights of the citizens, as well as the rights of 
the state and the duties of the cit1zens, should be defined by law-to be so far 
excluded from all this that absurdity can foist itself upon him as the word of God. 

THE STATE 
161 
willing; and individuals likewise do not live as private persons for 
their own ends alone, but in the very act of willing these they will 
the universal in the light of the universal, and their activity is 
consciously aimed at none but the universal end. The principle 
of modern states has prodigious strength and depth because it 
allows the principle of subjectivity to progress to its culmination 
in the extreme of self-subsistent personal particularity, and yet at 
the same time brings it back to the substantive unity and so main-
tains this unity in the principle of subjectivity itself. [A.] 
261. In contrast with the spheres of private rights and private 
welfare (the family and civil society), the state is from one point 
of view an external necessity and their higher authority; its nature 
is such that their laws and interests are subordinate to it and depen-
dent on it. On the other hand, however, it is the end immanent 
within them, and its strength lies in the unity of its own universal 
end and aim with the particular interest of individuals, in the fact 
that individuals have duties to the state in proportion as they have 
rights against it (see Paragraph ISS)· 
In the Remark to Paragraph 3 above, reference was made to the fact 
that it was Montesquieu above all who, in his famous work L'Esprit des 
Lois, kept in sight and tried to work out in detail both the thought of the 
dependence of laws-in particular, laws concerning the rights of persons 
-on the specific character of the state, and also the philosophic notion 
of always treating the part in its relation to the whole. 
Duty is primarily a relation to something which from my point of view 
is substantive, absolutely universal. A right, on the other hand, is simply 
the embodiment of this substance and thus is the particular aspect of it 
and enshrines my particular freedom. Hence at abstract levels, right 
and duty appear parcelled out on different sides or in different persons. 
In the state, as something ethical, as the inter-penetration of the sub-
stantive and the particular, my obligation to what is substantive is at the 
same time the embodiment of my particular freedom. This means that 
in the state duty and right are united in one and the same relation. But 
further, since none the less the distinct moments acquire in the state the 
shape and reality peculiar to each, and since therefore the distinction 
between right and duty enters here once again, it follows that while 
implicitly, i.e. in form, identical, they at the same time differ in content. 
In the spheres of personal rights and morality, the necessary bearing of 
right and duty on one another falls short of actualization; and hence 
there is at that point only an abstract similarity of content between them, 
i.e. in those abstract spheres, what is one man's right ought also to be 
another's, and what is one man's duty ought also to be another's. The 

162 
ETHICAL LIFE 
absolute identity of right and duty in the state is present in these spheres 
not as a genuine identity but only as a similarity of content, because in 
them this content is determined as quite general and is simply the 
fundamental principle of both right and duty, i.e. the principle that men, 
as persons, are free. Slaves, therefore, have no duties because they have 
no rights, and vice versa. (Religious duties are not here in point. 8) 
In the course of the inward development of the concrete Idea, how-
ever, its moments become distinguished and their specific determinacy 
becomes at the same tirr.e a difference of content. In the family, the 
content of a son's duties to his father differs from the content of his 
rights against him; the content of the rights of a member of civil society 
is not the same as the content of his duties to his prince and government. 
This concept of the union of duty and right is a point of vital impor-
tance and in it the inner strength of states is contained. 
Duty on its abstract side goes no farther than the persistent neglect 
and proscription of a man's particular interest, on the ground that it is 
the inessential, even the discreditable, moment in his life. Duty, taken 
concretely as Idea, reveals the moment of particularity as itself essential 
and so regards its satisfaction as indisputably necessary. In whatever 
way an individual may fulfil his duty, he must at the same time find his 
account therein and attain his personal interest an.:! satisfaction. Out of 
his position in the state, a right must accrue to him whereby public 
affairs shall be his own particular affair. Particular interests should in 
fact not be set aside or completely suppressed; instead, they should be 
put in correspondence with the universal, and thereby both they and the 
universal are upheld. The isolated individual, so far as his duties are 
concerned, is in subjection; but as a member of ci<z:il society he finds in 
fulfilling his duties to it protection of his person and property, regard for 
his private welfare, the satisfaction of the depths of his being, the con-
sciousness and feeling of himself as a member of the whole; and, in so 
far as he completely fulfils his duties by performing tasks and services 
for the state, he is upheld and preserved. Take duty abstractly, and the 
universal's interest would consist simply in the completion as duties of 
the tasks and services which it exacts. [A.] 
262. The actual Idea is mind, which, sundering itself into the 
two ideal spheres of its concept, family and civil society, enters 
upon its finite phase, but it does so only in order to rise above its 
ideality and become explicit as infinite actual mind. It is therefore 
to these ideal spheres that the actual Idea assigns the material of 
this its finite actuality, viz. human beings as a mass, in such a way 
that the function assigned to any given individual is visibly medi-
ated by circumstances, his caprice and his personal choice of his 
station in life (see Paragraph 185 and the Remark thereto). [A.] 

THE STATE 
263. In these spheres in which its moments, particularity and 
individuality, have their immediate and reflected reality, mind is 
present as their objective universality glimmering in them as the 
power of reason in necessity (see Paragraph 184), i.e. as the institu-
tions considered above. [A.] 
264. Mind is the nature of human beings en masse and their 
nature is therefore twofold: (i) at one extreme, explicit individuality 
of consciousness and will, and (ii) at the other extreme, universa-
lity which knows and wills what is substantive. Hence they attain 
their right in both these respects only in so far as both their private 
personality and its substantive basis are actualized. Now in the 
family and civil society they acquire their right in the first of these 
respects directly and in the second indirectly, in that (i) they find 
their substantive self-consciousness in social institutions which are 
the universal implicit in their particular interests, and (ii) the 
Corporation supplies them with an occupation and an activity 
directed on a universal end. 
265. These institutions are the components of the constitution 
(i.e. of rationality developed and actualized) in the sphere of par-
ticularity. They are, therefore, the firm foundation not only of 
the state but also of the citizen's trust in it and sentiment towards 
it. They are the pillars of public freedom since in them particular 
freedom is realized and rational, and therefore there is implicitly 
present even in them the union of freedom and necessity. [A.] 
266. But mind is objective and actual to itself not merely as 
this necessity and as a realm of appearance, but also as the ideality 
and the heart of this necessity. Only in this way is this substantive 
universality aware of itself as its own object and end, with the 
result that the necessity appears to itself in the shape of freedom as 
well. 
267. This necessity in ideality is the inner self-development of 
the Idea. As the substance of the individual subject, it is his 
political sentiment [patriotism]; in distinction therefrom, as the 
substance of the objective world, it is the organism of the state, 
i.e. it is the strictly political state9 and its constitution. [A.] 
268. The political sentiment, patriotism pure and simple, is 
assured conviction with truth as its basis-mere subjective assur-
ance is not the outcome of truth but is only opinion-and a volition 
which has become habitual. In this sense it is simply a product of 

ETHICAL LIFE 
the institutions subsisting in the state, since rationality is actually 
present in the state, while action in conformity with these institu-
tions gives rationality its practical proof. This sentiment is, in 
general, trust (which may pass over into a greater or lesser degree 
of educated insight), or the consciousness that my interest, both 
substantive and particular, is contained and preserved in another's 
(i.e. in the state's) interest and end, i.e. in the other's relation to me 
as an individual. In this way, this very other is immediately not 
an other in my eyes, and in being conscious of this fact, I am free. 
Patriotism is often understood to mean only a readiness for excep-
tional sacrifices and actions. Essentially, however, it is the sentiment 
which, in the relationships of our daily life and under ordinary con-
ditions, habitually recognizes that the community is one's substantive 
groundwork and end. It is out of this consciousness, which during 
life's daily round stands the test in all circumstances, that there sub-
sequently also arises the readiness for extraordinary exertions. But 
since men would often rather be magnanimous than law-abiding, they 
readily persuade themselves that they possess this exceptional patriotism 
in order to be sparing in the expression of a genuine patriotic sentiment 
or to excuse their lack of it. If again this genuine patriotism is looked 
upon as that which may begin of itself and arise from subjective ideas 
and thoughts, it is being confused with opinion, because so regarded 
patriotism is deprived of its tme ground, objective reality. [A.] 
269. The patriotic sentiment acquires its specifically deter-
mined content from the various members of the organism of the 
state. This organism is the development of the Idea to its differ-
ences and their objective actuality. Hence these different members 
are the various powers of the state with their functions and spheres 
of action, by means of which the universal continually engenders 
itself, and engenders itself in a necessary way because their specific 
character is fixed by the nature of the concept. Throughout this 
process the universal maintains its identity, since it is itself the 
presupposition of its own production. This organism is the con-
stitution of the state. [A.] 
270. (I) The abstract actuality or the substantiality of the state 
consists in the fact that its end is the universal interest as such and 
the conservation therein of particular interests since the universal 
interest is the substance of these. (2) But this substantiality of the 
state is also its necessity, since its substantiality is divided into the 
distinct spheres of its actiYity which correspond to the moments 
of its concept, and these spheres, owing to this substantiality, are 

THE STATE 
r6s 
thus actually fixed determinate characteristics of the state, i.e. its 
powers. (3) But this very substantiality of the state is mind knowing 
and willing itself after passing through the forming process of 
education.10 The state, therefore, knows what it wills and knows 
it in its universality, i.e. as something thought. Hence it works and 
acts by reference to consciously adopted ends, known principles, 
and laws which are not merely implicit but are actually preseHt 
to consciousness; and further, it acts with precise knowledge of 
existing conditions and circumstances, inasmuch as its actions have 
a bearing on these. 
This is the place to allude to the relation of the state to religion, 
because it is often reiterated nowadays'' that religion is the basis of the 
state, and because those who make this assertion even have the imper-
tinence to suggest that, once it is made, political science has said its last 
word. No doctrine is more fitted to produce so much confusion, more 
fitted indeed to exalt confusion itself to be the constitution of the state 
and the proper form of knowledge. 
In the first place, it may seem suspicious that religion is principally 
sought and recommended for times of public calamity, disorder, and 
oppression, and that people are referred to it as a solace in face of wrong 
or as a hope in compensation for loss. Then further, while the state is 
mind on earth (der Geist der in der Welt steht), religion may sometimes be 
looked upon as commanding downright indifference to earthly interests, 
the march of events, and current affairs, and so to turn men's attention to 
religion does not seem to be the way to exalt the interest and business of 
the state into the fundamental and serious aim of life. On the contrary, 
this suggestion seems to assert that politics is \Vholl) a matter of caprice 
and indifference, either because this way of talking merely amounts to 
saying that it is only the aims of passion and lawless force, &c., which 
bear sway in the state, or because this recommendation of religion is 
supposed to be of self-sufficient validity, and religion is to claim to decide 
the law and administer it. While it might seem a bitter jest to stifle all 
animus against tyranny by a3serting that the oppressed find their con-
solation in religion, it still must not be forgotten that religion may take a 
form leading to the harshest bondage in the fetters of superstition and 
man's degraded subservience to animals. (The Egyptians and the 
Hindus, for instance, revere animals as beings higher than themselves.) 
This phenomenon may at least make it evident that we ought not to 
speak of religion at all in general terms and that we really need a power 
to protect us from it in some of its forms and to espouse against them the 
rights of reason and self -consciousness. 
The essence of the relation between religion and the state can be 
determined, however, only if we recall the concept of religion. The 

166 
ETHICAL LIFE 
content of religion is absolute truth, and consequently the religious is 
the most sublime of all dispositions. 12 As intuition, feeling, repn:sen-
tative knowledge, its task is concentrated upon God as the unrestricted 
principle and cause on which everything hangs. It thus involves the 
demand that everything else shall be seen in this light and depend on 
it for corroboration, justification, and verification. It is in being thus 
related to religion that state, laws, and duties all alike acquire for con-
sciousness their supreme confirmation and their supreme obligatoriness, 
because even the state, laws, and duties are in their actuality something 
determinate which passes over into a higher sphere and so into that on 
which it is grounded.* It is for this reason that in religion there lies the 
place where man is always assured of finding a consciousness of the 
unchangeable, of the highest freedom and satisfaction, even within all 
the mutability of the world and despite the frustration of his aims and 
the loss of his interests and possessions. t Now if religion is in this way 
the groundwork which includes the ethical realm in gem:ral, and the 
state's fundamental nature-the divine will-in particular, it is at the 
same time only a groundwork; and it is at this point that state and reli-
gion begin to diverge. The state is the divin~ will, in the sense that it is 
mind present on earth, unfolding itself to be the actual shape and organi-
zation of a world. Those who insist on stopping at the form of religion, 
as opposed to the state, are acting like those logicians who think they are 
right if they continually stop at the essence and refuse to advance beyond 
that abstraction to existence, or like those moralists (see Remark to 
Paragraph qo) who will only good in the abstract and leave it to caprice 
to decide what is good. Religion is a relation to the Absolute, a relation 
which takes the form of feeling, representative thinking, faith; at)d, 
brought within its all-embracing circumference, everything becomes only 
accidental and transient. Now if, in relation to the state, we cling to 
this form of experience and make it the authority for the state and its 
essential determinant, the state must become a prey to weakness, in-
security, and disorder, because it is an organism in which firmly fixed 
distinct powers, laws, and institutions have been de\·eloped. In contrast 
with the form of religion, a form which draws a veil over e\'erything 
• See Enc. [1st edn.), § 453 [3rd edn. § 553). 
t Relig10n, kno" ledge, and science haYe as their prmciple a form peculiar to 
each and different from that of the state. They therefore enter the state partly as 
means-means to educatiOn and [a higher) mentahty-partly m so far as they 
are m essence ends m themselYes, for the reason that they are embodted in 
existent institutiOnS. In both these respects the pnnctples of the state ha,·e, in 
thetr application, a beanng on them. A comprehenSt\·c, concrete treattse on the 
state would also ha\e to deal wtth those spheres of life as well as wtth art and 
such things as mere geographical matters, and to consider thetr place in the state 
and thetr bearmg on it. In this book, ho" eYer, It ts the prmctple of the state m tts 
own special sphere which is being fully expounded in accordance wtth the Idea, 
and it is only m passing that reference can be made to the princtples of re!Jg10n, 
&c., and to the applicatton of the nght of the state to them. 

THE STATE 
determinate, and so comes to be purely subjective, the objective and 
universal element in the state, i.e. the laws, acquires a negative instead 
of a stable and authoritative character, and the result is the production 
of maxims of conduct like the following: 'To the righteous man no 
law is given; only be pious, and for the rest, practise what thou wilt; 
yield to thine own caprice and passion, and if thereby others suffer 
wrong, commend them to the consolations and hopes of religion, or 
better still, call them irreligious and condemn them to perdition.' This 
negative attitude, however, may not confine itself to an inner disposition 
and attitude of mind; it may turn instead to the outside world and assert 
its authority there, and then there is an outbreak of the religious fanati-
cism which, like fanaticism in politics, discards all government and legal 
order as barriers cramping the inner life of the heart and incompatible 
with its infinity, and at the same time proscribes private property, 
marriage, the ties and work involved in civil society, &c., &c., as de-
grading to love and the freedom of feeling. But since even then decisions 
must somehow be made for everyday life and practice, the same doctrine 
which we had before (see Remark to Paragraph 140, where we dealt 
generally with the subjectivity of the will which knows itself to be 
absolute) turns up again here, namely that subjective ideas, i.e. opinion 
and capricious inclination, are to do the deciding. 
In contrast with the truth thus veiled behind subjective ideas and 
feelings, the genuine truth is the prodigious transfer of the inner into 
the outer, the building of reason into the real world, and this has been 
the task of the world during the whole course of its history. It is by 
working at this task that civilized man has actually given reason an 
embodiment in law and government and achieved consciousness of the 
fact. Those who 'seek guidance from the Lord' and are assured that the 
whole truth is directly present in their unschooled opinions, fail to apply 
themselves to the task of exalting their subjectivity to consciousness of 
the truth and to knowledge of duty and objective right. The only 
possible fruits of their attitude are folly, abomination, and the demo-
lition of the whole ethical order, and these fruits must inevitably be 
reaped if the religious disposition holds firmly and exclusively to its 
intuitive form and so turns against the real world and the truth present 
in it in the form of the universal, i.e. of the laws. Still, there is no 
necessity for this disposition to turn outward and actualize itself in this 
way. With its negative standpoint, it is of course also open to it to 
remain something inward, to accommodate itself to government and 
law, and to acquiesce in these with sneers and idle longings, or with a 
sigh of resignation. It is not strength but weakness which has turned 
religious feeling nowadays into piety of a polemical kind, whether the 
polemic be connected with some genuine need or simply with unsatisfied 
vanity. Instead of subduing one's opinions by the labour of study, and 
subjecting one's will to discipline and so elevating it to free obedience, 

x68 
ETHICAL LIFE 
the line of least resistance is to renounce knowledge of objective truth. 
Along this line we may preserve a feeling of abject humility and so also 
of self-conceit, and claim to have ready to hand in godliness everything 
requisite for seeing into the heart of Jaw and government, for passing 
sentence on them, and laying down what their character should and 
must be; and of course if we take this line, the source of our claims is a 
pious heart, and they are therefore infallible and unimpeachable, and 
the upshot is that since we make religion the basis of our intentions and 
assertions, they cannot be criticized on the score of their shallowness or 
their immorality. 
But if religion be religion of a genuine kind, it does not run counter to 
the state in a negative or polemical way like the kind just described. It 
rather recognizes the state and upholds it, and furthermore it has a 
position and an external organization of its own. The practice of its 
worship consists in ritual and doctrinal instruction, and for this purpose 
possessions and property are required, as well as individuals dedicated 
to the service of the flock. There thus arises a relation between the state 
and the church. To determine this relation is a simple matter. In the 
nature of the case, the state discharges a duty by affording every assis-
tance and protection to the church in the furtherance of its religious 
ends; and, in addition, since religion is an integrating factor in the state, 
implanting a sense of unity in the depths of men's minds, the state 
should even require all its citizens to belong to a church-a church is all 
that can be said, because since the content of a man's faith depends on 
his private ideas, the state cannot interfere with it. A state which is 
strong because its organization is mature may lfe all the more liberal in 
this matter; it may entirely overlook details of religious practice which 
affect it, and may even tolerate a sect (though, of course, all depends on 
its numbers) which on religious grounds declines to recognize even its 
direct duties to the state. The reason for the state's liberal attitude here 
is that it makes over the members of such sects to civil society and its 
laws, and is content if they fulfil their direct duties to the state passively, 
for instance by such means as commutation or the performance of a 
different service.* 
• Quakers, Anabaptists, &c., may be said to be act1ve members only of civil 
society, and they may be regarded as pnvate persons standmg 1n merely private 
relations to others. Even when this posttwn has been allowed them, they have 
been exempted from takmg the oath. They fulfil the1r direct dut1es to the state in 
a pass1ve way; one of the most Important of these dut1es, the defence of the state 
agamst 1ts enem1es, they refuse outnght to fulfil, and their refusal may perhaps 
be admitted provided they perform some other sen ice instead. To sects of this 
kind, the state's att1tude IS toleration in the stnct sense of the word," because 
since they decltne to recogmze the1r duty to the state, they may not cla1m the 
nghts of citiZenship. On one occaswn when the abolition of the slave-trade'• was 
bemg pressed w1th great vigour in the Amencan Congress, a member from one 
of the Southern States made the striking retort: 'Give us our sla' es, and you may 
keep your Quakers.' Only if the state IS otherwise strong can 1t overlook and 
___j 

THE STATE 
But since the church owns property and carries on besides the practice 
of worship, and since therefore it must have people in its service, it 
forsakes the inner for the worldly life and therefore enters the domain of 
the state, and eo ipso comes under its laws. The oath and ethical ties 
generally, like the marriage bond, entail that inner permeation and 
elevation of sentiment which acquires its deepest confirmation through 
religion. But's since ethical ties are in essence ties within the actual 
rational order, the first thing is to affirm within that order the rights 
which it involves. Confirmation of these rights by the church is secon-
dary and is only the inward, comparatively abstract, side of the matter. 
As for the other ways in which an ecclesiastical communion gives 
expression to itself, so far as doctrine is concerned the inward pre-
ponderates over the outward to a greater extent than is the case with 
acts of worship and other lines of conduct connected with these, in 
which the legal side at least seems at once to be a matter for the state. 
(It is true, of course, that churches have managed to exempt their minis-
ters and property from the power and jurisdiction of the state, and they 
have even arrogated to themselves jurisdiction over laymen as well in 
matters in which religion co-operates, such as divorce and the taking of 
the oath, &c.) Public control of actions of this kind is indeterminate in 
extent, but this is due to the nature of public control itself and obtains 
similarly in purely civil transactions (see Paragraph 23+). When indi-
viduals, holding religious views in common, form themselves into a 
church, a Corporation, they fall under the general control and oversight 
of the higher state officials. Doctrine as such, however, has its domain 
in conscience and falls within the right of the subjective freedom of 
suffer such anomalies, because it can then rely pnncq,oll,· <lt1 the strength of 
custom and the inner rationality of its mstitutions to Jnmi;,,h and close the 
gap between the existence of anomalies and the full assert1on of Its own stnct 
rights. Thus technically it may have been nght to refuse a grant of even civil 
rights to the Jews on the ground that they should be regarded as belonging not 
merely to a religious sect but to a foreign race. But the fierce outcry raised 
against the Jews, from tlcat point of view and others, ignores the fact that they are, 
above all, men; and manhood, so far from bemg a mere superficial, abstract 
quality (see Remark to Paragraph 209), is on the contrary Itself the basis of the 
fact that what cn il nghts rouse In their possessors 1s the feeling of oneself as 
countmg m civil society as a person with nghts, and this feeling of self-hood, 
infinite and ftee from all restnctiOns, IS the root from \\hich the desired s1mdarity 
in dtsposttion and ways of thinkmg comes mto being. To exclude the je\\s from 
civil nghts, on the other hand, would rather be to confirm the ISolatiOn wtth 
which they han· been reproached-a result for whtch the state refusmg them 
nghts \\auld be blamable and reproachable, because by so refusmg, It would 
have misunderstuod tts own basic princtple, tts nature as an objectn e and 
powerful InStitUtiOn (compare the end of the Remark to Paragraph zu8). The 
excluston of the Jews from ctvil rights may be supposed to be a nght of the 
highest kmd and may be demanded on that ground; but experience has shown 
that ,o to exclude them is the silliest folly, and the way in which governments 
nul\ t'eat them has proved itself to be both prudent and dignified. 

ETHICAL LIFE 
self-consciousness, the sphere of the inner life, which as such is not 
the domain of the state. Yet the state, too, has a doctrine, since its organ-
ization and whatever rights and constitution are authoritative within 
it exist essentially in the form of thought as law. And since the state is 
not a mechanism but the rational life of self-conscious freedom, the 
system of the ethical world, it follows that an essential moment in the 
actual state is the mental attitude of the citizens, and so their conscious-
ness of the principles which this attitude implies. On the other hand, the 
doctrine of the church is not purely and simply an inward concern of 
conscience. As doctrine it is rather the expression of something, in fact 
the expression of a subject-matter which is most closely linked, or even 
directly concerned, with ethical principles and the law of the land. 
Hence at this point the paths of church and state either coincide or 
diverge at right angles. The difference of their two domains may be 
pushed by the church into sheer antagonism since, by regarding itself as 
enshrining the content of religion-a content which is absolute-it may 
claim as its portion mind 16 in general and so the whole ethical sphere, 
and conceive the state as a mere mechanical scaffolding for the attain-
ment of external, non-mental, ends. It may take itself to be the King-
dom of God, or at least as the road to it or its vestibule, while it regards 
the state as the kingdom of this world, i.e. of the transient and the finite. 
In a word, it may think that it is an end in itself, while the state is a mere 
means. These claims produce the demand, in connexion with doctrinal 
instruction, that the state should not only allow the church to do as it 
likes with complete freedom, but that it should pay unconditional 
respect to the church's doctrines as doctrines, whatever their character, 
because their determination is supposed to be the task of the church 
alone. The church bases this claim on the wide ground that the whole 
domain of mind (Geist) is its property. But science and all types of 
knowledge also have a footing in that domain and, like a church, they 
build themselves into a whole with a guiding principle of its own, and, 
with even better justification, may regard themselves as occupying the 
position which the church claims. Hence science also may in the same 
way demand to be independent of the state, which is then supposed to be 
a mere means with the task of providing for science as though science 
were an end in itself. 
Further, for determining the relation between church and state, it 
makes no difference whether the leaders of congregations or individuals 
ordained to the service of the church feel impelled to withdraw from the 
state and lead a sort of secluded life of their own, so that only the other 
church members are subject to the state's control, or whether they 
remain within the state except in their capacity as ecclesiastics, a 
capacity which they take to be but one side of their life. The most 
striking thing about such a conception of the church's relation to 
the state is that it implies the idea· that the state's specific function 

THE STATE 
consists in protecting and securing everyone's life, property, and 
caprice, in so far as these do not encroach upon the life, property, and 
caprice of others. 17 The state from this point of view is treated simply 
as an organization to satisfy men's necessities. In this way the element 
of absolute truth, of mind in its higher development, is placed, as 
subjective religious feeling or theoretical science, beyond the reach of 
the state. The state, as the laity pure and simple, is confined to paying 
its respects to this element and so is entirely deprived of any strictly 
ethical character. Now it is, of course, a matter of history that in times 
and under conditions of barbarism, all higher forms of intellectual life 
had their seat only in the church, while the state was a mere mundane 
rule of force, caprice, and passion. At such times it was the abstract 
opposition of state and church which was the main underlying principle 
of history (see Paragraph 359). 18 But it is far too blind and shallow a 
proceeding to declare that this situation is the one which truly corres-
ponds with the Idea. The development of this Idea has proved this 
rather to be the truth, that mind, as free and rational, is implicitly 
ethical, while the Idea in its truth is rationality actualized; and this it is 
which exists as the state. Further, this Idea has made it no less clearly 
evident that the ethical truth in it is present to conscious thought as a 
content worked up into the form of universality, i.e. as law-in short, 
that the state knows its aims, apprehends and gives practical proof of 
them with a clear-cut consciousness and in accordance with principles. 
Now, as I said earlier, religion has the truth as its universal subject-
matter, but it possesses it only as a given content which has not been 
apprehended in its fundamental characteristics as a result of thinking 
and the use of concepts. Similarly, the relation of the individual to 
this subject-matter is an obligation grounded on authority, while the 
'witness of his own spirit and heart', i.e. that wherein the moment of 
freedom resides, is faith and feeling. It is philosophtc insight which sees 
that while church and state differ in form, they do not stand opposed in 
content, for truth and rationality are the content of both. Thus when 
the church begins to teach doctrines (though there are and have been 
some churches with a ritual only, and others in which ritual is the chief 
thing, while doctrine and a more educated consciousness are only 
secondary), and when these doctrines touch on objective principles, on 
thoughts of the ethical and the rational, then their expression eo ipso 
brings the church into the domain of the state. In contrast with the 
church's faith and authority in matters affecting ethical principles, 
rightness, laws, institutions, in contrast with the church's subjective 
conviction, the state is that which knows. Its principle is such that its 
content is in essence no longer clothed with the form of feeling and 
faith but is determinate thought. 
If the content of absolute truth appears in the form of religion as 
a particular content, i.e. as the doctrines peculiar to the church as a 

ETHICAL LIFE 
religious community, then these doctrines remain out of the reach of the 
state (in Protestantism they are out of the reach of priests too because, 
as there is no laity there, so there is no priesthood to be an exclusive 
depository of church doctrine ).19 Since ethical principles and the 
organization of the state in general are drawn into the domain of religion 
and not only may, but also should, be established by reference thereto, 
this reference gives religious credentials to the state itself. On the other 
hand, however, the state retains the right and the form of self-conscious, 
objective, rationality, the right to make this form count and to maintain 
it against pretensions springing from truth in a subjective dress, no 
matter how such truth may girdle itself with certitude and authority. 
The state is universal in form, a form whose essential principle is 
thought. This explains why it was in the state that freedom of thought 
and science had their origin. It was a church, on the other hand, which 
burnt Giordano Bruno, forced Galileo to recant on his knees his expo-
sition of the Copernican view of the solar system, and so forth."' Science 
too, therefore, has its place on the side of the state since it has one 
element, its form, in common with the state, and its aim is knowledge, 
"' 'When Galileo published the discoveries' about the phases of Venus, &c., 
which he had made with the aid of the telescope, 'he showed that they incontest-
ably proved the motion of the earth. But this idea of the motion of the earth 
was declared heretical by an assembly of Cardinals, and Galileo, its most famous 
advocate, was haled before the Inquisition and compelled to recant it, under pain 
of severe imprisonment. One of the strongest of passions ts the love of truth in a 
man of genius.' 0 • • • Convinced of the motion of the earth as a result of his own 
observations, Galileo meditated a long while on a new work in which he had re-
solved to develop all the proofs in tts favour. But in order at the same time to 
escape from the persecution of which otherwise he would inevitably have been 
the victtm, he hit upon the device of expounding them in the form of dialogues 
between three speakers .... It is obvious enough in them that the advantage lies 
with the advocate of the Copernican system; but since Ga!ileo did not decide 
between the speakers, and gave as much weight as possible to the objections 
raised by the partisans of Ptolemy. he might well ha\·e expected to be left to 
enjoy undisturbed the peace to which his advanced age and his labours had 
entitled him. . . . In his seventieth year he was haled once more before the 
tribunal of the InqUisition. . . . He was imprisoned and required to recant his 
opinions a second time under threat of the penalty fixed for a relapse into heresy . 
• . . He was made to stgn an abjuration in the followmg terms: "I, Galileo, 
appeanng in person before the court in my seventieth year, kneeling, and with my 
eyes on the holy Gospels which I hold in my hands, abjure, damn, and execrate 
with my whole heart and true belief the absurd, false, and heretical doctrine of 
the motion of the earth .... " What a spectacle! An aged, venerable man, famous 
throughout a long life exclustvely de\·oted to the study of nature, abjuring on his 
knees, against the witness of his own conscience, the truth which he had demon-
strated so convmcmgly! By the JUdgement of the Inquisition he was condemned 
to perpetual imprisonment. A year later he was set at liberty through the inter-
cessiOn of the Grand Duke of Florence .... He died in 1642 .... Europe 
mourned his loss. It had been enlightened by his labours and was exasperated 
by the judgement passed by a detested tribunal on a man of his greatness.' (La-
place: Exposition du systi!me du monde, Book V, chap. 4.) 
J

THE STATE 
173 
knowledge of objective truth and rationality in terms of thought. Such 
knowledge may, of course, fall from the heights of science into opinion 
and deductive argumentation, and, turning its attention to ethical 
matters and the organization of the state, set itself against their basic 
principles. And it may perhaps do this while making for this opining-
as if it were reason and the right of subjective self-consciousness-the 
same pretentious claim as the church makes for its own sphere, the claim, 
namely, to be free from restraint in its opinions and convictions. 
This principle of the subjectivity of knowing has been dealt with 
above (see Remark to Paragraph 140 ). It is here only necessary to add a 
note on the twofold attitude of the state to this opining. On the one 
hand, in so far as opining is mere opining, a purely subjective matter, it 
is without any genuine inherent force or power, plume itself as it may; 
and from this point of view the state may be as totally indifferent to it 
as the painter who sticks to the three primary colours on his palette is 
indifferent to the academic wisdom which tells him there are seven. 
On the other hand, however, when this opining of bad principles em-
bodies itself in a general organization corrosive of the actual order, the 
state has to set its face against it and protect objective truth and the 
principles of ethical life (and it must do the same in face of the formulae 
of unconditioned subjectivity if these have proposed to take the starting 
point of science as their basis, and turn state educational institutions 
against the state by encouraging them to make against it claims as pre-
tentious as those of a church); while, vice versa, in face of a church 
claiming unrestricted and unconditional authority, the state has in 
general to make good the formal right of self-consciousness to its own 
insight, its own conviction, and, in short, its own thought of what is to 
hold good as objective truth. 
Mention may also be made of the 'unity of state and church'-a 
favourite topic of modern discussion and held up by some as the highest 
of ideals. 21 While state and church are essentially one in truth of prin-
ciple and disposition, it is no less essential that, despite this unity, the 
distinction between their forms of consciousness should be externalized 
as a distinction between their special modes of existence. This often 
desired unity of church and state is found under oriental despotisms, 22 
but an oriental despotism is not a state, or at any rate not the self-
conscious form of state which is alone worthy of mind, the form which 
is organically developed and where there are rights and a free ethical 
life. Further, if the state is to come into existence as the self-knowing 
ethical actuality of mind, it is essential that its form should be distinct 
from that of authority and faith. But this distinction emerges only in so 
far as the church is subjected to inward divisions. It is only thereafter 
that the state, in contrast with the particular sects, has attained to 
universality of thought-its formal principle-and is bringing this 
universality into existence. (In order to understand this, it is necessary 

174 
ETHICAL LIFE 
to know not only what universality is in itself, but also what its existence 
is.23 ) Hence so far from its being or its having been a misfortune for the 
state that the church is disunited, it is only as a result of that disunion 
that the state has been able to reach its appointed end as a self-con-
sciously rational and ethical organization. Moreover, this disunion is 
the best piece of good fortune which could have befallen either the 
church or thought so far as the freedom and rationality of either is 
concerned.24 [A.] 
271. The constitution of the state is, in the first place, the organi-
zation of the state and the self-related process of its organic life, 
a process whereby it differentiates its moments within itself and 
develops them to self-subsistence. Secondly, the state is an indi-
vidual, unique and exclusive, and therefore related to others. Thus 
it turns its differentiating activity outward and accordingly estab-
lishes within itself the ideality of its subsisting inward differen-
tiations. [A.] 
1. The Constitution (on its internal side only) 
272. The constitution is rational2S in so far as the state inwardly 
differentiates and determines its activity in accordance with the 
nature of the concept. The result of this is that each of these 
powers is in itself the totality of the constitution, because each 
contains the other moments and has them effective in itself, and 
because the moments, being expressions of the differentiation of 
the concept, simply abide in their ideality and constitute nothing 
but a single individual whole. 
In our day there has come before the public an endless amount of 
babble about the constitution, as about reason itself, and the stalest 
babble of all has been produced in Germany, thanks to those26 who have 
persuaded themselves that they have the best, or even the sole, under-
standing of what a constitution is. Elsewhere, particularly in govern-
ments, misunderstanding is supposed to reign. And these gentlemen 
are convinced that they have an unassailable justification for what they 
say becau3e they claim that religion and piety are the basis of all this 
shallow thinking of theirs. It is no wonder that this babble has made 
reasonable men just as sick of the words 'reason', 'enlightenment', 
'right', &c., as of the words 'constitution' and 'freedom', and a man 
might well be ashamed now to go on discussing the constitution of the 
state at all! However, we may at least hope that this surfeit will be 
effective in producing the general conviction that philosophical know-
ledge of such topics cannot arise from argumentation, deduction, calcu-

THE STATE 
175 
lations of purpose and utility, still less from the heart, love, and in-
spiration, but only from the concept. We may also hope that those27 
who hold that the divine is inconceivable and the knowledge of truth a 
wild-goose chase will feel themselves bound to refrain from taking part 
in the discussion. The products of their hearts and their inspirations 
are either undigested chatter or mere edification, and whatever the 
worth of these neither can pretend to notice from philosophy. 
Amongst current ideas, mention may be made (in connexion with 
Paragraph 269) of the necessity for a division of powers within the state.28 
This point is of the highest importance and, if taken in its true sense, 
may rightly be regarded as the guarantee of public freedom. It is an 
idea, however, with which the very people who pretend to talk out of 
their inspi,ation and love neither have, nor desire to have, any acquain-
tance, since it is precisely there that" the moment of rational determinacy 
lies. That is to say, the principle of the division of powers contains the 
essential moment of difference, of rationality realized. But when the 
abstract Understanding handles it, it reads into it the false doctrine of 
the absolute self-subsistence of each of the powers against the others, 
and then one-sidedly interprets their relation to each other as negative, 
as a mutual restriction. This view implies that the attitude adopted by 
each power to the others is hostile and apprehensive, as if the others 
were evils, and that their function is to oppose one another and as a 
result of this counterpoise to effect an equilibrium on the whole, but 
never a living unity. It is only the inner self-determination of the con-
cept, not any other consideration, whether of purpose or advantage, 
that is the absolute source of the division of powers, and in virtue of this 
alone is the organization of the state something inherently ratiol'al and 
the image of eternal reason. 
How the concept and then, more concretely, how the Idea, determine 
themselves inwardly and so posit their moments-universality, par-
ticularity, and individuality-in abstraction from one another, is dis-
coverable from my logic, though not of course from the logic current 
elsewhere. To take the merely negative as a starting-point and to exalt 
to the first place the volition of evil and the mistrust of this volition, and 
then on the basis of this presupposition slyly to construct dikes whose 
efficiency simply necessitates corresponding dikes over against them, 29 
is characteristic in thought of the negative Understanding and in senti-
ment of the outlook of the rabble (see Paragraph 244). 
If the powers (e.g. what are called the 'Executive' and the 'Legisla-
ture') become self-subsistent, then as we have recently seen on a grand 
scale, 30 the destruction of the state is forthwith a fait accompli. Alterna-
tively, if the state is maintained in essentials, it is strife which through 
the subjection by one power of the others, produces unity at least, how-
ever defective, and so secures the bare essential, the maintenance of the 
state. (A.] 

176 
ETHICAL LIFE 
273. The state as a political entity is thus cleft into three sub-
stantive divisions: 
(a) the power to determine and establish the universal-the 
Legislature ; 
(b) the power to subsume single cases and the spheres of par-
ticularity under the universal-the Executive; 
(c) the power of subjectivity, as the will with the power of 
ultimate decision-the Crown. In the crown, the different 
powers are bound into an individual unity which is thus at 
once the apex and basis of the whole, i.e. of constitutional 
monarchy. 
The development of the state to constitutional monarchy is the 
achievement of the modern world, a world in which the substantial 
Idea has won the infinite form [of subjectivity-see Paragrarh 144]. 
The history of this inner deepening of the world mind-or in other 
words this free maturation in course of which the Idea, realizing ration-
ality in the external, releases its moments (and they are only its moments) 
from itself as totalities, and just for that reason still retains them in the 
ideal unity of the concept-the history of this genuine formation of 
ethical life is the content of the whole course of world-history. 
The ancient division of constitutions into monarchy, aristocracy, and 
democracy, is based upon the notion of substantial, still undivided, 
unity, a unity which has not yet come to its inner differentiation (to 
a matured, internal organization) and which therefore has not yet 
attained depth or concrete rationality. From the standpoint of the 
ancient world, therefore, this division is the true and correct one, since 
for a unity of that still substantial type, a unity inwardly too immature 
to have attained its absolutely complete develorment, difference is 
essentially an external difference and appears at first as a difference 
in the number'"' of those in whom that substantial unity is supposed 
to be immanent.32 These forms, which on this principle belong to 
different wholes, are given in limited monarchy the humbler position 
of moments in a whole. The monarch is a single person; the few come 
on the scene with the executive, and the many en masse with the legis-
lative. But, as has been indicated, 33 purely quantitative distinctions 
like these are only superficial and do not afford the concept of the thing. 
Equally inadequate is the mass of contemporary talk about the demo-
cratic and aristocratic elements in monarchy, because when the elements 
specified in such talk are found in a monarchy there is no longer any-
thing democratic or aristocratic about them. There are notions of 
constitutions in which the state is portrayed from top to bottom as an 
abstraction which is supposed to rule and command, and how many 
• See Enc. [xst edn.), § 82" [Jrd edn. § 132]. 

THE STATE 
177 
individuals are at the head of such a state, whether one or a few or all, is a 
question left undecided and regarded as a matter of indifference. [E.g.:] 
'All these forms', says Fichte,34 ' ... are justified, provided there be 
an ephorate' (a scheme devised by Fichte to be a counterpoise to the 
chief power in the state) 'and may ... be the means of introducing 
universal rights into the state and maintaining them there.'* A view of 
this kind-and the device of the ephorate also-is begotten by the 
superficial conception of the state to which reference has just been made. 
It is true enough that in quite simple social conditions these differences 
of constitutional form have little or no meaning. For instance, in the 
course of his legislation Moses prescribed that, in the event of his 
people's desiring a king, its institutions should remain unchanged 
except for the new requirement that the king should not 'multiply horses 
to himself ... nor wives ... nor silver and gold'. t Besides, in a sense one 
may of course say that the Idea too is indifferent to these forms (includ-
ing monarchy, but only when it is restricted in meaning by being 
defined as an alternati'[·e on a parity with aristocracy and democracy). 
But the Idea is indifferent to them, not in Fichte's but in the opposite 
sense, because every one of them is inadequate to it in its rational de-
velopment (see Paragraph 272) and in none of them, taken singly, could 
the Idea attain its right and its actuality. Consequently, it is quite idle 
to inquire which of the three is most to be preferred. Such forms must 
be discussed historically or not at all. 
Still, here again, as in so many other places, we must recognize the 
depth of Montesquieu 's insight in his now famous treatment of the basic 
principles of these forms of government. To recognize the accuracy of 
his account, however, we must not misunderstand it. As is well known, 
he held that 'virtue'3s was the principle of democracy [and rightly], 
since it is in fact the case that that type of constitut10n rests on sentiment, 
i.e. on the purely substantial form in which the rationality of the abso-
lute will still exists in democracy. But Montesquieu goes on to say that 
in the seventeenth century England provided 'a fine spectacle of the way 
in which efforts to found a democracy were rendered ineffective by a 
lack of virtue in the leaders'. And again he adds 'when virtue vanishes 
from the republic, ambition enters hearts which are capable of it and 
greed masters everyone ... so that the state becomes everyone's booty 
and its strength now consists only in the power of a few citizens and the 
licence of all alike'. These quotations call for the comment that in more 
mature social conditions and when the powers of part1cularity have 
developed and become free, a form of rational law other than the form 
of sentiment is required, because virtue in the heads of the state is not 
enough if the state as a whole is to gain the power to resist disruption 
and to bestow on the powers of particularity, now become mature, both 
• Science of Rights [§ 16, sub-section 6, p. 248]. 
t Deut. xvu. 16 ff. 

ETHICAL LIFE 
their positive and their negative rights. Similarly, we must remove the 
misunderstanding of supposing that because the s~ntiment of virtue is 
the substantial form of a democratic republic, it is evidently superfluous 
in monarchy or even absent from it altogether,J 6 and, finally, we may 
not suppose that there is an opposition and an incompatibility between 
virtue and the legally determinate agency of a state whose organization 
is fully articulated. 
The fact that 'moderation'J7 is cited as the principle of aristocracy 
implies the beginning at this point of a divorce between public authority 
and private interest. And yet at the same time these touch each other so 
directly that this constitution by its very nature stands on the verge of 
lapsing forthwith into tyranny or anarchy-the harshest of political 
conditions-and so into self-annihilation. See Roman history, for 
example.JS 
The fact that Montesquieu discerns 'honour'J9 as the principle of 
monarchy at once makes it clear that by 'monarchy' he understands, not 
the patriarchal or any ancient type, nor, on the other hand, the type 
organized into an objective constitution,4° but only feudal monarchy, 
the type in which the relationships recognized in its constitutional law 
are crystallized into the rights of private property and the privileges of 
individuals and Corporations. In this type of constitution, political life 
rests on privileged persons and a great pa1 t of what must be done for the 
maintenance of the state is settled at their pleasure. The result is that 
their services are the objects not of duty but only of ideas and opinions. 
Thus it is not duty but only honour which holds the state together. 
Another question readily presents itself here: 'Who is to frame the 
constitution?' This question seems clear, but closer inspection shows at 
once that it is meaningless, for it presupposes that there is no constitu-
tion there, but only an agglomeration of atomic individuals. How an 
agglomeration of individuals could acquire a constitution, whether 
automatically or by someone's aid, whether as a present or by force or 
by thought, it would have to be allowed to settle for itself, since with an 
agglomeration the concept has nothing to do. But if the question pre-
supposes an already existent constitution, then it is not about framing, 
but only about altering the constitution, and the very presupposition of a 
constitution directly implies that its alteration may come about only by 
constitutional means. In any case, however, it is absolutely essential 
that the constitution should not be regarded as something made, even 
though it has come into being in time. It must be treated rather as 
something simply existent in and by itself, as divine therefore, and 
constant, and so as exalted above the sphere of things that are made. 
(A.] 
.l74. Mind is actual only as that which it knows itself to be, and 
the state, as the mind of a nation, is both the law permeating all 

THE STATE 
179 
relationships within the state and also at the same time the manners 
and consciousness of its citizens. It follows, therefore, that the 
constitution of any given nation depends in general on the charac-
ter and development of its self-consciousness.4 1 In its self-con-
sciousness its subjective freedom is rooted and so, therefore, is the 
actuality of its constitution. 
The proposal to give a constitution-even one more or less rational in 
content-to a nation a priori would be a happy thought overlooking 
precisely that factor in a constitution which makes it more than an ens 
rationis. Hence every nation has the constitution appropriate to it and 
suitable for it. [A.] 
(a) The Crown 
275. The power of the crown contains in itself the three 
moments of the whole (see Paragraph 272), viz. (ex) the universality 
of the constitution and the laws; ({3) counsel, which refers the par-
ticular to the universal; and (y) the moment of ultimate decision, 
as the self-determination to which everything else reverts and from 
which everything else derives the beginning of its actuality. This 
absolute self-determination constitutes the distinctive principle of 
the po\\·er of the crown as such, and \Yith this principle our ex-
position is to begin. [_-\,] 
276. (I) The fundamental characteristic of the state as a politi-
cal entity is the substantial unity, i.e. the ideahty, of its moments. 
(n.) In this unity, the particular powers and their activities are 
dissolYed and yet retained. They are retained, however, only in 
the sense that their authority is no independent one but only one 
of the order and breadth determined by the Idea of the whole; 
from its might they originate, and they are its flexible limbs while 
it is their single self. [A.] 
277. ({3) The particular activities and agencies of the state are 
its essential moments and therefore are proper to it. The indi-
vidual functionaries and agents are attached to their office not on 
the strength of their immediate personality, but only on the 
strength of their universal and objective qualities. Hence it is in 
an external and contingent way that these offices are linked with 
particular persons, and therefore the functions and powers of the 
state cannot be private property. [A.] 
278. These two points (::x) and ({3) constitute the sovereignty 
of the state. That is to say, sovereignty depends on the fact that 
the particular functions and powers of the state are not self-

x8o 
ETHICAL LIFE 
subsistent or firmly grounded either on their own account or in 
the particular will of the individual functionaries, but have their 
roots ultimately in the unity of the state as their single self. 
This is the sovereignty of the state at home. Sovereignty has another 
side, i.e. sovereignty ~·is-a-vis foreign states, on which see belowY 
In feudal times, the state was certainly sovereign vis-a-vis other states; 
at home however, not only was the monarch not sovereign at all, but the 
state itself was not sovereign either. For one thing, the particular 
functions and powers of the state and civil society were arranged (com-
pare Remark to Paragraph 273) into independent Corporations and 
societies, so that the state as a whole was rather an aggregate than an 
organism; and, for another thing, office was the private property of 
individuals, and hence what they were to do in their public capacity was 
left to their own opinion and caprice. 
The idealism which constitutes sovereignty is the same characteris-
tic as that in accordance with which the so-called 'parts' of an animal 
organism are not parts but members, moments in an organic whole, 
whose isolation and independence spell disease.'*' The principle 'here is 
the same as that which came before us (see Paragraph 7) in the abstract 
concept of the will (see Remark to Paragraph 279) as self-related negati-
vity, and therefore as the universality of the will determining itself to 
individuality and so cancelling all particularity and determinacy, as the 
absolute self-determining ground of all volition. To understand this, 
one must have mastered the whole conception of the substance and 
genuine subjectivity of the concept. 
The fact that the sovereignty of the state is the ideality of all particular 
authorities within it gives rise to the easy and also very common mis-
understanding that this ideality is only might and pure arbitrariness 
while 'sovereignty' is a synonym for 'despotism'. But despotism means 
any state of affairs where law has disappeared and where the particular 
will as such, whether of a monarch or a mob (ochlocracy), counts as law 
or rather takes the place of law; while it is precisely in legal, constitu-
tional, government that sovereignty is to be found as the moment of 
ideality-the ideality of the particular spheres and functions. That is to 
say, sovereignty brings it about that each of these spheres is not some-
thing independent, self-subsistent in its aims and modes of working, 
something immersed solely in itself, but that instead, even in these 
aims and modes of working, each is determined by and dependent on the 
aim of the whole (the aim which has been denominated in general terms 
by the rather vague expression 'welfare of the state'). 
This ideality manifests itself in a twofold way: 
(i) In times of peace, the particular spheres and functions pursue 
the path of satisfying their particular aims and minding their own busi-
• See Enc. [1st edn.], § 293 [3rd edn. § 371]. 

THE STATE 
181 
ness, and it is in part only by way of the unconscious necessity of the 
thing that their self-seeking is turned into a contribution to reciprocal 
support and to the support of the whole (see Paragraph 183). In part, 
however, it is by the direct influence of higher authority that they are 
not only continually brought back to the aims of the whole and restricted 
accordingly (see Paragraph 289), out are also constrained to perform 
direct services for the support of the whole. 
(ii) In a situation of exigency, however, whether in home or foreign 
affairs, the organism of which these particular spheres are members 
fuses into the single concept of sovereignty. The sovereign is entrusted 
with the salvation of the state at the sacrifice of these particular authorities 
whose powers are valid at other times, and it is then that that ideality 
comes into its proper actuality (see Paragraph 321 ). 
279. ( 2) Sovereignty, at first simply the universal thought of 
this ideality, comes into existence only as subjectivity sure of itself, 
as the will's abstract and to that extent ungrounded self-determina-
tion in which finality of decision is rooted. This is the strictly 
individual aspect of the state, and in virtue of this alone is the state 
one. The truth of subjectivity, however, is attained only in a 
subject, and the truth of personality only in a person; and in a 
constitution which has become mature as a realization of ration-
ality, each of the three moments of the concept has its explicitly 
actual and separate formation. Hence this absolutely decisive 
moment of the whole is not individuality in general, but a single 
individual, the monarch. 
The immanent development of a science, the derivation43 of its entire 
content from the concept in its simplicity (a science otherwise derived, 
whatever its merit, does not deserve the name of a philosophical science) 
exhibits this peculiarity, that one and the same concept-the will in this 
instance-which begins by being abstract (because it is at the beginning), 
maintains its identity even while it consolidates its specific determina-
tions, and that too solely by its own activity, and in this way gains a 
concrete content. Hence it is the basic moment of personality, abstract 
at the start in immediate rights, which has matured itself through its 
various forms of subjectivity, and now-at the stage of absolute rights, 
of the state, of the completely concrete objectivity of the will-has 
become the personality of the state, its certainty of itself. This last re-
absorbs all particularity into its single self, cuts short the weighing of 
pros and cons between which it lets itself oscillate perpetually now this 
way and now that, and by saying 'I will' makes its decision and so 
inaugurates all activity and actuality. 
Further, however, personality, like subjectivity in general, as in-
finitely self-related, has its truth (to be precise, its most elementary, 

182 
ETHICAL LIFE 
immediate, truth) only in a person, in a subject existing 'for' himself, 
and what exists 'for' itself is just simply a unit. It is only as a person, the 
monarch, that the personality of the state is actual. Personality expresses 
the concept as such; but the person enshrines the actuality of the concept, 
and only when the concept is determined as person is it the Idea or truth. 
A so-called 'artificial person', be it a society, a community, or a family, 
however inherently concrete it may be, contains personality only 
abstractly, as one moment of itself. In an 'artificial person', personality 
has not achieved its true mode of existence. The state, however, is 
precisely this totality in which the moments of the concept have attained 
the actuality correspondent to their degree of truth. All these cate-
gories, both in themselves and in their external formations, have been 
discussed in the whole course of this treatise. They are repeated here, 
however, because while their existence in their particular external 
formations is readily granted, it does not follow at all that they are 
recognized and apprehended again when they appear in their true place, 
not isolated, but in their truth as moments of the Idea. 
The conception of the monarch is therefore of all conceptions the 
hardest for ratiocination, i.e. for the method of reflection employed by 
the Understanding. This method refuses to move beyond isolated 
categories and hence here again knows only raisonnement, finite points 
of view, and deductive argumentation. Consequently it exhibits the 
dignity of the monarch as something deduced, not only in its form, but 
in its essence. The truth is, however, that to be something not deduced 
but purely self-originating is precisely the conception of monarchy. 
Akin, then, to this reasoning is the idea of treating the monarch's right 
as grounded in the authority of God, since it is in its divinity that its 
unconditional character is contained. 44 We are familiar, however, with 
the misunderstandings connected with this idea, and it is precisely this 
'divine' element which it is the task of a philosophic treatment to com-
prehend. 
We may speak of the 'sovereignty of the people' in the sense that any 
people whatever is self-subsistent vis-a-vis other peoples, and constitutes 
a state of its own, like the British people for instance. But the peoples 
of England, Scotland, or Ireland, or the peoples of Venice, Genoa, 
Ceylon, &c., are not sovereign peoples at all now that they have ceased 
to have rulers or supreme governments of their own. 
We may also speak of sovereignty in home affairs residing in the people, 
provided that we are speaking generally about the whole state and 
meaning only what was shown above (see Paragraphs 277, 278), namely 
that it is to the state that sovereignty belongs. 
The usual sense, however, in which men have recentlyH begun to 
speak of the 'sovereignty of the people' is that it is something opposed 
to the sovereignty existent in the monarch. So opposed to the sovereignty 
of the monarch, the sovereignty of the people is one of the confused 

THE STATE 
notions based on the wild idea of the 'people'. Taken without its monarch 
and the articulation of the whole which is the indispensable and direct 
concomitant of monarchy, the people is a formless mass and no longer a 
state. It lacks every one of those determinate characteristics-sove-
reignty, government, judges, magistrates, class-divisions, &c.,-which 
are to be found only in a whole which is inwardly organized. By the 
very emergence into a people's life of moments of this kind which have 
a bearing on an organization, on political life, a people ceases to be that 
indeterminate abstraction which, when represented in a quite general 
way, is called the 'people'. 
If by 'sovereignty of the people' is understood a republican form of 
government, or to speak more specifically (since under 'republic' are 
comprised all sorts of other mixed forms of government, which are 
purely empirical, let alone irrelevant in a philosophical treatise) a demo-
cratic form, then all that is needed in reply has been said already (in the 
Remark to Paragraph 273); and besides, such a notion cannot be further 
discussed in face of the Idea of the state in its full development. 
If the 'people' is represented neither as a patriarchal clan, nor as 
living under the simple conditions which make democracy or aristocracy 
possible as forms of government (see Remark to Paragraph 273), nor 
as living under some other unorganized and haphazard conditions, but 
instead as an inwardly developed, genuinely organic, totality, then 
sovereignty is there as the personality of the whole, and this personality 
is there, in the real existence adequate to its concept, as the person of 
the monarch. 
At the stage at which constitutions are divided, as above mentioned,46 
into democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy, the point of view taken is 
that of a still substantial unity, abiding in itself, without having yet 
embarked on its infinite differentiation and the plumbing of its own 
depths. At that stage, the moment of the final, self-determining, de-
cision of the will does not come on the scene explicitly in its own proper 
actuality as an organic moment immanent in the state. None the less, 
even in those comparatively immature constitutional forms, there must 
always be individuals at the head. Leaders must either be available 
already, as they are in monarchies of that type, or, as happens in aristo-
cracies, but more particularly in democracies, they may rise to the top, 
as statesmen or generals, by chance and in accordance with the particular 
needs of the hour. This must happen, since everything done and every-
thing actual is inaugurated and brought to completion by the single 
decisive act of a leader. But comprised in a union of powers which 
remains undifferentiated, this subjectivity of decision is inevitably 
either contingent in its origin and appearance, or else is in one way or 
another subordinate to something else. Hence in such states, the power 
of the leaders was conditioned, and only in something beyond them 
could there be found a pure unambiguous decision, afatum, determining 

ETHICAL LIFE 
affairs from without. As a moment of the Idea, this decision had to 
come into existence, though rooted in something outside the circle of 
human freedom with which the state is concerned. Herein lies the origin 
of the need for deriving the last word on great events and important 
affairs of state from oracles, a 'divine sign' (in the case of Socrates), the 
entrails of animals, the feeding and flight of birds, &c. It was when men 
had not yet plumbed the depths of self-consciousness or risen out of 
tbeir undifferentiated unity of substance to their independence that they 
lacked strength to look within their own being for the final word. 
In the 'divine sign' of Socrates47 (compare Remark to Paragraph 138) 
we see the will which formerly had simply transferred itself beyond 
itself now beginning to apply itself to itself and so to recognize its own 
inward nature. This is the beginning of a self-knowing and so of a 
genuine freedom. This realized freedom of the Idea consists precisely 
in giving to each of the moments of rationality its own self-conscious 
actuality here and now. Hence it is this freedom which makes the 
ultimate self-determining certitude-the culmination of the concept of 
the will-the function of a single consciousness. This ultimate self-
determination, however, can fall within the sphere of human freedom 
only in so far as it has the position of a pinnacle, explicitly distinct from, 
and raised above, all that is particular and conditional, for only so is it 
actual in a way adequate to its concept. [A.] 
280. (3) This ultimate self in which the will of the state is con-
centrated is, when thus taken in abstraction, a single self and there-
fore is immediate individuality.48 Hence its 'natural' character is 
implied in its very conception. The monafch, therefore, is essen-
tially characterized as this individual, in abstraction from all his 
other characteristics, and this individual is raised to the dignity of 
monarchy in an immediate, natural, fashion, i.e. through his birth 
in the course of nature. 
This transition of the concept of pure self-determination into the 
immediacy of being and so into the realm of nature is of a purely specu-
lative character, and apprehension of it therefore belongs to logic. More-
over, this transition is on the whole the same as that familiar to us in the 
nature of willing, and there the process is to translate something from 
subjectivity (i.e. some purpose held before the mind) into existence (see 
Paragraph 8). But the proper form of the Idea and of the transition 
here under consideration is the immediate conversion of the pure self-
determination of the will (i.e. of the simple concept itself) into a single 
and natural existent without the mediation of a particular content (like 
a purpose in the case of action). 
In the so-called 'ontological' proof of the existence of God, we have 
the same conversion of the absolute concept into existence. This con-

THE STATE 
version has constituted the depth of the Idea in the modern world, 
although recently it has been declared inconceivable,49 with the result 
that knowledge of truth has been renounced, since truth is simply the 
unity of concept and existence (see Paragraph 23). Since the Under-
standing has no inner consciousness of this unity and refuses to move 
beyond the separation of these two moments of the truth, it may perhaps, 
so far as God is concerned, still permit a 'faith' in this unity. But since 
the idea of the monarch is regarded as being quite familiar to ordinary 
consciousness, the Understanding clings here all the more tenaciously 
to its separatism and the conclusions which its astute ratiocination 
deduces therefrom. As a result, it denies that the moment of ultimate 
decision in the state is linked implicitly and actually (i.e. in the rational 
concept) with the immediate birthright of the monarch. Consequently 
it infers, first, that this link is a matter of accident, and further-since it 
has claimed that the absolute diversity of these moments is the rational 
thing-that such a link is irrational, and then there follow the other 
deductions disruptive of the Idea of the state. so [A.] 
281. Both moments in their undivided unity-(a) the will's 
ultimate ungrounded self, and (b) therefore it& similarly un-
grounded objective existence (existence being the category which 
is at home in nature)-constitute the Idea of something against 
which caprice is powerless,s 1 the 'majesty' of the monarch. In 
this unity lies the actual unity of the state, and it is only through 
this, its inward and outward immediacy, that the unity of the state 
is saved from the risk of being drawn down into the sphere of 
particularity and its caprices, ends, and opinions, and saved too 
from the war of factions round the throne and from the enfeeble-
ment and overthrow of the power of the state. 
The rights of birth and inheritance constitute the basis of legitimacy, 
the basis of a right not purely positive but contained in the Idea. 
If succession to the throne is rigidly determined, i.e. if it is hereditary, 
then faction is obviated at a demise of the crown; this is one aspect of 
hereditary succession and it has long been rightly stressed as a point in 
its favour. This aspect, however, is only consequential, and to make it 
the reason for hereditary succession is to drag down the majesty of the 
throne into the sphere of argumentation, to ignore its true character as 
ungrounded immediacy and ultimate inwardness, and to base it not on 
the Idea of the state immanent within it, but on something external to 
itself, on some extraneous notion such as the 'welfare of the state' or the 
'welfare of the people'. Once it has been so based, its hereditary 
character may of course be deduced by the use of medii termini. But 
other medii termini are equally available, and so therefore are different 
conclusions, and it is only too well known what conclusions have in fact 

186 
ETHICAL LIFE 
been drawn from this 'welfare of the people' (salut du peuple). Hence 
the majesty of the monarch is a topic for thoughtful treatment by 
philosophy alone, since every method of inquiry, other than the specu-
lative method of the infinite Idea which is purely self-grounded, annuls 
the nature of majesty altogether. 
An elective monarchy seems of course to be the most natural idea, i.e. 
the idea which superficial thinking finds handiest. Because it is the 
concerns and interests of his people for which a monarch has to provide, 
so the argument runs, it must be left to the people to entrust with its 
welfare whomsoever it pleases, and only with the grant of this trust does 
his right to rule arise. This view, like the notion of the monarch as the 
highest executive official in the state, or the notion of a contractual 
relation between him and his people, &c., &c., is grounded on the will 
interpreted as the whim, opinion, and caprice of the Many.sz A will of 
this character counts as the first thing in civil society (as was pointed out 
long ago )53 or rather it tries to count as the only thing there, but it is not 
the guiding principle of the family, still less of the state, and in short it 
stands opposed to the Idea of ethical life. 
It is truer to say that elective monarchy is the worst of institutions, 
and its results suffice to reveal this to ratiocination. To ratiocination, 
however, these results have the appearance of something merely possible 
and probable, though they are in fact inherent in the very essence of this 
institution. In an elective monarchy, I mean, the nature of the relation 
between king and people implies that the ultimate decision is left with 
the particular wiii, and hence the constitution becomes a Compact of 
Election, 54 i.e. a surrender of the power of the state at the discretion 
of the particular will. The result of this is that the particular offices of 
state turn into private property, the sovereignty of the state is enfeebled 
and lost, and finally the state disintegrates within and is overthrown 
from without.ss [A.] 
282. The right to pardon criminals arises from the sovereignty 
of the monarch, since it is this alone which is empowered to 
actualize mind's power of making undone what has been done and 
wiping out a crime by forgiving and forgetting it. 
The right of pardon is one of the highest recognitions of the majesty 
of mind. Moreover it is one of those cases where a category which be-
longs to a higher sphere is applied to or reflected in the sphere below.s6 
Applications of higher categories to a lower sphere, however, concern 
the particular science which has to handle its subject-matter in all its 
empirical details (see [the second] footnote to the Remark to Paragraph 
270 ). Another instance of the same kind of thing is the subsumption 
under the concept of crime (which came before us earlier-see Paragraphs 
95-102) of injuries against the state in· general, or against the sovereignty, 
---

THE STATE 
majesty, and person of the prince. In fact these acquire the character 
of crime of the worst kind, requiring a special procedure, &c. [A.] 
283. The second moment in the power of the crown is the 
moment of particularity, or the moment of a determinate content 
and its subsumption under the universal. When this acquires a 
special objective existence, it becomes the supreme council and the 
individuals who compose it. They bring before the monarch for 
his decision the content of current affairs of state or the legal pro-
visions required to meet existing needs, together \Vith their objec-
tive aspects, i.e. the grounds on which decision is to be based, the 
relative laws, circumstances, &c. The individuals who discharge 
these duties are in direct contact with the person of the monarch 
and therefore their choice and dismissal alike rest with his un-
restricted caprice. 
284. It is only for the objective side of decision, i.e. for know-
ledge of the problem and the attendant circumstances, and for the 
legal and other reasons which determine its solution, that men are 
answerable; in other \vords, it is these alone which are capable of 
objective proof. It is for this reason that these may fall within the 
province of a council which is distinct from the personal will of the 
monarch as such. Hence it is only councils or their individual 
members that are made answerable. The personal majesty of the 
monarch, on the other hand, as the final subjectivity of decision, is 
above all answerability for acts of government. 
285. The third moment in the power of the crO\m concerns the 
absolute universality which subsists subjectively in the conscience 
of the monarch and objectively in the whole of the constitution and 
the laws. Hence the power of the crown presupposes the other 
moments in the state just as it is presupposed by each of them. 
286. The objecth·e guarantee of the power of the crown, of the 
hereditary right of succession to the throne, and so forth, consists 
in the fact that just as monarchy has its own actuality in distinction 
from that of the other rationally determined moments in the state, 
so these others explicitly possess the rights and duties appropriate 
to their own character. In the rational organism of the state, each 
member, by maintaining itself in its own position, eo ipso maintains 
the others in theirs. 
One of the results of more recent history is the development of a 
monarchical constitution with succession to the throne firmly fixed on 

x88 
ETHICAL LIFE 
heteditary principles in accordance with primogeniture. With this 
development, monarchy has been brought back to the patriarchal 
principle in which it had its historical origin, but its determinate 
character is now higher, because the monarch is the absolute apex of an 
organically developed state. This historical result is of the utmost 
importance for public freedom and for rationality in the constitution, 
but, as was remarked above,s' it is often grossly misunderstood despite 
the respect paid to it. 
The history of despotisms, as of the now obsolete, purely feudal, 
monarchies, is a tale of the vicissitudes of revolt, monarchical tyranny, 
civil war, the ruin of princes of the blood and whole dynasties, and, 
consequentially, the general devastation and overthrow of the state in 
both its home and foreign concerns. This is all due to the fact that, in 
monarchies of that type, the division of the business of the state is purely 
mechanical, the various sections being merely handed over to pashas, 
vassals, &c. The difference between the departments is simply one of 
greater or lesser power instead of being one of form and specific character. 
Hence each department maintains itself and in doing so is productive 
only of itself and not of the others at the same time; each is independent 
and autonomous and completely incorporates in itself all the moments 
of the concept. When there is an organic relation subsisting betwee!l 
members, not parts, then each member by fulfilling the functions of its 
own sphere is eo ipso maintaining the others; what each fundamentally 
aims at and achieves in maintaining itself is the maintenance of the others. 
The guarantees in question here for the maintenance of the succession 
to the throne or for the power of the crown generally, or for justice, 
public freedom, &c., are modes of securing these things by means of 
institutions. For subjective guarantees we may look to the affection of 
the people, to character, oaths of allegiance, power, and so forth, but, 
when the constitution is being discussed, it is only objective guarantees 
that are relevant. And such guarantees are institutions, i.e. mutually 
conditioning moments, organically interconnected. 
Hence public 
freedom in general and an hereditary monarchy guarantee each other; 
they stand or fall together of necessity, ·because public freedom means 
a rational constitution, while the hereditary character of the power of the 
crown is, as has been shown,s8 the moment lying in the concept of that 
power. 
(b) The Executive 
287. There is a distinction between the monarch's decisions and 
their execution and application, or in general between his decisions 
and the continued execution or maintenance of past decisions, 
existing laws, regulations, organizations for the securing of common 
ends, and so forth. This task of merely subsuming the particular 
__j

THE STATE 
under the universal is comprised in the executive power, which also 
includes the powers of the judiciary and the police. The latter have 
a more immediate bearing on the particular concerns of civil 
society and they make the universal interest authoritative over its 
particular aims. 
288. Particular interests which are common to everyone fall 
within civil society and lie outside the absolutely universal interest 
of the state proper (see Paragraph 256). The administration of 
these is in the hands of Corporations (see Paragraph 251), com-
mercial and professional as well as municipal, and their officials, 
directors, managers, and the like. It is the business of these 
officials to manage the private property and interests of these 
particular spheres and, from that point of view, their authority 
rests on the confidence of their commonalties and professional 
equals. On the other hand, however, these circles of particular 
interests must be subordinated to the higher interests of the state, 
and hence the filling of positions of responsibility in Corporations, 
&c., will generally be effected by a mixture of popular election 
by those interested with appointment and ratificatiOn by higher 
authority. 
289. The maintenance of the state's universal interest, and of 
legality, in this sphere of particular rights, and the work of bringing 
these rights back to the universal, require to be superintended by 
holders of the executive power, by (a) the executi' e civil servants, 
and (b) the higher advisory officials (who are organized into 
committees). These converge in their supreme heads who are in 
direct contact \Vith the monarch. 
,Just as civil society is the battlefield where everyone's individual 
private interest meets everyone else's, so here we have the struggle (a) of 
private interests against particular matters of common concern and (b) 
of both of these together against the organization of the state and its 
higher outlook. At the same time the corporation mind, engendered 
when the particular spheres gain their title to rights, is now inwardly 
converted into the mind of the state, since it finds in the state the means 
of maintaining its particular ends. This is the secret of the patriotism 
of the citizens in the sense that they know the state as their substance, 
because it i~ the state that maintains their particular spheres of interest 
together with the title, authority, and welfare of these. In the corpora-
tion mind the rooting of the particular in the universal is directly en-
tailed, and for this reason it is in that mind that the depth and strength 
which the state possesses in sentiment is seated. 

ETHICAL LIFE 
The administration of a Corporation's business by its own officials 
is frequently clumsy, because although they keep before their minds 
and are acquainted with its special interests and affairs, they have a far 
less complete appreciation of the connexion of those affairs with more 
remote conditions and the outlook of the state. In addition, other 
circumstances contribute to the same result, e.g. dose private relation-
ships and other factors putting officials on a footing of equality with those 
who should be their subordinates, the rather numerous ways in which 
officials lack independence, and so on. This sphere of private interests, 
however, may be regarded as the one left to the moment of formal 
freedom,sg the one which affords a playground for personal knowledge, 
personal decisions and their execution, petty passions and conceits. This 
is all the more permissible, the more trivial, from the point of view of 
the more universal affairs of state, is the intrinsic worth of the business 
which in this way comes to ruin or is managed less well or more labori-
ously, &c. And further, it is all the more permissible, the more this 
laborious or foolish management of such trivial affairs stands in direct 
relation with the self-satisfaction and vanity derived therefrom. 
290. Division of labour (see Paragraph 11)8) occurs in the busi-
ness of the executive also. For this reason, the organization of 
officials has the abstract though difficult task of so arranging that 
(a) civil life shall be governed in a concrete manner from below 
where it is concrete, but that (b) none the less the business of 
government shall be divided into its abstract branches manned by 
special officials as different centres of administration, and further 
that (c) the operations of these various departments shall converge 
again when they are directed on civil life from above, in the same 
way as they converge into a general supervision in the supreme 
executive.6o [A.] 
291. The nature of the executive functions is that they are 
objective and that in their substance they have been explicitly fixed 
by previous decisions (see Paragraph 287); these functions have to 
be fulfilled and carried out by individuals. Between an individual 
and his office there is no immediate natural link. Hence indivi-
duals are not appointed to office on account of their birth or native 
personal gifts. The objective factor in their appointment is know-
ledge and proof of ability. Such proof guarantees that the state 
will get what it requires; and since it is the sole condition of 
appointment, it also guarantees to every citizen the chance of 
joining the class of civil servants. 
292. Since the objective qualification for the civil service is 

THE STATE 
not genius (as it is for work as an artist, for example), there is of 
necessity an indefinite plurality of eligible candidates whose rela-
tive excellence is not determinable with absolute precision. The 
selection of one of the candidates, his nomination to office, and 
the grant to him of full authority to transact public business-all 
this, as the linking of two things, a man and his office, which in 
relation to each other must always be fortuitous, is the subjective 
aspect of election to office, and it must lie with the crown as the 
power in the state which is sovereign and has the last word. 
293. The particular public functions which the monarch en-
trusts to officials constitute one part of the objective aspect of the 
sovereignty residing in the crown. Their specific discrimination is 
therefore given in the nature of the thing. And while the actions 
of the officials are the fulfilment of their duty, their office is also a 
right exempt from contingency. 
294. Once an individual has been appointed to his official 
position by the sovereign's act (see Paragraph 292), the tenure of 
his post is conditional on his fulfilling its duties. Such fulfilment 
is the very essence of his appointment, and it is only consequential 
that he finds in his office his b-elihood and the assured satisfaction 
of his particular interests (see Paragraph 264), and further that his 
external circumstances and his official work are freed from other 
kinds of subjective dependence and influence. 
The state does not count on optional, discretion8ry, services (e.g. on 
justice administered by knights errant). It is just hL:cduse such services 
are optional and discretionary that the state cannot rely on them, for 
casual servants may fail for private reasons to fulfil their duties com-
pletely, or they may arbitrarily decide not to fulfil them at all but pursue 
their private ends instead. The opposite extreme to a knight errant, so 
far as the service of the state goes, would be an official who clung to his 
office purely and simply to make a liYing without any real sense of duty 
and so without any real right to go on holding it. 
What the service of the state really requires is that men shall forgo the 
selfish and capricious satisfaction of their subjective ends; by this very 
sacrifice, they acquire the right to find their satisfaction in, but only in, 
the dutiful discharge of their public functions. In this fact, so far as 
public business is concerned, there lies the link between universal and 
particular interests which constitutes both the concept of the state and 
its inner stability (see Paragraph z6o ). 
It follows that a man's tenure of his civil service post is not contractual 
(see Paragraph 75), although his appointment involves a consent and an 

192 
ETHICAL LIFE 
undertaking on both sides. A civil servant is not appointed, like an 
agent, to perform a single casual act of service; on the contrary, he 
concentrates his main interests (not only his particular interests but his 
mental interests also) on his relation to his work. Similarly, the work 
imposed upon him and entrusted to him is not merely a particular thing, 
external in character; the value of such a thing is something inward and 
therefore distinct from its outward character, so that it is in no way 
impaired if\\ hat has been stipulated is not fulfilled (see Paragraph 77). 
The work of a civil servant, ho\\ ever, is as such a value in and for itself. 
Hence the wrong committed through its non-performance, or positive 
mis-performance (i.e. through an action contrary to official duty, and 
both of these are of that type), is an infringement of the universal con-
tent itself (i.e. is a negatively infinite judgement-see Paragraph 95) and 
so is a trespass or even a crime. 
The assured satisfaction o' particular needs removes the external 
compulsion which may tempt a man to seek ways and means of satisfy-
ing them at the expense of his official duties. Those who are entrusted 
with affairs of state find in its universal power the protection they need 
against another subjective phenomenon, na!'1ely the personal passions 
of the governed, whose private interests, &c., suffer injury as the interest 
of the state is made to prevail against them. 
295. The security of the state and its subjects against the misuse 
of power by ministers and their officials lies directly in their 
hierarchical organization and their answerability; but it lies too in 
the authority given to societies and Corporations, because in itself 
this is a barrier against the intrusion of subjective caprice into the 
pO\ver entrusted to a civil servant, and it completes from below the 
state control which does not reach down as far as the conduct of 
individuals. 
The conduct and culture of officials is the sphere where the laws and 
the government's decisions come into contact with individuals and are 
actually made good. Hence it is on the conduct of officials that there 
depend not only the contentment oi citizens and their confidence in the 
government, hut also the execution-or alternatin~ly the distortion and 
frustration-of state projects; at any rate, this is the case in the sense 
that feeling and sc:ntlment may easily rate the manner of execution as 
highly as the very content of the command to be ext>cuted, e\·en ,hough 
the content may in fact be the imposition of a tax. Owing to the direct 
and personal nature of this contact with individuals, control from above 
can attain its ends in this respect only to a rather incomplete extent. 
:\Ioreo\·er, its ends may also be hindered by interests common to officials 
who form a clique over against their inferiors on one side and their 
superiors on the other. In states whose institutions may perhaps be 
__j

THE STATE 
193 
imperfectly developed in other respects also, the removal of hindrances 
like these requires and justifies the higher intervention of the sovereign 
(as for example of Frederick the Great in the notorious affair61 of Arnold 
the miller). 
296. But th~ fact that a dispassionate, upright, and polite 
demeanour becomes customary [in civil servants] is (i) partly a 
result of direct education in thought and ethical conduct. Such an 
education is a mental counterpoise to the mechanical and semi-
mechanical activity involved in acquiring the so-called 'sciences' 
of matters connected with administration, in the requisite business 
training, in the actual work done, &c. (ii) The size of the state, 
however, is an important factor in producing this result, since it 
diminishes the stress of family and other personal ties, and also 
makes less potent and so less keen such passions as hatred, revenge, 
&c. In those who are busy with the important questions arising in 
a great state, these subjective interests automatically disappear, 
and the habit is generated of adopting universal interests, points 
of view, and activities. 
297. Civil sen·ants and the members of the executive constitute 
the greater part of the middle class, the class in which the con-
sciousness of right and the developed intelligence of the mass of 
the people is found. The sovereign working on the middle class 
at the top, and Corporation-rights working on it at the bottom, 
are the institutions which effectually prevent it from acquiring the 
isolated position of an aristocracy and using its echJc2.tion and skill 
as means to an arbitrary tyranny. 
At one time the administration of justice, which is concerned with the 
private interests of all members of the state, was in this way turned into 
an instrument of profit and tyranny, when the knowledge of the law was 
buried in pedantry and a f0reign tongue, and knowledge of legal pro-
cesses was similarly buried in involved formalities. [A.] 
(c) The Legislature 
298. The legislature is concerned (a) with the laws as such in 
so far as they require fresh and extended determination; and (b) 
with the content of home affairs affecting the entire state. The 
legislature is itself a part of the constitution which is presupposed 
by it and to that extent lies absolutely outside the sphere directly 
determined by it; none the less, the constitution becomes pro-
gressively more mature in the course of the further elaboration of 

194 
ETHICAL LIFE 
the laws and the advancing character of the universal business of 
government. [A.] 
299. Legislative business is more precisely determined, in 
relation to private individuals, under these two heads: (n:) provision 
by the state for their well-being and happiness, and ({3) the exaction 
of services from them. The former comprises the laws dealing 
with all sorts of private rights, the rights of communities, Corpora-
tions, and organizations affecting the entire state, and further it 
indirectly (see Paragraph 298) comprises the whole of the con-
stitution. As for the sen·ices to be exacted, it is only if these are 
reduced to terms of money, the really existent and universal nlue 
of both things and services, that they can be fixed justly and at the 
same time in such a 'vay that any particular tasks and services 
which an individual may perform come to be mediated through 
his own arbitrary will. 
The proper object of universal legislation may be distinguished in a 
general way from the proper function of administrative officials or of 
some kind of state regulation, in that the content of the former is wholly 
universal, i.e. determinate laws, while it is what is particular in content 
which falls to the latter, together with ways and means of enforcing the 
law. This distinction, however, is not a hard and fast one, because a law, 
by being a law, is ab initio something more than a mere command in 
general terms (such as 'Thou shalt not kill'-compare Remark (d) to 
Paragraph 140). A law must in itself be something determinate, but the 
more determinate it is, the more readily are its terms capable of being 
carried out as they stand. At the same time, however, to give to laws 
such a fully detailed determinacy would give them empirical features 
subject inevitably to alteration in the course of their being actually 
carried out, and this would contravene their character as laws. The 
organic unity of the powers of the state itself implies that it is one single 
mind which both firmly establishes the universal and also brings it into 
its determinate actuality and carries it out. 
In the state it may happen, to begin with, 6z that the numerous apti-
tudes, possessions, pursuits, and talents of its members, together with the 
infinitely varied richness of life intrinsic to these-all of which are at the 
same time linked with their owner's mentality-are not subject to direct 
levy by the state. It lays claim only to a single form of riches, namely 
money. (Services requisitioned for the defence of the state in war arise 
for the first time in connexion with the duty considered in the next sub-
divtsion of this book.) In fact, however, money is not one particular 
type of wealth amongst others, but the universal form of all types so far 
as they are expressed in an external embodiment and so can be taken 
__j

THE STATE 
195 
as 'things'. 6J Only by being translated into terms of this extreme 
culmination of externality can services exacted by the state be fixed 
quantitatively and so justly and equitably. 
In Plato's Republic, the Guardian~ are left to allot individuals to their 
particular classes and impose on them their particular tasks (compare 
Remark to Paragraph 185). under the feudal monarchies the services 
required from vassals were equally indeterminate, but they had also to 
sen·c in their partiwlar capacity, e.g. as judges. The same particular 
character pertains to tasks imposed in the East and in Egypt in connexion 
1vith colossal architectural undertakings, and so forth. In these circum-
stances the principle of subjective freedom is lacking, i.e. the principle 
that the individual's substantive activity-which in any case becomes 
something particular in content in services like those mentioned-shall 
he mediated through his particular 1·olition. This is a right which can be 
secured only when the demand for service takes the form of a demand 
for something of uni1·ersal value, and it is this right which has brought 
with it this conversion of the state's demands into demands for cash. [A.] 
300. In the legislature as a whole the other powers are the first 
two moments 11·hich are cffecti1·e, (i) the monarchy as that to 
11·hich ultimate decisions belong; (i1) the c'cc 1lti\ cas the advisory 
body since it is the moment possessed uf ( '1 .• concrete knowledge 
and m-crsight of the \\hole state in its numcro~l" facets and the 
actual pnnc1ples firmly estab]i:;hed wnhm It cnd (;3) a knowledge 
In particular of what the state's po11 cr neLd~. The last moment 
In the legislature is the Estates. 64 
[:\ ] 
301. The Estates ha1·e the functi<Jn of h:in~·~-~ ;•uhlic affairs 
into existence not only implicitlv, hue al~o act't~.lh., :· of bringing 
into existence the moment of subjecti1·e formal frtedurn, the public 
consciousness as an empirical uni\·ersal, of 11 h1ch the thoughts and 
opinions oi the :\Iany are particulars. 
The phrase 'the :\Ian~' (oi r.o,\,\oi) denotes ernpmca: uni1·ersality 
more stnctly than' -~11 ·. 11·hich ism current usc. If it IS sa~ci;) he obvious 
that this 'all' J•nma facie exdmks at least children, '"m,en, &:c., then 
it is mreh· still mnrc ohYinus that the quite defimte '' orJ 'all' should not 
be used "·hen snmcthing qnite indetimtc is meant. 
Current op1nirm k;s put mto !'Cncral circulation such .1 host of per-
vcr<'<: and false !Lkas and \\3\'S of speaking about 'Pcnplc, 'Constitu-
tion', and 'Estates' thJt it ,,-otdd he a \\·aste of energy t" :ry to specify, 
expound, and correct them. The Idea uppermost in men's minds when 
the\ ;:peak about the necessity or the expediency of ·~umm0ning the 
EstJtcs' IS l'L'nnalh· something of this sort: (i) The deputiL·s of the 
peopk, or even the people themsclve8, must know best what is in their 

ETHICAL LIFE 
best interest, and (ii) their will for its promotion is undoubtedly the 
most disinterested. So far as the first of these points is concerned, 
however, the truth is that if 'people' means a particular section of the 
citizens, then it means precisely that section which does not know what 
it wills. To know what one wills, and still more to know what the 
absolute will, Reason, wills, is the fruit of profound apprehension and 
insight, precisely the things which are not popular. 
The Estates are a guarantee of the general welfare and public freedom. 
A little reflection will show that this guarantee does not lie in their 
particular power of insight, because the highest civil servants necessarily 
have a deeper and more comprehensive insight into the nature of the 
state's organization and requirements. They are also more habituated 
to the business of government and have greater skill in it, so that even 
without the Estates they are able to do what is best, just as they also 
continually ha·ce to do while the Estates are in session. No, the guarantee 
lies on the contrary ((}:) in the additional insight of the deputies, insight 
in the first place into the activity of such officials as are not immediately 
under the eye of the higher functionaries of state, and in particular into 
the more pressing and more specialized needs and deficiencies which are 
directly in their view; ({3) in the fact that the anticipation of criticism 
from the Many, particularly of public criticism, has the effect of inducing 
officials to devote their best attention beforehand to their duties and the 
schemes under consideration, and to deal with these only in accordance 
with the purest motives. This same compulsion is effective also on the 
members of the Estates themselves. 
As for the conspicuously good will for the general welfare which the 
Estates are supposed to possess, it has been pointed out already (in the 
Remark to Paragraph 272) that to regard the will of the executive as bad, 
or as less good [than that of the ruled] is a presupposition characteristic 
of the rabble or of the negative outlook generally. This presupposition 
might at once be answered on its own ground by the counter-charge 
that the Estates start from isolated individuals, from a private point of 
view, from particular interests, and so are inclined to devote their 
activities to these at the expense of the general interests, while per contra 
the other moments in the power of the state explicitly take up the stand-
point of the state from the start and devote themselves to the universal end. 
As for the general guarantee which is supposed to lie peculiarly in the 
Estates, each of the other political institutions shares with the Estates in 
being a guarantee of public welfare and rational freedom, and some of 
these institutions, as for instance the sovereignty of the monarch, 
hereditary succession to the throne, the judicial system, &c., guarantee 
these things far more effectively than the Estates can. 
Hence the specific function which the concept assigns to the Estates 
is to be sought in the fact that in tht.m the subjective moment in universal 
freedom-the private judgement and private will of the sphere called 
I 
J

THE STATE 
197 
'civil society' in this book-comes into existence integrally related to the 
state. This moment is a determination of the Idea once the Idea has 
developed to totality, a moment arising as a result of an inner necessity 
not to be confused with external necessities and expediencies. The proof 
of this follows, like all the rest of our account of the state, from adopting 
the philosophical point of view. [A.] 
302. Regarded as a mediating organ, the Estates stand between 
the government in general on the one hand and the nation broken 
up into particulars (people and associations) on the other. Their 
function requires them to possess a political and administrative 
sense and temper, no less than a sense for the interests of indi-
viduals and particular groups. At the same time the significance 
of their position is that, in common with the organized executive, 
they are a middle term preventing both the extreme isolation of the 
power of the crown, which otherwise might seem a mere arbitrary 
tyranny, and also the isolation of the particular interests of persons, 
societies, and Corporations. Further, and more important, they 
prevent individuals from having the appearance of a mass or an 
aggregate and so from acquiring an unorganized opinion and 
volition and from crystallizing into a powerful bloc in opposition 
to the organized state. 
It is one of the most important discoveries of logic that a specific 
moment which, by standing in an opposition, has the position of an 
extreme, ceases to be such and is a moment in an organic whole by being 
at the same time a mean. In connexion \\ ith our prt·sent topic it is all 
the more important to emphasize this aspect of the matter because of 
the popular, but most dangerous, preJudice wluch regards the Estates 
principally from the point of view of their opposition to the executive, 
as if that were their essential attitude. If the E~tates become an organ 
in the whole by being taken up into the state, they evince themselves 
solely through their mediating function. In this way thetr opposition to 
the executiye is reduced to a show. There may indeed be .m appearance 
of opposition between them, but if they were opposed, not merely super-
ficially, but actually and in substance, then the state would be in the 
throes of destruction. That the clash is not of this kind IS evident in 
the nature of the thing, because the Estates have to deal, not with the 
essential elements in the organism of the state, hut only with rather 
specialized and trifling matters, while the passion which even these 
arouse spends itself in party cravings in connexwn with purely subjec-
tive interests such as appointments to the higher offices of state. [A.] 
303. The universal class, or, more precisely, the class of civil 
servants, must, purely in virtue of its character as universal, have 

ETHICAL LIFE 
the universal as the end of its essential activity. In the Estates, 
as an element in the legislative power, the unofficial class acquires 
its political significance and efficacy; it appears, therefore, in the 
Estates neither as a mere indiscriminate multitude nor as an 
aggregate dispersed into its atoms, but as what it already is, namely 
a class subdivided into two, one sub-class (the agricultural class] 
being based on a tie of substance between its members, and the 
other (the business class] on particular needs and the work whereby 
these are met (see Paragraph 201 ff.). It is only in this way that 
there is a genuine link between the particular which is effective in 
the state and the universal. 
This runs counter to another prevalent idea, the idea that since it is in 
the legislature that the unofficial class rises to the level of participating 
in matters of state, it must appear there in the form of individuals, 
whether individuals are to choose representatives for this purpose, or 
whether every single individual is to have a vote in the legislature him-
self. This atomistic and abstract point of view vanishes at the stage of 
the family, as well as that of civil society where the individual is in evi-
dence only as a member of a general group. The state, however, is essen-
tially an organization each of whose members is in itself a group of this 
kind, and hence no one of its moments should appear as an unorganized 
aggregate. The 1\lany, as units-a congenial interpretation of 'people', 
are of course something connected, but they are connected only as an 
aggregate, a formless mass whose commotion and activity could there-
fore only be elementary, irrational, barbarous, and frightful. When we 
hear speakers on the constitution expatiating about the 'people'-this 
unorganized collection-we know from the start that we have nothing 
to expect but generalities and perverse declamations. 
The circles of association in civil society are already communities. 
To picture these communities as once more breaking up into a mere 
conglomeration of individuals as soon as they enter the field of politics, 
i.e. the field of the highest concrete universality, is eo ipso to hold civil 
and political life apart from one another and as it were to hang the 
latter in the air, because its basis could then only be the abstract in-
dividuality of caprice and opinion, and hence it would be grounded on 
chance and not on what is absolutely stable and justified. 
So-called 'theories' of this kind involve the idea that the classes 
( Stiinde) of civil society and the Estates ( Stiinde ), which are the 'classes' 
given a political significance, stand wide apart from each other. But the 
German language, by calling them both Stiinde has still maintained the 
unity which in any case they actually possessed in former times. 
304. The Estates, as an element in political life, still retain in 
their own function the class distinctions already present in the 

THE STATE 
199 
lower spheres of civil life. The position of the classes is abstract 
to begin with, i.e. in contrast with the whole principle of monarchy 
or the crown, their position is that of an extreme--empirical 
universality. This extreme opposition implies the possibility, 
though no more, of harmonization, and the equally likely possi-
bility of set hostility. This abstract position changes into a rational 
relation (into a syllogism, see Remark to Paragraph 302) only if the 
middle term between the opposites comes into existence. From 
the point of view of the crown, the executive already has this 
character (see Paragraph 300). So, from the point of view of the 
classes, one moment in them must be adapted to the task of existing 
as in essence the moment of mediation. 
305. The principle of one of the classes of civil society is in 
itself capable of adaptation to this political position. The class in 
question is the one whose ethical life is natural, whose basis is 
family life, and, so far as its livelihood is concerned, the possession 
of land. Its particular members attain their position by birth, just 
as the monarch does, and, in common wi(h him, they possess a will 
which rests on itself alone. 6s 
306. This class is more particularly fitted for political position 
and significance in that its capital is independent alike of the state's 
capital, the uncertainty of business, the quest for profit, and any 
sort of fluctuation in possessions. It is likewise independent of 
favour, whether from the executive or the mob. It is even fortified 
against its own wilfulness, because those members of this class who 
are called to political life are not entitled, as otht>r citizens are, 
either to dispose of their entire property at will, or to the assurance 
that it will pass to their children, whom they loYe equally, in 
similarly equal divisions. Hence their wealth becomes inalienable, 
entailed, and burdened by primogeniture. [A.] 
307. The right of this section of the agricultural class is thus 
based in a way on the natural principle of the family. But this 
principle is at the same time reversed owing to hard sacrifices made 
for political ends, and thereby the activity of this class is essentially 
directed to those ends. As a consequence of this, this class is 
summoned and entitled to its political Yocation by birth without 
the hazards of election. It therefore has the fixed, substantive 
position between the subjective wilfulness or contingency of both 
extremes; and while it mirrors in itself (see Paragraph 305) the 
moment of the monarchical power, it also shares in other respects 

200 
ETHICAL LIFE 
the needs and rights of the other extreme (i.e. civil society] and 
hence it becomes a support at once of the throne and society. 
308. The second section of the Estates comprises the fluctuating 
element in civil society. This element can enter politics only 
through its deputies; the multiplicity of its members is an external 
reason for this, but the essential reason is the specific character 
of this element and its activity. Since these deputies are the 
deputies of civil society, it follows as a direct consequence that 
their appointment is made by the society as a society. That is to 
say, in making the appointment, society is not dispersed into 
atomic units, collected to perform only a single and temporary 
act, and kept together for a moment and no longer. On the con-
trary, it makes the appointment as a society, articulated into 
associations, communities, and Corporations, which although con-
stituted already for other purposes, acquire in this way a connexion 
with politics. The existence of the Estates and their assembly finds 
a constitutional guarantee of its own in the fact that this class is 
entitled to send deputies at the summons of the crown, while 
members of the former class are entitled to present themselves in 
person in the Estates (see Paragraph 307). 
To hold that every single person should share in deliberating and 
deciding on political matters of general concern on the ground that all 
individuals are members of the state, that its cont:crns arc their concerns, 
and that it is their right that what is done should he done with their 
knowl·~dge and volition, is tantamount to a proposal to put the demo-
cratic element without any rational form into the organism of the state, 
although it is only in virtue of the possession of such a form that the 
state is an organism at all. This idea comes readily to mind because it 
does not go beyond the abstraction of 'being a member of the state', and 
it is superficial thinking which clings to abstractions. The rational con-
sideration of a topic, the consciousness of the Idea, is concrete, and to 
that extent coincides with a genuine practical sense. 
~uch a sense is 
itself nothing but the sense of rationality or the Idea, though it is not 
to be confused with mere business routine or the horizon of a restricted 
sphere. The concrete state is the whole, articulated into its particular 
groups. The member of a state is a member of such a group, i.e. of 
a social class, and it is only as characterized in this objecti\·e way that 
he comes under consideration when we are dealing with the state. 
His mere character as universal implies that he is at 0ne and the same 
time both a private person and also a thinking consciousness, a will 
which wills the universal. This consciousness and will, however, lose 
their emptiness and acquire a content and a living actuality only when 

THE STATE 
201 
they are filled with particularity, and particularity means determinacy 
as particular and a particular class-status; or, to put the matter other-
wise, abstract individuality is a generic essence, but has its immanent 
universal actuality as the generic essence next higher in the scale. 66 
Hence the single person attains his actual and living destiny for univer-
sality only when he becomes a member of a Corporation, a society, &c. 
(see Paragraph 251), and thereby it becomes open to him, on the 
strength of his skill, to enter any class for which he is qualified, the class 
of civil servants included. 
Another presupposition of the idea that all should participate in the 
business of the state is that everyone is at home in this business-a 
ridiculous notion, however commonly we may hear it sponsored. Still, 
in public opinion (see Paragraph 3 16) a field is open to everyone where he 
can express his purely personal political opinions and make them count. 
309. Since deputies are elected to deliberate and decide on 
public affairs, the point about their election is that it is a choice of 
individuals on the strength of confidence felt in them, i.e. a choice 
of such individuals as have a better understanding of these affairs 
than their electors have and such also as essentially vindicate the 
universal interest, not the particular interest of a society or a Cor-
poration in preference to that interest. Hence their relation to 
their electors is not that of agents with a commission or specific 
instructions. A further bar to their being so is the fact that their 
assembly is meant to be a living body in ''"hich ali members de-
liberate in common and reciprocally instruct and convince each 
other. [A.) 
310. The guarantee that deputies will haw the qualifications 
and disposition that accord with this end-since independent 
means attains its right in the first section of the Estates-is to be 
found so far as the second section is concerned-the section drawn 
from the fluctuating and changeable element in civil society-
above all in the knowledge (of the organization and interests of the 
state and civil society), the temperament, and the skill which a 
deputy acquires as a result of the actual transaction of business in 
managerial or official positions, and then evinces in his actions. 
As a result, he also acquires and develops a managenal and politi-
cal sense, tested by his experience, and this is a further guarantee 
of his suitability as a deputy. 
Subjective opinion, naturally enough, finds superfluous and even 
perhaps offensive the demand for such guarantees, if the demand is 
made with reference to what is called the 'people'. The state, however, 

202 
ETHICAL LIFE 
is characterized by objectivity, not by a subjective opinion and its self-
confidence. Hence it can recognize in individuals only their objectively 
recognizable and tested character, and it must be all the more careful on 
this point in connexion with the second section of the Estates, since this 
section is rooted in interests and activities directed towards the parti-
cular, i.e. in the sphere where chance, mutability, and caprice enjoy 
their right of free play. 
The external guarantee, a property qualification, is, if taken by itself, 
evidently just as one-sided in its externality as, at the other extreme, are 
purely subjective confidence and the opinion of the electorate. Both 
alike are abstractions in contrast with the concrete qualifications 
requisite for deliberation on affairs of state and comprised in the points 
indicated in Paragraph 302. This apart, however, a property qualifica-
tion has a sphere, where it may work effectively, in the choice of the 
heads and other officers of the associations and societies, especially if 
many of these posts are honorary, and in direct reference to Estates 
business if the members draw no salary. 
311. A further point about the election of deputies is that, 
since civil society is the electorate, the deputies should themselve~ 
be conversant with and participate in its special needs, difficulties, 
and particular interests. Owing to the nature of civil society, its 
deputies are the deputies of the various Corporations (see Para-
graph 308), and this simple mode of appointment obviates any 
confusion due to conceiving the electorate abstractly and as an 
agglomeration of atoms. Hence the deputies eo ipso adopt the point 
of view of society, and their actual election is therefore either some-
thing wholly superfluous or else reduced to a trivial play of opinion 
and caprice. 
It is obviously of advantage that the deputies should include represen-
tatives of each particular main branch of society (e.g. trade, manu-
factures, &c., &c.)-representatives who are thoroughly conversant with 
it and who themselves belong to it. The idea of free unrestricted election 
leaves this important consideration entirely at the mercy of chance. All 
such branches of society, however, have equal rights of representation. 
Deputies are sometimes regarded as 'representatives'; but they are 
representatives in an organic, rational sense only if they are representa-
tives not of individuals or a conglomeration of them, but of one of the 
essential spheres of society and its large-scale interests. Hence represen-
tation cannot now be taken to mean simply the substitution of one man 
for another; the point is rather that the interest itself is actually present 
in its representative, while he himself is there to represent the objective 
element of his own being. 
As for popular suffrage, it may be further remarked that especially in 

THE STATE 
203 
large states it leads inevitably to electoral indifference, since the casting 
of a single vote is of no significance where there is a multitude of 
electors. Even if a voting qualification is h'ghly valued and esteemed by 
those who are entitled to it, they still do not enter the polling booth. 
Thus the result of an institution. of this kind is more likely to be the 
opposite of what was intended; election actually falls into the power of 
a few, of a caucus, and so of the particular and contingent interest which 
is precisely what was to have been neutralized. 
312. Each class in the Estates (see Paragraphs 305-8) con-
tributes something peculiarly its own to the work of deliberation. 
Further, one moment in the class-element has in the sphere of 
politics the special function of mediation, 67 mediation between 
two existing things. Hence this moment must likewise acquire a 
separate existence of its own. For this reason the assembly of the 
Estates is divided into two houses. 
313. This division, by pro\·iding chambers of the first and 
second instance, is a surer guarantee for ripeness of decision and it 
obviates the accidental character which a snap-dtvision has and 
which a numerical majority may acqUire. But the principal advan-
tage of this arrangement is that there is less chance of the Estates 
being in direct opposition to the execut1ve; or that, if the media-
ting element is at the same time on the s1Jc uf the lO\YCr house, the 
weight of the lower house's opinion is all the stronger, because it 
appears less partisan and its opposition appears neutralized. 
314. The purpose of the Estates as an mstitut10n 1s not to be an 
inherent sine qua non of maximum efficiency 1n the consideration 
and dispatch of state business, since in fact 1t 1s unly an added 
efficiency that they can supply (see Paragraph 301). Their distinc-
tive purpose is that in their pooled political knowledge, delibera-
tions, and decisions, the moment of formal freedom shall come 
into its right in respect of those members of civil soc1ety who are 
without any share in the executive. Consequently, it 1s knowledge 
of public business above all \vhich is extended by the publicity of 
Estates debates. 
315. The opening of this opportunity to know has a more 
universal aspect because by th1s means public opinion first reaches 
thoughts that are true and attains insight into the situation and 
concept of the state and its affairs, and so first acquires ability to 
estimate these more rationally. By this means also, it becomes 
acquainted with and learns to respect the work, abilities, virtues, 

ETHICAL LIFE 
and dexterity of ministers and officials. While such publicity 
provides these abilities with a potent means of development and a 
theatre of higher distinction, it is at the same time another antidote 
to the self-conceit of individu.tls singly and en masse, and another 
means-indeed one of the chief means-of their education. [A.] 
316. The formal subjective freedom of individuals consists in 
their having and expressing their own private judgements, opinions, 
and recommendations on affairs of state. This freedom is collec-
tively manifested as what is called 'public opinion', in which what 
is absolutely universal, the substantive and the true, is linked with 
its opposite, the purely particular and private opinions68 of the 
Many. Public opinion as it exists is thus a standing self-contra-
diction, knowledge as appearance, the essential just as directly 
present as the inessential. (A.] 
317. Public opinion, therefore, is a repository not only of the 
genuine needs and correct tendencies of common life, but also, in 
the form of common sense (i.e. all-pervasive fundamental ethical 
principles disguised as prejudices), of the eternal, substantive 
principles of justice, the true content and result of legislation, the 
whole constitution, and the general position of the state. At the 
same time, when this inner truth emerges into consciousness and, 
embodied in general maxims, enters representative thinking-
whether it be there on its own account or in support of concrete 
arguments about felt \vants, public affairs, the organization of the 
state, and relations of parties within it-it becomes infected by all 
the accidents of opinion, by its ignorance and perversity, by its 
mistakes and falsity of judgement. Since in considering such 
opinion we have to do with the consciousness of an insight and 
conviction peculiarly one's own, the more peculiarly one's own an 
opinion may be the worse its content is, because the bad is that 
which is wholly private and personal in its content; the rational, 
on the other hand, is the absolutely universal, while it is on 
peculiarity that opining prides itself. 
Hence it is not simply due to a subjective difference of view that we 
find it said that vox populi, vox Dei, and on the other hand, as Ariosto 
has it, 
Che 'l ~·olgare i'gnorante ogn' un riprenda 
E parli pilt di que! che meno intenda 
or, as Goethe puts it, 'the masses are respectable hands at fighting, but 
miserable hands at judging'.69 

. 
--
THE STATE 
205 
Both types of assertion are true at one and the same time of public 
opinion, and since it is such a hotch-potch of truth and endless error, it 
cannot be genuinely serious about both of these. But about which is it 
serious? The question may seem hard to answer, and it will actually be 
hard if we cling simply to the words in which public opinion is directly 
expressed. The substantial, however, is the heart of public opinion, and 
therefore it is with that alone that it is truly serious. What the sub-
stantial is, though, is not discoverable from public opinion, because its 
very substantiality implies that it is known in and from itself alone. The 
passion with which an opinion is urged or the seriousness with which it 
is maintained or attacked and disputed is no criterion of its real content; 
and yet the last thing which opinion could be made to see is that its 
seriousness is nothing serious. 
A great genius7° propounded as a problem for a public essay com-
petition the question '\\hether it be permissible to deceive a people'. 
The answer must have been that a people does not allow itself to be 
deceived about its substantive basis, the essence and specific character 
of its mind. On the other hand, it is self-deceived about the manner of 
its knowledge of these things and about its corresponding judgement of 
its actions, experiences, &c. [A.] 
318. Public opinion therefore deserves to be as much respected 
as despised-despised for its concrete expression and for the 
concrete consciousness it expresses, respected for its essential 
basis, a basis which only glimmers more or less dimly in that 
concrete expression. But in itself it has no criterion of discrimina-
tion, nor has it the ability to extract the substantive element it 
contains and raise it to precise knowledge. Thus to he independent 
of public opinion is the first formal condition of adtJn·ing anything 
great or rational whether in life or in science. Great achievement 
is assured, however, of subsequent recognition and grateful accep-
tance by public opinion, which in due course will make it one of its 
own prejudices. [A.] 
319. Freedom of public communication-of the two modes of 
communication, the press and the spoken word, the first exceeds 
the second in range of contact but lags behind it m vivacity-
satisfaction of the goading desire to say one's say and to have said 
it, is directly assured by the laws and by-laws which control or 
punish its excesses. But it is assured indirectly by the innocuous 
character which it acquires as a result principally of the rationality 
of the constitution, the stability of government, and secondly of the 
publicity of Estates Assemblies. The reason why the latter makes 
free speech harmless is that what is voiced in these Assemblies 

206 
ETHICAL LIFE 
is a sound and mature insight into the concerns of the state, 
with the result that members of the general public are left with 
nothing of much importance to say, and above all are deprived of 
the opinion that what they say is of peculiar importance and 
efficacy. A further safeguard of free speech is the indifference and 
contempt speedily and necessarily visited on shallow and cantan-
kerous talking. 
To define freedom of the press as freedom to say and write whatever 
we please is parallel to the assertion that freedom as such means freedom 
to do as we please. Talk of this kind is due to wholly uneducated, 
crude, and superficial ideas. Moreover, it is in the very nature of the 
thing that abstract thinking should nowhere be so stubborn, so unin-
telligent, as in this matter of free speech, because what it is considering 
is the most fleeting, the most contingent, and the most personal side of 
opinion in its infinite diversity of content and tergiversation. Beyond 
the direct incitation to theft, murder, rebellion, &c., there lies its art-
fully constructed expression-an expression which seems in itself quite 
general and vague, while all the time it conceals a meaning anything 
but vague or else is compatible with inferences which are not actually 
expressed, and it is impossible to determine whether they rightly follow 
from it, or whether they were meant to be inferred from it. This vague-
ness of matter and form precludes laws on these topics from attaining 
the requisite determinacy of law, and since the trespass, wrong, and 
injury here are so extremely personal and subjective in form, 71 judge-
ment on them is reduced equally to a wholly subjective verdict. Such an 
injury is directed against the thoughts, opinions, and wills of others, but 
apart from that, these form the element in which alone it is actually any-
thing. But this element is the sphere of the freedom of others, and it 
therefore depends on them whether the injurious expression of opinion 
is or is not actually an effective act. 
Laws then [against libel, &c.] may be criticized by exhibiting their 
indeterminacy as well as by arguing that they leave it open to the speaker 
or writer to devise turns of phrase or tricks of expression, and so evade 
the laws or claim that judicial decisions are mere subjective verdicts. 
Further, however, against the view that the expression of opinion is an 
act with injurious effects, it may be maintained that it is not an act at all, 
but only opining and thinking, or only talking. And so we have before 
us a claim that mere opining and talking is to go unpunished because 
it is of a purely subjective character both in form and content, because it 
does not mean anything and is of no importance. And yet in the same 
breath we have the claim that this same opining and talking should be 
held in high esteem and respect-the opining because it is personal 
property and in fact pre-eminently the property of mind; the talking 
because it is only this same property being expressed and used. 

THE STATE 
207 
But the substance of the matter is and remains that traducing the 
honour of anyone, slander, abuse, the contemptuous caricature of 
government, its ministers, officials, and in particular the person of the 
monarch, defiance of the laws, incitement to rebellion, &c., &c., are all 
crimes or misdemeanours in one or other of their numerous gradations. 
The rather high degree of indeterminability which such actions acquire 
on account of the element in which they are expressed does not annul 
this fundamental character of theirs. Its only effect is that the subjective 
field in which they are committed also determines the nature and form 
of the reaction to the offence. It is the field in which the offence was 
committed which itself necessitates subjectivity of view, contingency, 
&c., in the reaction to the offence, whether the reaction takes the form 
of punishment proper or of police action to prevent crimes. Here, as 
always, abstract thinking sets itself to explain away the fundamental and 
concrete nature of the thing by concentrating on isolated aspects of its 
external appearance and on abstractions drawn therefrom. 
The sciences, however, are not to be found anywhere in the field of 
opinion and subjective views, provided of course that they be sciences 
in other respects. Their exposition is not a matter of clever turns of 
phrase, allusiveness, half-utterances, and semi-reticences, but consists 
in the unambiguous, determinate, and open expression of their mean-
ing and purport. It follows that they do not fall under the category 
of public opinion (see Paragraph 316). Apart from this, however, as I 
said just now, the element in which views and their expression become 
actions in the full sense and exist effectively, consists of the intelligence, 
principles, and opinions of others. Hence this aspect of these actions, 
i.e. their effectiveness proper and their danger to mdiYiduals, society, 
and the state (compare Paragraph 218), depends on tbt: character of the 
ground on which they fall, just as a spark falling on a heap of gunpowder 
is more dangerous than if it falls on hard ground where it vanishes with-
out trace. Thus, just as the right of science to express itself depends on 
and is safeguarded by its subject-matter and content, so an illegitimate 
expression may also acquire a measure of security, or at least sufferance, 
in the scorn which it has brought upon itself. An offence of this sort is 
punishable on its own account too, but part of it may be accounted that 
kind of nemesis which inner impotence, feeling itself oppressed by the 
preponderating abilities and virtues of others, is impelled to vent in 
order to come to itself again in face of such superiority, and to restore 
some self-consciousness to its own nullity. It was a nemesis of a more 
harmless type which Roman soldiers vented against their generals when 
they sang scurrilous songs72 about them in triumphal processions in 
order in a way to get even with them for all the hard service and dis-
cipline they had undergone, and especially for the omission of their 
names from the triumphal honours. The former type of nemesis, the 
bad and hateful type, is deprived of its effect by being treated with scorn, 

2C8 
ETHICAL LIFE 
and hence, like the public, which perhaps forms a circle of spectators of 
scurrility, it is restricted to futile malice and to the self-condemnation 
which it implicitly contains. 
320. Subjectivity is manifested in its most external form as the 
undermining of the established life of the state by opinion and 
ratiocination when they endeavour to assert the authority of their 
own fortuitous character and so bring about their own destruction. 
But its true actuality is attained in the opposite of this, i.e. in the 
subjectivity identical with the substantial will of the state, the sub-
jectivity which constitutes the concept of the power of the crO\vn 
and which, as the ideality of the whole state, has not up to this 
point attained its right or its existence.73 [A.] 
2. So~·fnignty vis-a-vis foreign States 
321. Sovereignty at home (see Paragraph 278) is this ideality 
in the sense that the moments of mind and its actuality, the state, 
have become developed in their necessity and subsist as the organs 
of the state. :\lind in its freedom is an infinitely negative relation 
to itself and hence its essential character from its own point of 
view is its singleness, a singleness which has incorporated tl-.ese 
subsistent differences into itself and so is a unit, exclusive of other 
units. So characterized, the state has individuality, and individual-
ity is in essence an indi\·idual, and in the sovereign an actual, 
immediate individual (sec Paragraph 279). 
322. Individuality is a\vareness of one's existence as a unit in 
sharp distinction from others. It manifests itself here in the state 
as a relation to other states, each of which is autonomous 'l.'is-a-vis 
the others. This autonomy embodies mind's actual awareness of 
itself as a unit and hence it is the most fundamental freedom which 
a people possesses as well as its highest dignity. 
Those74 v;ho talk of the 'wishes' of a collection of people constituting 
a more or less autonomous state with its own centre, of its 'wishes' to 
renounce this centre and its autonomy in order to unite with others to 
form a new whole, have very little knowledge of the nature of a collection 
or of the feeling of sclfhood which a nation possesses in its indepen-
dence. 
Thus the dominion which a state has at its first entry into history is 
this bare autonomy, even if it be quite abstract and without further 
inner development. For this reason, to have an individual at its head-a 
patnarch, a chieftain, &c.-is appropriate to this origin:.~! appearance 
of the state. 

THE STATE 
323. This negative relation of the state to itself is embodied in 
the world as the relation of one state to another and as if the 
negative were something external,7s In the world of existence, 
therefore, this negative relation has the shape of a happening and 
an entanglement with chance events coming from without. But in 
fact this negative relation is that moment in the state which is most 
supremely its own, the state's actual infinity as the ideality of 
everything finite within it. It is the moment wherein the substance 
of the state-i.e. its absolute power against everything individual 
and particular, against life, property, and their rights, even against 
societies and associations-makes the nullity of these finite things 
an accomplished fact and brings it home to consciousness. 
324. This destiny whereby the rights and interests of indivi-
duals are established as a passing phase, is at the same time the 
positive moment, i.e. the positing of their absolute, not their con-
tingent and unstable, individuality. This relation and the recog-
nition of it is therefore the individual's substantive duty, the duty 
to maintain this substantive individuality, i.e. the independence 
and sovereignty of the state, at the risk and the sacrifice of property 
and life, as well as of opinion and everything else naturally com-
prised in the compass of life. 
An entirely distorted account of the demand for this sacrifice results 
from regarding the state as a mere civil society and from regarding its 
final end as only the security of individual life and property. This 
security cannot possibly be obtained by the sacrifice of what is to be 
secured-on the contrary. 
The ethical moment in war is implied in what has been said in this 
Paragraph. War is not to be regarded as an absolute evil and as a purely 
external accident, which itself therefore has some accidental cause, be 
it injustices, the passions of nations or the holders of power, &c., or in 
short, something or other which ought not to be. It is to what is by 
nature accidental that accidents happen, and the fate whereby they 
happen is thus a necessity. Here as elsewhere, the point of view from 
which things seem pure accidents vanishes if we look at them in the 
light ot the concept and philosophy, because philosophy knows accident 
for a show and sees in it its essence, necessity. It is necessary that the 
finite-property and life-should be definitely established as accidental, 
because accidentality is the concept of the finite. From one point of 
view this necessity appears in the form of the power of nature, and 
everything is mortal and transient. But in the ethical substance, the 
state, nature is robbed of this power, and the necessity is exalted to be 
the work of freedom, to be something ethical. The transience of the 

210 
ETHICAL LIFE 
finite becomes a willed passing away, and the negativity lying at the 
roots of the finite becomes the substantive individuality proper to the 
ethical substance. 
War is the state of affairs which deals in earnest with the vanity of 
temporal goods and concerns-a vanity at other times a common theme 
of edifying sermonizing. This is what makes it the moment in which the 
ideality of the particular attains its right and is actualized. War has the 
higher significance that by its agency, as I have remarked elsewhere,76 
'the ethical health of peoples is preserved in their indifference to the 
stabilization of finite institutions; just as the blowing of the winds pre-
serves the sea from the foulness which would be the result of a prolonged 
calm, so also corruption in nations would be the product of pro-
longed, Jet alone 'perpetual', peace. '77 This, however, is said to be only 
a philosophic idea, or, to use another common expression, a 'justification 
of Providence', and it is maintained that actual wars require some other 
justification. On this point, see below.78 
The ideality which is in evidence in war, i.e. in an accidental relation 
of a state to a foreign state, is the same as the ideality in accordance with 
which the domestic powers of the state are organic moments in a whole. 
This fact appears in history in various forms, e.g. successful wars have 
checked domestic unrest and consolidated the power of the state at 
home. Other phenomena illustrate the same point: e.g. peoples un-
willing or afraid to tolerate sovereignty at home have been subjugated 
from abroad, and they have struggled for their independence with the 
less glory and success the less they have been able previously to organize 
the powers of the state in home affairs-their freedom has died from the 
fear of dying; states whose autonomy has been guaranteed not by their 
armed forces but in other ways (e.g. by their disproportionate smallness 
in comparison with their neighbours) have been able to subsist with a 
constitution of their own which by itself would not have assured peace 
in either home or foreign affairs. [A.] 
325. Sacrifice on behalf of the individuality of the state is 
the substantial tie between the state and all its members and so is 
a universal duty. Since this tie is a single aspect of the ideality, 
as contrasted with the reality, of subsistent particulars, it becomes 
at the same time a particular tie, and those who are in it form a 
class of their own with the characteristic of courage.79 
326. The matter at issue in disputes between states may be only 
one particular aspect of their relation to each other, and it is for 
such disputes that the particular class devoted to the state's 
defence is principally appointed. But if the state as such, if its 
autonomy, is in jeopardy, all its citizens are in duty bound to 

THE STATE 
211 
answer the summons to its defence. If in such circumstances the 
entire state is under arms and is torn from its domestic life at 
home to fight abroad, the war of defence turns into a war of con-
quest. 
The armed force of the state becomes a standing army, while its 
appointment to the particular task of state defence makes it a class. 
This happens from the same necessity as compels other particular 
moments, interests, and activities in the state to crystallize into a given 
status or class, e.g. into the status of marriage or into the business or 
civil servant class, or into the Estates of the Realm. Ratiocination, 
running hither and thither from ground to consequent, launches forth 
into reflections about the relative advantages and disadvantages of 
standing armies. Opinion readily decides that the latter preponderate, 
partly because the concept of a thing is harder to grasp than its single 
and external aspects, but also because particular interests and ends (the 
expense of a standing army, and its result, higher taxation, &c.) are 
rated in the consciousness of civil society more highly than what is 
necessary in and by itself. In this way the latter comes to count only as 
a means to particular ends. 
327. In itself, courage is a formal virtue, because (i) it is a 
display of freedom by radical abstraction from all particular ends, 
possessions, pleasure, and life; but (ii) this negation is a neg~tion 
of externalities, and their alienation, the culmination of courage, 
is not intrinsically of a spiritual (geistiger) character; (iii) the 
courageous man's inner motive need only be some particular 
reason or other, and even the actual result of \Yhat he does need be 
present solely to the minds of others and not to hts own. so [A.] 
328. The intrinsic worth of courage as a disposition of mind is 
to be found in the genuine, absolute, final end, the sovereignty of 
the state. The work of courage is to actualize this final end, and 
the means to this end is the sacrifice of personal actuality. This 
form of experience thus contains the harshness of extreme contra-
dictions: a self-sacrifice which yet is the real existence of one's 
freedom; the maximum self-subsistence of individuality, yet only 
as a cog playing its part in the mechanism of an external organiza-
tion; absolute obedience, renunciation of personal opmions and 
reasonings, in fact complete absence of mind, coupled with the 
most intense and comprehensive presence of mind and decision in 
the moment of acting; the most hostile and so most personal 
action against individuals, coupled with an attitude of complete 
indifference or even liking to\vards them as individuals. 

212 
ETHICAL LIFE 
To risk one's life is better than merely fearing death, but is still purely 
negative and so indeterminate and without value in itself. It is the posi-
tive aspect, the end and content, which first gives significance to this 
spiritedness. Robbers and murderers bent on crime as their end, adven-
turers pursuing ends planned to suit their own whims, &c., these too 
have spirit enough to risk their lives. 
The principle of the modern world-thought and the universal-has 
given courage a higher form, because its display now seems to be more 
mechanical, the act not of this particular person, but of a member of a 
whole. Moreover, it seems to be turned not against single persons, but 
against a hostile group, and hence personal bravery appears impersonal. 
It is for this reason that thought has invented the gun, and the invention 
of this weapon, which has changed the purely personal form of bravery 
into a more abstract one, is no accident. 
329. The state's tendency to look abroad lies in the fact that 
it is an individual subject. Its relation to other states therefore 
falls to the power of the crown. Hence it directly devolves on the 
monarch, and on him alone, to command the armed forces, to con-
duct foreign affairs through ambassadors &c., to make war and 
peace, and to conclude treaties of all kinds. Br [A.] 
B. International Law 
330. International law springs from the relations between 
autonomous states. It is for this reason that what is absolute in 
it retains the form of an ought-to-be, since its actuality depends 
on different wills each of which is sovereign. [A.] 
331. The nation state is mind in its substantive rationality and 
immediate actuality and is therefore the absolute power on earth. 
It follows that every state is sovereign and autonomous against its 
neighbours. It is entitled in the first place and without qualifica-
tion to be sovereign from their point of view, i.e. to be recognized 
by them as sovereign. At the same time, however, this title is 
purely formal, and the demand for this recognition of the state, 
merely on the ground that it is a state, is abstract. \Vhether a 
state is in fact something absolute depends on its content, i.e. on 
its constitution and general situation; and recognition, implying 
as 1t docs an identity of both form and content, is conditional on 
the neighbouring state's judgement and will. 
A state is as little an actual individual without relations to other 
states (see Paragraph 322) as an individual is actually a person without 
rapport with other persons (see Paragraph 7I and elsewhere82). The 

THE STATE 
213 
legitimate authority of a state and, more particularly, so far as its foreign 
relations are concerned, of its monarch also, is partly a purely domestic 
matter (one state should not meddle with the domestic affairs of another). 
On the other hand, however, it is no less essential that this authority 
should receive its full and final legitimation through its recognition by 
other states, although this recognition requires to be safeguarded by the 
proviso that where a state is to be recognized by others, it shall likewise 
recognize them, i.e. respect their autonomy; and so it comes about that 
they cannot be indifferent to each other's domestic affairs. 
The question arises how far a nomadic people, for instance, or any 
people on a low level of civilization, can be regarded as a state. As once 
was the case with the Jews and the Mohammedan peoples, religious views 
may entail an opposition at a higher level between one people and its 
neighbours and so preclude the general identity which is requisite for 
recognition. [A.] 
332. The immediate actuality which any state possesses from 
the point of view of other states is particularized into a multiplicity 
of relations which are determined by the arbitrary will of both 
autonomous parties and which therefore possess the formal nature 
of contracts pu;e and simple. The subject-matter of these con-
tracts, however, is infinitely less varied than it is in civil society, 
because in civil society individuals are reciprocally interdependent 
in the most numerous respects, while autonomous states are princi-
pally wholes whose needs are met within their own borders. 
333. The fundamental proposition of international law (i.e. the 
universal law which ought to be absolutely valid between states, as 
distinguished from the particular content of posit1ve treaties) is 
that treaties, as the ground of obligations between states, ought 
to be kept. But since the sovereignty of a state is the principle of 
its relations to others, states are to that extent in a state of nature 
in relation to each other. Their rights are actualized only in their 
particular wills and not in a universal will with constitutional 
powers over them. This universal proviso of international law 
therefore does not go beyond an ought-to-be, and what really 
happens is that international relations in accordance with treaty 
alternate with the severance of these relations. 
There is no Praetor to judge between states; at best there may be an 
arbitrator or a mediator, and even he exercises his functions contin-
gently only, i.e. in dependence on the particular wills of the disputants. 
Kant had an idea for securing 'perpetual peace' by a League of Nations 
to-adjust every dispute. It was to be a power recognized by each indi-
vidual state, and was to arbitrate in all cases of dissension in order to 

ETHICAL LIFE 
make it impossible for disputants to resort to war in order to settle them. 
This idea presupposes an accord between states; this would rest on 
moral or religious or other grounds and considerations, but in any case 
would always depend ultimately on a particular sovereign will and for 
that reason would remain infected with contingency. 
334. It follows that if states disagree and their particular wills 
cannot be harmonized, the matter can only be settled by war. A 
state through its subjects has widespread connexions and many-
sided interests, and these may be readily and considerably injured; 
but it remains inherently indeterminable which of these injuries is 
to be regarded as a specific breach of treaty or as an injury to the 
honour and autonomy of the state. The reason for this is that a 
state may regard its infinity and honour as at stake in each of its 
concerns, however minute, and it is all the more inclined to suscep-
tibility to injury the more its strong individuality is impelled as a 
result of long domestic peace to seek and create a sphere of activity 
abroad. 
335. Apart from this, the state is in essence mind and therefore 
cannot be prepared to stop at just taking notice of an injury after 
it has actually occurred. On the contrary, there arises in addition 
as a cause of strife the idea of such an injury as the idea of a danger 
threatening from another state, together with calculations of degrees 
of probability on this side and that, guessing at intentions, &c., &c. 
336. Since states are related to one another as autonomous 
entities and so as particular wills on which the very validity of 
treaties depends, and since the particular will of the whole is in 
content a will for its own welfare pure and simple, it follows that 
welfare is the highest law governing the relation of one state to 
another. This is all the more the case since the Idea of the state 
is precisely the supersession of the clash between right (i.e. empty 
abstract freedom) and welfare (i.e. the particular content which 
fills that void), and it is when states become concrete wholes that 
they first attain recognition (see Paragraph 331). 
337. The substantial welfare of the state is its welfare as a 
particular state in its specific interest and situation and its no less 
special foreign affairs, including its particular treaty relations. Its 
government therefore is a matter of particular wisdom, not of 
universal Providence (compare Remark to Paragraph 324). Simi-
larly, its aim in relation to other states and its principle for justify-
ing wars and treaties is not a universal thought (the thought of 

THE STATE 
215 
philanthropy) but only its actually injured or threatened welfare 
as something specific and peculiar to itself. 
At one time the opposition between morals and politics, and the 
demand that the latter should conform to the former, were much can-
vassed. On this point only a general remark is required here. The wel-
fare of a state has claims to recognition totally different from those of the 
welfare of the individual. The ethical substance, the state, has its deter-
minate being, i.e. its right, directly embodied in something existent, 
something not abstract but concrete, and the principle of its conduct and 
behaviour can only be this concrete existent and not one of the many 
universal thoughts supposed to be moral commands. When politics is 
alleged to clash with morals and so to be always wrong, the doctrine 
propounded rests on superficial ideas about morality, the nature of the 
state, and the state's relation to the moral point of view. 
338. The fact that states reciprocally recognize each other as 
states remains, even in war-the state of affairs when rights dis-
appear and force and chance hold sway-a bond wherein each 
counts to the rest as something absolute. Hence in war, war itself 
is characterized as something which ought to pass away. It implies 
therefore the proviso of the jus gentium that the possibility of 
peace be retained (and so, for example, that envoys must be re-
spected), and, in general, that war be not waged against domestic 
institutions, against the peace of family and private life, or against 
persons in their private capacity. [A.] 
339. Apart from this, relations between states (e.g. in war-time, 
reciprocal agreements about taking prisoners; in peace-time, con-
cessions of rights to subjects of other states for the purpose of 
private trade and intercourse, &c.) depend principally upon the cus-
toms of nations, custom being the inner universality of behaviour 
maintained in all circumstances. [A.] 
340. It is as particular entities that states enter into relations 
with one another. Hence their relations are on the largest scale a 
maelstrom of external contingency and the inner particularity of 
passions, private interests and selfish ends, abilities and virtues, 
vices, force, and wrong. All these whirl together, and in their 
vortex the ethical whole itself, the autonomy of the state, is exposed 
to contingency. The principles of the national minds8J are wholly 
restricted on account of their particularity, for it is in this particu-
larity that, as existent individuals, they have their objective actual-
ity and their self-consciousness. Thei'r deeds and destinies in their 

:u6 
ETHICAL LIFE 
reciprocal relations to one another are the dialectic of the finitude 
of these minds, and out of it arises the universal mind, the mind 
of the world, free from all restriction, producing itself as that which 
exercises its right-and its right is the highest right of all-over 
these finite minds in the 'history of the world which is the world's 
court of judgement'. 
C. World History 
341. The element in which the universal mind exists in art is 
intuition and imagery, in religion feeling and representative think-
ing, in philosophy pure freedom of thought. In world history this 
element is the actuality o; mind in its whole compass of internality 
and externality alike. World history is a court of judgement 
because in its absolute universality, the particular-i.e. the Penates, 
civil society, and the national minds in their variegated actuality-
is present as only ideal, and the movement of mind in this element 
is the exhibition of that fact.B4 
342. Further, world history is not the verdict of mere might, 
i.e. the abstract and non-rational inevitability of a blind destiny. 
On the contrary, since mind is implicitly and actually reason, and 
reason is explicit to itself in mind as knowledge, world history is 
the necessary development, out of the concept of mind's freedom 
alone, of the moments of reason and so ot the self-consciousness 
and freedom of mind. This development is the interpretation and 
actualization of the universal mind. 
343. The history of mind is its own act. Mind is only what it 
does, and its act is to make itself the object of its own consciousness. 
In history its act is to gain consciousness of itself as mind, to 
apprehend itself in its interpretation of itself to itself. This appre-
hension is its being and its principle, and the completion of 
apprehension at one stage is at the same time the rejection of that 
stage and its transition to a higher. To use abstract phraseology, 
the mind apprehending this apprehension anew, or in other words 
returning to itself again out of its rejection of this lower stage of 
apprehension, is the mind of the stage higher than that on which 
it stood in its earlier apprehension. 
The question of the perfectibility and Education of the Human Race 
arises here. Those85 who have maintained this perfectibility have 
divined something of the nature of mind, something of the fact that it is 
its nature to have yvwOL awvTC)v as the law of its being, and, since it 

THE STATE 
217 
apprehends that which it is, to have a form higher than that which con-
stituted its mere being.86 But to those who reject this doctrine, mind has 
remained an empty word, and history a superficial play of casual, so-
called 'merely human', strivings and passions. Even if, in connexion 
with history, they speak of Providence and the plan of Providence, and 
so express a faith in a higher power, their ideas remain empty because 
they expressly declare that for them the plan of Providence is inscrutable 
and incomprehensible. 87 
344. In the course of this work of the world mind, states, 
nations, and individuals arise animated by their particular deter-
minate principle which has its interpretation and actuality in their 
constitutions and in the whole range of their life and condition. 
While their consciousness is limited to these and they are absorbed 
in their mundane interests, they are all the time the unconscious 
tools and organs of the world mind at work within them. The 
shapes which they take pass away, while the absolute mind prepares 
and works out its transition to its next higher stage. 
345. Justice and virtue, wrongdoing, power and vice, talents and 
their achievements, passions strong and weak, guilt and innocence, 
grandeur in individual and national life, autonomy, fortune and 
misfortune of states and individuals, all these have their specific 
significance and worth in the field of known actuality; therein 
they are judged and therein they have their partial, though only 
partial justification. World-history, however, is above the point 
of view from which these things matter. Each of its stages is the 
presence of a necessary moment in the Idea of the world mind, and 
that moment attains its absolute right in that stage, The mtion 
whose life embodies this moment secures its good fortune and 
fame, and its deeds are brought to fruition. 
346. History is mind clothing itself with the form of events or 
the immediate actuality of nature. The stages of its development 
are therefore presented as immediate natural principles. These, 
because they are natural, are a plurality external to one another, 
and they are present therefore in such a way that each of them is 
assigned to one nation in the external form of its geographical and 
anthropological conditions. 
347. The nation to which is ascribed a moment of the Idea in 
the form of a natural principle is entrusted with giving complete 
effect to it in the advance of the self-developing self-consciousness 
of the world mind. This nation is dominant in world history 

218 
ETHICAL LIFE 
during this one epoch, and it is only once (see Paragraph 345)88 
that it can make its hour strike. In contrast with this its absolute 
right of being the vehicle of this present stage in the world mind's 
development, the minds of the other nations are without rights, 
and they, along with those whose hour has struck already, count no 
longer in world history. 
The history of a single world-historical nation contains (a) the de-
velopment of its principle from its latent embryonic stage until it 
blossoms into the self-conscious freedom of ethical life and presses in 
upon world history; and {b) the period of its decline and fall, since it is 
its decline aTld fall that signalizes the emergence in it of a higher prin-
ciple as the pure negative of its own. When this happens, mind passes 
over into the new principle and so marks out another nation for world-
historical significance. After this period, the declining nation has lost 
the interest of the absolute; it may indeed absorb the higher principle 
positively and begin building its life on it, but the principle is only like 
an adopted child, not like a relative to whom its ties are immanently vital 
and vigorous. Perhaps it loses it!l autonomy, or it may still exist, or drag 
out its existence, as a particular state or a group of states and involve 
itself without rhyme or reason in manifold enterprises at home and 
battles abroad. 
348. All actions, including world-historical actions, culminate 
with individuals as subjects giving actuality to the substantial 
(see Remark to Paragraph 279). They are the living instruments of 
what is in substance the deed of the world mind and they are there-
fore directly at one with that deed though it is concealed from them 
and is not their aim and object (see Paragraph 344). For the deeds 
of the world mind, therefore, they receive no honour or thanks 
either from their contemporaries (see Paragraph 344) or from 
public opinion in later ages. All that is vouchsafed to them by such 
opinion is undying fame in respect of the subjective form of their 
acts.8o 
349. A nation does not begin by being a state. The transition 
fron;1 a family, a horde, a clan, a multitude, &c., to political con-
ditions is the realization of the Idea in the form of that nation. 
Without this form, a nation, as an ethical substance-which is 
what it is implicitly, lacks the objectivity of possessing in its own 
eyes and in the eyes of others, a universal and universally valid 
embodiment in laws, i.e. in determinate thoughts, and as a result 
it fails to secure recognition from others. So long as it lacks 

THE STATE 
219 
objective law and an explicitly established rational constitution, 
its autonomy is formal only and is not sovereignty. 
It would be contrary even to commonplace ideas to call patriarchal 
conditions a 'constitution' or a people under patriarchal government a 
'state' or its independence 'sovereignty'. Hence, before history actually 
begins, we have on the one hand dull innocence, devoid of interest, 
and, on the other, the courage of revenge and of the struggle for formal 
recognition (see Paragraph 33 I and Remark to Paragraph 57). 
350. It is the absolute right of the Idea to step into existence in 
clear-cut laws and objective institutions, beginning with marriage 
and agriculture (see Remark to Paragraph 203), whether this right 
be actualized in the form of divine legislation and favour, or in the 
form of force and wrong. This right is the right of heroes to found 
states. 
351. The same consideration justifies civilized nations in 
regarding and treating as barbarians those who lag behind them in 
institutions which are the essential moments of the state. Thus a 
pastoral people may treat hunters as barbarians, and both of these 
are barbarians from the point of view of agriculturists, &c. The 
civilized nation is conscious that the rights of barbarians are 
unequal to its own and treats their autonomy as only a formality. 
When wars and disputes arise in such circumstances, the trait which 
gives them a significance for world history is the fact that they are 
struggles for recognition in connexion with something of specific 
intrinsic worth. 
352. The concrete Ideas, the minds of the natwns, have their 
truth and their destiny in the concrete Idea which is absolute 
universality, i.e. in the world mind. Around its throne they stand 
as the executors of its actualization and as signs and ornaments of 
its grandeur. As mind, it is nothing but its active movement 
towards absolute knowledge of itself and therefore towards freeing 
its consciousness from the form of natural immediacy and so 
coming to itself. Therefore the principles of the formations of 
this self-consciousness in the course of its liberation-the world-
historical realms-are four in number. 
353. In its first and immediate revelation, mind has as its 
principle the shape of the substantial mind, i.e. the shape of the 
identity in which individuality is absorbed in its essence and its 
claims are not explicitly recognized. 
The second principle is this substantial mind endowed with 

220 
ETHICAL LIFE 
knowledge so that mind is both the positive content and filling of 
mind and also the individual self-awareness which is the living 
form of mind. This principle is ethical individuality as beauty. 90 
The third principle is the inward deepening of this individual 
self-awareness and knowledge until it reaches abstract universality 
and therefore infinitf opposition to the objective world which in 
the same process has become mind-forsaken. 
The principle of the fourth formation is the conversion of this 
opposition so that mind receives in its inner life its truth and 
concrete essence, while in objectivity it is at home and reconciled 
with itself. The mind which has thus reverted to the substantiality 
with which it began is the mind which has returned out of the 
infinite opposition, and which consequently engenders and knows 
this its truth as thought and as a world of actual laws. 
354. In accordance with these four principles, the world-
historical realms are the following: ( 1) the Oriental, ( 2) the Greek, 
(3) the Roman, (4) the Germanic. 
355. (1) The Oriental realm. 
The world-view of this first realm is substantial, without inward 
division, and it arises in natural communities patriarchically 
governed. According to this view, the mundane form of govern-
ment is theocratic, the ruler is also a high priest or God himself; 
constitution and legislation are at the same time religion, while 
religious and moral commands, or usages rather, are at the same 
time natural and positive law. In the magnificence of this regime 
as a whole, individual personality loses its rights and perishes; the 
external world of nature is either directly divine or else God's 
ornament, and the history of the actual is poetry. Distinctions are 
developed in customs, government, and state on their many sides, 
and in default of laws and amidst the simplicity of manners, they 
become unwieldy, diffuse, and superstitious ceremonies, the acci-
dents of personal power and arbitrary rule, and class differences 
become crystallized into hereditary castes. Hence in the Oriental 
state nothing is fixed, and what is stable is fossilized; it lives there-
fore only in an outward movement which becomes in the end an 
elemental fury and desolation. Its inner calm is merely the calm 
of non-political life and immersion in feebleness and exhaustion. 
A still substantial, natural, mentality is a moment in the development 
of the state, and the point at which any state takes this form is the 
absolute beginning of its history. This has been emphasized and 
-

THE STATE 
221 
demonstrated with learning and profound insight in connexion with the 
history of particular states by Dr. Stuhr in his book Der Untergang der 
Naturstaaten9'-a work in which he leads the way to a rational treat-
ment of constitutional history and of history generally. The principle of 
subjectivity and self-conscious freedom is there too shown to be the 
principle of the Germanic people, but the book goes no further than 
the decline of natural states, and consequently the principle is only 
brought to the point where it appears either as a restless mobility, as 
human caprice and corruption, or in its particular form as emotion, and 
where it has not yet developed to the objectivity of the self-conscious 
substantiality or to an organized legal system. 
356. (z) The Greek realm. 
This realm possesses this substantial unity of finite and infinite, 
but only as a mysterious background, suppressed in dim recesses of 
the memory, in caves9 2 and traditional imagery. This background, 
reborn out of the mind which differentiates itself to individual 
mentality, emerges into the daylight of knowing and is tempered 
and transfigured into heauty and a free and unruffled ethical life. 
Hence it is in a world of this character that the principle of personal 
individuality arises, though it is still not sclf-enclos,,d but kept in 
its ideal unity. The result is that the \\hole is divided into a group 
of particular national minds ;9J ultimate decis1on is ascribed not to 
the subjectivity of explicitly independent self-consciousness but to 
a power standing above and outside it (see Remark to Paragraph 
279); on the other hand, the due satisfaction of particular needs is 
not yet comprised in the sphere of freedom hm ~~ relegated ex-
clusively to a class of slaves. 
357. (3) The Roman realm. 
In this realm, differentiation is carried to its conclusion, and 
ethical life is sundered without end into the extremes of the private 
self-consciousness of persons on the one hand, and ab~tract univer-
sality on the other. 94 This opposition begins in the clash between 
the substantial intuition of an aristocracy and the principle of free 
personality in democratic form. As the opposition grows, the first 
of these opponents develops into superstition and the maintenance 
of heartless self-seeking power, while the second becomes more 
and more corrupt until it sinks into a rahble.9s Finally, the whole 
is dissolved and the result is universal misfortune and the destruc-
tion of ethical life. ::\ational heroes die away into the unity of a 
Pantheon, 96 all individuals are degraded to the level of private 
persons equal with one another, possessed of formal rights, and the 

222 
ETHICAL LIFE 
only bond left to hold them together is abstract insatiable self-
will. 
358. (4) The Germanic realm. 
Mind and its world are thus both alike lost and plunged in the 
infinite grief97 of that fate for which a people, the Jewish people, 
was held in readiness. :\lind is here pressed back upon itself in the 
extreme of its absolute negativity. This is the absolute turning 
point; mind rises out of this situation and grasps the infinite 
positivity of this its inward character, i.e. it grasps the principle of 
the unity of the divine nature and the human, the reconciliation 
of objective truth and freedom as the truth and freedom apptaring 
within self-consciousness and subjectivity, a reconciliation \vith 
the fulfilment of which the principle of the north, the principle of 
the Germanic peoples, has been entrusted. 
359. This principle is first of all inward and abstract; it exists 
in feeling as faith, loYe, and hope, the reconciliation and resolution 
of all contradiction. It then discloses its content, raising it to 
become actuality and self-conscious rationality, to become a mun-
dane realm proceeding from the heart, fidelity, and comradeship 
of free men, a realm which in this its subjectivity is equally a realm 
of crude individual caprice and barbarous manners. This realm it 
sets over against a world of beyond, an intellectual realm, whose 
content is indeed the truth of its (the principle's) mind, but a truth 
not yet thought and so still veiled in barbarous imagery. This 
world of beyond, as the power of mind over the mundane heart, 
acts against the latter as a compulsive and frightful force. 
360. These two realms98 stand distinguished from one another 
though at the same time they are rooted in a single unity and Idea. 
Here their distinction is intensified to absolute opposition and a 
stern struggle ensues in the course of which the realm of mind 
lowers the place of its heaven to an earthly here and now, to a 
common worldliness of fact and idea. The mundane realm, on the 
other hand, builds up its abstract independence into thought and 
th.e principle of rational being and knowing, i.e. into the rationality 
of right and law. In this way their opposition implicitly loses its 
marrow and disappears. The realm of fact has discarded its bar-
barity and unrighteous caprice, while the realm of truth has 
abandoned the world of beyond and its arbitrary force, so that the 
true reconciliation which discloses the state as the image and 
actuality of reason has become objective. In the state, self-con-

THE STATE 
223 
sciousness finds in an organic development the actuality of its 
substantive knowing and willing; in religion, it finds the feeling 
and the representation of this its own truth as an ideal essentiality; 
while in philosophic science, it finds the free comprehension and 
knowledge of this truth as one and the same in its mutually com-
plementary manifestations, i.e. in the state, in nature, and in the 
ideal world.99 

ADDITIONS 
I. Preface, p. 4· 
Laws are of two kinds-laws of nature and laws of the land. The laws 
of nature simply are what they are and arc valid as they are; they are not 
liable to encroachment, though in certain cases man may transgress them. 
To know the law of nature, we must learn to know nature, since its laws 
are rigid and it is only our ideas about them that can be false. The 
measure of these laws is outside us; knowing them adds nothing to them 
and does not assist their operation; our knowledge of them can expand, 
that is all. Knowledge of the laws of the land is in one way similar, but 
in another way not. These laws too we learn to know just as they exist; 
the citizen's knowledge of them is more or less of this sort, and the 
student of positive law equally stops at what is given. But the difference 
in the case of laws of the land is that they arouse the spirit of reflection, 
and their diversity at once draws attention to the fact that they are not 
absolute. Positive laws are something posited, something originated 
by men. Between what is so originated and man's inner voice there may 
be an inevitable clash or there may be agreement. Man does not stop 
short at the existent, but claims to have in himself the measure of what 
is right. He may be subjected to the compul~ion and dominion of an 
external authority, though never as he is to the evmpulsion of nature, 
because his inner self always tells him how things ought to be and he 
finds within himself the confirmation or denial of \Yhat passes as valid. 
In nature, the highest truth is that there is a law; in the law of the land, 
the thing is not valid simply because it exists; on the contrary, everyone 
demands that it shall comply with his private criterion. Here then an 
antagonism is possible between what ought to he and what is, between 
the absolutely right which stands unaltered and the arbitrary determina-
tion of what is to he recognized as right. A schism and a conflict of this 
sort is to be found only in the territory of mind, and because mind's 
privilege seems therefore to lead to discontent and unhappiness, men 
are often thrown back from the arbitrariness of life to the contemplation 
of nature and set themseh·es to take nature as an example. But it is 
precisely in these clashes between what is absolutely right and what 
arbitrariness makes pass as right that there lies the need for studying the 
fundamentals of right. In the right, man must meet \\·ith his own reason; 
consequently, he must consider the rationality of the right, and this is 
the task of our science in contrast with the positiYe study of law which 
often has to do only with contradictions.* The world of to-day h:1s in 
addition a more urgent need to make this study because \Yhile amongst 
" [i.e. w1th the mconSJstencies many system of positne law (see, e.g., Hegel's 
comments on fictions m Roman law m the Remarks to Paragnphs 3 and Jf\o) as 
well as w1th contrad1ctoty judgements, see, e.g., Remark to Paragr;·ph 211 ] 

ADDITIONS 
22~ 
the ancients the ex1stmg laws were still respected and reverenced, 
nowadays the civilization of the age has taken a new turning and thought 
has placed itself at the head of everything which is to have validity. 
Theories are set over against the existent and are intended to appear as 
absolutely correct and necessary. At present there is a rather special 
need for becoming acquainted with, and understanding, the thoughts of 
the right. Since thought has risen to be the essential form of things, we 
must try to grasp the right too as thought. It seems to be opening wide 
the door to casual opinions to hold that thought is to be pre-eminent 
over the right, yet true thought is not an opinion about the thing but the 
concept of the thing itself. The concept of the thing does not come our 
way by nature. Anyone h?..11' fingers and may take a brush and colours, 
but that does not make him a painter. The same is true about thinking. 
The thought of the right is surely not the thought that everybody 
possesses at first hand; on the contrary, exact thinking is cognizing and 
apprehending the thing, and our apprehension should therefore be 
scientific. 
2. Paragraph I. 
The concept and its objective existence are two sides of the same 
thing, distinct and united, like soul and body. The body is the same 
life as the soul and yet both may be spoken of as lying outside one 
another. A soul without a body would not be a living thing, nor would 
a body without a soul. Hence the determinate existence of the concept 
is its body, while its body obeys the soul which brought it into being. 
The seeds have the tree implicit within them and contain the tree's 
whole strength, although they are not yet the tree itself. The tree 
corresponds in detail with the simple construction of the seed. If the 
body does not match the soul, it is a poor sort of thing. The unity of 
determinate existence and the concept, of body and soul, is the Idea. 
The unity is not a mere harmony, but rather a complete interpenetration. 
Nothing is alive which is not in some way or other Idea. The Idea of 
right is freedom, and if it is to be truly understood, it must be known 
both in its concept and in the determinate existence of that concept. 
3. Paragraph 2. 
Philosophy forms a circle. It has a beginning, an immediate factor 
(for it must somehow make a start), something unproved which is not a 
result. But the terminus a quo of philosophy is simply relative, since it 
must appear in another terminus as a terminus ad quem. Philosophy is a 
sequence which does not hang in the air; it is not something which 
begins from nothing at all; on the contrary, it circles back into itself. • 
4· Paragraph 4· 
The freedom of the will is best explained by a reference to the 
• [See Science of Logic, i. j9-90.] 

226 
ADDITIONS 
physical world. Freedom, I mean, is just as fundamental a character 
of the will as weight is of bodies. If we say: matter is 'heavy', we might 
mean that this predicate is only contingent; but it is nothing of the kind, 
for nothing in matter is without weight. ~atter is rather weight itself. 
Heaviness constitutes the body and is the body. The same is the case 
with freedom and the will, since the free entity is the wilL Will without 
freedom is an empty word, while freedom is actual only as will, as subject. 
The following points should be noted about the connexion between 
the will and thought. Mind is in principle thinking, and man is dis-
tinguished from beast in virtue of thinking. But it must not he imagined 
that man is half thought and half will, and that he keeps thought in one 
pocket and will in another, for this would be a foolish idea. The dis-
tinction between thought and will is only that between the theoretical 
attitude and the practical. These, however, are surely not two faculties; 
the will is rather a special way of thinking, thinking translating itself into 
existence, thinking as the urge to give itself existence. 
This distinction between thought and will may be described as follows. 
In thinking an object, I make it into thought and deprive it of its sensuous 
aspect; I make it into something '' hich is directly and essentially mine. 
Since it is in thought that I am first by myself, I do not penetrate an 
object until I understand it; it then ceases to stand over against me and I 
have taken from it the character of its own which it had in opposition to 
me. Just as Adam said to Eve: 'Thou art flesh of my flesh and bone of 
my bone',* so mind says: 'This is mind of my mind and its foreign 
character has disappeared.' An idea is always a generalization, and 
generalization is a property of thinking. To generalize means to think. 
The ego is thought and so the universal. When I say '1', I eo ipso 
abandon all my particular characteristics, my disposition, natural en-
dowment, knowledge, and age. The ego is quite empty, a mere point, 
simple, yet active in this simplicity. The variegated canvas of the world 
is before me; I stand over against it; by my theoretical attitude to it I 
overcome its opposition to me and make its content my own. I am at 
home in the world when I know it, still more so when I have understood 
it. So much for the theoretical attitude. 
The practical attitude, on the other hand, begins in thinking, in the 
ego itself, and it appears first as though opposed to thinking because, I 
mean, it sets up a sort of diremption. In so far as I am practical or active, 
i.e. in so far as I do something, I determine myself, and to determine 
myself simply means to posit a difference. But these differences which I 
posit are still mine all the same; the determinate volitions are mine and 
the aims which I struggle to realize belong to me. If I now let these 
determinations and differences go, i.e. if I posit them in the so-called 
external \liorld, they none the less still remain mine. They are what I 
have done, what I have made; they bear the trace of my mind. 
" [Genesis ti. 23.] 

ADDITIONS 
227 
Such is the distinction between the theorical attitude and the practical, 
but now the tie between them must be described. The theoretical is 
essentially contained in the practical; we must decide against the idea 
that the two are separate, because we cannot have a will without 
intelligence. On the contrary, the will contains the theoretical in itself. 
The will determines itself and this determination is in the first place 
something inward, because what I will I hold before my mind as an idea; 
it is the object of my thought. An animal acts on instinct, is driven by an 
inner impulse and so it too is practical, hut it has no will, since it does 
not bring before its mind the object of its desire. A man, however, can 
just as little be theoretical or think without a \\ill, because in thinking 
he is of necessity being active. The content of something thought has 
the form of being; but this being is something mediated, something 
established through our activity. Thus these :lis tinct attitudes cannot be 
divorced; they are one and the same; and in any activity, whether of 
thinking or willing, both moments are present. 
5· Paragraph 5· 
In this clement of the \\ill is rooted my ability to free myself from 
everything, abandon every aim, abstract from <.:\en thmg. !\Ian alone 
can sacrifice everything, his life mclucled; h, , an cmmmt suicide. An 
animal cannot; It always remains merely mQ.ill\c. m Ml alien destiny 
to which it merely accustoms itself. :\!an is the 1·11rc· tll<!ught of himself, 
and only in thinkmg i,; he this pO\\er to gi1·c !um,cll mm·ersality, i.e. 
to extinguish all particulanty, all detcrmman. Th1s Ill'L'.l'Ive freedom, 
or freedom as the l.'nderstanding conceives lt, b nm··sJdcd: hut a one-
sided view always contains one essential bet en and t !J,·t .J,rc is not to be 
discarded. But the Cndcrstanding is ddcctne IT' 
•. '\.t!lmg a single 
one-sided factor to be the sole and thl' supreme· nne. 
In history this form of freedom is a frequent phcnom,n •n. Amongst 
the Hindus, for instance, the highest life JS held to he pcr:,;-;tence in the 
bare knowledge of one's simple identity \\·ith oneself, Ji'\atwn in this 
empty space of one's inner life, as light remains co],Jllrless in pure 
vision, and the sacrific(' of every activit\' in life, every :Jlln, and every 
project. In this \\·ay man becomes Drahrna; there is no lu•<gcr any dis-
tinction hct\1 cen the finite man and Brahma. In fact 111 this universality 
every difference has disappeared. 
This form of freedom appears more concretely in the act1 1·c fanaticism 
of both political and religious life. For mstancc, dunng t!le Terror in 
the French Revolution all differences of talent and authonty were 
supposed to have been superseded. This period \\as an upheaval, an 
agitation, an irreconcilable hatred of everything particular. 
Since 
fanaticism wills an abstraction only, nothmg articulated, it folloi\S that, 
when distinctions appear, it finds them antagonistic to its 0\1 n indetn-
mmacy and annuls them. For this reason, the French RenJiutionaries 

ADDITIONS 
destroyed once more the institutions which they had made themselves, 
since any institution whatever is antagonistic to the abstract self-
consciousness of equality. 
6. Paragraph 6. 
This second moment appears as the moment opposed to the first; 
it is to be grasped in its general character; it is intrinsic to freedom, 
although it does not constitute the whole of freedom. Here the ego 
leaves undifferentiated indeterminacy and proceeds to differentiate 
itself, to posit a content or object and so to give itself determinacy. My 
willing is not pure willing but the willing of something. A will which, 
like that expounded in Paragraph 5, wills only the abstract universal, 
wills nothing and is therefore no will at all. The particular volition is a 
restriction, since the will, in order to be a will, must restrict itself in 
some way or other. The fact that the will wills something is restriction, 
negation. Thus particularization is what as a rule is called finit11de. 
Reflective thinking usually takes the first moment, i.e. indeterminacy, 
as the higher and absolute moment, while it regards restriction as a mere 
negation of this indeterminacy.• But this indeterminacy is itself only 
a negation in contrast with the determinate, with finitude; the ego is this 
solitude and absolute negation. t The mdeterminate will is to this 
extent just as one-sided a: the will rooted in sheer determinacy. 
7· Paragraph 7· 
What is properly called the will includes in itself both the preceding 
moments. The ego as such is in the first place pure activity, the universal 
which is by itself. But this universal determines itself and to that extent 
is no longer by itself but posits itself as an other and ceases to be the uni-
versal. Now the third moment is that, in its restriction, in this other, the 
will is by itself; in determining itself it still remains by itself and does 
not cease to keep hold of the universal. This moment, then, is the concrete 
concept of freedom, while the two previous moments have been found 
to be through and through abstract and one-sided. 
Freedom in this sense, however, we already possess in the form of 
feeling-in friendship and love, for instance. Here we are not inherently 
one-sided; we restrict ourselves gladly in relating ourselves to another, 
but in this restriction know ourselves as ourselves. In this determinacy 
a man should not feel himself determined; on the contrary, since he 
treats the other as other, it is there that he first arrives at the feeling of 
his own self-hood. Thus freedom lies neither in indeterminacy nor in 
determinacy; it is both of these at once. The will which restricts itself 
simply to a this is the will of the capricious man who supposes that he is 
• [Hegel is thinking e.g. of Spinoza's view that all determmation is negation 
and that only the mdetermmate, "" the infinite, is real.] 
t [i e. the pure ego of Paragraph 5· It is 'alone' and negative because it IS the 
renunciation of everything determinate and is simply turned m upon itself.] 

ADDITIONS 
not free unless he has this will. But the will is not tied to something 
restricted; it must go beyond the restriction, since the nature of the will 
is other than this one-sidedness and constraint. Freedom is to will 
something determinate, yet in this determinacy to be by oneself and to 
revert once more to the t.niversal. 
8. Paragraph 8. 
The consideration of the will's determinacy properly belongs to the 
Understanding and is in the first instance not speculative. The will is 
determined in two senses, i.e. in both content and form. Its determinacy 
in form is its purpose and the fulfilment of its purpose. My purpose is at 
first only something inward, something subjective, but it should also 
become objective and cast aside the defect of mere subjectivity. At this 
point you may ask the why of this defect. If what has a defect does not 
at the same time stand above its defect, it cannot recognize the defect 
as a defect. An animal is a defective thing from our point of view, not 
from its own. My purpose, so far as it is still only mine, is felt by me 
as a d.¢'e'ct since freedom and will are fur me the unity of the subjective 
and objective. Hence the purpose must be established objectively and 
thereby it attains not a new one-sided character but only its realization. 
9· Paragraph IO. 
The will which is a will only in accordance \\lth its concept is implicitly 
free but at the same time it is also unfree, for it would first become truly 
free as truly determinate content . .-H that point it is free in its own eyes, 
has freedom as its object, and is freedom. \\'hat is still only in accordance 
with its concept, what is merely implicit, 1s only immediate, only 
natural. In our ordinary ways of thinking we are fanuiJar with this. The 
child is man implicit. At first it possesses reasun nnl\· implicitly; it 
begins by being the potentiality of reason and fn:nJ, 'm and so is free 
only in accordance with its concept. l"ow what ex1sts purely implicitly 
in this way does not yet exist in its actuality. !\Ian is imphcitly rational, 
but he must also become explicitly so by struggling to create himself, 
not only by going forth from himself but also by building himself up 
within. 
ro. Paragraph II. 
An animal too has impulses, des1res, inclinations, but it has no will 
and must obey its impulse if nothing external deters it. :\Jan, howe,·er, 
the wholly undetermined, stands above his impulses and mJy make them 
his own, put them in himself as his own. An impulse is something 
natural, but to put it into my ego depends on my will which thus cannot 
fall back on the plea that the impulse has its basis in nature. 
I r. Paragraph I]. 
A will which resolves on nothing is no actual will; a characterless man 
ne··er reaches a decision. The reason for indecision may also lie in a 

230 
ADDITIONS 
faintheartedness which knows that, in willing something determinate, 
it is engaging with finitude, imposmg a barrier on itself and sacrificing 
the infinite; yet it will not renounce the totality after which it hankers. 
However 'beautiful •• such a disposition may be, it is nevertheless dead. 
As Goethe says: 'Whoever wills great achievement must be able to 
restrict himself. 't Only by resolving can a man step into actuality, 
however bitter to him his resolve may be. Inertia lacks the will to 
abandon the inward brooding which! allows it to retain everything as a 
possibility. But possibility is still less than actuality. The will which 
is sure of itself docs not eo ipso lose itself in its determinate volition. 
12. Paragraph Ij. 
Since it is possible for me to determine myself in this way or that, or 
in other words since I can choose, I possess the arbitrary will, and to 
possess this is what is usually called freedom. The choice which I have 
is grounded in the universality of the will, in the fact that I can make 
this or that mine. This thing that is mine is particular in content and 
therefore not adequate to me and so is separate from me; it is only 
potentially mine, while I am the potentiality of linking myself to it. 
Choice, therefore, is grounded 11' the indeterminacy of the ego and the 
determinacy of a content. Thus the will, on account of this content. is 
not free, although it has an infinite aspect in virtue of its form. No 
single content is adequate to it and in no single content is it really at 
grips with itself. Arbitrariness implies that the content is made mine 
not by the nature of my will but by chance. Thus I am dependent on 
this content, and this is the contradiction lying in arbitrariness. The 
man in the street thinks he is free if it is open to him to act as he pleases 
but his very arbitrariness implies that he is not free. When I will what 
is rational, then I am acting not as a particular individual but in accor-
dance with the concepts of ethics in general. In an ethical action, what 
I vindicat~ is not myself but the thing. But in doing a perverse action, 
it is my singularity that I bring on to the centre of the stage. The rational 
is the high road where everyone travels, where no one is conspicuous. 
\Vhen great artists complete a masterpiece, we may speak of its inevita-
bility, which means that the arttst's idiosyncrasy has completely dis-
appeared and no mannerism is detectable in it. Pheidias has no 
mannerisms; his figures themselves live and declare themselves. But the 
\\ orse the artist is, the more we see in his work the artist, his singularity, 
his arbitrariness. If you stop at the consideration that, having an arbitrary 
• [An allusiOn to the 'beaut1tul soul' of the :\Iora\"lans, for wh1ch see Remark 
(f) to Paragraph I 40 ] 
t [From the sonnet Satur und Kunst (Lasson). Hegel quotes Inaccurately. 
Goethe's uc""<ual words may be translated: '\\'hoe,er \\Ills great achit:\ ement 
must first collect h1s energies; It IS m restnct10n that a man first shows h1> 
masten '] 
! [Taking der a> :-. misprint for dem.] 

ADDITIONS 
2JI 
will, a man can will this or that, then of course his freedom consists in 
that ability. But if you keep firmly in view that the content of his willing 
is a given one, then he is determined thereby and in that respect at all 
events is free no longer. 
IJ. Paragraph I7. 
Impulses and inclinations are in the first instance a content of the will, 
and reflection alone stands above them. But these impulses begin to 
impel themselves, they drive one another, stir each other, and all of them 
demand satisfaction. Now if I neglect all the others and put myself in 
one of them by itself, I find myself under a restriction which destroys me, 
since just by so doing I have surrendered my universality, which is a 
system of all impulses. But it is just as little help to make a mere hier-
archy of impulses-a device to which the Understanding usually resorts 
-since no criterion for so ordering them is available here, and therefore 
the demand for such a hierarchy runs out in the tedium of generalities. 
q. Paragraph I8. 
The Christian doctrine that man is by nature evil is loftier than the 
other which takes him to be by nature good. This doctrine is to be 
understood as follows in accordance with the philosophical exegesis of it:'" 
As mind, man is a free substance which is in the position of not allowing 
itself to be determined by natural impulse. \Vhen man's condition is 
immediate and mentally undeveloped, he is in a situation in which he 
ought not to be and from which he must free himself. This is the mean-
ing of the doctrine of original sin without wh1ch Christianity would not 
be the religion of freedom. 
15. Paragraph 20. 
In happiness thought has already a mastery over the natural force 
of impulses, since the thinker is not content with the momentary but 
requires happiness in a whole. This requirement is connected with 
education in that it is education which vindicates a universal. In the 
ideal of happiness, however, there are two moments: (i) a universal 
which is above all particularity; but (ii) since the content of this uni-
versal is still only universal pleasure, there appears here once again the 
singular, the particular, i.e. something finite, and a return must therefore 
be made to impulse. Since the content of happiness lies ir, everyone's 
subjectivity and feeling, this universal end is for its p..:rt particular, and 
consequently there is still not present in it any genuine unity of form and 
content. 
16. Paragraph 2I. 
Truth in philosophy means that concept and external reality corre-
spond. For example, the body is the external reality, while the soul is the 
• [For Hegel's exegesis of this doctnne, see Paragraph 139 below and the 
Add1t10n to Enc., § 24.] 

2J2 
ADDITIONS 
concept; but soul and body ought to be adequate to one another. There-
fore a corpse is stilt an existent, but its existence is no true existence; the 
concept has left it; and for this reason a dead body putrefies. So a will 
is truly a wiil only when what it wills, its content, is identical with itself, 
when, that is to say, freedom wills freedom. 
17. Paragraph zz. 
Infinity has rightly been represented figuratively as a circle, because 
a straight line goes on and on for ever and denotes the purely negative 
;md false infinite which, unlike the true infinite, has no return into 
itself. The free will is truly infinite, since it is not just a potentiality and a 
capacity. On the contrary, its external existence is its own inwardness, 
is itself. 
18. Paragraph z6. 
It is usually supposed that subjective and objective stand rigidly in 
opposition to one another. But this is not the case; it would be truer 
to say that they pass over into each other, since they are not abstract 
categories like positive and negative but already have a more concrete 
significance. 
Consider first the word 'subjective'. We may call 'subjective' an end 
which is only the end of one specific individual subject. In this sense a 
very bad work of art, one which is not quite the thing, is purely 'sub-
jective'. The word may also be applied, however, to the content of the 
will, and it is then almost synonymous with 'arbitrary'; a 'subjective' 
content is that which belongs to the subject alone. Hence bad actions, 
for example, are purely 'subjective'. But, further, it is just that pure 
empty ego which may be called 'subjective', the ego which has itself 
alone for its object and possesses the power to abstract from any other 
content. Thus subjectivity sometimes means something wholly idiosyn-
cratic, and at other times something with the highest of claims, since 
everything which I am to recognize has also the task of becoming mine 
and attaining its validity in me. Subjectivity is insatiably greedy to con-
centrate and drown everything in this single spring of the pure ego. 
No less varied are the ways in which we may take 'objective'. We may 
understand by it everything which we make an object to ourselves, 
whether objective actualities or pure thoughts which we bring before 
our minds. We also include under this category the immediacy of 
existence in which the end is to be realized; even if the end is itself 
wholly singular and subjective, we none the less call it 'objective' on its 
appearance. But the 'objective' will is also that in which truth lies, and 
thus God's will, the ethical will, is an 'objective' one. Finally, we may 
also call 'objective' the will which is entirely absorbed in its object, as 
for example the will of the child, which is rooted in trust and lacks 
subjective freedom, and the will of the slave, which does not yet know 
itself as free and on that account is a will-less will. In this sense any will 

ADDITIONS 
233 
is 'objective' which acts under the guidance of an alien authority and has 
not yet completed its endless return into itself. 
19. Paragraph 32. 
The Idea must further determine itself within itself continually, 
since in the beginning it is no more than an abstract concept. But this 
original abstract concept is never abandoned. It merely becomes con-
tinually richer in itself and the final determination is therefore the 
richest. In this process its earlier, merely implicit, determinations 
attain their free self-subsistence but in such a way that the concept 
remains the soul which holds everything together and attains its own 
proper differentiation only through an immanent process. It therefore 
cannot be said that the concept reaches anything new; on the contrary, 
its final determinati0n coincides with its first. Even if the concept seems 
in its existence to have become decomposed, this is nothing but a 
semblance revealing Itself in due course as a semblance, because every 
single detail reverts at last to the concept of the universal. The empirical 
sciences are usually analyses of the content of our ideas, and when the 
single instance has been brought back to the common character, the 
latter is then called the concept. This is not our procedure; we only 
wish to look on at the way in which the concept determines itself and to 
restrain ourselves from adding thereto anything of our thoughts and 
opinions. What we acquire in this way, however, is a series of thoughts 
and another series of existent shapes of experience; to which I may add 
that the time order in which the latter actually appear is other than the 
logical order. Thus, for example, we cannot say that property existed 
before the family, yet, in spite of that, property must be dealt with first. 
Consequently you might raise here the question why we do not begin 
at the highest point, i.e. with the concretely true. The answer is that it 
is precisely the truth in the form of a result that we are looking for, and 
for this purpose it is essential to start by grasping the abstract concept 
itself. What is actual, the shape in which the concept is embodied, is for 
us therefore the secondary thing and the sequel, even if it were itself first 
in the actual world. The development we are studying is that whereby 
the abstract forms reveal themselves not as self-subsistent but as false. 
20. Paragraph 33· 
In speaking of Right [Recht, i.e. jus] in this book, we mean not merely 
what is generally understood by the word, namely civil law, but also 
morality, ethical life, and world-history; these belong just as much to 
our topic, because the concept brings thoughts together into a true 
system. If the free will is not to remain abstract, it must in the first 
place give itself an embodiment, and the material primarily available to 
sensation for such an embodiment is things, i.e. objects outside us. This 
primary mode of freedom is the one which we are to become acquainted 
with as property, the sphere of formal and abstract right. To this sphere 

234 
ADDITIONS 
there also belong property m its mediated form as contract, and right in 
its infringement as crime and punishment. The freedom which we have 
here is what is called a person, i.e. the subject who is free, free indeed in 
his own eyes, and who gives himself an embodiment in things. 
The sheer immediacy of external fact, however, is not an adequate 
embodiment of freedom, and the negation of this immediacy is the 
sphere of morality. I am now free, not merely in this immediate thing, 
but also after the immediacy has been superseded, i.e. I am free in 
myself, in my subjectivity. In this sphere the main thing is my insight, 
my intention, my purpose, because externality has now been established 
as of no importance. Good, however, which here is the universal end, 
should not simply remain in my inner life; it should be realized. That 
is to say, the subjective will demands that what is internal to it, i.e. its 
end, shall acquire an external existence, that the good shall in this way 
be consummated in the external world. 
Morality and formal right arc two abstract moments whose truth is 
ethical life alone. Hence ethical life is the unity of the will in its concept 
with the will of the individual, i.e. of the subject. Its first embodiment 
is again something natural, whose form is love and feding~thc family. 
Here the individual has transcended his shyness of personality and finds 
himself and his consciousness of himself in a whole. At the next stage, 
however, we see substantial unity disappearing along with ethical life 
proper; the family falls asunder and its members relate themselves to 
each other as self-subsistent, since their only bond of conncxion is 
reciprocal need. This stage~civil society-has often been looked upon 
as the state, but the state is first present at the third stage, the stage of 
ethical life and the stage of mind in which the prodigious unification 
of self-subsistent individuality with universal substantiality has been 
achieved. The right of the state therefore stands above the preceding 
stages; it is freedom in its most concrete shape and as such is subordinate 
to one thing alone-the supreme absolute truth of the world-mind. 
21. Paragraph ].f.. 
When I say that 'the absolutely free will at the stage'' hen its concept 
is abstract has the determinate character of immediacy',\\ hat I mean is 
this: when the concept had fully realized itself and \Yh<.:n the embodi-
ment of the concept had become nothing but the unfolding of its own 
self, then that state of affairs \\Ould be the fully developed Idea of the 
will. But at the start the concept is abstract, \Yhich means that all its 
determinations are contained within it, but still only contained within it; 
they are only implicit and not yet developed to be a totality in themselves. 
If I say 'I am free', the ego is still this inwardness, not confronted by an 
opposite. In morality, on the other hand, there is opposition from the 
start, since I stand in the moral sphere as a single will while the good is 
the universal even though it is within myself. Thus at that len!, the will 

ADDITIONS 
235 
has in itself the different factors of singularity and universality, and this 
gives it its specific character. But, to begin with, no such difference is 
present, since at the first stage, that of abstract unity, there is no advance 
and no mediation and so the will has the form of immediacy, of mere 
being. The essential point of view to be taken here then is that this 
original indeterminacy is itself a determinacy. The indeterminacy lies 
in the fact that there is as yet no difference between the will and its 
content; but indeterminacy, opposed to the determinate, acquires the 
character of being something determinate. It is abstract identity which 
here constitutes determinacy; the will therefore becomes a single will, a 
person. 
22. Paragraph 35· 
The abstract will, consciously self-contained, is personality. Man's 
chief glory is to be a person, and yet in spite of that the bare abstraction, 
'person', is somewhat contemptuous in its very expression. 'Person' is 
essentially different from 'subject', since 'subject' is only the possibility 
of personality; every living thing of any sort is a subject. A person, then, 
is a subject a\vare of this subjectivity, since in personality it is of myself 
alone that I am aware. A person is a unit of freedom aware of its sheer 
independence. As this person, I know myself to be free in myself. I can 
abstract from everything, since nothing confronts ml' save pure per-
sonality, and yet as this person I am something wholly determinate, e.g. 
I am of a certain age, a certain stature, I occupv this space, and so on 
through whatever other details you like. Thus personality is at once the 
sublime and the trivial. It implies this umty of the infinite with the 
purely finite, of the wholly limitless with determin~lte limitation. It is 
the sublimity of personality that is able to sustain tlns contradiction, a 
contradiction which nothing merely natural contam,; or could endure. 
23. Paragraph 37· 
Since, in personality, particularity is not present as freedom, every-
thing which depends on particularity is here a matter of indifference. 
To have no interest except in one's formal right may be pure obstinacy, 
often a fitting accompaniment of a cold heart and restricted sympathies. 
It is uncultured people who insist most on their rights. \vhile noble 
minds look on other aspects of the thing. Thus abstract right is nothing 
but a bare possibility and, at least in contrast with the whole range of 
the situation, something formal. On that account, to haw a right gives 
one a warrant, but it is not absolutely necessary that one should insist 
on one's rights, because that is only one aspect of the whole situation. 
That is to say, possibility is being which has the significance of also not 
being. 
24. Paragraph 4I. 
The rationale of property is to be found not in the satisfaction of needs 
but in the supersession of the pure subjectivity of personality. In his 

ADDITIONS 
property a person exists for the first time as reason. Even if my freedom 
is here realized first of all in an external thing, and so falsely realized, 
nevertheless abstract personality in its immediacy can have no other 
embodiment save one characterized by immediacy. 
25. Paragraph 42. 
Since a thing lacks subjectivity, it is external not merely to the subject 
but t6 itself. Space and time are external in this way. As sentient, I 
am myself external, spatial, and temporal. As receptive of sensuous 
intuitions, I receive them from something which is external to itself. 
An animal can intuit, but the soul of an animal has for its object not its 
soul, itself, but something external. 
26. Paragraph 44· 
All things may become man's property, because man is free will and 
consequently is absolute, while what stands over against him lacks this 
quality. Thus everyone has the right to make his will the thing or to 
make the thing his will, or in other words to destroy the thing and trans-
form it into his own; for the thing, as externality, has no end in itself; 
it is not infinite self-relation but something external to itself. A living 
thing too (an animal) is external to itself in this way and is so far itself 
a thing. Only the will is the infinite, absolute in contrast with every-
thing other than itself, while that other is on its side only relative. Thus 
'to appropriate' means at bottom only to manifest the pre-eminence of 
my will over the thing and to prove that it is not absolute, is not an end 
in itself. This is made manifest when I endow the thing with some 
purpose not directly its own. When the living thing becomes my 
property, I give to it a soul other than the one it had before, I give to it 
my soul. The free will, therefore, is the idealism which does not take 
things as they are to be absolute, while realism pronounces them to be 
absolute, even if they only exist in the form of finitude. Even an animal 
has gone beyond this realist philosophy since it devours things and so 
proves that they are not absolutely self-subsistent. 
27. Paragraph 46. 
In property my will is the will of a person; but a person is a unit and 
so property becomes the personality of this unitary will. Since property 
is the means whereby I give my will an embodiment, property must also 
have the character of being 'this' or 'mine'. This is the important 
doctrine of the necessity of private property. While the state may 
cancel private ownership in exceptional cases, it is nevertheless only the 
state that can do this; but frequently, especially in our day, private 
property has been re-introduced by the state. For example, many 
states have dissolved the monasteries, and rightly, for in the last resort 
no community has so good a right to property as a person has. 

ADDITIONS 
237 
28. Paragraph 47· 
Animals are in possession of themselves; their soul is in possession 
of their body. But they have no right to their life, because they do not 
will it. 
29. Paragraph 49· 
The equality which might be set up, e.g. in connexwn with the 
distribution of goods, would all the same soon be destroyed again, 
because wealth depends on diligence. But if a project cannot be exe-
cuted, it ought not to be executed. Of course men are equal, but only 
qua persons, that is, with respect only to the source from which posses-
sion springs; the inference from this is that everyone must have property. 
Hence, if you wish to talk of equality, it is this equality which you must 
have in view. But this equality is something apart from the fixing of 
particular amounts, from the question of how much I own. From this 
point of view it is false to maintain that justice requires everyone's 
property to be equal, since it requires only that everyone shall own pro-
perty. The truth is that particularity is just the sphere where there is 
room for inequality and where equality would be wrong. True enough, 
men often lust after the goods of others, but that is just doing wrong, 
since right is that which remains indifferent to particularity. 
30. Paragraph 50. 
The points made so far have been mainly concerned with the proposi-
tion that personality must be embodieJ in property. Now the fact that 
the first person to take possession of a thing should also be its owner is 
an inference from what has been said. The first is the rightful owner, 
however, not because he is the first but because he 1s a free will, for it is 
only by another's succeeding him that he becomes the first. 
3I. Paragraph sr. 
A person puts his will into a thing-that is just the concept ot property, 
and the next step is the realization of this concept. The inner act of will 
which consists in saying that something is mine must also become 
recognizable by others. If I make a thing mine, I give to it a predicate, 
'mine', which must appear in it in an external form and must not simply 
remain in my inner will. It often happens that children lay stress on 
their prior willing in preference to the seizure of a thing by others. But 
for adults this willing is not sufficient, since the form of subjectivity must 
be remoYed and must work its way beyond the subjective to objectivity. 
32. Paragraph 52. 
Fichte* has raised the question whether the matter too belongs to me 
• [Scze11ce of Rights, § 19 A, pp. 298 ff. (so Lasson and Reyburn). Fichte zs 
there mamtammg that the farmer has no nght to his land as such but only to its 
products, to lts ~accidents' not to Ib 'substance'; he may not pre\·ent others from 
grazmg cattle on zt after harvest, unless, m addztwn to cultzvatzon nghts, he has 
grazmg nghts for cattle of his own.] 

ADDITIONS 
if I impose a form on it. On his argument, after I had made a golden 
cup, it would have to be open to someone else to take the gold provided 
that in so doing he did no damage to my work. However separable the 
matter may be in thought, still in reality this distinction is an empty 
subtlety, because, if I take possession of a field and plough it, it is not 
only the furrow that is my property, but the rest as well, the furrowed 
earth. That is to say, I will to take this matter, the whole thing, into my 
possession; the matter therefore does not remain a res nullius nor does 
it remain its own property. Further, even if the matter remains external 
to the form which I have given to the object, the form is precisely a sign 
that I claim the thing as mine. The thing therefore docs not remain 
external to my will or outside what I have willed. Hence there is nothing 
left to be taken into possession by someone else. 
33· Paragraph 54· 
These modes of taking possession involve the advance from the cate-
gory of singularity to that of universality. It is only of a single thing 
that we can take possession physically, while marking a thing as mine 
is taking possession of it in idea. In the latter case I have an idea of the 
thing and mean that the thing as a whole is mine, not simply the part 
which I can take into my possession physically. 
34· Paragraph 55· 
Taking possession is always piece-meal in type; I take into possession 
no more than what I touch with my body. But here comes the second 
point: external objects extend further than I can grasp. Therefore, 
whatever I have in my grasp is linked with something else. It is with 
my hand that I manage to take possession of a thing, but its reach can be 
extended. What I hold in my hand-that magnificent tool which no 
animal possesses-can itself be a means to gripping something else. 
If I am in possession of something, the intellect immediately draws the 
inference that it is not only the immediate object in my grasp which is 
mine but also what is connected with it. At this point positive law must 
enact its statutes since nothing further on this topic can be deduced from 
the concept. 
35· Paragraph 56. 
This forming of an object may in practice assume the most various 
guises. In farming land I impose a form on it. Where inorganic objects 
are concerned, the imposition of a form is not always direct. For 
example, if I build a windmill, I have not imposed a form on the air, but 
I have formed something for utilizing the air, though I am not on that 
account at liberty to call the air mine, since I have not formed the air 
itself. Further, the preserving of game may be regarded as a way of 
forming game, for we preserve it with a view to maintaining the species. 

ADDITIONS 
239 
[The same is true of] the taming of animals, only of course that is a more 
direct way of forming them and it depends on me to a greater extent. 
36. Paragraph 57· 
To adhere to man's absolute freedom-one aspect of the matter-is 
eo ipso to condemn slavery. Yet if a man is a slave, his own will is 
responsible for his slavery, just as it is its will which is responsible if a 
people is subjugated. Hence the wrong of slavery lies at the door not 
simply of enslavers or conquerors but of the slaves and the c0nquered 
themselves. Slavery occurs in man's transition from the state of nature 
to genuinely ethical conditions; it occurs in a world where a wrong 
is still right. At that stage wrong has validity and so is necessarily in 
place. 
37· Paragraph 58. 
To take possession by marking a thing is of all sorts of taking posses-
sion the most complete, since the mark is implicitly at work to some 
extent in the other sorts too. \Vhen I grasp a thing or form it, this also 
means in the last resort that I mark it, and mark it for others, in order 
to exclude them and show that I have put my will into the thing. The 
notion of the mark, that is to say, is that the thing does not count as the 
thing which it is but as what it is supposed to signify. A cockade, for 
instance, signifies citizenship of a state, though (he colour has no con-
nexion with the nation and represents not itself '.1ut the nation. By being 
able to give a mark to things and thereby tr acquire them, man just 
shows his mastery over things. 
38. Paragraph 59· 
While in marking a thing I am taking pos~ession in a universal way of 
the thing as such, the use of it implies a still more universal relation to 
the thing, because, when it is used, the thing in its particularity is not 
recognized but is negated by the user.* The thing is reduced to a means 
to the satisfaction of my need. When I and the thing meet, an identity 
is established and therefore one or other must lose its qualitative charac-
ter. But I am alive, a being who wills and is truly affirmative; the:. thing 
on the other hand is something physical. Therefore the thing must be 
destroyed while I preserve myself. This, in general terms, is the prero-
gative and the principle of the organic. 
39· Paragraph 61. 
The relation of use to property is the same as that of substance to 
accident, inner to outer, force to its manifestation. Just as force exists 
• [\Vhen I mark a thing as mine, I attribute to it the uni>·ersal predicate 
'mmc' and 'recognize' its particular characteristics m the sense that I do not 
interfere with them. But when I use it I 'negate' its particular charactenstics in 
the sense that I change them to suit my purpose. To mark land as mine by 
fencing it does not change its character, but to use 1t, e.g. by planting it, does.) 

ADDITIONS 
only in manifesting itself, so arable land is arable land only in bearing 
crops. Th•Js he who has the use• of arable land is the owner of the 
whole, and it is an empty abstraction to recognize still another property 
in the object itself. 
40. Paragraph 63. 
The qualitative disappears here in the form of the quantitative; that 
is to say, when I speak of 'need', I use a term under which the most 
various things may be brought; they share it in common and so become 
commensurable. The advance of thought here therefore is from a 
thing's specific quality to a character which is indifferent to quality, i.e. 
quantity. A similar thing occurs in mathematics. The definition of a 
circle, an ellipse, and a parabola reveals their specific difference. But, 
in spite of this, the distinction between these different curves is deter-
mined purely quantitatively, i.e. in such a way that the only important 
thing is a purely quantitative difference which rests on their coefficients 
alone, on purely empirical magnitudes. In property, the quantitative 
character which emerges from the qualitative is value. Here the quali-
tative provides the quantity with its quantum and in consequence is as 
much preserved in the quantity as superseded by it. If we consider the 
concept of value, we must look on the thing itself only as a symbol; it 
counts not as itself but as what it is worth. A bill of exchange, for 
instance, does not represent what it really is-paper; it is only a symbol 
of another universal-value. The value of a thing may be very hetero-
geneous; it depends on need. But if you want to express the value of 
a thing not in a specific case but in the abstract, then it is money which 
expresses this. l\loney represents any and every thing, though since it 
does not portray the need itself but is only a symbol of it, it is itself 
controlled by the specific value [of the commodity]. l\1oney, as an 
abstraction, merely expresses this value. t It is possible in principle 
to be the owner of a thing without at the same time being the owner of 
its value. If a family can neither sell nor pawn its goods, it is not the 
owner of their value. But since this form of property is not in accordance 
with the concept of property, such restrictions on ownership (feudal 
tenure, testamentary trusts) are mostly in course of disappearing. 
41. Paragraph 64. 
Prescription rests on the presumption that I have ceased to regard the 
thing as mine. If a thing is to remain mine, my will must continue in it, 
and using it or keeping it safe shows this continuance. That public 
• [i.e. the entire and permanent use of it-see Paragraph liz ) 
t ['Prices are regulated by an a\·erage price; this in the last resort means that 
they are regulated by the volue of the commodities. I say "m the last resort" 
because average pnces do nut (as Adam Smith, Ricardo, and others believed) 
directly comcide With the 'alue of commodities.' Karl :\larx Capztal, tr. by 
E. and C. Paul, London, 1929, p. I53·l 

ADDITIONS 
memorials may lose their value was frequently shown during the 
Reformation in the case of foundations, endowments, &c., for the Mass. 
The spirit of the old faith, i.e. of these foundations, had fled, and con-
sequently they could be seized as private property. 
42. Paragraph 65. 
While prescription is an alienation with no direct expression of the 
will w alienate, alienation proper is an expression of my wjJJ, of my will 
no longer to regard the thing as mine. The whole matter may also be so 
viewed that alienation is seen to be a true mode of taking possession. 
To take possession of the thing directly is the first moment in property. 
Use is likewise a way of acquiring property. The third moment then is 
the unity of these two, taking possession of the thing by alienating it.• 
43· Paragraph 66. 
It is in the nature of the case that a slave has an absolute right to free 
himself and that if anyone has prostituted his ethical life by hiring 
himself to thieve and murder, this is an absolute nullity and everyone 
has a warrant to repudiate this contract. The same is the case if I hire 
my religious feeling to a priest who is my confessor, for such an inward 
matter a man has to settle with himself alone. A religious feeling which 
is partly in control of someone else is no proper religious feeling at all. 
The spirit 1s always one and single and should dwell in me. I am entitled 
to the union of my potential and my actual being. 
44· Paragraph 67. 
The distinction here explained is that between a slave and a modern 
domestic servant or day-labourer. The Athenian slave perhaps had an 
easier occupation and more intellectual work than is usually the case 
with our servants, but he was still a slave, because he bad alienated to 
his master the whole range of his activity. 
45· Paragraph 70. 
A single person, I need hardly say, is something subordinate, and 
as such he must dedicate himself to the ethical whole. Hence if the state 
claims life, the individual must surrender it. But may a man take his 
own life? Suicide may at a first glance he regarded ;:~ an act of courage, 
but only the false courage of tailors and servant girls. Or again it may be 
Jook:cd upon as a misfortune, since it is inward distraction which leads 
to it. But the fundamental question is: Have I a right to take my life? 
The answer will be that I, as this individual, am not master of my life, 
• [Takmg possessiOn is posztn·e acquisition. Use is the negation of a thing's 
parucu!ar charactensttcs (see Paragraph 59). Alienatton is the synthesis of 
posttt\'C and negatne, tt ts negattve m that 1t imolves spurning the thing alto-
gether; tt ts pos!ti\ e because tt is only a thmg completely mme which I can so 
spurn.) 

ADDITIONS 
because life, as the comprehensive sum of my activity, is nothing 
externa~ to personality, which itself is this immediate personality. 
Thus when a person is said to have a right over his life, the words are a 
contradiction, because they mean that a person has a right over himself. 
But he has no such right, since he does not stand over himself and he 
cannot pass judgement on himself. When Hercules destroyed himself by 
fire and when Brutus fell on his sword, this was the conduct of a hero 
against his personality. But as for an unqualified right to suicide, we 
must simply say that there is no such thing, even for heroes. 
46. Paragraph JI. 
In a contract I hold property on the strength of a common will; that 
is to say, it is the interest of reason that the subjective will should 
become universal and raise itself to this degree of actualization. Thus 
in contract my will still has the character 'this', though it has it in com-
munity with another will. The universal will, however, still appears 
here only in the form and guise of community. 
47· Paragraph 75· 
It has recently become very fashionable to regard the state as a con-
tract of all ·with all. Everyone makes a contract with the monarch, so the 
argument runs, and he agai!l with his subjects. This point of view arises 
from thinking superficially of a mere unity of different wills. In contract, 
however, there are two identical wills who are both persons and wish to 
remain property-owners. Thus contract springs from a person's arbit-
rary will, an origin which marriage too has in common with contract. 
But the case is quite different with the state; it does not lie with an 
mdividual's arbitrary will to separate himself from the state, because we 
are already citizens of the state hy birth. The rational end of man is life 
in the state, and if there is no state there, reason at once demands that 
one be founded. Permission to enter a state or leave it must be given by 
the state; this then is not a matter which depends on an individual's 
arbitrary will and therefore the state does not rest on contract, for con-
tract presupposes arbitrariness. It is false to maintain that the founda-
tion of the state is something at the option of all its members. It is 
nearer the truth to say that it is absolutely necessary for every individual 
to be a citizen. The great advance of the state in modern times is that 
nowadays all the citizens have one and the same end, an absolute and 
permanent end; it is no longer open to individuals, as it was in the 
l\Iiddlc Ages, to make private stipulations in connexion \Vith it. 
48. Paragmph 76. 
Contract implies two consenting parties and two things. That is to 
say, in a contract my purpose is both to acquire property and to surren-
der it. Contract is real when the action of both parties is complete, i.e. 
when both surrender and both acquire property, and when both remain 

ADDITIONS 
243 
property owners even in the act of surrender. Contract is formal where 
only one of the parties acquires property or surrenders it. 
49· Paragraph 78. 
Just as in the theory of property we had the distinction between 
owner, hip and possession, between the substance of the matter and its 
purely external side, so here in contract we have the difference between 
a common will-covenant-and a particular will-performance. It lies 
in the nature of contract that it should be an expression of both the 
common and the particular will of the parties, because in it will is 
related tu will. The covenant, made manifest in a symbol, and its per-
formance arc quite distinct from each other amongst civilized peoples, 
though amongst savages they may coincrde. In the forests of Ceylon 
there is a tribe of traders \vho put down their property and wait quietly 
until others come to put theirs down opposite. Here there is no differ-
ence bct\veen the dumb declaration of will and the performance of what 
is willed. 
50. Paragraph So. 
In contract we drew the distinction between the covenant or stipula-
tion (\\ hich made the property mine thnu~h 1\ drc! nnt [!!\·e me posses-
sion) and performance (which first gan· mt: ''ossco:'l<~I' 1. :\ow if I am 
already the out-and-out owner of the prnpcrt\. the nhJcTt of the pledge 
is to put me simultaneously in possessiOn "1 the· value ot the property 
and thereby to guarantee the covenant's pcrt<>rnHncc at the very time 
the em·enant is made. Surety is a partJcular k1nd of pkdge whereby 
someone gives his pror:1ise or pledges lw; crt·· lit 
,, L:llarantee for 
another's performance. Here a person iultilo tf:r 
,, lr•>ll which is 
fulfilled by a mere thmg in the case of a pled;.>:e l'r·'l''- 1 
5 r. Paragraph Sr. 
In contract \\e had the relation of two wills as a comm·,n will. But 
this idcnt1cal wrll is only rdatiwly uni\·crsal, posited as w•iYcrsal, and 
so is still oproscd to the partrcular \\ill. In wntract, to be cure, making 
a covenant entails the right to requrre its pcrformancc. H'.It this per-
formance 1s dependent again on the part1cular \\Ill \Yh1ch qua particular 
may act in contraYention of the princrplc of nghtness .. -\t th1;c point then 
the negation, \\hich was implicitly present m the pnncipk r.i the \\Ill at 
the start, comes into view, and this negation is just \\·hat \\ ron,l! is. In 
general terms, the course of ewnts is that the \\ 1ll rs freed from Its 
immcdi3.cy and thus there is n·okcd nut of the common \\ill the par-
ticularity\\ hrch then comes on the scene as opposed to the common will. 
In contract the: parties still retain their particular wills; contract there-
fore is n0t yet hcyond the stage of arhitrariness, wah the result that it 
remains at the mercy of wrong. 

ADDITIO~S 
52. Paragraph 82. 
The principle of rightness, the universal will, receives its essential 
determinate character through the particular will, and so is in relation 
with something which is inessential. This is the relation of essence to 
its appearance. Even if the appearance corresponds with the essence, 
still, looked at from another point of view, it fails to correspond with it, 
since appearance is the stage of contingency, essence related to the 
inessential. In wrong, however, appearance proceeds to become a show. 
A show is a determinate existence inadequate to the essence, the empty 
disjunction and positing of the essence, so that in hoth essence and show 
the distinction of the one from the other is present as sheer difference. 
The show, therefore, is the falsity which disappears in claiming inde-
pendent existence; and in the course of the show's disappearance the 
essence reveals itself as essence, i.e. as the authority of the show. The 
essence has negated that which negated it and so is corroborated. 
Wrong is a show of this kind, and,\\ hen it disappears, right acquires the 
character of something fixed and valid. \Vhat is here called the essence 
is just the principle of rightness, and in contrast with it the particular 
will annuls itself as a falsity. Hitherto the being of the right has been 
immediate only, but now it is actual because it returns out of its nega-
tion. The actual is the effectual; in its otherness it still holds fast to 
itself, while anything immediate remains susceptible of negation. 
53· Paragraph 83. 
Wrong is thus the show of the essence, putting itself as self-subsistent. 
If the show is only implicit and not explicit also, i.e. if the wrong passes 
in my eyes as right, the wrong is non-malicious. The show here is a 
show from the point of view of the right but not from my point of view. 
The second type of wrong is fraud. Here the wrong is not a show 
from the point of view of the principle of rightness. The position is that 
I am making a show to deceive the other party. In fraud the right is in 
my eyes only a show. In the first case, the wrong was a show from the 
point of view of the right. In the second case, from my own point of 
view, from the point of view of wrong, right is only a show. 
Finally, the third type of wrong is crime. This is wrong both in 
itself and from my point of view. But here I will the wrong and make 
no use of even a show of right. I do not intend the other against whom 
the crime is committed to regard the absolutely wrong as right. The 
distinction between crime and fraud is that in the lattc:r the form of 
acting still implies a recognition of the right, and this is just what is 
lacking in crime. 
54· Paragraph 86. 
There is a specific ground for what is inherently right, and the wrong 
which I hold to be right I also defend on some ground or other. The 
nature of the finite and particular is to allow room for accidents. Thus 

ADDiTIONS 
245 
here collisions must occur, because here we are on the level ot the finite. 
This first type of wrong-doing negates the particular will only, while 
universal rightness is respected. Consequently this is the most venial of 
the types of wrong-doing. If I say 'a rose is not red', I still recognize 
that it has a colour. Hence I do not deny the genus; all that I negate is 
the particular colour, red. Similarly, right is recognized herto. Each of 
the parties wills the right and what is supposed to result to each is the 
right alone. The wrong of each consists simply in his holding that what 
he wants is right. 
55· Paragraph 87. 
At this second level of wrong-doing, the particular will is respected, 
but universal rightness is not. In fraud, the particular will is not in-
fringed, because the party defrauded is saddled with what he is asked to 
believe is right. Thus the right which he demands is posited as some-
thing subjective, as a mere show, and it is this which constitutes fraud. 
56. Paragraph 89. 
In the case of non-malicious wrong and civil suits at law, no punish-
ment is imposed, because in such cases the wrongdoer has willed 
nothing in opposition to the right. In the case of fraud, on the other 
hand, punishments come in, because here it is an infringement of right 
which is in question. 
57· Paragraph 90. 
\Vrong in the full sense of the word is crime, where there is no respect 
either for the principle of rightness or for what seems right to me, 
where, then, both sides, the objective and the subjective, are infringed. 
58. Paragraph 93· 
Once the state has been founded, there can no longer be any heroes. 
They come on the scene only in uncivilized conditions. Their aim is 
right, necessary, and political, and this they pursue as the1r own affair. 
The heroes who founded states, introduced marriage and agriculture, 
did not do this as their recognized right, and their conduct ~till has the 
appearance of being their particular will. But as the higher right of the 
Idea against nature, this heroic coercion is a rightful coercion. Mere 
goodness can achieve little against the pO\Yer of nature. 
59· Paragraph 94· 
Special attention must be paid at this point to the difference between 
the right and the moral. In morality, i.e. when I am reflected into 
myself, there is also a duality, because the good is my aim and I ought 
to determine myself by reference to that Idea. The good is embodied in 
my decision and I actualize the good in myself. But this embodiment is 
purely inward and therefore cannot be coerced. The law of the land 
therefore cannot possibly wish to reach as far as a man's disposition, 

ADDITIONS 
because, so far as his moral convictions are concerned, he exists for 
himself alone, and force in that context is meaningless. 
6o. Paragraph 96. 
How any given crime is to be punished cannot be settled by mere 
thinking; positive laws are necessary. But with the advance of educa-
tion, opinions about crime become less harsh, and to-day a criminal is 
not so severely punished as he was a hundred years ago. It is not exactly 
crimes or punishments which change but the relation between them. 
61. Paragraph 97· 
A crime alters something in some way, and the thing has its existence 
in this alteration. Yet this existence is a self-contradiction and to that 
extent is inherently a nullity. The nullity is that the crime has set aside 
right as such. That is to say, right as something absolute cannot be set 
aside, and so committing a crime is in principle a nullity: and this nullity 
is the essence of what a crime effects. A nullity, however, must reveal itself 
to be such, i.e. manifest itself as vulnerable. A crime, as an act, is not 
something positive, not a first thing, on which punishment would super-
vene as a negation. It is something negative, so that its punishment is 
only a negation of the negation. Right in its actuality, then, annuls what 
infringes it and therein displays its validity and proves itself to be a 
necessary, mediated, reality. 
62. Paragraph 99· 
Feuerbach* bases his theory of punishment on threat and thinks that 
if anyone commits a crime despite the threat, punishment must follow 
because the criminal was aware of it beforehand. But what about the 
justification of the threat? A threat presupposes that a man is not 
free, and its aim is to coerce him by the idea of an evil. But right and 
justice must have their seat in freedom and the will, not in the lack of 
freedom on which a threat turns. To base a justification of punishment 
on threat is to liken it to the act of a man who lifts his stick to a dog. It is 
to treat a man like a dog instead of with the freedom and respect due to 
him as a man. But a threat, which after all may rouse a man to demon-
strate his freedom in spite of it, discards justice altogether.-Coercion 
by psychological factors can concern only differences of quantity and 
quality in crime, not the nature of crime itself, and therefore any legal 
codes that may be products of the doctrine that crime is due to such 
coercion lack their proper foundation. 
63. Paragraph Ioo. 
Beccaria's requirement that men should give their consent to being 
punished is right enough, but the criminal gives his consent already by 
his very act. The nature of the crime, no less than the private will of the 
• [P. J. A. Feuerbach (1775-183J). See his Lehrbuch des gemeinen peinlichen 
Rechts (1801). (Messmeo).] 

ADDITIONS 
247 
criminal, requires that the injury initiated by the criminal should be 
annulled. However that may be, Beccaria's endeavour to have capital 
punishment abolished has had beneficial effects. Even if neither 
Joseph II nor the French ever succeeded in entirely abolishing it, still we 
have begun to see which crimes deserve the death penalty and which do 
not. Capital punishment has in consequence become rarer, as in fact 
should be the case with this most extreme punishment. 
64. Paragraph IOI. 
Retribution is the inner connexion and the identity of two concep-
tions which are different in appearance and which also exist in the 
world as two distinct and opposed events. Retribution is inflicted on 
the criminal and so it has the look of an alien destiny, not intrinsically 
his own. Nevertheless punishment, as we have seen, is only crime made 
manifest, i.e. is the second half which necessarily presupposes the first. 
Prima facie, the objection to retribution is that it looks like something 
immoral, i.e. like revenge, and that thus it may pass for something per-
sonal. Yet it is not something personal, but the concept itself, which 
carries out retribution. 'Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord', as the 
Bible says.• And if something in the word 'repay' calls up the idea of a 
particular caprice of the subjective will, it must be pointed out that what 
is meant is only that the form which crime takes is turned round against 
itself. The Eumenides sleep, but crime awakens them, and hence it is 
the very act of crime itself which vindicates itself.-Now although 
requital cannot simply be made specifically equal to the crime, the case 
is otherwise with murder, which is of necessity liable to the death 
penalty; the reason is that since life is the full compass of a man's 
existence, the punishment here cannot simply consist in a 'value', for 
none is great enough, but can consist only in taking away a second life. 
65. Paragraph ro2. 
In that condition of society when there are neither magistrates nor 
laws, punishment always takes the form of revenge; revenge remains 
defective inasmuch as it is the act of a subjective will and therefore does 
not correspond with its content. Those who administer justice are persons, 
but their will is the universal will of the law and they intend to import 
into the punishment nothing except what is implied in the nature of 
the thing. The person wronged, however, views the wrong not as some-
thing qualitatively and quantitatively limited but only as wrong pure and 
simple, and in requiting the injury he may go too far, and this would 
lead to a new wrong. Amongst uncivilized peoples, revenge is deathless; 
amongst the Arabs, for instance, it can be checked only by superior 
force or by the impossibility of its satisfaction. A residue of revenge 
st1ll lingers in comparatively modern legislation in those cases where 
it is left to the option of individuals whether to prosecute or not. 
• [Romans xii. 19.] 

ADDITIONS 
66. Paragraph I04. 
Truth entails that the concept shall be, and that this existence shall 
correspond with the concept. In the sphere of right, the will is existent 
in something external, but the next requirement is that the will should 
be existent in something inward, in itself. It must in its own eyes be 
subjectivity, and have itself as its own object. This relation to itself is 
the moment of affirmation, but it can attain it only by superseding its 
immediacy. The immediacy superseded in crime leads, then, through 
punishment, i·.e. through the nullity of this nullity, to affirmation, i.e. to 
morality. 
67. Paragraph ro6. 
So far as right in the strict sense was concerned, it was of no impor-
tance what my intention or my principle was. This question about the 
self-determination and motive of the will, like the question about its 
purpose, now enters at this point in connexion with morality. Since man 
wishes to be judged in accordance with his own self-determined choices, 
he is free in this relation to himself whatever the external situation may 
impose upon him. No one can break in UJ>On this inner conviction of 
mankind, no violence can be done to it, and the moral will, therefore, is 
inaccessible. Man's worth is estimated by reference to his inward action 
and hence the standpoint of morality is that of freedom aware of itself. 
68. Paragraph I07. 
This entire category of the subjectivity of the will is once again a whole 
which, as subjectivity, must also have objectivity. It is in a subject that 
freedom can first be realized, since the subjective is the true material for 
this realization. But this embodiment of the will which we have called 
subjectivity is different from the will which has developed all its potenti-
alities to actuality. That is to say, the will must free itself from this 
second one-sidedness of pure subjectivity in order to become the fully 
actualized will. In morality, it is man's private interest that comes into 
question, and the high worth of this interest consists precisely in the 
fact that man knows himself as absolute and is self-determined. The 
uneducated man allows himself to be constrained in everything by brute 
force and natural factors; children have no moral will but leave their 
parents to decide things for them. The educated man, however, 
develops an inner life and wills that he himself shall be in everything 
he does. 
69. Paragraph ro8. 
In morality, self-determination is to be thought of as the pure rest-
lessness and activity which can never arrive at anything that is. It is in 
the sphere of ethical life that the will is for the first time identical with 
the concept of the will and has this concept alone as its content. In the 
moral sphere the will still relates itself to its implicit principle and con-

ADDITIONS 
249 
sequently its position is that of difference. The process through which 
this position develops is that whereby the subjective will becomes 
identified with its concept. Therefore the 'ought-to-be' which is never 
absent from the moral sphere becomes an 'is' only in ethical life. 
Further, this 'other' in relation to which the subjective will stands is 
two-sided: first, it is what is substantive, the concept; secondly, it is 
external fact. Even if the good were posited in the subjective will, that 
still would not give it complete realization. 
70. Paragraph IIO. 
The content of the subjective or moral will has a specific character of 
its own, i.e. even if it has acquired the form of objectivity, it must still 
continue to enshrine my subjectivity, and my act is to count as mine 
only if on its inward side it has been determined by me, if it was my pur-
pose, my intention. Beyond what lay in my subjective will I recognize 
nothing in its expression as mine. What I wish to see in my deed is my 
subjective consciousness over again. 
71. Paragraph II2. 
In dealing with formal right, I said [see Paragraph 38 J that it con-
tained prohibitions only, that hence a right action, strictly so called, was 
purely negative in character in respect of the will of others. In morality, 
on the other hand, my will has a positive character in relation to the will 
of others, i.e. the universal will is implicitly present within what the 
subjective will effects. To effect something is to produce something or 
to alter what already exists, and such changes have a bearing on the will 
of others. The concept of morality is the inner relation of the will to 
itself. But here it is not only one will; on the contrary its objectification 
implies at the same time the cancellation of the single will, and therefore, 
in addition, just because the character of one-sidedness vanishes, the 
positing of two wills and a positive bearing of each on the other. So far 
as rights are concerned, it makes no difference whether someone else's 
will may do something in relation to mine. when I give my will an 
embodiment in property. In morality, however, the welfare of others 
too is in question, and this positive bearing cannot come on the scene 
before this point. 
72. Paragraph II4. 
If an action is to be moral, it must in the first place correspond with 
my purpose, since the moral will has the right to refuse to recognize in 
the resulting state of affairs what was not present inwardly as purpose. 
Purpose concerns only the formal principle that the external will shall 
be within me as something inward. On the other hand, in the second 
moment of the moral sphere, questions may be asked about the intention 
behind the action, i.e. about the relative worth of the action in relation 

ADDITIONS 
to me. The third and last moment is not the relative worth of the 
action but its universal worth, the good. 
In a moral action, then, there may be a breach first between what is 
purposed and what is really effected and achieved; secondly, between 
what is there externally as a universal will and the particular inner 
determination which I give to it. The third and last point is that the 
intention should be in addition the universal content of the action. 
The good is the intention raised to be the concept of the will. 
73· Paragraph IIS. 
I am chargeable with what lay in my purpose and this is the most 
important point in connexion with crime. But responsibility contains 
only the quite external judgement whether I have or have not done some 
thing. It does not follow that, because I am responsible, the thing done 
may be imputed to me. 
74· Paragraph II7. 
The will has confronting it a state of affairs upon which it acts. But 
in order to know what this state of affairs is I must have an idea of it, and 
the responsibility is truly mine only in so far as I had knowledge of the 
situation confronting me. Such a situation is a presupposition of my 
volition and my will is therefore finite, or rather, since my will i& 
finite, it has a presupposition of this kind. As soon as my thinking and 
willing is rational, I am no longer at this level of finitude, since the 
object on which I act is no longer an 'other' to me. Finitude, however, 
implies fixed limits and restrictions. I have confronting me an 'other' 
which is only contingent, something necessary in a purely external way; 
its path and mine may meet or diverge. Nevertheless, I am nothing 
except in relation to my freedom, and my will is responsible for the deed 
only in so far as I know what I am doing. Oedipus, who killed his 
father without knowing it, cannot be accused of parricide. The ancient 
penal codes, however, attached less weight to the subjective side of 
action, to imputability, than we do nowadays. That is why sanctuaries 
were instituted in ancient times for harbouring and protecting the 
fugitive from vengeance. 
75· Paragraph II8. 
The transition to intention depends on the fact that I accept respon-
sibility only for what my idea of the situation was. That is to say, there 
can be imputed to me only what I knew of the circumstances. On the 
other hand, there are inevitable consequences linked with every action, 
even if I am only bringing about some single, immediate, state of affairs. 
The consequences in such a case represent the universal implicit within 
that state of affairs. Of course I cannot foresee the consequences-they 
might be preventable-but I must be aware of the universal character of 
my isolated act. The important point here is not the isolated thing but 

ADDITIONS 
the whole, and that depends not on the differentia of the particular 
action, but on its universal nature. Now the transition from purpose to 
intention lies in the fact that I ought to be aware not simply of my 
single action but also of the universal which is conjoined with it. The 
universal which comes on the scene here in this way is what I have 
willed, my intention. 
76. Paragraph ng. 
It happens of course that circumstances may make an action miscarry 
to a greater or lesser degree. In a case of arson, for instance, the fire may 
not catch or alternatively it may take hold further than rne incendiary 
intended. In spite of this, however, we must not make this a distinction 
between good and bad luck, since in acting a man must lay his account 
with externality. The old proverb is correct: 'A flung stone is the 
devil's.' To act is to expose oneself to bad luck. Thus bad luck has 
a right over me and is an embodiment of my own willing. 
77· Paragraph 121. 
In my own eyes, reflected into myself, I am a particular in correlation 
with the externality of my action. My end constitutes the content of the 
action, the content determinant of the action. l\Iurder and arson, for 
example, are universals and so are not the positive content of my action 
qua the action of a subject. If one of these crimes has been committed, 
its perpetrator may be asked why he committed it. The murder was 
not done for the sake of murdering; the murderer had in view some 
particular positive end. But if we were to say that he murdered for the 
mere pleasure of murdering, then the purely positive content of the 
subject would surely be pleasure, and if that is the case then the deed is 
the satisfaction of the subject's will. Thus the motive of ;m act is, more 
particularly, what is called the 'moral' factor, and this has in that case 
the double meaning of the universal implicit in the purpose and the 
particular aspect of the intention. It is a striking modern innovation to 
inquire continually about the motives of men's actions. Formerly, the 
question was simply: 'Is he an honest man? Does he do his duty?' 
Nowadays we insist on looking into men's hearts and so we presuppose 
a gulf between the objectivity of actions and their inner side, the sub-
jective motives. To be sure, the subject's volition must be considered; 
he wills something and the reason for what he wills lies within himself; 
he wills the satisfaction of his desire, the gratification of his passion. 
None the less, the good and the right are also a content of action, a 
content not purely natural but put there by my rationality. To make my 
freedom the content of what I will is a plain goal of my freedom itself. 
Therefore it is to take higher moral ground to find satisfaction in the 
action and to advance beyond the gulf between the self-consciousness of 
a man and the objectivity of his deed, even though to treat action as if it 

ADDITIONS 
involved such a gulf is a way of looking at the matter characteristic of 
certain epochs in world history and in individual biography. 
78. Paragraph I2J. 
Since the specifications of happiness are giv:en, they are not true 
specifications of freedom, because freedom is not genuinely free in its 
own eyes except in the good, i.e. except when it is its own end. Con-
sequently we may raise the question whether a man has the right to set 
before himself ends not freely chosen but resting solely on the fact that 
the subject is a living being. The fact that man is a living being, how-
ever, is not fortuitous, but in conformity with reason, and to that extent 
he has a right to make his needs his end. There is nothing degrading in 
being alive, and there is no mode of intelligent being higher than life 
in which existence would be possible. It is only the raising of the given 
to something self-created which yields the higher orbit of the good, 
although this distinction implies no incompatibility between the two 
levels. 
79· Paragraph I24. 
In magnis ... voluisse sat est• is right in the sense th:1·· we ought to 
will something great. But we must also be able to achieve it, otherwise 
the willing is nugatory. The laurels of mere willing are dry leaves that 
never were green. 
So. Paragraph I26. 
The famous answer :t Je n'en '1-'ois pas Ia necessite, given to the lam-
pooner who excused himself with the words: Il faut done que je '1-'it·e, is 
apposite at this point. Life ceases to be necessary in face of the higher 
realm of freedom. When St. Crispin stole leather to make shoes for the 
poor, his action was moral but wrong and so inadmissible. 
8x. Paragraph I27. 
Life as the sum of ends has a right against abstract right. If for 
example it is only by stealing hread that the wolf can be kept from the 
door, the action is of course an encroachment on somcone's property, 
but it would be wrong to treat this action as an ordinary theft. To 
refuse to allow a man in jeopardy of his life to take such steps for self-
preservation would be to stigmatize him as without rights, and since he 
would be deprived of his life, his freedom would be annulled altogether. 
Many diverse details have a bearing on the preservation of life, and 
when we have our eyes on the future we have to engage ourselves in 
these details. But the only thing that is necessary is to live now, the 
future is not absolute but ever exposed to accident. Hence it is only the 
necessity of the immediate present which can justify a wrong action, 
because not to do the action would in turn be to commit an offence, 
• ['In great things to have willed is enough' (Propertius, 11. x. 6).] 
t [By Richelieu (Bolland).] 

' -
ADDITIONS 
253 
indeed the most wrong of all offences, namely the complete destruction 
of the embodiment of freedom. Beneficium competentiae is relevant here, 
because kinship and other close relationships imply the right to demand 
that no one shall be sacrificed altogether on the altar of right. 
82. Paragraph I29. 
Every stage is really the Idea, but the earlier stages contain it only in 
rather an abstract form. Thus for example, even the ego, as personality, 
is already the Idea, though in its most abstract shape. The good, there-
fore, is the Idea further determined, the unity of the concept of the will 
with the particular will. It is nm something abstractly right, but some-
thing concrete whose contents are made up of both right and welfare alike. 
83. Paragraph IJI. 
The good is the truth of the particular will, but the will is only that 
into which it puts itself; it is not good by nature but can become what it 
is only by its own labour. On the other hand, the good itself, apart from 
the subjective will, is only an abstraction without that real existence 
which it is to acquire for the first time through the efforts of that will. 
Accordingly, the development of the good has three stages: (i) The good 
should present itself to my volition as a particular will and I should 
know it. (ii) I should myself say what is gooc1 and should develop its 
particular specifications. (iii) Finally, the spcCJficatwn of the good on its 
own account, the particularization of the good as infinite subjectivity 
aware of itself. This inward specifying of 11 hat good is, is conscience. 
84. Paragraph I]]. 
From my point of view the essence of the 11ill is duty. Now if my 
knowledge stops at the fact that the good is my dut1·. I am still going no 
further than the ahstract character of duty. I shouki do my duty for 
duty's sake, and \Yhen I do my duty it IS in a true sense my own objec-
tivity which I am bringing to realization. In doing my duty, I am by 
myself and free. To han emphasized this meaning of duty has constituted 
the merit of Kant's moral philosophy and its loftiness of outlook. 
85. Paragraph IJ.+. 
This is the same question as was put to Jesus 11 hen someone \Yished 
to learn from him what he ~hould do to inhent eternal hfe.* Good as a 
universal is abstract and cannot be accomplished so long as it remains 
abstract. To be accomplished it must acquire in addition the character 
of particularity. 
86. Paragraph I]j. 
\Vhile we laid emphasis above on the fact that the outlook of Kant's 
philosoplt.) is a high one in that it propounds a correspondence between 
duty and rationality, still we must notice here that this point of view is 
" [St. Luke x. 25.) 

ADDITIONS 
defective in lacking all articulation. The proposition: 'Act as if the 
maxim of thine action could be laid down as a universal principle', 
would be admirable if we already had determinate principles of conduct. 
That is to say, to demand of a principle that it shall be able to serve in 
addition as a determinant of universal legislation 1s to presuppose that 
it already possesses a content. Given the content, then of course the 
application of the principle would be a simple matter. In Kant's case, 
however, the principle itself is still not available and his criterion of 
non-contradiction is productive of nothing, since where there is nothing, 
there can be no contradiction either. 
87. Paragraph I]6. 
We may speak in a very lofty strain about duty, and talk of the kind 
is uplifting and broadens human sympathies, but if it never comes to 
anything specific it ends in being wearisome. !\lind demands particu-
larity and is entitled to it. But conscience is this deepest inward solitude 
with oneself where everything external and every restriction has disap-
peared-this complete withdrawal into oneself. As conscience, man is 
no longer shackled by the aims of particularity, and consequently in 
attaining that position he has risen to higher ground, the ground of the 
modern world, which for the firsr time has reached this consciousness, 
reached this sinking into oneself. The more sensuous consciousness* of 
earlier epochs had something external and given confronting it, either 
religion or law. But conscience knows itself as thinking and knows that 
what alone has obligatory force for me is this that I think. 
88. Paragraph I37· 
When we speak of conscience, it may easily be thought that, in virtue 
of its form, which is abstract inwardness, conscience is at this point 
without more ado true conscience. But true conscience determines 
itself to will what is absolutely good and obligatory and is this self-
determination. So far, however, it is only with good in the abstract that 
we have to do and conscience is still without this objective content and 
is but the infinite certainty of oneself. 
89. Paragraph I]8. 
If we look more closely at this process of evaporation and see how all 
specific determinations disappear into this simple concept and then have 
to be condensed out of it again, what we find is that it is primarily due 
to the fact that everything recognized as right and duty may he proved 
by discursive thinking to be nugatory, restricted, and in all respects not 
absolute. On the other hand, just as subjectivity evaporates every 
content into itself, so it may develop it out of itself once more. Every-
thing which arises in the ethical sphere is produced by this activity of 
• [For the distinction between sense-consciousness and more h1r<hly de-
veloped types of conscwusness, see Remarks to Paragraphs 21 and 35.] 

ADDITIONS 
zss 
mind. The moral point of view, however, is defective because 1t IS 
purely abstract. When I am aware of my freedom as the substance of my 
being, I am inactive and do nothing. But if I proceed to act and look for 
principles on which to act, I grope for something determinate and then 
demand its deduction from the concept of the free will. While, there-
fore, it is right enough to evaporate right and duty into subjectivity, it 
is wrong if this abstract groundwork is not then condensed out again. 
It is only in times when the world of actuality is hollow, spiritless, and 
unstable, that an individual may be allowed to take refuge from actuality 
in his inner life. Socrates lived at the time of the ruin of the Athenian 
democracy. His thought vaporized the world around him and he with-
drew into himself to search there for the right and the good. Even in our 
day there arc cases when reverence for the established order is more or 
less lacking; man insists on having the authoritative as his will, as that 
to which he has granted recognition. 
go. Paragraph I39· 
The abstract self-certainty which knows itself as the basis of every-
thing has in it the potentiality either of willing the universality of the 
concept or alternatively of taking a particular content as a principle and 
realizing that. The second alternative is evil, which therefore always 
includes the abstraction of self-certainty. It IS only man who is good, 
and he is good only because he can also be evil. Good and evil are 
inseparable, and their inseparability is rooted in the fact that the concept 
becomes an object to itself, and :.:s object it eo 1pso acquires the character 
of difference. The evil will wills something opposed to the universality 
of the will, while the good will acts in accordance ·with 1ts true concept. 
The difficulty of the question as to hmv the will can be evil as well as 
good usually arises because we think of the will as related to itself purely 
positively and because we represent its volition as something deter-
minate* confronting it, as the good. But the problem of the origin of 
evil may be more precisely put in the form: 'How does the negative 
come into the positive?' If we begin by presupposing that in the creation 
of the world God is the absolutely positive, then, turn where \Ve will, we 
shall never discover the negative within that positive, since to talk of 
God's 'permitting' evil is to ascribe to him a passive relation to evil 
which is unsatisfactory and meaningless. In the representative thinking 
of religious mythology there is no comprehension of the origin of evil; 
i.e. the positive and the negative are not discovered in one another, 
there is only a representacion of their succession and juxtaposition, so 
that it is from outside that the negative comes to the positive. But this 
cannot satisfy thought, which demands a reason and a necessity and 
insists on apprehending the negative as itself rooted in the positive. 
Kow the solution of the problem, the way the concept treats the matter, 
• [Readmg und sein TFollen als ein Bestimmtes, with Lasson.] 

ADDITIONS 
is already contained in the concept, since the concept, or to speak more 
concretely, the Idea, has it in its essence to differentiate itself and to 
posit itself negatively. If we adhere to the purely positive, i.e. if we rest 
in the unmixed good which is supposed to be good at its source, then we 
are accepting an empty category of the Understanding which clings to 
abstractions and one-sided categories of this kind and by the very asking 
of this question makes it a difficult one. If we begin with the standpoint 
of the concept, however, we apprehend the positive as activity and as 
self-distinction. Evil and good alike have their origin in the will and the 
will in its concept is both good and evil. 
The natural will is implicitly the contradiction of self-distinction, of 
being both inwardness and also self-awareness."' To maintain then that 
evil implies the further point that man is evil in so far as his will is 
natural would be to contradict the usual idea that it is just the natural 
will which is guiltless and good. But the natural will stands in opposi-
tion to the content of freedom, and the child and the uneducated man, 
whose wills are only natural, are for that very reason liable to be called 
to account for their actions only in a less degree. Now when we speak 
of man, we mean not the child hut the scli-conscious adult, and when 
we speak of good, we mean the knowledge of it. It is doubtless true that 
the natural is inherently innocent, neither good nor bad, but when it is 
drawn into the orbit of the will which is free ami knows that it is free, it 
acquires the character of not being free and is therefore evil. \Yhen man 
wills the natural, it is no longer merely natural, but the negative opposed 
to the good, i.e. to the concept of the will. 
On the other hand, if it is now objected that since evil is rooted in the 
concept and inc\·itable, man would be guiltless if he committed it, our 
reply must be that a man's decision is his own act, and his own act is 
freely chosen and his o\\ n responsibility. In the religious legend it is 
said that man is as God when he knows good and evil ;t and it is true 
that this likeness to God IS present in such knmdedge in that the 
inevitability here is no natural inevitability since on the contrary the 
decision is really the transcendence of this duality of good and evil. 
\\'hen both good and c\·il are placed before me, I have a choice between 
the two; I can decide bet\vecn them and endow my subjective character 
with either. Thus the nature of evil is that man may \vill it but need not. 
9r. Paragraph I.fO. 
Representati\·e thinking may go further and pervert the evil will into 
a show of goodness. Although it cannot alter the nature of evil, it can 
invest it with a show of goodness. Since every action has a positive 
aspect, and since the category of good as opposed to evil is likewise 
• [i.e. both unn ersal mner pnnciple and also awareness of self as particular, 
as opposed to the um,·ersal.) 
t [Genesis, ii1. 5, I.e. after doing what had been forbidden.) 

ADDITIONS 
257 
reduced to positivity, I may claim that my action in its bearing on my 
intention is good. Thus evil has good linked with it not only in my 
consciousness but also if we look at my action on its positive side. When 
self-consciousness gives out, to others only, that its action is good, this 
form of subjectivism is hypocrisy. But if it goes so far as to claim that 
the deed is good in its own eyes also, then we have a still higher peak of 
the subjectivism which knows itself as absolute. For this type of mind 
absolute good and absolute evil have both vanished, and the subject is 
therefore at liberty to pass himself off at discretion as anything he likes. 
This is the position of the absolute sophistry which usurps the office of 
lawgiver and rests the distinction between good and evil on its own 
caprice. The chief hypocrites are the pious ones (the Tartuffes) who are 
punctili!ius in every ritual observance and may even be religious to all 
appearance, while yet they do just as they please. There is little mention 
of hypocrites nowadays, partly because the accusation of hypocrisy seems 
to be too harsh; partly, however, because hypocrisy in its naive form 
has more or less disappeared. This downright falsehood, this veneer of 
goodness, has now become too transparent not to be seen through, and 
the divorce bet\veen doing good with one hand and evil with the other 
no longer occurs, since advancing culture has weakened the opposition 
between these categories. 
Instead, hypocrisy has now assumed the subtler form of Probabilism, 
which involves the agent's attempt to represent a transgression as some-
thing good from the point of view of his private conscience. This 
doctrine can only arise when the ~oral and the good are determined by 
authority, with the result that there are as many reasons as there are 
authorities for supposing that evil is good. Casuist theologians, Jesuits 
especially, have worked up these cases of conscience and multiplied 
them ad infinitum. 
These cases have now been elaborated to such a high degree of 
subtlety that numerous clashes have arisen between them, and the 
opposition between good and evil has become so weak that in single 
instances they appear to turn into one another. The only desideratum 
now is probability, i.e. something approximately good, something which 
may be supported by any single reason or authority. Thus the special 
characteristic of this attitude is that its content is purely abstract; it sets 
up the concrete content as something inessential or rather abandons it to 
bare opinion. On this principle, anyone may have committed a crime 
and yet have willed the good. For example, if a bad character is mur-
dered, the positive side of the action may be given out to be the with-
standing of evil and the will to diminish it. 
Now the next step beyond Probabilism is that it is no longer a question 
of someone else's statement or authority; it is a question only of the 
subject himself, i.e. of his own conviction-a conviction which alone 
is able to make a thing good. The defect here is that everything is 

zs8 
ADDITIONS 
supposed to fall within the orbit of conviction alone and that the abso-
lutely right, for which this conviction should be only the form, no longer 
exists. It is certainly not a matter of indifference whether I do something 
by habit and custom or because I am actuated throughout by the truth 
\~hich underlies these. But objective truth is still different from my 
conviction, because conviction lacks the distinction between good and 
evil. Conviction always remains conviction, and the bad could only be 
that of which I am not convinced. 
Now while this obliteration of good and evil implies a very lofty 
attitude, there is involved in this attitude the admission that it is subject 
to error, and to that extent it is brought down from its pedestal into 
mere fortuitousness and seems undeserving of respect. Now this form 
of subjectivism is irony, the consciousness that this principle of con-
viction is not worth much and that, lofty criterion though it be, it is only 
caprice that governs it. This attitude is really a product of Fichte's 
philos0phy, which proclaims that the Ego is absolute, i.e. is absolute 
certainty, the 'universal self-hood' which advances through a course of 
further development to objectivity. • 
Of Fichte himself it cannot 
properly be said that he made subjective caprice a guiding principle in 
ethics, but, later on, this principle of the mere particular, in the sense of 
'particular self-hood', was deified by Friedrich von Schlegel with refer-
ence to the good and the beautiful. As a result, he made objective 
goodness only an image of my conviction, receiving support from my 
efforts alone, and dependent for its appearance and disappearance on 
me as its lord and master. If I relate myself to something objective, it 
vanishes at the same moment before my eyes, and so I hover over a pit 
of nothingness, summoning shapes from the depths and annihilating 
them. This supreme type of subjectivism can emerge only in a period 
of advanced culture when faith has lost its seriousness, and its essence is 
simply 'all is vanity'. 
gz. Paragraph I4I. 
Each of the two principles hitherto discussed, namely good in the 
abstract and conscience, is defective in lacking its opposite. Good in the 
abstract evaporates into something completely powerless, into which I 
may introduce any and every content, while the subjectivity of mind 
becomes just as worthless because it lacks any objective significance. 
Thus a longing may arise for an objective order in which man gladly 
degrades himself to servitude and total subjection, if only to escape the 
torment of vacuity and negation. l'vlany Protestants have recently gone 
over to the Roman Catholic Church, and they have done so because 
they found their inner life worthless and grasped at something fixed, at 
• [For further comments on Fichte's views, with references, see e.g Hzstory 
of Philosophy, 111. 481 ff.] 

ADDITIONS 
259 
a support, an authority, even if it was not exactly the stability of thought 
which they caught. 
The unity of the subjective with the objective and absolute good is 
ethical life, and in it we find the reconciliation which accords with the 
concept. Morality is the form of the will in general on its subjective 
side. Ethical life is more than the subjective form and the self-determina-
tion of the will; in addition it has as its content the concept of the will, 
namely freedom. The right and the moral cannot exist independently; 
they must have the ethical as their support and foundation, for the right 
lacks the moment of subjectivity, while morality in turn possesses that 
moment alone, and consequently both the right and the moral lack 
actuality by themselves. Only the infinite, the Idea, is actual. Right 
exists only as a branch of a whole or like the ivy which twines itself 
round a tree firmly rooted on its own account. 
93· Paragraph I44· 
Throughout ethical life the objective and subjective moments are 
alike present, but both of them are only its forms. Its substance is the 
good, i.e. the objective is filled with subjectivity. If we consider ethical 
life from the objective standpoint, we may say that in it we are ethical 
unselfconsciously. In this sense, Antigone proclaims that 'no one knows 
whence the laws come; they are everlasting',* 1.e. their determinate 
character is absolute and has its source in the nature of the thing. None 
the less, however, the substance of ethical life has a consciousness also, 
though the status of this consciousness is never higher than that of being 
one moment. 
94· Paragraph I45· 
Since the laws and institutions of the ethical order make up the con-
cept of freedom, they are the substance or um \·ersal e'stnce of indivi-
duals, who are thus related to them as accidents only. \Vhether the 
individual exists or not is all one to the objective ethiCal order. It alone 
is permanent and is the power regulating the life of individuals. Thus 
the ethical order has been represented by mankind as eternal JUstice, as 
gods absolutely existent, in contrast with which the empty business of 
individuals ts only a game of see-saw. 
95· Paragraph I49· 
Duty is a restriction only on the self-will of subjectivity It stands in 
the way only of that abstract good to which subjecti\·ity adheres. \Vhcn 
we say: '\\'e want to be free', the primary meaning of the words is 
simply: '\Ve want abstract freedom', and every instttt·tion and every 
organ of the state passes as a restriction on freedom of that kind. Thus 
duty is not a restriction on freedom, but only on freedom in the abstract, 
" [ThJs misquotatiOn of Sophocles. Anltgone, II 450-7, may he due to the 
transcnber of Hegel's lecture, because the lines are quoted correctly m the 
Remark to Paragraph x66.] 

z6o 
ADDITIONS 
i.e. on unfreedom. Duty is the attainment of our essence, the winning 
of positive freedom. 
96. Paragraph 150. 
To conform to the ethical order on this or that particular occasion is 
hardly enough to make a man virtuous; he is virtuous only \\hen this 
mode of behaviour is a fixed element in his character. Yirtue is rather 
like ethical virtuosity, • and the reason why we speak of virtue less 
nowadays than formerly is that ethical living is less like the form of 
a particular individual's character. The French are par excellence the 
people who speak most of virtue, and the reason is that amongst them 
ethical life in the individualt is more a matter of his own idiosyncrasies 
or a natural mode of conduct. The Germans, on the other hand, are 
more thoughtful, and amongst them the same content acquires the form 
of universality. 
97· Paragraph I5f. 
Just as nature has its laws, and as animals, trees, and the sun fulfil 
their law, so custom (Sztte) is the law appropriate to free mind. Right 
and morality are not yet what ethics (Sitte) is, namely mind. In right, 
particularity is still not the particularity of the concept, but only that 
of the natural will. So, too, at the standpoint of morality, self-con-
sciousness is not yet mind"s consciousness of itself. At that level it is 
only the worth of the subject in himself that is in question, i.e. the 
subject who determines himself by refen:nce to good in contrast with 
evil, who still has self-will as the form of his willing. Here, however, 
at the standpoint of ethics, the will is mind's will and it has a content 
which is substantive and in conformity with itself. 
Education is the art of making men ethical. It begins with pupils 
whose life is at the instinctive level and shows them the way to a second 
birth, the way to change their instinctive nature into a second, intel-
lectual, nature, and makes this intellectual level habitual to them. At 
this point the clash between the natural and the subjective will dis-
appears, the subject's internal struggle dies away. To this extent, 
habit is part of ethical life as it is of philosophic thought also, since such 
thought demands that mind he trained against capricious fancies, and 
that these be destroyed and overcome to leave the way clear for rational 
thinking. It is true that a man is killed by habit, i.e. if he has once 
come to feel completely at home in life, if he has become mentally 
and physically dull, and if the clash between subjective consciousness 
• [Heroes ('ethical virtuosi') lived in uncivilized conditio,'< (see Addition to 
Paragraph 93) and there was no ethical life in society as they found it; but since 
they introduced ethical mstitutwns for the first time (see Remarks to Paragraphs 
167 and 203), they displayed virtue as a kmd of virtuosity. No\\adays, ethical hfe 
1s common to evervone and consists m conformity to the cxistmg order, not m 
dl\·ergence from It.) 
t [Readmg das Sitlliche am Individuum, With Lasson.] 

ADDITIONS 
and mental activity has disappeared; for man is active only in so far as 
he has not attained his end and wills to develop h1s potentialities and 
vindicate himself in struggling to attain it. When this has been fully 
achieved, activity and vitality arc at an end, and the result-loss of 
interest in life-is mental or physical death. 
98. Paragraph Ij]. 
The educational experiments, advocated by Rousseau in Emile, of 
withdrawing children from the common life of every day and bringing 
them up in the country, have turned out to he futile, since no success 
can attend an attempt to estrange people from the laws of the world. 
Even if the young have to he educated in solituue, it is still useless to 
hope that the fragrance of the intellectual world will not ultimately 
permeate this solitude or that the power of the world mind is too feeble 
to gain the mastery of those outlying regions. It is by becoming a 
citizen of a good state that the individual tirst comes into his right. 
99· Paragraph I 55· 
A slave can have no duties; only a free man has them. If all rights 
were put on one side and all duties on the other, the whole would be 
dissolved, since their identity alone is the fundJmental thing, and it is to 
this that we have here to hold fast. 
100. Paragraph Ij6. 
Ethical life is not abstract like the good, but is intensely actual. 
1\'Iind has actuality, and individuals are accidents of this actuality. 
Thus in dealing with ethical life, on!} t"\\"0 v1ews are possible: either 
we start from the substantiality of the ethical order, or else we proceed 
atornistically and huild on the basis of sin~Sle mdmdu~ls. This second 
point of view excludes mind because It lead~ nnl~ t<> :1 JUXtaposition. 
!\lind, however, is not something single, but IS the u:Jlt:, of the single 
and the universal. 
101. Paragraph Ij8. 
Love rncans in gcncral terms the consciousness of my unity with 
another, so that I am not in selfish isolation but ''in my self-con-
sciousness only as the rcnunciation of my independence and through 
knO\\ in~ myself as the unity of mysclf wllh another and of the other 
\uth mc. Love, however, is feeling, i.e. ethical hfe in the form of some-
thing natural. In the state, feeling l.hsappears; there we 2re conscious 
of unity as law; there the content must be rational and known to us. 
The first moment in lO\ e is that I do not wish to be a self-subsistent 
and mdependent person and that, if I were, then I would feel defective 
and incomplete. The second moment is that I find myself in another 
person, that I count for something in the other, while the other in turn 
comes to count for something m me. Love, therefore, is the most tre-
mendous contradiction; the understanding cannot resolve it since there 

262 
ADDITIONS 
is nothing more stubborn than this point (Punktualitiit) of self-con-
sciousness which is negated and which nevertheless I ought to possess as 
affirmative. Love is at once the propounding and the resolving of this 
contradiction. As the resolving of it, love is unity of an ethical type. 
102. Paragraph I59· 
The right of the family properly consists in the fact that its sub-
stantiality should have determinate existence. Thus it is a right against 
externality and against secessions from the family unity. On the other 
hand, to repeat, love is a feeling, something subjective, against which 
unity cannot make itself effective. The demand for unity can be sus-
tained, then, only in relation to such things as are by nature external 
and not conditioned by feeling. 
103. Paragraph I6I. 
Marriage is in essence an ethical tie. Formerly, especially in most 
systems of natural law, attention was paid only to the physical side of 
marriage or to its natural character. Consequently, it was treated only 
as a sex relationship, and this completely barred the way to its other 
characteristics. This is crude enough, but it is no less so to think of it 
as only a civil contract, and even Kant does this. On this view, the parties 
are bound by a contract of mutual caprice, and marriage is thus degraded 
to the level of a contract for reciprocal use. A third view of marriage 
is that which bases it on love alone, but this must he rejected like the 
other two, since love is only a feeling and so is exposed in every respect 
to contingency, a guise which ethical life may not assume. :Marriage, 
therefore, is to be more precisely characterized as ethico-legal (reclztlich 
sittliche) love, and this eliminates from marriage the transient, fickle, 
and purely subjective aspects of love. 
104. Paragraph 162. 
Amongst peoples who hold the female sex in scant respect, marriages 
are arranged by the parents at will without consulting the young people. 
The latter raise no objection, since at that level of culture the parti-
cularity of feeling makes no claims for itself. For the woman it is only 
a matter of getting a husband, for the man, of getting a wife. In other 
social conditions, considerations of wealth, connexions, political ends, 
may be the determining factor. In such circumstances, great hardships 
may arise through making marriage a means to other ends. Nowadays, 
however, the subjective origin of marriage, the state of being in love, 
is regarded as the only important originating factor. Here the position 
is represented to be that a man must wait until his hour has struck and 
that he can bestow his love only on one specific individual. 
ros. Paragraph I6J. 
The distinction between marriage and concubinage is that the latter 
is chiefly a matter of satisfying natural desire, while this satisfaction is 

ADDITIONS 
made secondary in the former. It is for this reason that physical ex-
periences may be mentioned in married life without a blush, although 
outside the marriage tie their mention would produce a sense of shame. 
But it is on this account, too, that marriage must be regarded as in 
principle indissoluble, for the end of marriage is the ethical end, an 
end so lofty that everything else is manifestly powerless against it and 
made subject to it. Marriage is not to be dissolved because of passion, 
since passion is subordinate to it. But it is not indissoluble except in 
principle, since as Christ says, only 'for the hardness of your heart'• is 
divorce established. Since marriage has feeling for one of its moments, 
it is not absolute but weak and potentially dissoluble. Legislators, how-
ever, must make its dissolution as difficult as possible and uphold the 
right of the ethical order against caprice. 
106. Paragraph I64. 
Friedrich von Schlegel in his Lucinde, t and a follower of his in the 
Briefe eines Ungenannten,t have put forward the view that the wedding 
ceremony is superfluous and a formality which might be discarded. 
Their reason is that love is, so they say, the substance of marriage and 
that the celebration therefore detracts from its worth. Surrender to 
sensual impulse is here represented as necessary to prove the freedom 
and inwardness of love-an argument not unknown to seducers. 
It must be noticed in connexion with sex-relatiOns that a girl in 
surrendering her body loses her honour. \Vith a man, however, the 
case is otherwise, because he has a field for ethical act1vity outside the 
family. A girl is destined in essence for the marriage tie and for that 
only; it is therefore demanded of her that her love shall take the form 
of marriage and that the different moments in Ion: shall attain their 
true rational relation to each other. 
107. Paragraph r66. 
Women are capable of education, but they are not maJe for activities 
which demand a universal faculty such as the more advanced sciences, 
philosophy, and certain forms of artistic production. \Vomen may have 
happy ideas, taste, and elegance, but they cannot attain to the ideal.§ 
The difference between men and women is like that between animals 
and plants. !\len correspond to animals, while women correspond to 
plants because their development is more placid and the principle that 
underlies it is the rather vague unity of feeling. When women hold the 
• [St. ::\1atthew, xix. 8, St. Mark, x. s.] 
t [Berlin. I 799 ) 
! Lubeck and Leipzig, 1ooo 
[' Anrmymous Letters', 1 e 
::ichle~tormachcr' 
anonymously published defence of Lucmde against the charge ot Immorality.] 
§ [Idea/e. 
By this word Hegel means 'the Beautiful and whate\·er tends 
thither' (Science uf Logic, i. I 63, footnote). It is to be distinguished, therefore, 
from Idedle, for which see Note 36 to Paragraph 7.] 

ADDITIONS 
helm of government, the state is at once in jeopardy, because women 
regulate their actions not by the demands of universality but by arbitrary 
inclinations and opinions. Women are educated-who knows how ?-as 
it were by breathing in ideas, by living rather than by acquiring know-
ledge. The status of manhood, on the other hand, is attained only by 
the stress of thought and much technical exertion. 
108. Paragraph 168. 
A sense of shame-to go no farther-is a bar to consanguineous 
marriage. Hut this repugnance finds justification in the concept of the 
thing. What is already united, I mean, cannot be united for the first 
time by marriage. It is a commonplace of stock-breeding that the off-
spring is comparatively weak when animals of the same stock are mated, 
since if there is to be unification there must first be division. The force 
of generation, as of mind, is all the greater, the greater the oppositions 
out of which it is reproduced. Familiarity, close acquaintance, the 
habit of common pursuits, should not precede marriage; they should 
come about for the first time within it. And their development has all 
the more value, the richer it is and the more facets it has. 
109. Paragraph 172. 
In many legal codes the wider circle of the clan is adhered to, and 
this is regarded as the essential bond, while the other bond, that of each 
particular family, appears less important in comparison. Thus in the 
older Roman law, the wife in the easily dissolved type of marriage stood 
in a closer relation to her kinsfolk than to her husband and children. 
Under feudal law, again, the maintenance of the splendor familiae made 
it necessary for only the males of the family to be reckoned members 
and for the clan as a whole to count as the important thing, while the 
newly founded family disappeared in comparison. Nevertheless, each 
new family is the essential thing in contrast with the more remote 
connexions of clan-kinship, and parents and children form the nucleus 
proper as opposed to the clan, which is also in a certain sense called 
a 'family'. Hence an individual's relation to his wealth must have a 
more essential connexion with his marriage than with the wider circle 
of his kin. 
1 ro. Paragraph 173· 
The relation of love between husband and wife is in itself not 
objective, because even if their feeling is their substantial unity, still 
this unity has no objectivity. Such an objectivity parents first acquire 
in their children, in whom they can see objectified the entirety of their 
union. In the child, a mother loves its father and he its mother. Both 
have their love objectified for them in the child. While in their goods 
their unity is embodied only in an external thing, in their children it is 

ADDITIONS 
embodied in a spiritual one in which the parents are loved and which 
they love. 
I I I. Paragraph 174. 
:\Ian has to acquire for himself the position which he ought to attain; 
he is not already in possession of it by instinct. It is on this fact that 
the child's right to education is based. Peoples under patriarchal 
government are in the same position as children; they are fed from 
central stores and not regarded as self-subsistent and adults. Tl>e 
services which may be demanded from children should therefore have 
eJucation as their sole end anJ be relevant thereto; they must not be 
enos in themseh·es, since a child in slavery is in the most unethical of 
all situations whatever. One of the chief factors in education is discipline, 
the purport of which is to break down the child's self-will and thereby 
eradicate his purely natural and sensuous self. VVe must not expect to 
achieve this by mere goodness, since it is just the immediate will which 
acts on immediate fancies and caprices, not on reasons and represen-
tative thinking. If we advance reasons to children, we leave it open 
to them to decide whether the reasons are weighty or not, and thus we 
make everything depend on their whim. So far as children are con-
cerned, universality and the substance of things reside in their parents, 
and this implies that children must be obedient. If the feeling of 
subordination, producing the longing to grow up, is not fostered in 
children, they become forward and impertinent. 
I I 2. Paragraph 17 5· 
As a child, man must have lived with his parents encircled by their 
love and trust, and rationality must appear in lnm as his very own 
subjectivity. In the early years it is education by the mother especially 
which is important, since ethical principles must he implanted in the 
child in the form of feeling. It is noteworthy that on the whole children 
love their parents less than their parents love them. The reason for 
this is that they a!"e gradually increasing in strength, and are learning 
to stand on their own feet, and so are leaving their p:~rents behind them. 
The parents, on the other hand, possess in their children the objective 
embodiment of their union. 
I I3. Paragraph 176. 
It is because marriage depends entirely on feeling, something sub-
jective and contingent, that it may be dissolved. The state, on the other 
hand, is not subject to partition, because it rests on law. To be sure, 
marriage ought to be indissoluble, but here again we have to stop at 
this 'ought'; yet, since marriage is an ethical institution, it cannot be 
dissolved at will but only by an ethical authority, whether the church or 
the law-court. If the parties are completely estranged, e.g. owing to 
adultery, then even the ecclesiastical authority must permit divorce. 

266 
ADDITIONS 
114. Paragraph I8o. 
In earlier times, a Roman father had the right to disinherit his 
children and even kill them. Later he lost both these rights. Attempts 
were made to forge into a legal system this incoherence between un-
ethical institutions and devices to rob them of that character, and it is 
the retention of this incoherence which constitutes the deficiency and 
difficulty of the German law of inheritance. To be sure, the right to 
make a will must be conceded; but in conceding it our point of view 
must be that this right of free choice arises or is magnified with the 
dispersion and estrangement of the members of the family. Further, 
the so-called 'family of friends' which testamentary disposition brings 
with it may be admitted only in defect of members of the family proper, 
i.e. of spouse and children. To make a will at all entails something 
obnoxious and disagreeable, because in making it I reveal the names of 
my favourites. Favour, however, is arbitrary; it may be gained sur-
reptitiously by a variety of expedients, it may depend on all sorts of 
foolish reasons, and as a condition of having his name included in a will, 
a beneficiary may be required to subject himself to the most abject 
servilities. In England, the home of all sorts of eccentricity, there is no 
end to the folly and whimsicality of bequests. 
115. Paragraph I8I. 
The starting-point for the universal here is the self-subsistence of the 
particular, and the ethical order seems therefore to be lost at this point, 
since it is precisely the identity of the family which consciousness takes 
to be the primary thing, the divine, and the source of obligation. Now, 
however, a situation arises in which the particular is to be my primary 
determining principle, and thus my determinacy by ethical factors has 
been annulled. But this is nothing hut a pure mistake, since, while I 
suppose that I am adhering to the particular, the universal and the 
necessity of the link between particulars remains the primary and 
essential thing. I am thus altogether on the level of show, and while my 
particularity remains my determining pnnciple, i.e. my end, I am for 
that very reason the servant of the universal which properly retains 
power over me in the last resort. 
u6. Paragraph I82. 
Civil society is the [stage of] difference which intervenes between 
the familv and the state, even if its formation follows later in time than 
that of th.e state, because, as [the stage of] difference, it presupposes the 
state; to subsist itself, it must have the state before 1ts eyes as something 
self-subsistent. l\loreover, the creation of civil society is the achieve-
ment of the modern world which has for the first time given all deter-
minations of the Idea their due. If the state is represented as a unity of 
different persons, as a unit\ which is only a partnership, then what is 
really meant is only civil society. l\lany modern constitutional lawyers 

ADDITIONS 
have been able to bring within their purview no theory of the state but 
this. In civil society each member is his own end, everything else is 
nothing to him. But except in contact with others he cannot attain the 
whole compass of his ends, and therefore these others are means to 
the end of the particular member. A particular end, however, assumes 
the form of universality through this relation to other people, and it is 
attained in the simultaneous attainment of the welfare of others. Since 
particularity is inevitably conditioned by universality, the whole sphere 
of civil society is the territory of mediation where there is free play for 
every idiosyncrasy, every talent, every accident of birth and fortune, 
and where waves of every passion gush forth, regulated only by reason 
glinting through them. Particularity, restricted by universality, is the 
only standard whereby each particular member promotes his welfare. 
I I7. Paragraph 184. 
Here ethical life is split into its extremes and lost; the immediate 
unity of the family has fallen apart into a plurality. Reality here is 
externality, the decomposing of the concept, the self-subsistence of its 
moments which have now won their freedom and their determinate 
existence. Though in civil society universal and particular have fallen 
apart, yet hoth are still reciprocally bound together and conditioned. 
While each of them seems to do just the opposite to the other and 
supposes that it can exist only by keeping the other at arm's length, none 
the less each still conditions the other. Thus, for example, most people 
regard the paying of taxes as injurious to their particular interest, as 
something inimical and obstructive of their own ends. Yet, however 
true this seems, particular ends cannot be attamed \\ ithout the help of 
the universal, and a country where no taxes were paid could not be 
singled out as invigorating its citizens. Similarly, It might seem that 
universal ends would be more readily attainable if the umversal absorbed 
the strength of the particulars in the way described, for instance, in 
Plato's Republic. But this, too, is only an illusion, since both universal 
and particular turn into one another and exist only for and by means of 
one another. If I further my ends, I further the ends of the universal, 
and this in turn furthers my end. 
I IS. Paragraph 185. 
Particularity hy itself is measureless excess, and the forms of this 
excess are themselves measureless. By means of his ideas and reflections 
man expands his desires, which are not a closed circle like animal 
instinct, and carries them on to the false infinite. At the other end of 
the scale, hO\vever, want and destitution are measureless too, and the 
discord of this situation can be brought into a harmony only by the 
state which has powers over it. Plato wished to exclude particularity 
from his state, but this is no help, since help on these lines would con-
travene the infinite right of the Idea to allow freedom to the particular. 

268 
ADDITIONS 
It was in the Christian religion in the first place that the right of sub-
jectivity arose, together with the infinity of self-awareness, and while 
granting this right, the whole order must at the same time retain 
strength enough to put particularity in harmony with the unity of 
ethical life. 
119. Paragraph 187. 
By educated men, we may prima facie understand those who without 
the obtrusion of personal idiosyn~.:rasy can do what others do. It is 
precisely this idiosynuasy, however, which uneducated men display, 
since their behaviour is not governed by the universal characteristics of 
the situation. Similarly, an uneducated man is apt to hurt the fcelings 
of his neighbours. He simply lets himself go and docs not reflect on the 
susceptibilities of others. It is not that he intends to hurt them, but his 
conduct is not consonant with his intention. Thus education rubs the 
edges off particular characteristics until a man conducts himself in 
accordance with the nature of the thing. Genuine originality, which 
produces the real thing, demands genuine education, while bastard 
originality adopts eccentricities which only enter the heads of the 
uneducated. 
120. Paragraph 189. 
There are certain universal needs such as food, drink, clothing, &c., 
and it depends entirely on accidental circumstances how these are 
satisfied. The fertility of the soil varies from place to place, harvests 
vary from year to year, one man is industrious, another indolent. But 
this medley of arbitrariness generates universal characteristics by its 
own working; and this apparently scattered and thoughtless sphere is 
upheld by a necessity which automatically enters it. To discover this 
necessary element here is the object of political economy, a science 
which is a credit to thought because it finds laws for a mass of accidents. 
It is an interesting spectacle here to sec all chains of activity leading 
back to the same point; particular sphen:s of action fall into groups, 
influence others, and are helped or hindered by others. The most 
remarkable thing here is this mutual interlocking of particulars, \vhich 
is what one would least expect because at first sight everything seems 
to be given over to the arbitrariness of the individual, and it has a 
parallel in the solar system which displays to the eye only irregular 
movements, though its laws may none the less be ascertained. 
121. Paragraph 190. 
An animal is restricted to particularity. It has its instincts and means 
of satisfying them, means which are limited and which it cannot overstep. 
Some insects are parasitic on a certain kind of plant; some animals 
have a wider range and can live in different climates, hut there is ah\ays 
a restriction preventing them from having the range open to man. The 

ADDITIONS 
need of shelter and clothing, the necessity of cooking his food to make 
it fit to eat and to overcome its natural rawness, both mean that man has 
less comfort than an animal, and indeed, as mind, he ought to have less. 
Intelligence, with its grasp of distinctions, multiplies these human 
needs, and since taste and utility become criteria of judgement, even 
the needs themselves arc affected thereby. Finally, it is no longer need 
but opinion which has to be satisfied, and it is just the educated man 
who analyses the concrete into its particulars. The very multiplication 
of needs involves a check on desire, because when many things are in 
use, the urge to obtain any one thing which might be needed is less 
strong, and this is a sign that want altogether is not so imperious. 
122. Paragraph I9I. 
What the English call 'comfort' is something inexhaustible and 
illimitable. [Others can discover to you that what you take to be] 
comfort at any stage is discomfort, and these discoveries never come to 
an end. Hence the need for greater comfort does not exactly arise within 
you directly; it is suggested to you by those who hope to make a profit 
from its creation. 
123. Paragraph I92. 
The fact that I must direct my conduct by reference to others intro-
duces here the form of universality. It is from others that I acquire the 
means of satisfaction and I must according!~· accept their views. At the 
same time, however, I am compelled to produce means for the satisfac-
tion of others. We play into each other's hands and so hang together. 
To this extent everything private becomes something social. In dress 
fashions and hours of meals, there are certain conYentions which we 
have to accept because in these things it is nr)t \I· ,rth the trouble to 
insist on displaying one's own discernment. The 11 bcot thing here is 
to do as others do. 
124. Paragraph IIJ5· 
The entire Cynical mode of life adopted by Diogenes was nothing 
more or less than a product of Athenian social life, and what determined 
it was the way of thinking against which his whole mar.ncr protested. 
Hence it was not independent of social conditions but simply their 
result; it was itself a rude product of luxury. When luxury is at its 
height, distress and depravity are equally extreme, and in such circum-
stances Cynicism is the outcome of opposition to refinement. 
125. Paragraph I96. 
There is hardly any raw material which does not need to be worked 
on before use. Even air has to be worked for because we have to warm 
it. Water is perhaps the only exception, because we can drink it as we 
find it. It is by the sweat of his brow and the toil of his hands that 
man obtains the means to satisfy his needs. 

ADDITIONS 
126. Paragraph I97· 
The savage is lazy and is distinguished from the educated man by 
his brooding stupidity, because practical education is just education in 
the need and habit of being busy. A clumsy man always produces a 
result he does not intend; he is not master of his own job. The skilled 
worker, on the other hand, may be said to be the man who produces 
the thing as it ought to be and who hits the nail on the head without 
shrinking (keine SprOdigkeit in seinem subjektiven Tun gegen den Zweck 
findet). 
127. Paragraph 20I. 
The ways and means of sharing in the capital of society are left to 
each man's particular choice, but the subdivision of civil society into 
different general branches is a necessity. The family is the first pre-
condition of the state, but class divisions are the second. The impor-
tance of the latter is due to the fact that although private persons are 
self-seeking, they are compelled to direct their attention to others. 
Here then is the root which connects self-seeking to the universal, i.e. 
to the state, whose care it must be that this tie is a hard and fast one. 
128. Paragraph 20]. 
In our day agriculture is conducted on methods devised by reflective 
thinking, i.e. like a factory. • This has given it a character like that of 
industry and contrary to its natural one. Still, the agricultural class will 
always retain a mode of life which is patriarchal and the substantial 
frame of mind proper to such a life. The member of this class accepts 
unreflectively what is given him and takes what he gets, thanking God 
for it and living in faith and confidence that this goodness will continue. 
What comes to him suffices him; once it is consumed, more comes 
again. This is the simple attitude of mind not concentrated on the 
struggle for riches. It may be described as the attitude of the old 
nobility which just ate what there was. So far as this class is concerned, 
nature does the major part, while individual effort is secondary. In 
the business class, however, it is intelligence which is the essential thing, 
and natural products can be treated only as raw materials. 
129. Paragraph 204. 
In the business class, the individual is thrown back on himself, and 
this feeling of self-hood is most intimately connected with the demand 
for law and order. The sense of freedom and order has therefore 
arisen above all in towns. The agricultural class, on the other hand, 
has little occasion to think of itself; what it obtains is the gift of a 
stranger, of nature. Its feeling of dependence is fundamental to it, and 
" [On the authority of Arthur Young's Lincolnshire (1799), Halevy remarks 
that, zf you were m the offices of a rertam farm there, 'you could not tell" hether 
you were on a farm or in the heart of a large factory' (lizstory of the Engltsh 
People m I8I5, Bk. ii, Chap. i).] 

ADDITIONS 
with this feeling there is readily associated a willingness to submit to 
whatever may befall it at other men's hands. The agricultural class is 
thus more inclined to subservience, the business class to freedom. 
130. Paragraph 207. 
When we say that a man must be a 'somebody', we mean that he 
should belong to some specific social class, since to be a somebody 
means to have substantive being. A man with no class is a mere private 
person and his universality is not actualized. On the other hand, the 
individual in his particularity may take himself as the universal and 
presume that by entering a class he is surrendering himself to an 
indignity. This is the false idea that in attaining a determinacy necessary 
to it, a thing is restricting and surrendering itself. 
131. Paragraph 209. 
From one point of view, it is through the working of the system of 
particularity that right becomes an external compulsion as a protection 
of particular interests. Even though this result is due to the concept, 
right none the less only becomes something existent because this is 
useful for men's needs. To become conscious in thought of his right, 
man must be trained to think and give up dallying with mere sensation. 
We must invest the objects of our thought with the form of universality 
and similarly we must direct our willing by a universal principle. It is 
only after man has devised numerous needs and after their acquisition 
has become intertwined with his satisfaction, that he can frame laws 
for himself. 
132. Paragraph 2II. 
The sun and the planets have their laws too, but they do not know 
them. Savages are governed by impulses, customs, and feelings, but 
they are unconscious of this. When right is posited as law and is 
known, every accident of feeling vanishes together With the form of 
revenge, sympathy, and selfishness, and in this way the right attains 
for the first time its true determinacy and is given its due honour. It is 
as a result of the discipline of comprehending the right that the right 
first becomes capable of universality. In the course of applying the 
laws, clashes occur, and in dealing with these the judge's intelligence 
has its proper scope; this is quite inevitable, because othenYise carrying 
out the law would be something mechanical from start to finish. But 
to go so far as to get rid of clashes altogether by leaving much to the 
judge's discretion is a far worse solution, because even the clash is 
intrinsic to thought, to conscious thinking and its dialectic, while the 
mere fiat of a judge would be arbitrary. 
It is generally alleged in favour of customary law that it is 'living', 
but this vitality, i.e. the identity between the subject and what the law 
provides, is not the whole essence of the matter. Law (Recht) must be 
known by thought, it must be a system in itself, and only as such can it 

ADDITIONS 
be recognized in a civilized country. The recent denial that nations 
'have a vocation to codify their laws' is not only an insult; it also implies 
the absurdity of supposing that not a single individual has been endowed 
with skill enough to bring into a coherent system the endless mass of 
existing laws. The truth is that it is just systematization, i.e. elevation 
to the universal, which our time is pressing for without any limit. A 
similar view is that collections of judgements, like those available in a 
Corpus Juris, are far superior to a code worked out in the most general 
way. 
The reason alleged is that such judgements always retain a 
certain particularity and a certain reminiscence of history which men 
are unwilling to sacrifice. But the mischievousness of such collections 
is made clear enough by the practice of English law. 
133. Paragraph 2I:J. 
In the higher relationships of marriage, love, religion, and the state, 
the only aspects which can become the subject of legislation are those 
of such a nature as to permit of their being in principle external. Still, 
in this respect there is a wide difference between the laws of different 
peoples. The Chinese, for instance, have a law requiring a husband to 
love his first wife more than his other wives. If he is convicted of doing 
the opposite, corporal punishment follows. Similarly, the legislation 
of the ancients in earlier times was full of precepts about uprightness 
and integrity which are unsuited by nature to legal enactment because 
they fall wholly within the field of the inner life. It is only in the case 
of the oath, whereby things are brought home to conscience, that up-
rightness and integrity must be taken into account as the substance of 
the matter. 
134. Paragraph 2I4. 
There is one essential element in Jaw and the administration of 
justice which contains a measure of contingency and which arises 
from the fact that the law is a universal prescription which has to be 
applied to the single case. If you wished to declare yourself against 
this contingency, you would be talking in abstractions. The measure 
of a man's punishment, for example, cannot he madr equivalent to any 
determination of the concept of punishment, and the decision made, 
whatever it he, is from this point of view arbitrary always. But this 
contingency is itself necessary, and if you argue against having a code 
at all on the ground that any code is incomplete, you are overlooking 
just that element of law in which completion is not to be achieved and 
which therefore must just be accepted as it stands. 
135. Paragraph zrs. 
The legal profession, possessed of a special knowledge of the law, 
often claims this knowledge as its monopoly and refuses to allow any 
layman to discuss the subject. Phy5icists similarly have taken amiss 

ADDITIONS 
273 
Goethe's theory about colours• because he did not belong to their 
craft and was a poet into the bargain. But we do not need to be shoe-
makers to know if our shoes fit, and just as little have we any need to be 
professionals to acquire knowledge of matters of universal interest. 
Law is concerned with freedom, the worthiest and holiest thing in man, 
the thing man must know if it is to have obligatory force for him. 
136. Paragraph 216. 
Completeness means the exhaustive collection of every single thing 
pertaining to a given field, and no science or branch of knowledge can be 
complete in this sense. Now if we say that philosophy or any one of 
the sciences is incomplete, we are not far from holding that we must wait 
until the deficiency is made up, since the best part may still be wanting. 
But take up this attitude and advance is impossible, either in geometry, 
which seems to be a closed science although new propositions do arise, 
or in philosophy, which is always capable of freshness in detail even 
though its subject is the universai Idea. In the past, the universal law 
always consisted of the ten commandments; now we can see at once 
that not to lay down the law 'Thou shalt not kill', on the ground that 
a legal code cannot be complete, is an obvious absurdity. Any code 
could be still better-no effort of reflection is required to justify this 
affirmation; we can think of the best, finest, and noblest as still better, 
finer, and nobler. But a big old tree puts forth more and more branches 
without thereby becoming a new tree; though it \vould be silly to 
refuse to plant a tree at all simply because it might produce new 
branches. 
1 37· Paragraph :!TJ. 
Law and the right arc identical in the sense that what is implicitly 
right is posited in the law. I possess something, 0\\ n a property, which 
I occupied when it was ownerless. This possession must now further 
be recognized and posited as mine. Hence in civil society formalities 
arise in connexion with property. Boundary stones are erected as a 
symbol for others to recognize. Entries are made in mortgage and pro-
perty registers. Most property in civil society is held on contract, and 
contractual forms are fixed and determinate. Now we may have an 
antipathy to formalities of this kind and we may s:.:~pose that they only 
exist to bring in money to the authorities; we may even regard them as 
something otfensive and a sign of mistrust because they impair the 
validity of the saying: 'A man is as good as his word.' But the formality 
is essential because what is inherently right must also be posited as 
right. l\Iy 'Yill is a rational will; it has validity, and its validity should 
be recognized by others. At this point, then, my subjectivity and that 
• [Hege!"s acceptance of this anti-Newtonian theory, e.g. in Enc., § 320, gave 
great pleasure to Goethe. For a summary and criticism of the theory, see e.g. 
G. II. Lewes: Ltfe of Goethe, Book V, chap. ix.] 

274 
ADDITIONS 
of others must be set aside and the will must achieve the security, 
stability, and objectivity which can be attained only through such 
formalities. 
138. Paragraph 2I8. 
It seems to be a contradiction that a crime committed in society 
appears more heinous and yet is punished more leniently. But while it 
would be impossible for society to leave a crime unpunished, since that 
would be to posit it as right, still since society is sure of itself, a crime 
must always be something idiosyncratic in comparison, something 
unstable and exceptional. The very stability of society gives a crime 
the status of something purely subjective which seems to be the product 
rather of natural impulse than of a prudent will. In this light, crime 
acquires a milder status, and for this reason its punishment too becomes 
milder. If society is still internally weak, then an example must be 
made by inflicting punishments, since punishment is itself an example 
over against the example of crime. But in a society which is internally 
strong, the commission of crime is something so feeble that its annul-
ment must be commensurable with its feebleness. Harsh punishments, 
therefore, are not unjust in and by themselves; they arc related to 
contemporary conditions. A criminal code cannot hold good for all 
time, and crimes are only shows of reality which may draw on them-
selves a greater or lesser degree of disavowal. 
139. Paragraph 22I. 
Since any individual has the right in judicio stare, he must also know 
what the law is or othenvise this privilege would be useless to him. 
But it is also his duty to stand his trial. Under the feudal system, the 
nobles often refused to stand their trial. They defied the court and 
alleged that the court was wrong to demand their appearance. Feudal 
conditions, however, contravened the very idea of a court. 
~owadays 
monarchs have to recognize the jurisdiction of the court in their private 
affairs, and in free states they commonly lose their case. 
140. Paragraph 222. 
A man may be indignant if a right which he knows he has is refused 
him because he cannot prove it. But if I have a right, it must at the 
same time be a right posited in law. I must be able to explain and 
prove it, and its validity can only be recognized in society if its rightness 
:in principle is also made a posited rightness in law. 
qr. Paragraph 224. 
It is straightfonvard common sense to hold that the publicity of legal 
proceedings is right and just. A strong reason against such publicity 
has always been the rank" of justices; they are unwilling to sit in public 
• [In the etghtcenth century, judicial authority was often still vested tn Lords 
of the Manor.] 

ADDITIONS 
275 
and they regard themselves as a sanctuary of law which laymen are not 
to enter. But an integral part of justice is the confidence which citizens 
have in it, and it is this which requires that proceedings shall be public. 
The right of publicity depends on the fact that (i) the aim of the court 
is justice, which as universal falls under the cognizance of everyone, 
and (ii) it is through publicity that the citizens become convinced that 
the judgement was actually just. 
142. Paragraph 227. 
No grounds can be adduced for supposing that the judge, i.e. the 
legal expert, should be the only person to establish how the facts lie, 
for ability to do so depends on general, not on purely legal, education. 
Determination of the facts of the case depends on empirical details, on 
depositions about what happened, and on similar perceptual data, or 
again on facts from which inferences can be drawn about the deed in 
que . .<;tion and which make it probable or improbable. Here then, it is 
an assurance'' hich should be required, not truth in the higher sense in 
which it is always something eternal. Here such assurance is subjective 
conviction, or conscience, and the problem is: What form should this 
assurance take in a court of law? The demand, commonly made in 
German law, that a criminal should confess his guilt, has this to be said 
for it, that the right of self-consciousness therehy attams a measure of 
satisfaction; consciousness must chime in \\ tth the j uuge 's sentence, and 
it is only \\hen the criminal has confessed that the Juugcment loses its 
alien character so far as he is concerned 
But a ulfticult\ arises here, 
because the criminal may lie, anJ the interest of JUStice may be jeopar-
dized. lf, on the other hand, the subjectn·c connction nf the judge is to 
hold good, some hardship is once more involn:d, hccauc;,· the accused is 
no longer being treated as a free man. :\ow th,· m:ddk term between 
these extremes is trial by Jury, which meets the demand that the declara-
tion of guilt or innocence shall spring from the soul of the accused.'" 
143· Paragraph 229. 
In ci\'il society, universality is necessity only. When we are dealing 
with human needs, it is only right as such which is steadfast. But this 
right-only a restricted sphere-has a bearing simply on the protection 
of property; welfare is something external to nght as such. This wel-
fare, however, i'> an essential end in the system of needs. Hence the 
universal,\\ hich in the first instance is the right only, has to he c:-.tended 
O\'er the \\hole field of particularity. Justice is a b1g tlnng 1!1 ci,·il 
society. Gtven good laws, a state can flourish, and freedom of property 
is a fundamental condition of its prosperity. Still, since I am inex-
• [The' erd1ct of his peers 1s the' erd1ct of the cnmmal's own soul or reason 
because reason 1s unn ersal and so common to them and to him al!ke His crime 
1s his subjectn e defiance of h1s reason or his mner unn ersality-see Part 1, sub-
sectiOn 3 (c).l 

ADDITIONS 
tricably involved in particularity, I have a right to claim that in this 
association with other particulars, my particular welfare too shall be 
promoted. Regard should he paid to my welfare, to my particular 
interest, and this is done through the police and the Corporation. 
144. Paragmph 2]4· 
Here nothing hard and fast can he laid down and no absolute lines 
can be drawn. E\Trything here is personal; subjective opinion enters 
in, and the spirit of the constitution and the crisis of the day have to 
provide precision of detail. In time of war, for instance, many a thing, 
harmless at other times, has to be rl'l~arded as harmful. As a result of 
this presence of accident, of personal arbitrariness, the public authority 
acquires a measure of odium. \\"hen reflective thinkmg is very highly 
developed, the public authority may tend to draw into its orbit every-
thing it possibly can, for in everything some factor may he found 
which might make it dangerous in one of its bearingg, In such circum-
stances, the public authority may set to work very pedantically and 
em~arrass the day-to-day life of people. But however great this annoy-
ance, no objective line can be drawn here either. 
145. Paragraph 2]6. 
The oversight and care exercised hy the public authority aims at 
being a middle term between an individual and the uni\'l·rsal possibility, 
afforded by society, of attaining individual ends. It has tn undertake 
street-lighting, bridge-building, the pricing of dally necessaries, and 
the care of public health. In this connexion, two main views predomi-
nate at the present time. One asserts that the superintendence of every-
thing properly belongs to the public authority, the other that the 
public authority has nothmg at all to settle here because everyone will 
direct his conduct according to the needs of others. The individual 
must have a right to work for his hn·ad as he pleases, but the public 
also has a right to ins1st that csgcntial tasb shall be properly done. 
Both points of view must be satisfied, and freedom of trade should 
not be such as to jeopardize the general good. 
146. Paragraph 238. 
To be sure, the family has to provide bread for its members, hut in 
civil society the family is something subordinate and only lays the 
foundations; its cffectn·e range is no longer so comprehensive. Civil 
society is rather the tremendous power which draws men into itself and 
claims from them that they work for it, owe e\'crything to it, and do 
everything by its means. If man is to he a member of civil society in 
this sense, he has rights and claims against it just as he had rights and 
claims in the family. Civil society must protect its members and 
defend their rights, while Its rights impose duties on every one of its 
members. 

ADDITIONS 
147· Paragraph 239· 
The line which demarcates the rights of parents from those of civil 
society is very hard to draw here. Parents usually suppose that in the 
matter of education they have complete freedom and may arrange 
everything as they like. The chief opposition to any form of public 
education usually comes from parents and it is they who talk and make 
an outcry about teachers and schools because they have a faddish dislike 
of them. None the less, society has a right to act on principles tested 
by its experience and to compel parents to send their children to school, 
to have them vaccinated, and so forth. The disputes that have arisen in 
France• between the advocates of state supervision and those who 
demand that education shall be free, i.e. at the option of the parents, 
are relevant here. 
148. Paragraph 240. 
There was an Athenian law compelling every citizen to give an 
account of his source of livelihood. t Nowadays we take the view that 
this is nobody's business but his own. Of course every individual is 
from one point of view independent, but he also plays his part in the 
system of civil society, and while every man has the right to demand 
subsistence from it, it must at the same time protect him from himself. 
It is not simply starvation which is at issue; the further end in view is 
to prevent the formation of a pauperized rabble. Since civil society is 
responsible for feeding its members, it also has the right to press them 
to provide for their own livelihood. 
149. Paragraph 244. 
The lowest subsistence level, that of a rabble of paupers, is fixed auto-
matically, but the minimum varies considerably m dttfcrent countries. 
In England, even the very poorest believe that they ha\T rights; this is 
different from what satisfies the poor in other countries. Poverty in 
itself does not make men into a rabble; a rabble is created only when 
there is joined to poverty a disposition of mind, an inner indignation 
against the rich, against society, against the government, &c. A further 
consequence of this attitude is that through their dependence on chance 
men become frivolous and idle, like the :\"eapolitan lazzaroni for 
example. In this way there is born in the rabble the evil of Jacking self-
respect enough to secure subsistence by its own labour and yet at the 
same time of claiming to receive subsistence as its right. Against nature 
man can claim no right, but once society is established, poverty immedi-
• [Rousseau's Emile, published in I 762, is the classic demand for freedom in 
educatwn. State supervisiOn was advocated by La Chalotais m his Essai 
d'Educatzon natwnale, published a year later. The Jesuits, the chief educators m 
France, were expelled m I 764. The re;wal of family life also helped to stimulate 
French interest m educat10n in the second half of the etghteenth century.] 
t [Herodotus, ii. I77. Plutarch: Life of Solon, chap. 2:<:.) 

ADDITIONS 
atcly takes the form of a wrong done to one class by another. The im-
portant question of how poverty is to be abolished is one of the most 
disturbing problems which agitate modern society. 
150. Paragraph 248. 
Civil society is thus driven to found colonies. Increase of population 
alone has this effect, but it is due in particular to the appearance of a 
number of people who cannot secure the satisfaction of their needs by 
their own labour once production rises above the requirements of con-
sumers. Sporadic colonization is particularly characteristic of Germany. 
The emigrants withdraw to America or Russia and remain there with no 
home tics, and so prove useless to their native land. The second and 
entirely different type of colonization is the systematic; the state under-
takes it, is aware of the proper method of carrying it out and regulates it 
accordingly. This type was common amongst the ancients, particularly 
the Greeks. Hard work was not the business of the citizens in Greece, 
since their energy was directed rather to public affairs. So if the popula-
tion increased to such an extent that there might be difficulty in feeding 
it, the young people would be sent away to a new district, sometimes 
specifically chosen, sometimes left to chance discovery. In modern 
times, colonists have not been allowed the same rights as those left at 
home, and the result of this situation has been wars and finally inde-
pendence, as may be seen in the history of the English and Spanish 
colonies. Colonial independence proves to be of the greatest advantage 
to the mother country, just as the emancipation of slaves turns out to 
the greatest advantage of the owners. 
151. Paragraph 255. 
The consideration behind the abolition of Corporations in recent 
times is that the individual should fend for himself. But we may grant 
this and still hold that corporation membership does not alter a man's 
obligation to earn his living. Under modern political conditions, the 
citizens have only a restricted share in the public business of the state, yet 
it is essential to provide men-ethical entities-with work of a public 
character over and above their private business. This work of a public 
character, which the moden1 state does not always provide, is found in 
the Corporation. We saw earlier [Addition to Paragraph 184] that in 
fending for himself a member of civil society is also working for others. 
But this unconscious compulsion IS not enough; it is in the Corporation 
that it first changes into a known and thoughtful ethical mode of life. 
Of course Corporations must fall under the higher surveillance of the 
state, because otherwise they would ossify, build themselves in, and 
decline into a miserable system of castes. In and by itself, however, a 
Corporation is not a closed caste; its purpose is rather to bring an 
isolated trade into the social order and elevate it to a sphere in which 
it gains strength and respect. 

ADDITIONS 
279 
152. Paragraph 258. 
The state in and by itself is the ethical whole, the actualization of 
freedom; and it is an absolute end of reason that freedom should be 
actual. The state is mind on earth and consciously realizing itself there. 
In nature, on the other hand, mind actualizes itself only as its own other, 
as mind asleep. Only when it is present in consciousness, when it knows 
itself as a really existent object, is it the state. In considering freedom, 
the starting-point must be not individuality, the single self-conscious-
ness, but only the essence of self-consciousness; for whether man knows 
it or not, this essence is externally realized as a self-subsistent power in 
which single individuals are only moments. The march of God in the 
world, that is what the state is. The basis of the state is the power of 
reason actualizing itself as will. In considering the Idea of the state, we 
must not have our eyes on particular states or on particular institu-
tions. Instead we must consider the Idea, this actual God, by itself. On 
some principle or other, any state may be shown to be bad, this or that 
defect may be found in it; and yet, at any rate if one of the mature states 
of our epoch is in question, it has in it the moments essential to the 
existence of the state. But since it is easier to find defects than to under-
stand the affirmative, we may readily fall into the mistake of looking at 
isolated aspects of the state and so forgetting its inward organic life. 
The state is no ideal work of art; it stands on earth and so in the sphere 
of caprice, chance, and error, and bad behaviour may disfigure it in 
many respects. But the ugliest of men, or a criminal, or an invalid, or a 
cripple, is still always a living man. The affirmative, life, subsists 
despite his defects, and it is this affirmative factor which is our theme 
here. 
153. Paragraph 259. 
The state in its actuality is essentially an individual state, and beyond 
that a particular state. Individuality is to be distinguished from parti-
cularity. Th_e former is a moment in the very Idea of the state, while 
the latter belongs to history. States as such are independent of one 
another, and therefore their relation to one another can only be an 
external one, so that there must be a third thing standing above them to 
bind them together. Now this third thing is the mind which gives 
itself actuality in world-history and is the absolute judge of states. 
Several states may form an alliance to be a sort of court with jurisdiction 
over others, there may be confederations of states, like the Holy Alliance 
for example, but these are always relative only and restricted, like 
'perpetual peace'.* The one and only absolute judge, which makes 
itself authoritative against the particular and at all times, is the absolute 
mind which manifests itself in the history of the world as the universal 
and as the genus there operative. 
• [See Paragraphs 324, 333, and the Addition and Notes thereto. 

28o 
ADDITIONS 
154· Paragraph z6o. 
The Idea of the state in modern times has a special character in that the 
state is the actualization of freedom not in accordance with subjective 
whim but in accordance with the concept of the will, i.e. in accordance 
with its universality and divinity. Immature states are those in which 
the Idea of the state is still veiled and where its particular determina-
tions have not yet attained free self-subsistence. In the states of classical 
antiquity, universality was present, but particularity had not then been 
released, given free scope, and brought back to universality, i.e. to the 
universal end of the whole. The essence of the modern state is that the 
universal be bound up with the complete freedom of its particular 
members and with private well-being, that thus the interests of family 
and civil society must concentrate themselves on the st~tc, although the 
universal end cannot be advanced without the personal knowledge and 
will of its particular members, whose own rights must be maintained. 
Thus the universal must be furthered, but subjectivity on the other 
hand must attain its full and living development. It is only when both 
these moments subsist in their strength that the state can be regarded as 
articulated and genuinely organized. 
155. Paragraph z6r. 
In the state everything depends on the unity of univers:1l and par-
ticular. In the states of antiquity, the subjective end simply coincided 
with the state's will. In modern times, however, we make claims for 
private judgement, private willing, and private conscience. The ancients 
had none of these in the modern sense; the ultimate thing with them was 
the will of the state. Whereas under the despots of Asia the individual 
had no inner life and no justification in himself, in the modern world 
man insists on respect being paid to his inner life. The conjunction of 
duty and right has a twofold aspect: what the state demands from us as 
a duty is eo ipso our right as individuals, since the state* is nothing but 
the articulation of the concept of freedom. The determinations of the 
individual will are given an objective embodiment through the state and 
thereby they attain their truth and their actualization for the first time. 
The state is the one and only prerequisite of the attainment of particular 
ends and welfare. 
156. Paragraph 262. 
In Plato's state, subjective freedom does not count, because people 
have their occupations assigned to them by the Guardians. In many 
oriental states, this assignment is determined by birth. But subjective 
freedom, which must be respected, demands that individuals should 
have free choice in this matter. 
• [Reading er, with Lasson.] 

ADDITIONS 
157. Paragraph 263. 
The state, as mind, sunders itself into the particular determirtations 
of its concept, of its mode of being. We might use here an illustration 
drawn from nature. The nervous system is the sensitive system proper; 
it is the abstract moment, the moment of being by oneself and so of 
having identity with oneself. But analysis of sensation reveals {hat it 
has two aspects and these are distinct in such a way that edch of them 
seems to be a whole system by itself. The first is feeling in the abstract, 
keeping oneself self-enclosed, the dull movement which goes on in-
ternally, reproduction, internal self-nutrition, growth, and digestion. 
ThP. second moment is that this self-related existence has over against it 
the moment of difference, a movement outwards. This is irritability, 
sensation moving outwards. This constitutes a system of its own, and 
there are some of the lower types of animals which have developed this 
system alone, while they lack the soul-charged unity of inner sensation. 
If we compare these natural features with those of mind, then the family 
must be paralleled with sensibility and civil society with irritability. 
Now the third is the state, the nervous system as a whole, something 
inwardly organized; but this lives only in so far as both moments (in 
this case family and civil society) are developed within it. The laws 
regulating family and civil society are the institutions of the rational 
order which glimmers in them. But the ground and final truth of these 
institutions is mind, their universal end and kno\\ n objective. The 
family too is ethical, only its end is not known as such, while it is the 
separation between one man and another which makes civil society what 
it is. 
158. Paragraph 265. 
As was remarked earlier on,• the sanctity of marriage and the institu-
tions in which civil society is an appearance of ethical ltf..: constitute the 
stability of the whole, i.e. stability is secured when universal affairs are 
the affairs of each member in his particular capacity. What is of the 
utmost importance is that the law of reasof\. should be shot through and 
through by the law of particular freedom, and that my particular end 
should become identified with the universal end, or otherwise the state 
is left in the air. The state is actual only when its members have a 
feeling of their own self-hood and it is stable only when public and 
private ends are identical. It has often been said that the end of the 
state is the happiness of the citizens. That is perfectly true. If all is 
not well with them, if their subjective aims are not satisfied, if they do 
not find that the state as such is the means to their satisfaction, then the 
footing of the state itself is insecure. 
159· Paragraph 267. 
The unity of the freedom which knows and wills itself is present first 
• [The reference is probably to Paragraph 255.] 

ADDITIONS 
of all as necessity. Here substance is present as the subjective existence of 
individuals. Necessity's other mode of being, however, is the organism, 
i.e. mind is a process internal to itself, it articulates itself within, posits 
differences in itself, and thereby completes the cycle of its life. 
160. Paragraph 268. 
Immature minds delight in argumentation and fault-finding, because 
it is easy enough to find fault, though hard to see the good and its 
inner necessity. The learner always begins by finding fault, but the 
scholar sees the positive merit in everything. In religion, this or that is 
quickly dismissed as superstitious. but it is infinitely harder to appre-
hend the truth underlying the superstition. Hence men's apparent 
sentiment towards the state is to be distinguished from what they really 
will; inwardly they really will the thing, but they cling to details and 
take delight in the vanity of pretending to know better. We are confident 
that the state must subsist and that in it alone can particular interests be 
secured. But habit blinds us to that on which our whole existence 
depends. When we walk the streets at night in safety, it does not strike 
us that this might be otherwise. This habit of feeling safe has become 
second nature, and we do not reflect on just how this is due solely to the 
working of special institutions. Commonplace thinking often has the 
impression that force holds the state together, but in fact its only bond 
is the fundamental sense of order which everybody possesses. 
161. Paragraph 269. 
The state is an organism, i.e. the development of the Idea to the 
articulation of its differences. Thus these different sides of the state are 
its various powers with their functions and ~pheres of action, by means 
of which the universal continually engenders itself in a necessary way; 
in this process it maintains its identity since it is presupposed even m 
its own production. This organism is the constitution of the state; it is 
produced perpetually by the state, while it is through it that the state 
maintains itself. If the state and its constitution fall apart, if the various 
members of the organism free themselves, then the unity produced hy 
the constitution is no longer an accomplished fact. This tallies with the 
fable'*' about the belly and the other members. The nature of an organ-
ism is such that unless each of its parts is brought into identity with 
the others, unless each of them is prevented from achieving autonomy, 
the whole must perish. By listing attributes, axioms, &c., no progress 
can be made in assessing the nature of the state; it must be apprehended 
as an organism. One might as well try to understand the nature of God 
by listing his attributes, while the truth is that we must intuit God's life 
in that life itself. 
0 [The fable recounted bv Menenius Agrippa to dissuade the Roman plebs 
from secession. Livy, n. 32. Shakespeare, Coriolanus, Act I, Sc. i.] 

ADDITIONS 
162. Paragraph 270. 
The state is actual, and its actuality consists in this, that the interest 
of the whole is realized in and through particular ends. Actuality is 
always the unity of universal and particular, the universal dismembered 
in the particulars which seem to be self-subsistent, although they really 
are upheld and contained only in the whole. Where this unity is not 
present, a thing is not actual even though it may have acquired existence. 
A bad state is one which merely exists; a sick body exists too, but it has 
no genuine reality. A hand which is cut off still looks like a hand, and it 
exists, but without being actual.• Genuine actuality is necessity; what 
is actual is inherently necessary. Necessity consists in this, that the 
whole is sundered into the differences of the concept and that this 
divided whole yields a fixed and permanent determinacy, though one 
which is not fossilized but perpetually recreates itself in its dissolution. 
To a mature state thought and consciousness essentially belong. 
Therefore the state knows what it wills and knows it as something 
thought. 1\'ow since knowing has its seat in the state, the seat of science 
must he there too and not in the church. Despite this, it is often said 
nowadays that the state must grow out of religion. The state is mind 
fully mature and it exhibits its moments in the daylight of consciousness. 
Now the fact that what is hidden in the Idea steps forth into objective 
existence gives the state the appearance of something finite, and so the 
state reveals itself as a domain of worldliness, while religion displays 
itself as a domain of the infinite. If this be so, the state seems to be the 
subordinate, and since what is finite cannot stand on its own feet, the 
state is therefore said to need the church as its basis. As finite, it lacks 
justification, and it is only through religion that it can hecome sacro-
sanct and pertain to the infinite. This handling of the matter, however, 
is supremely one-sided. Of course the state is esst·ntlall~· worldly and 
finite; it has particular ends and particular powers; but its worldly 
character is only one of its aspects, and it is only to an unintelligent 
superficial glance that it is finite and nothing more. For the state has a 
life-giving soul, and the soul which animates it is subjectivity, which 
creates differences and yet at the same time holds them together in 
unity. In the realm of religion too there are distinctions and limitations. 
God, it is said, is triune; thus there are three persons whose unity alone 
is Spirit (Geist). Therefore to apprehend the nature of God concretely 
is to apprehend it through distinctions alone. Hence in the kingdom of 
God there are limitations, just as there are in the world, and to hold that 
mind (Geist) on earth, i.e. the state, is only a finite mind, is a one-sided 
view, since there is nothing irrational about actuality. Of course a bad 
state is worldly and finite and nothing else, but the rational state is 
inherently infinite. 
Secondly, it is averred that the state must derive its justification from 
• [The illustratiOn is from Aristotle's Politics 1253• 19 ff.] 

ADDITIONS 
religion. In religion, the Idea is mind in the inwardness of the heart, 
but it is this same Idea which gives itself a worldly form as the state and 
fashions for itself an embodiment and an actuality in knowing and 
willing. Now if you say that the state must be grounded on religion, you 
may mean that it should rest on rationality and arise out of it; but your 
statement may also he misunderstood to mean that men are most 
adroitly schooled to obedience if their minds are shackled by a slavish 
religion. (The Christian religion, however, is the religion of freedom, 
though it must be admitted that this religion may become changed in 
character and perverted from freedom to bondage when it is infected 
with superstition.) Now if you mean that men must have religion so 
that their minds, already shackled, may the more easily be oppressed by 
the state, then the purport of your statement is bad. But if you mean 
that men ought to respect the state, this whole whose limbs they are, 
then of course the hest means of effecting this is to give them philosophi-
cal insight into the essence of the state, though, in default of that, a 
religious frame of mind may lead to the same result. For this reason, 
the state may have need of religion and faith. But the state remains 
essentially distinct from religion, since whatever it claims, it claims in 
the form of a legal duty, and it is a matter of indifference to it in what 
spirit that duty is performed. The field of religion, on the other hand, 
is the inner life, and just as the state would jeopardize the right of that 
life if, like religion, it made claims on it, so also when the church acts 
like a state and imposes penalties, it degenerates into a religion of 
tyranny. 
A third difference which is connected with the foregoing is that the 
content of religion is and remains veiled, and consequently religion's 
place is in the field of the heart, feeling, and representative thinking. 
In this field everything has the form of subjectiz•ity. The state, on the 
other hand, actualizes itself and gives its specific institutions a stable, 
objective, existence. Now if religious feeling wished to assert itself in the 
state in the same way as it is wont to do in its own field, it would over-
turn the organization of the state, because the different organs of the 
state have latitude to pursue their several distinct paths, while in religion 
everything is always referred back to the whole. If this whole, then, 
wished to engulf all the concerns of the state, this would be tantamount 
to fanaticism; the wish to have the whole in every particular could be 
fulfilled only by the destruction of the particular, and fanaticism is just 
the refusal to give scope to particular differences. Hence to say: 'To the 
pious man no law is given' is nothing but an expression of this same 
fanaticism. Once piety usurps the place of the state, it cannot tolerate 
the determinate but simply shatters it. It is quite consistent with this if 
piety leaves decisions to conscience, to the inner life, and is not governed 
by reasons. This inner life does not develop into reasoned argument or 
give an account of itself. Hence if piety is to pass for the actuality of the 

ADDITIONS 
state, all laws are cast to the winds and subjective feeling is the legis-
lator. This feeling may be pure caprice, and whether it is or not can 
only be learnt from its actions. But by becoming actions and precepts, 
its actions assume the guise of laws, and this is just the very opposite of 
the subjective feeling with which we started. This feeling has God for 
its object, and we might make him the determinant of everything. But 
God is the universal Idea and this feeling can regard him only as the 
indeterminate, which is too immature to determine what is existent in 
the state in a developed form. It is precisely the fact that everything in 
the state is fixed and secure which is the bulwark against caprice and 
dogmatic opinion. Religion as such, then, ought not to be the governor. 
163. Paragraph :!ji. 
Just as irritability in the living organism is itself from one point of 
view something inward, something pertaining to the organism as such, 
so here again the outward reference is an inward tendency. The inner 
side of the state as such is the civil power, while its outward tendency 
is the military power, although this has a fixed place inside the state 
itself. Xow to have both these powers in equilibrium constitutes an 
important factor in the spirit of the state. Sometimes the civil power is 
wholly effaced and rests entirely on the military power, as was the case, 
for instance, in the time of the Roman Emperors and the Praetorians.* 
At other times, no\\ a days for example, the milttary power is a mere by-
product of the civil power once all the citizens are conscriptable. 
16+. Paragraph 272. 
We should desire to have in the state nothing except what is an 
expression of rationality. The state is the world which mmd has made 
for itself; its march, therefore, is on ltncs that are fi:-.cd and absolute. 
How often \\ e talk of the wisdom of God in nature 1 Hut we are not to 
assume for that reason that the physical world of naturL· IS .1 loftier thing 
than the world of mind. As high as mind stands above nature, so high 
docs the state stand above physical life. l\Ian must therefore venerate 
the state as a ,;ecular Lleitv,t and observe that It It 
b dithcu!t to 
comprehend nature, it is infinitely harder to understand the state. It is 
a fact of the highest importance that nowadays we have gained a clear-
cut intuition into the state in general and have been so much engaged 
in discussing and making constitutions. But by getting so far we have 
not yet settled e\·erything. In addition, it is necessary to bnng to hear on 
a rational topic the reason underlying intuition, to know what the essence 
of the matter is and to realize that the obvious is not always the essential. 
• [l'nder the reforms instituted by Dwcletian and Constantine, the Fraetonan 
Prefects, who were ongmalh· cxclusiHly military officials, had supreme authonty, 
under the Emperor, m both Cl\ il and military affairs. See e.g. Gibbon, chap. 
X\ u-perhaps Hegel's source.] 
t [Irdisch-Gottliches. Hegel here follows Kant who, e.g. at the end of his 
essay on Theory and Practice, refers to nation states as Erden-Gotter.] 

ADDITIONS 
The powers of the state, then, must certainly be distinguished, but 
each of them must build itself inwardly into a whole and contain in 
itself the other moments. When we speak of the distinct activities of 
these powers, we must not slip into the monstrous error of so inter-
preting their distinction as to suppose that each power should subsist 
independently in abstraction from the others. The truth is that the 
powers are to be distinguished only as moments of the concept. If 
instead they subsist independently in abstraction from one another, 
then it is as clear as day that two independent units cannot constitute a 
unity but must of course give rise to strife, whereby either the whole is 
destroyed or else unity is restored by force. Thus in the French Revo-
lution, the legislative power sometimes engulfed the so-called 'executive', 
the executive sometimes engulfed the legislative, and in such a case it 
must be stupid to formulate e.g. the moral demand for harmony. 
Leave the thing to the heart if you like and be saved all trouble; but 
even if ethical feeling is indispensable, it has no right to determine the 
powers of the state by reference to itself alone. The vital point, then, 
is that since the fixed characters of the powers are implicitly the whole, 
so also all the powers as existents constitute the concept as a whole. 
Mention is usually made of three powers, the legislative, the executive, 
and the judiciary; of these the first corresponds to universality and the 
second to particularity, but the judiciary is not the third moment of the 
concept, since the individuality intrinsic to the concept lies outside these 
spheres. 
165. Paragraph 273. 
The principle of the modern world is freedom of subjectivity, the 
principle that all the essential factors present in the intellectual whole 
are now coming into their right in the course of their development. 
Starting from this point of view, we can hardly raise the idle question: 
Which is the better form of government, monarchy or democracy? 
We may only say that all constitutional forms are one-sided unless they 
can sustain in themselves the principle of free subjectivity and know how 
to correspond with a matured rationality. 
166. Paragraph 274· 
The state in its constitution must permeate all relationships within the 
state. Napoleon, for instance, wished to give the Spaniards a constitu-
tion a priori,• but the project turned out badly enough. A constitution 
is not just something manufactured; it is the work of centuries, it is the 
• [\Vhen he expelled the Bourbons from Spatn and put Joseph Bonaparte on 
the throne under the Constitution of Bayonne in 1808. \Vith the breakdov.n of 
the Napoleonic regime In I 8 I 2- I 3' the Bourbons were restored together with the 
old constitution. A liberal document, the Constitutwn of Cadiz, was drawn up 
in I812, but it remained a dead letter. 
~ate that Hegel regards a more liberal 
constitution as a more rational one.] 

ADDITIONS 
Idea, the consciousness of rationality so far as that consciousness is 
developed in a particular nation. No constitution, therefore, is just the 
creation of its subjects. What Napoleon gave to the Spaniards was more 
rational than what they had before, and yet they recoiled from it as from 
something alien, because they were not yet educated up to its level. A 
nation's constitution must embody its feeling for its rights and its 
position, otherwise there may he a constitution there in an external way, 
but it is meaningless and valueless. Isolated individuals may often feel 
the need and the longing for a better constitution, but it is quite another 
thing, and one that does not arise till later, for the mass of the people to 
be animated by such an idea. The principle of morality, of the inner life 
of Socrates, was a necessary product of his age, but time was required 
before it could become part and parcel of the self-consciousness of 
everyone. 
167. l'aragraplz 275. 
We begin with the power of the crown, i.e. with the moment of indi-
viduality, since this includes the state's three moments as a totality in 
itself. The ego, that is to say, is at once the most indtvidual thing and 
the most universal. Prima facie, individuality occurs in nature too, but 
reality, the opposite of ideality, and reciprocal externality are not the 
same as self-enclosed existence. On the contrary, m nature the various 
individual things subsist alongside one another. In mmd, on the other 
hand, variety exists only as something ideal and as a unity. The state, 
then, as something mental, is the exhibitwn of all Its moments, but 
individuality is at the same time the hearer of tts soul and its life-giving 
principle, i.e. the sovereignty which contains all differences in itself. 
168. Paragraph 276. 
Much the same thing as this idealtty of the moments in the state 
occurs with life in the physical organism. Life is present in every cell. 
There is only one life in all the cells and nothing withstands it. Sepa-
rated from that life, every cell dies. This is the same as the ideality of 
every single class, power, and Corporation as soon as they have the 
impulse to subsist and be independent. It is with them as it is with the 
belly in the organism. It, too, asserts its independence, but at the same 
time its independence is set aside and it is sacrificed and absorbed into 
the whole. 
169. Paragraph 277. 
The business of the state is in the hands of individuals. But their 
authority to conduct its affairs is based not on their birth but on their 
objective qualities. Ability, skill, character, all belong to a man in his 
particular capacity. He must be educated and be trained to a particular 
ta~k. Hence an office may not be saleable or hereditary. In France, 
seats in parliament were formerly saleable, and in the English army 

288 
ADDITIONS 
commissions up to a certain rank are saleable to this day. • This sale-
ability 0f office, however, was or is still connected with the medieval 
constitution of certain states, and such constitutions are nowadays 
gradually disappearing. 
170. Paragraph 279. 
In the organization of the state-which here means in constitutional 
monarchy-we must have nothing before our minds except the inherent 
necessity of the Idea. All other points of view must vanish. The state 
must be treated as a great architectonic stmcture, as a hieroglyph of the 
reason which reveals itself in actuality. Everything to do with mere utility, 
externality, and so forth, must be eliminated from the philosophical 
treatment of the subject. Kow our ordinary icleas can quite well grasp 
the conception of the state as a self-determining and completely sove-
reign will, as final decision. What is more difficult is to apprehend this 
'I will' as a person. To do so is not to say that the monarch may act 
capriciously. As a matter of fact, he is bound by the concrete decisions 
of his counsellors, and if the constitution is stable, he has uften no more 
to do than sign his name. But this name is important. It is the last 
word beyond which it is impossible to go. It might be said that an 
organic, articulated, constitution was present even in the beautiful 
democracy of Athens, and yet we cannot help noticing that the Greeks 
derived their final decisions from the observation of quite external 
phenomena such as oracles, the entrails of sacrificial animals, and the 
flight of birds. They treated nature as a power which in those ways 
revealed and expressed what was good for men. At that time, self-
consciousness had not yet advanced to the abstraction of subjectivity, 
not even so far as to understand that, when a decision is to be made, an 
'I will' must be pronounced by man himself. This 'I will' constitutes 
the great dtfference between the ancient world and the modern, and in 
the great edifice of the state it must therefore have its appropriate 
objective existence. Unfortunately, however, this requirement is re-
garded as only external and optional. 
I 7 r. Paragraph 280. 
It is often alleged against monarchy that it makes the welfare of the 
state dependent on chance, for, it is urged, the monarch may be ill-
edu_cated, he may perhaps be unworthy of the highest position in the 
state, and it is senseless that such a state of affairs should exist because it 
is supposed to be rational. But all this rests on a presupposition which 
is nugatory, namely that everything depends on the monarch's particular 
character. In a completely organized state. it is only a question of the 
culminating point of formal decision (and a natural bulwark against 
" [In Hegel's day, all officers' comrniss10ns from an ensign's to a lieutenant-
colonel's were on sale, but there were restnctions on both purchaser and pnce] 

ADDITIONS 
passion. It is wrong therefore to demand objective qualities in a 
monarch);* he has only to say 'yes' and dot the 'i', because the throne 
should be such that the significant thing in its holder is not his particular 
make-up. (Monarchy in this sense is rational because it corresponds 
with the concept, but since this is hard to grasp, we often fail to notice 
the rationality of monarchy. Monarchy must be inherently stable and) 
whatever else the monarch may have in addition to this power of final 
decision is part and parcel of his private character and should be of no 
conseyuence. Of course there may be circumstances in which it is this 
private character alone which has prominence, but in that event the state 
is either not fully developed, or else is badly constructed. In a well-
organized monarchy, the objective aspect belongs to law alone, and the 
monarch's part is merely to set to the law the subjective 'I will'. 
172. Paragraph 28I. 
If we are to grasp the Idea of the monarch, we cannot be content with 
saying that God has appointed kings to rule over us, since God has made 
everything, even the worst of things. The point of view of utility does 
not get us very far either, and it is always possible to point out counter-
balancing disadvantages. Still less does it help to regard monarchy as a 
positi'L'e right. That I should hold property is necessary, but my holding 
of this particular property is contingent; and in the same way, the right 
that there must be one man at the head of affairs seems contingent too 
if it is treated as abstract and as posited. This right, however, is 
inevitably present both as a felt want and as a requirement of the 
situation. Monarchs are not exactly distinguished for bodily prowess or 
intellectual gifts, and yet millions submit to their rule. Now to say that 
men allow themselves to be ruled counter to their own interests, ends, 
and intentions is preposterous. Men are not so stupid. It is their need, 
it is the inner might of the Idea, which, even against what they appear to 
think, constrains them to obedience and keeps them in that relation. 
If then the monarch comes on the scene as the head and a part of the 
constitution, we are compelled to hold that there is no constitutional 
identity between a conquered people and its prince. A rebellion in a 
province conquered in war is a different thing from a rising in a well-
organized state. It is not against their prince that the conquered are in 
rebellion, and they are committing no crime against the state, because 
their connexion with their master is not a connexion within the Idea 
or one within the inner necessity of the constitution. In such a case, 
there is only a contract, no political tie. Je ne suis pas votre prince, je 
suis 'L'Ofre maitre, Napoleon retorted to the envoys at Erfurt.t 
• [The bracketed passages are translated from Gans's third edition; they did 
not appear in the first.] 
t [\-\'hen l'<apoleon met Tsar Alexander at Erfurt in 1 8o8, he was visited by 
representatives of many German states. This is one of the many stories of his 
rudeness on that occasion.] 

ADDITIONS 
173. Paragraph 282. 
Pardon is the remission of punishment, but it does not annul the law 
(Recht). On the contrary, the law stands and the pardoned man remains 
a criminal as before. Pardon does not mean that he has not committed a 
crime. This annulment of punishment may take place through religion, 
since something done may by spirit (Geist) be made undone in spirit. 
But the power to accomplish this on earth resides in the king's majesty 
alone and must belong solely to his self-determined decision. 
174. Paragraph 290. 
The point of special importance in the executive is the division of 
functions. The executive is concerned with the transition from the 
universal to the particular and the individual, and its functions must be 
divided in accordance ,,·ith the differences between its branches. The 
difficulty, ho\\·ever, is that these different branches meet again at both 
the top and the bottom. The police and the judiciary, for instance, move 
at right angles to one another, but in each particular case they coincide 
again. The usual expedient adopted to meet this difficulty is to appoint 
a Chancellor, a Prime Minister, or a President du Conseil des Ministres 
to unify control at the top. But the result of this is that once more 
everything may have its source in the Minister's power, and the business 
of the state is, as we say, centralized. This entails the maximum of 
simplification, speed, and efficiency in meeting state requirements. A 
system of this kind was introduced by the French revolutionaries, 
elaborated by Napoleon, and still exists in France to-day. On the other 
hand, France lacks Corporations and local government, i.e. associations 
wherein particular and universal interests meet. It is true that these 
associations won too great a measure of self-subsistence in the 'Middle 
Ages, \Yhen they were states within states and obstinately persisted in 
behaving like independent corporate bodies. But while that should not 
be allowed to happen, we may none the less affirm that the proper 
strength of the state lies in these associations. In them the executive 
meets with legitimate interests \Yhich it must respect, and since the 
administration cannot be other than helpful to such interests, though it 
must also supervise them, the individual finds protection in the exercise 
of his rights and so links his private interest With the maintenance of 
the whole. For some time past organizations have been framed with a 
view to controlling these particular spheres from above,* and effort has 
chiefly been expended on organizations of that type, while the lower 
classes, the mass of the population, have been left more or less un-
organized. And yet it is of the utmost importance that the masses 
should he organized, because only so do they become mighty and 
powerful. Otherwise they are nothing but a heap, an aggregate of 
" [Hegel1s thinking of his own experience m Ba,·ana in 1807. See Bn"cfe •·on 
und an Hegel, vol. i, p. 130. (Lasson).] 

ADDITIONS 
atomic units. Only when the particular assoc1atwns "' c or~anized 
members of the state are they possessed of legitimate power. 
17 5. Puragraplt :297. 
The middle class, to which civil servants belong, is politically co,, 
scious and the one in which education is mc-st prorninr nt. For this 
reason it is also the pillar of the state so iar as honesty and in•elligence 
are concerned. A state without a middle class must therefore remain 
on a low level. Russia, for instance, has a mass of serfs on the one 
hand and a mass of rulers on the other. It is a prime concern of the 
state that a middle class should be developed, but this can be done 
only if the state is an organic unity like the one described here, i.e. it 
can be done only by giving authority to sphen:s of particular interests, 
which are relatively independent, and by appointing an army of officials 
whose personal arbitrariness is broken against such authorized bodies. 
Action in accordance with everyone's rights, and the habit of such 
action, is a consequence of the counterpoise to officialdom which 
independent and self-subsistent bodies create. 
176. Paragraph 298. 
The constitution must in and by itself be the fi:-.cd and recognized 
ground on which the kgislature stands, and for tins reason it must not 
first be constructed. Thus the constitution 1s, hut jU~t as essentially it 
becomrs, i.e. it advances and matures. 
Tht~ ad\ <~nee is an alteration 
which is impcrccptihk and \\ hich lacks the form of alteration. For 
exampk, the \\calth of the German princes and thetr hmdies began by 
being private property hut then without any struggle or opposition it 
was converted into crmvn lands, i.e. into public propcrt\'. This came 
about because the pnnces felt the need of mtcnattiw thctr possessions 
and demanded property guarantees from their C<Juntn ard Estates; and 
these guarantees \\·ere mtcrt\vincd \nth such a mode of stabilizing 
property that it ceased to be at the sole dtsposal oi the princes. An 
ana!O)!OUS case is thdt [in the I l0ly Roman Empire J the Emperor was 
fornH:rly a JUdge and travelled the Empire on circuit, and then, owing 
to the purely supcrficidl results of cultural progress, n:tcrnal reasons 
made tt necessary for him to delegate more and more of hts judicial 
functions to others, \\lth the result that the judicial po\\er \\:IS trans-
ferred fmm the person of the monarch to groups of judges. I lcnce the 
advance from one state of affairs to another is tranquil in appearance 
and unnottced. In this \\ay a constitution changes over a long period of 
time into somcthlilfS quite dttfcn:nt from what it was origmally. 
177- l'aragraplz :!fJfJ· 
The t\\·o sides of the constitution hear rcspccttvely on the rights and 
the servtccs of imltnduals. Sernces are now almost entirely reduced to 
money payments, and military service is now almost the only personal 

292 
ADDITIONS 
one exacted. In the past, far more claims were made directly on a man's 
own person, and he used to be called upon for work according to his 
ability. In our day, the state purchases what it requires. This may at 
first sight seem an abstract, heartless, and dead state of affairs, and for 
the state to be satisfied with indirect services may also look like decad-
ence in the state. But the principle of the modern state requires that the 
whole of an individual's activity shall be mediated through his will. By 
means of money, however, the justice of equality can be achieved much 
more efficiently. 
Otherwise, if assessment depended on concrete 
ability, a talented man would be more heavily taxed than an untalented 
one. But nowadays respect for subjective freedom is publicly recognized 
precisely in the fact that the state lays hold of a man only by that which 
is capable of being held.* 
178. Paragraph 300. 
The proposal to exclude members of the executive from legislative 
bodies, as for instance the Constituent Assemblyt did, is a conse-
quence of false views of the state. In England, ministers must be 
members of parliament, and this is right, because executive officers 
should be linked with and not opposed to the legislature. The idea! of 
the so-called 'independence of powers' contains the fundamental error 
of supposing that the powers, though independent, are to check one 
another. This independence, however, destroys the unity of the state, 
and unity is the chief of all desiderata. 
179. Paragraph ]OI. 
The attitude of the executive to the Estates should not be essentially 
hostile, and a belief in the necessity of such hostility is a sad mistake. 
The executive is not a party standing over against another party in such 
a way that each has continually to steal a march on the other and wrest 
something from the other. If such a situation arises in the state, that 
is a misfortune, but it cannot be called health. The taxes voted by the 
Estates, moreover, are not to be regarded as a present given to the state. 
On the contrary, they are voted in the best interests of the voters them-
selves. The real significance of the Estates lies in the fact that it is 
throug:t them that the state enters the subjective consciousness of the 
people and that the people begins to participate in the state. 
180. Paragraph 302. 
The constitution is essentially a system of mediation. In despotisms 
where there are only rulers and people, the people is effective, if at all, 
only as a mass destructive of the organization of the state. \\"hen the 
multitude enter" the state >s one of its organs, it achieves its interests 
• [i.e. external b •ods. See Paragraph 299 ] 
t [In France.] 
t [:\lontesquteu's. See Esprit des Lozs, x.1. 6.] 

ADDITIONS 
by legal and orderly means. But if these means are lacking, the voice 
of the masses is always for violence. Hence, in despotic states, the 
despot always indulges the mob and keeps his wrath for his entourage. 
For the same reason too the mob in such states pays only a few taxes. 
Taxes rise in a constitutionally governed state simply owing to the 
people's own consciousness. In no country :~re so many taxes paid as 
in England. 
181. Paragraph 306. 
This class has a volition of a more independent character. On the 
whole, the class of landed-property owners is divided into an educated 
section and a section of farmers. But over against both of these sorts of 
people there stands the business class, which is dependent on needs and 
concentrated on their satisfaction, and the civil servant class, which is 
essentially dependent on the state. The security and stability of the 
agricultural class may be still further increased by the institution of 
primogeniture, though this institution is desirable only from the point 
of view of politics, since it entails a sacrifice for the political end of 
giving the eldest son a life of independence. Primogeniture is grounded 
on the fact that the state should be able to reckon not on the bare 
possibility of political inclinations, but on somethmg necessary. Now 
an inclination for politics is of course not bound up with wealth, but 
there is a relatively necessary connexion between the two, because a man 
with independent means is not hemmed in by external circumstances 
and so there is nothing to prevent him from entering politics and work-
ing for the state. \'/here political institutions are lacking, however, the 
foundation and encouragement of primogemture is nothing but a chain 
on the freedom of private rights, and either politlcal meaning must be 
given to it, or else it will in due course disappear. 
182. Paragraph 309. 
The introduction of representation implies that consent 1s to be given 
not directly by all but only by plenipotentiaries, since under a repre-
sentative system the individual, qua infinite person, no longer comes 
into the picture. Representation is grounded on trust, but trusting 
another is something different from g1ving my vote mysc:lf in my own 
personal capacity. I !ence majority voting runs counter to the principle 
that I should be personally present in anything which is to be obligatory 
on me. \Ve have confidence in a man when we take him tn be a man of 
discretion who will manage our affairs conscientiously and to the best of 
his knowledge, just as if they were his own. Thus the pnnciple of the 
individual subjective will disappears, since confidence is given to a thing, 
to a man's principles, or his demeanour or his conduct or his concrete 
mentality generally. The important thing, then, is that a member of 
the Estates shall have a character, insight, and will adequate to his task 
of concentrating on public business. In other words there is no ques-

294 
ADDITIONS 
tion of an individu~l's talking as an abstract single person. The point 
is r~tha that hi.; interests arc made good in an assembly wh'lse business 
is\\ ith the general interest. The ekctors require a guarantee that their 
deputy will furth<.:r and secure this general interest. 
r83. Paragraph JIS. 
Estates Assemblies, open to the public, arc a great spectacle and an 
excellent education for the citizens, and it is from them that the people 
learns best ho\\ to recognize the true character of its interests. The 
idea usually dominant is that everyone knows from the start what is 
best for the state and that the .\ssembly deh<lte is a mere discw;sion of 
this knm\lcdge. In fact, however, the precise contrary is the truth. It 
is here that there first begin to de\·elop the virtues, abilities, dex-
terities, which han~ to scn·e as examples to the public. Of course such 
debates an: irksome to ministers, who have to equip themsehTs \\ ith 
wit and eloquence to meet the criticisms there directed against them. 
I\: one the less, publicity here is the chief means of educating the public 
in national atfairs. A nation\\ hich has such public sittings is far more 
vitally related to the state than one '' hich has no Estates Assembly 
or one which meets in private. It is only because their e\«:ry step is 
made kno\\n publicly in this way that the t\\O Houses keep pace with 
the advance of public opinion, and it then becomes clear that a man's 
castle buildin.~ at his fireside with his wife and his friends is one thing, 
while what happens in a great :\ssemhly, \\here one shrewd idea devours 
another, is something quite different. 
18+. Paragr11plz Jl6. 
Public opinwn is the unorgamzed -.yay in which a people's opinions 
and wishes are made known. \\'hat is actually made authoritative in the 
state must <'per<lte in an organized manner as the parts of the con-
stitution Jo. But at all times public opinion has been a great power 
and it is particularly so in our day when the principle of subjective 
freedom has such importance and sigmficance. \\'hat is to be authori-
tative no\Yadays deri\ cs its authority, not at all from force, only to a 
small extent from habit and custom, really from insight and argument. 
185. I'magwplz JI7. 
The prtnctplc of the modern \\ orld requires that what anyone is to 
recognw: shall rc\-eal itself to him as something entitled to recognition. 
Apart from that, ho" ever, c\·eryone \\ i,~hcs to have some share in 
discuss10n and Jclihn,Jtion. Once h<: has had Ins s:ty and so his share 
of responoihilit\', his suhjecti\·it\· has hn::n satisti.cd anJ he puts up 
with a lot. In France freedom of speech has turned out far less danger-
ous than enforced stlenc<:, because 1nth the latter the fear is that men 
bottle up thctr objections to a thing,\\ hercas argument gi\·es them an 
outlet and a measure of satisfaction, and thts is in addition a means 
whereby the thing can be pushed aheaJ more easily. 

ADDITIONS 
295 
186. Paragraph JIB. 
Public opinion contains all kinds of falsity and truth, but it takes 
a great man to find the truth in it. The great man of the age is the one 
who can put into words the will of his age, tell his age what its will is, 
and accomplish it. • What he does is the heart and the essence of hi3 
age, he actualizes his age. The man who lacks sense enough to despise 
public opinion expressed in gossip will never do anything great. 
187. Paragraph 320. 
Subjectivity has been treated once already [Paragraphs 279 ff.] as 
the apex of the state, as the crown. Its other aspect is its arbitrary 
manifestation in public opinion, its most external mode of appearance. 
The subjectivity of the monarch is inherently abstract, but it should 
be something concrete and so he the ideality which diffuses itself over 
the whole state. The state at peace is that in which all branches of 
civil life subsist, but they possess their subsistence outside and along-
side one another as something which issues from the Idea of the whole. 
The fact that it so issues must also come into appearance as the ideality 
of the whole. 
188. Paragraph J2.J.. 
In peace civil life continually expands; all its departments wall 
themselves in, and in the long run men sta~nate. Their idiosyncrasies 
become continually more fixed and ossified 
But for health the unity 
of the body is required, and if its parts harden themselves into exclusive-
ness, that is death. Perpetual peace is often ad,·ocatcd as an ideal 
towards which humanity should strive. With that end 111 view, Kant 
proposed a league of monarchs to adjust differcnct:s between states, 
and the Holy Alliancet v.as meant to be a lea~Llt: of much the same 
kind. But the state is an individual, and individuahty t:s.,entially implies 
negation. Hence even if a number of states make themselves into a 
family, this group as an individual must engender an opposite and 
create an enemy 
As a result of war, nations are strengthened, but 
peoples involved in civil stnfe also acqu~rc peace at home through 
making wars abroad. To he sure, war produces insecurity of property, 
but this insecurity of things is nothing hut their transience-which is 
inevitable. We hear plenty of sermons from the pulpit about the in-
security, vanity, and instability of temporal things, but e\ ayone thinks, 
howe\·er much he is moved by what he hears, that he at least will be 
able to retain his own. But if this insecurity now comes on the scene 
in the form of hussars with shining sabres and they actualize in real 
• [Readm~ fVer, rcas seine Zezt u:zll, ausspricht, ihr su;:t und t ollbmz;:t, w!lh 
Ziegler m Kant-Studien, I909.] 
t [IBIS, between Russia, Austna, and Prussia; formed on the mttzatn·e of 
Tsar Alexander m the professed endeavour 'to regulate future conduct bv the 
princzples of the Gospel'.] 
· 

ADDITIONS 
earnest what the preachers have said, then the moving and edifying 
discourses which foretold all these events turn into curses against the 
invader. Be that as it may, the fact remains that wars occur when the 
necessity of the case requires. The seeds burgeon once more, and 
harangues are silenced by the solemn cycles of history. 
189. Paragraph 327. 
The military class is that universal class which is charged with the 
defence of the state, and its duty is to make real the ideality implicit 
within itself, i.e. to sacrifice itself. Courage to be sure is multiform. 
The mettle of an animal or a brigand, courage for the sake of honour, 
the courage of a knight, these are not true forms of courage. The true 
courage of civilized nations is readiness for sacrifice in the service of 
the state, so that the individual counts as only one amongst many. The 
important thing here is not personal mettle but aligning oneself with 
the universal. In India five hundred men conquered twenty thousand 
who were not cowards, but who only lacked this disposition to work in 
close co-operation with others.* 
190. Paragraph 329· 
In almost all European countries the individual head of the state is 
the monarch, and foreign affairs are his business. Where the Estates 
have constitutional powers, the question may arise whether they should 
not decide on war and peace, and in any case they have their influence 
on the question, particularly in connexion with ways and means. In 
England, for example, no unpopular war caa be waged. If, however, 
it is supposed that monarchs and cabinets are more subject tv passion 
than parliaments are, and if for this reason an attempt is made to 
juggle the decision on war and peace into the hands of the latter, then 
we must point out that whole peoples may often be a prey to excitement 
or be carried away by passion to a greater extent than their leaders. In 
England the whole nation has frequently pressed for war and to a 
certain extent compelled ministers to wage it. The popularity of Pitt 
was due to his knowing how to fall in with what the people wanted at 
the time."t It was only later! that the people cooled down and so began 
to reflect that the war was useless and unnecessary and had been under-
taken without counting the cost. Moreover, a state stands in relation 
not with one other state only, but with many. And the complexities of 
their relations become so delicate that they can be handled only by the 
head of the state. 
• [In 1751 Clive 'led five hundred men to Arcot ... and there held a crumb-
ling fortress agamst ten thousand Indians with a stiffemng of French troops'. At 
Plassey 'he brought 3,000 men mto action of whom 900 only were Europeans, 
agamst a force of 40,ooo mfantry and 15,000 cavalry and ... routed his oppo-
nents' (Fisher, History of Europe, London, 1936, p. 764).) 
t [1793-] 
t [1797-] 

ADDITIONS 
297 
191. Paragraph ]JO. 
States are not private persons but completely autonomous totalities 
in themselves, and so the relation between them differs from a moral 
relation and a relation involving private rights. Attempts have often 
been made to regard the state as a person with the rights of persons and 
as a moral entity. But the position with private persons is that they 
are under the jurisdiction of a court which gives effect to what is right 
in principle. Now a relation between states ought also to be right in 
principle, but in mundane affairs a principle ought also to have power. 
Now since there is no power in existence which decides in face of the 
state what is right in principle and actualizes this decision, it follows 
that so far as international relations are concerned we can never get 
beyond an 'ought'. The relation between states is a relation between 
autonomous entities which make mutual stipulations but which at the 
same time are superior to these stipulations. 
192. Paragraph ]]I. 
When Napoleon said before the Peace of Campoformio* that 'the 
French Republic needs recognition as little as the sun requires it', 
what his words implied was simply the thing's strength which carries 
with it, without any verbal expression, the guarantee of recognition. 
193. Paragraph ]]8. 
Modern wars are therefore humanely waged, and person is not set 
over against person in hatred. At most, personal enmities appear in 
the vanguard, but in the main body of the army hostility is something 
vague and gives place to each side's respect for the duty of the other. 
194. Paragraph 339· 
The European peoples form a family in accordance with the universal 
principle underlying their legal codes, their customs, and their civiliza-
tion. This principle has modified their international conduct accord-
ingly in a state of affairs [i.e. war) otherwise dominated by the mutual 
infliction of evils. The relations of state to state are uncertain, and 
there is no Praetor available to adjust them. The only higher judge 
is the universal absolute mind, the world mind. 
" [1 797, at the close of Napoleon's first Italian campaign.] 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
PREFACE 
I. As Professor of Philosophy in Berlin. When the Philosophy of 
Right was published in I 82 I, Hegel had held this appointment for three 
years. He used this book as a text for lectures in the winter session of 
1821, I822, 1824, and 1830, and had started to use it for a fifth time 
when he died on 7 ~ovember 183r. On each occasion he lectured on 
the subject for five days a week throughout the session. 
2. Encyklopiidie der philosophischen Wissenscluiften im Gnmdrisse. A 
second edition was published in I827 and a third in I8JO. Of the three 
parts, Logic, Nature, and :\lind, the first and third were translated by 
W. Wallace from the third edition; the second has not yet been trans-
lated into English. Where Hegel has cited in the Philosophy of Right 
Paragraphs of the first edition, the translator has appended in square 
brackets references to the corresponding passages of the third edition, 
although the third often differs substantially from the first. In the 
third edition Paragraphs r-244 arc devoted to Logic, :md Paragraphs 
377-577 to l'vlind. (The .\dditions to the Paragraphs on !\lind are not 
included in Wallace's translation.) The Paragraphs in that edition 
which cover the same ground as the Philosophy of Right are 483-552. 
In these r\otes references to the Enryclapaedza are to the third edition 
unless the contrary is stated. 
3· The intuitive philosophy of Jacobi, Krug, Fries, and their fol-
lowers, against which Hegel speaks so strongly here and elsewhere in 
this book, is tteated at greater length in Enc., Paragraphs 6I ff., as well 
as in essays and articles which Hegel pul,lished from I80I onwards-
see JVerke 1 , i. 3 ff, and xvi. 33 t{ 
4· JVissenschaft da L.1gih (~urembcrg, I812-16). See especially the 
introduction to that \\·ork and its final section on 'the Absolute Idea'. 
'Speculative'-Hegel is fond of the distinctiOn between 'speculative' 
and 'empirical', and he uses the latter in a pejorative sense. 'Empiri-
cism' was in his view a purely scientific outlook and not a philosophy 
in the propt:r sense at all. Compare Kant's words: 'Those who are 
more especially 
speculativ~ are ... hostile to heterogeneity . . . ; 
those \\ ho arc more especially empirical are constantly endeavouring to 
differentiate nature' (Ciitique of Pure Reason, B. 683, Kemp Smith's 
translation). 'Speculative' thinl-.ing is thinking in terms of the 'con-
cept'-sce Translator's Foreword, § 4, i and ii. 
5· St. Luke xvi. 29. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
299 
6. 'Positive'-i.e. posited, laid down arbitrarily, as when we speak 
of 'positive' as di~tinct from 'natural' law. Notice that llegd's statement 
implies that a state has no absolute authority and is not exempt from 
philosophical criticism. 
7· 'The public was through the philosophy of Kant and Jacobi 
strengthened in its opinion ... that the knowledge of God is immediate, 
and that we know it from the beginning and without requiring to 
study, and hence philosophy is quite supcrHuous' (llistory of Philosophy, 
iri. 505). Cf. Enc., § 5 and§§ 6r ff. 
fl. It is publications by Romantics (e.g. F. von Schlegel) that Hegel 
has mainly in mind. For a good account of these and other political 
ideas current in Hcgt:!'s day in Germany, see R. Aris: Ifistory uf 
l'ultltcal Thought in Germany 1789-ISij (London, 1936). 
9· The Romantics in therr revolt against eighteenth-century ration-
alism accepted Kant's vi<:w that knowledgt: was of phenomena alone, 
since reason could not attain knO\\Iedge of things in themselves, but 
they \YCnt on to hold that tht: heart has its rt:asons that the head knows 
not of. 
ro. Cf. Enc., §H), 11ith \\'allacc's note iid foe., in which a specific 
instance of flattery of the young is quutt:d from Fichtc. \Vordsworth, 
referring to this period, \Hites of a new pllllusophy finding a ready 
welcome because it offered a 'tempting rl'giOn 11hcre passions had the 
pri1·ilegc to ~o~ork .... The dream tlattered the :-oung. How glorious' 
to build social freedom on the basis of thL· mdrvrdual's freedom, 
'superior to the blind restraints of gencrJI IJ\1s' (Prelude, xi. 223-44 in 
Works, ed. by \Y. Knight, London, r8y6, 1·ol. iu) 
I r. Like nearly all I lcgel's quotations, thrs rs Jll,lc'Curate. Psalm 
cxxvii. 2, in Luther's version, reads, literally tr;mslat<:d, 'for He giveth 
to His beloved in sleep'. The '1varcs of sle<:p' are Jrcams, ct. Pheno-
menology, pp. 7-J.-5· 
L!. J. F. Fries, I77J-IS.J.3, Professor at !Ieidelberg (where he was 
Hegel's predecessor) rSos-·r6, and thereafter at Jcna. In r819 he was 
suspended by the government for his participation in the 'v\'artburg 
Fcsti1·al (sec the next note) and for his ultra-liberal views. In 182-J. he 
\\as allowed to teach mathematics and physics, and he was restored to 
his philosophy chair in r825. 'He turns back to the faith of Jacobi in 
the form of immediate judgments derived from reason and dark con-
ceptions incapable of utterance. He wished to improve Kant's Cn!ique 
hy apprehending the categories as facts of consciousness. Anything one 
chooses can be introduced by that method' (llistury of P!tilosuphy, 
iii. )ll ). 
IJ. The Wartburg Festival of the German Students' Sucil'ties un 
1\ October r8r7 (Lasson). This was a liberal demonstration in favour 

300 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
of German unity and Stein's reforms. Hegel supported both of these, 
but he held that enthusiastic demonstrations were no substitute for 
thinking and could only lead to immorality and anarchy. His view 
received some support in rSrg when Kotzebue, who was suspected 
of being a Russian spy, was murdered by a student. However well 
intentioned the student may have been, good intentions 1vere in Hegel's 
view no excuse for murder. See Paragraph 126 and Remark (d) to 
Paragraph 140. The book by von Haller, which Hegel attacks in the 
footnote to Paragraph 258, was burned at this Festival, and Hegel's 
reference to Fries at this point is simply an indication that he had as 
little sympathy with Romantics as he had with Reactionaries. See 
Note r 7 below and the Translator's article on 'Hegel and Prussianism' 
in Philosophy, January 1940. See below, Addenda, p. 376. 
14· Epicurus measured conduct by the standard of feeling and 
impulse, and truth by the standard of sense-perception (History of 
Philosophy, ii. 276 ff. and especially 28r). 
15. The lines in Faust to which Hegel refers are 
Verachte nur Venzunft und TVissenschaft 
Des kimschen allerhochste Kraft . ... 
Und hiitt' er sich auch nicht dem Teufel ubergeben, 
Er musste doch zu Grunde gehn. 
I. iv. 322-3, 337-8. 
'Reason and knowledge only thou despise, 
The htghest strength in man that lies! ... 
Had he not made himself the devt!'s naught could save him, 
Still were he lost for evermore!' 
(Tr. Bayard Taylor.) 
Hegel misquotes the lines both here and in the Phenomenology, p. 384. 
16. The piety which Hegel attacks (Schleiermacher is sometimes in 
his mind) is that which regards the world as God-forsaken and which 
exalts the sanctities of inner conviction above the wickedness of the 
world. It forgets, Hegel holds, that God reveals himself in the world, 
in nature and history. Piety of the right sort worships God not as an 
abstract 'supreme being', but as a loving and self-revealing spirit. Such 
piety is at home in the world and is reconciled to it, because it has 
faith that, since the world is the revelation of God, reason must be 
immanent in it as its law and essential principle. Philosophy differs 
from such piety, in Hegel's view, only in substituting knowledge for 
faith. 
17. In the footnote to Paragraph 258. The significance of this 
reference is that this 'shibboleth' is there said to be characteristic of 
von Haller, the reactionary, as it is here said to be of Fries, the liberal. 
Their extreme views rest on a common error. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
301 
r8. Hegel is speaking of the Existenz of philosophy, and all that he 
means is that in Prussia philosophy was confined mainly or entirely 
to universities, i.e. to state institutions, whose professors were civil 
servants and so in 'the service of the state'. In Greece, on the other 
hand, philosophy was not a professional occupation at all. 
19. For the wide meaning which Hegel gives to 'police', sec Para-
graphs 231-49. The action of which he is thinking here is probably the 
suspension of Fries from his chair, hut he may be going so far as to 
suggest that there is justification for imprisoning philosophers who 
propound views dangerous to the maintenance of public peace. 
20. See e.g. Protagoras and Republic, 493 ff., where the sophist is 
contrasted with the true philosopher. 
21. The reference is probably to the numerous attacks made by 
empirical scientists on Schelling's philosophy of nature. 
22. Tiibingen, r8ro-I2. All editions read Teil viii, s. s6 as the 
reference, but that is an error. 
23. This has not been said before, but it may be implied in the 
assertion that subjectivism adopts the sophistic principles which, in 
their practical reference, are destructive' of estabhshed law and order 
and so bring police action on themselves. 
24. The reference may he to the preface to the Phenomenology, p. ros, 
where philosophy's element and content is said to be the actual, or to 
the first edition of Enc., § 5, where philosophy is described as the 
science of reason. 
25. In the Remark to Paragraph rSs. 
26. Reading welche damals die bez·orstelm1de, for m lrhe dte, &c., in 
accordance \Vith Hegels e. R., p. v, note. Th.., 'deeper pnnciple' breaking 
into the Greek world in Plato's time was the principle of 'subjective 
freedom', on which Hegel has a good deal to say m tht: third part of 
this hook. The 'world revolutiOn' then impending \\·a, the change in 
men's ideas due to the Christian revelation, and e"ill'Cially to the 
Christian doctrine of conscience. According to this doctnne, moral 
worth depends not simply on the fulfilment of the Ia\\ (because such 
fulfilment may he Pharisaical or im·oluntary), hut on the conocientious 
and willin~ acceptance of the law; and the demand \\ :m·h cnnscicncc 
makes is that no moral agent shall he required to perform any action in 
defiance of his conscientiOus conviction. Such a doctrine has its danger 
(as Hegel shows in the Remark to Paragraph qo) because it may 
degtncrate into a claim for suhjecti\·e mfallihihty, and it \\as this 
dan~er which Plato S..t\1" in the moral subjectivism of the Sophists. For 
Plato the principles of conduct were objective and eternal, obligatorv 

J02 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
whether men knew them or not; the Greeks had no word for con-
science. For Hegel the principles arc objective indeed, hut they 
are actualized only in men's minds and through their conscientious 
actions. In his view, the subjective claims of the Sophists did enshrine 
part of the new truth which mankind was shortly to discover through 
Christianity; in substance they were claims for freedom of conscience, 
though that was not n:alized. Hence, instead of regarding this sub-
jectivism as something merely 'corruptive', to he stemmed only by a 
rigid system of objective laws imposed on the individual from without, 
as described in the Republic, Plato should have accepted it in its essence 
and so have achieved what Hegel attempts in Part III of this hook, 
namely an integration of the objectivity of law with subjective freedom. 
To have done so, however, would have meant anticipating Christian 
teaching, as Plato could not have done before it was revealed 'from on 
High'. ::iee Paragraphs 185 and 206. Cf. Hist01y of Philosoph_v, ii. 
90-us.-'Free infinite pcrsonality'-see Paragraphs 5, 21, and 35· 
For Hegel a person is a thinking being conscious of himself as an ego. 
In virtue of this consciousness, a man is free and infinite, because he 
can abstract himself, his ego, from any restraints which may be imposed 
on his body. Hegel's point is that Plato (a) by his purely objective 
regulations, and (b) by his retention of slavery, fails to recognize this 
inviolable sanctity of the inner life. 
27. This statement is further explained and defended in Enc., § 6. 
Note that Hegel is not saying that what exists or is 'real' is rational. 
By 'actuality' (sec Translator's Foreword, § 3) he means the synthesis 
of essence and existence. If we say of a statesman who accomplishes 
nothing that he is not a 'real' statesman, then we mean by 'real' what 
Hegel calls 'actual'. The statesman exists as a man in office, hut he 
lacks the essence constitutive of what statesmanship ought to be, say 
effectiveness. Conversely, and in Hegel's view no less important, if 
effectiveness were never the quality of an existing statesman, then it 
would not be the rational essence of statesmanship, hut a mere ideal or 
dream. Hegel's philosophy as a whole might be regarded as an attempt 
to justify his identii1cation of rationality with actuality and vice versa, 
hut his doctrine depends ultimately on his faith in God's Providence, 
his conviction that history is the working out of His rational purpose. 
That purpose, as the purpose of the Almighty, is not so impotent as to 
remain a mere ideal or aspiration, and conversely, '' h~t is genuinely 
actual or effective in the world is simply the working of that purpose.-
It follows that Hegel's identification of the actual and the rational is 
not a plea for conservatism in politics. The actualization of God's 
purpose is not yet complete. See the Addition to Paragraph 270 and 
the closing pages of the Philosophy of History. 
28. Thought at any stage does not attain full actuality until it pas:;es 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
303 
over into existence and embodies itself in something objective. E.g. 
religious convictions are not genuinely actual until they are objectified 
in institutions, churches, &c. Similarly, the s~ate, as an objectification 
in the external world of man's rational will, is that in which alone his 
freedom, the essence of his will, is fully actualized. 
29. Lau·s, vii. 789 e. Hegel's citation is not quite accurate, and he 
seems to have forgotten that Plato is saying that to make such a regula-
tion is unnecessary and would be ridiculous. 
30. Science of Rights,§ 21, p. 379· Fichte limits this requirement to 
'important persons who can afford to pay for it'. For the conception of 
'construction' and Hegel's criticism of it, see Enc., § 231. 
31. The ultimate source of the Greek proverb ('here is Rhodes, 
here's your jump') is Michael Apostolius viii. 100 (Leutsch: Pm·oemio-
graphi Graeci, Gottingen, 1851, vol. ii). But in its Latin form it is a 
commonplace of German elementary Latin text-books, and it may 
have reached them, and Hegel also, from Erasmus, Adagia, III. iii. 28. 
Erasmus quotes the Greek, gives a Latin translation, and continues: 
'The proverb will be apt when someone is asked to show on the spot 
that he can do what he boasts he has done elsewhere.' (Hegel's inter-
pretation seems to have been slightly different.) Cf. Goethe: Zahme 
Xenien, III. ii. 
32. Perhaps a reminiscence of Au! us Gellius, Soctes Atticae, xii. I I: 
'One of the old poets said that truth is the daughter of time.' Cf. 
Bacon: No~·um Organum, i. 84: 'Rightly is truth called the daughter 
of time, not of authority.' 
33· Hegel is playing on words. 'Po(>os- means not only the island 
of Rhodes, but also a rose. Saltus means a jump, hut salta is the 
imperative of the verb 'to dance'. The rose is the symbol of joy, and the 
philosopher's task is to find joy in the present by discovering reason 
within it. In other words, philosophy may 'dance' for joy in this 
world; it need not postpone its 'dancing' until it builds an ideal world 
else\Yhcre. 
34· If the actual is rational, then however tragic the actual may seem 
to be, reason will he able to find joy in it, because it will find itself in 
it as its essence. Hegel uses the same metaphor in Philosophy of Religion, 
i. 284-5. As he indicates in TVrrhel, xvii. 227, the metaphor was sug-
gested to him by the Rosicrucians. (See Lasson: Beitriige zur Hegel-
Forschung, Part 2, Berlin, 1910, pp. 49-50.) 
35· Cf. Hegel's criticism of Spinoza in, e.g., Phenommology, p. 8o, 
and Enc., § I 51. His point is that Spinoza's view of the universe as 
substance or necessity needs to be supplemented by the Christian 
doctrine of subjectivity and subjective freedom. God is substance, but 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
is person or subject as well. Hegel applies this doctrine to the state and 
holds that although the state is a substance, in modern times it has 
come to consciousness of itself in its citizens and its monarch, and so 
has become not a mere external necessity but the embodiment of 
freedom. Cf. Note 3 to Paragraph 144. 
36. Sec p. 2. 
37· Hegel regards religion, especially Protestantism, and philosophy 
as the same in content, but faith and feeling are the form of religion, 
while rationality is the form of philosophy (see Remark to Paragraph 
270 ). According to the 'Lutheran faith, it is this specific individual 
who is related to God. A man's piety, his hope of salvation, &c., all 
demand that his heart, his subjectivity, should be present in them. 
His feelings, his faith, in short all that belongs to him is claimed, Man 
must repent from the heart and be filled with the Holy Ghost. Thus 
here the principle of subjectivity, i.e. freedom, is recognized· (History 
of Philosophy, iii. 149). The influence of Luther is marked in Hegel's 
work. Luther preached non-resistance to the temporal power, and the 
action which he urged was always action within the framework of the 
existing order. It is a view like this which colours Hegel's conception 
of the relation between the state and the church. 
38. The phrase is from Bacon: De Aug. Sc., i. 5 (Lasson). There is 
a similar remark in his essay on Atheism. 
39· A hit at Kant's 'regulative employment of the Ideas of Reason'. 
See e.g. Critique of Pure Reason, B. 675. 
40. Revelation iii. 15-16. 
41. 'Grey in grey'-a reminiscence of the words of Mephistopheles: 
My worthy fnend, grey are all theories 
And green alone hfe's golden tree. 
(Faust, tr. Bayard Taylor, I. iv. 509-14.) Philosophy paints the greyness 
of theory against the background of an ageing world. 
f_IVTRODUCTION 
Heading. 1. This summary of the contents of the Introduction is 
added here from Hegel's original table of contents. 
1. 2. The two moments of the Idea are (a) form, i.e. the concept-
the will in this book-and (b) content, i.e. the existence of the concept 
or its embodiment in the realm of the finite-in this book a series of 
rights, subjects, and institutions embodying the will. The concept 
actualizes its potentialities by developing its determinations and embody-
ing them in existence-see Paragraph 32. Now the characteristic of the 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
external world is its finitude; anything in it is a this, here, and now, 
connected by external relations with other equally finite entities. 
Thought, on the other hand, is an organic system of internal relations, 
and hence it can never be perfectly embodied without remainder in any 
external sphere. External relations imply accidental as well as necessary 
connexions, and the presence of accident in the finite is inescapable, 
although, since the finite as a whole is mind externalized, and so depends 
for its being on mind, this contingency is confined within limits. The 
task of the philosophy of nature and the philosophy of history is to 
ignore the contingency and penetrate through the husk of appearance 
to the reason, or the concept, at its heart. Vvhat it finds then is (a) a 
series of thoughts, the determinations of the concept, a necessary, 
organically connected, series, and (b) a series of natural phenomena and 
human institutions embodying the series of thoughts. To apprehend 
the Idea is to grasp both these series. Actuality is the synthesis of the 
two. Besides this actuality there are the accidents and contingencies 
inseparable from the spatio-temporal sphere; of these the empirical 
scientist and the historian have to take account, but in Hegel's view they 
are of no importance to the philosopher. They are irrational and there-
fore lack actuality. 
2. 3· As Hegel points out in Paragraph 29, right is the will determi-
nately existent, or is an embodiment of the mll. The concept of the will 
is a determination of the concept of mind. The ~rages through which 
mind passes before will is reached are bridly summarized in Paragraph 4· 
Any genuine philosophy must in Hegel's view form a systematically and 
organically developed whole, and his own conceptwn of this whole is 
summarized in his Encyclopaedza. In the Phzlosuphy of Right he is 
expounding in detail one part of that system, and as .1 p.1rt of an organic 
development,; it is like a period of history in preSllj'jlOSing preceding 
periods and being pregnant with those to follow. It cannot be too often 
emphasized that Hegel's philosophy culminates not with the state but 
with art, religion, and philosophy, which lie beyond the state and above 
it (see the last section of the Encyclopaedia). 
4· 'In civil law, definition is always hazardous' (Digest, LX. xvii. 202). 
(:'vlessineo.) 'Slave could not be brought under it'. sc. without exposing 
the wrong of slavery. If a slave is a 'man', then his slavery is a denial 
of his rights. 
5· 'Facts of consciousness'-here and in other places where Hegel 
uses this phrase, his arrmv is primarily aimed at Fries (see Note 12 to the 
Preface). The expressions 'self-evident truths' and 'things intuitively 
known' are perhaps the modern equivalents of 'facts of consciousness'. 
6. See e.g. Remarks to Paragraphs 126 and 140. If feeling or 
inspiration is made a substitute for law, then any crime may be justified 
by the convictions or 'moral intentions' of the criminal. 

306 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
7· Cf. Preface, p. 2 and Note 4 ad we. 
3. 8. Right (Recht) once posited (gesetzt) or laid down is law (Gesetz). 
Now we may raise questions either about natural law, or about what is 
accepted as right in a given country, i.e. about positive law. In the 
latter there is an element of brute fact, something merely 'posited', 
which is important to the lawyer but out of place in a philosophical 
theory of law. Further, if we consider what is accepted as right in a 
given country, we can distinguish between its form and its content. The 
content may consist of specific statutes, of the judgements of various 
courts, of 'common law', &c.; but the form which all these possess is 
positedness or legal validity. The lawyn works a posteriori; he simply 
wishes to know what the law is. The philosopher wishes to probe deeper, 
to see positive law as the embodiment of the determinations of the 
concept of right, and these determinations form a necessary series, 
developing by the inner necessity of thought itsdf. But we must beware 
of supposing that the philosopher works a priori. A knowlrdge of what 
even the categories of logic are can be acquired only after an experience 
of thinking; and a fortiori, in the concrete spheres of nature and history, 
we cannot forecast the specific determinations which thought has given 
to itself (see :\otc 2 to Paragraph r), although we can probe their 
necessity once we have ascertained what they have been. A study of 
empirical science must therefore precede the philosophy of nature (sec 
Enc., § 246) :md a study of positive law and history must precede the 
philosophy of right. The philosopher tries to see the meaning of 
the facts which the historian collects, and to discover the necessity at the 
heart of their contingency. It is important to notice that Hegel brought 
to the writing of this book an extensive study of the facts whose inward 
and moving principle he here professes to expound, and thus he is very 
far from attempting to deduce the philosophy of the state hy a priori 
thinking. For the distinction between Recht and Gcsetz see Paragraphs 
2I I ff 
g. i.e. by soil, climate, geographical position, &c. On the influence 
of these, see the section on the 'Geographical Basis of History' in the 
Philosophy of History, pp. 79 ff. 
IO. e.g. the concept of theft must be applied to a case of literary 
plagiarism (HegeL> e. R., p. 3), a case not visualized when the law against 
theft was first laid down. See Remarks to Paragraphs 69, 212, 214. 
I I. Provisions 
detailin~ kind and amount of punishment, e.g. 
imprisonment or fine, and lcn~th of impris0nmcnt or amo,Jnt of fine; 
or such things as a summons to appear in court In a year and a ddy, &c. 
(l!!'grls e. R., p. 3). 
12. Legal rights in any given system of law are regarded by Hegel 
as an embodiment of the legislator's conception of what is right in the 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
nature of things. The illustration he chooses is not very happy. The 
Institutes of Justinian arc an elementary text-book of law; the Pandects 
(or Digest) arc a complete codex of case-law to which the Institutes 
are an introduction. Hegel takes the Institutes to lay down the general 
principles on which the detailed case-law collected in the Pandects is 
based, but that is not quite true of the books in question. 
iJ. See Esprit des Lois, Book i, chap. 3· 
14. See Remark and Addition to Paragraph 180, with I\"otes ad foe. 
15. By the 'pragmatic' type of history is usually meant a type 
which has a utilitarian aim. Sec Enc., § 140, and Wallace's note ad foe. 
So here the 'pragmatic' conception of law and institutions is that which 
regards a given law or institution as justified if it is useful, i.e. if it meets 
the needs of the time. Bentham's Theory of Legislatio11 might perhaps 
be regarded as written from this point of view. 
16. Begrrifen-i.c. pra.!~matic historians claim hy their method to 
comprehend (begreifen) history, although they make no attempt to 
pierce the wil of fact to the Brgriff or concept in the light of which alone 
the facts are really intelligible, since they are its embodiment. 
17. This is an allusion to the contra\ nsy started by the historical 
school of jurists-Savigny and his foiiO\\Crs~-m l!t·!:;el's day. They 
maintained against the rationalists that the Ia\\ of a people was part and 
parcel of the national consciousness; conception~ of \'·hat \\as right 
differed therefore from nation to nation and customary law was of more 
importance than direct legislation. 
18. Hegel's point is that both history ami philosophy study the 
growth of institutions and the rise and fall of empu ,·s. But history stops 
at brute fact while the philosophy of history penctr.ttes t•J the meaning 
of the facts. Since the philosophy of history is dependent on the results 
of histnrical im·estigation for its material, philosophy and history can to 
this extent be at peace with one another because they supplement each 
other. But they can also be at peace in anothcrway hccause philosophy, 
as logic or metaphysics, must study the concept in and hy nsclf, and not 
merely, as philosophy of history, the concept cmhoJa?d in historical 
material; history and this abstract study arc inditTen:nt to one another. 
liege! agrees \\ ith the historical school of jurists against the rationaiists 
in laying emphasis on the historical or positive clement n; law, hut he 
thinks that they arc wrong in ignoring the rational clement \lhich is 
present also, and inJect! fundamental, since the historical clement is 
produced hy the \lorking of the concept itself. For some of Hegel's 
criticisms of Savigny, sec Paragraph 211. 
H). Gustav, Ritter von Hugo, 1764-18H, Professor in GottillJ~en 
from 1788 (Lasson). The first edition of his Text-book of the History 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
of Roman Law, was published in 1790. The fifth edition appeared in 
r815 and there were many subsequent editions. 
20. 'Affectation'-this refers back to the second paragraph of this 
Remark. The quotation from Hugo is from Paragraph 5 r of the seventh 
edition, which is more easily accessible than the fifth and of which there 
is a French translation. The reference to Cicero is to De Oratore, i. 44; 
and the remarks of Fa,·orinus are from the passage cited just below from 
Aulus Gellius. 
21. Right principles remain abstract and therefore not fully actual 
until they arc applied to the needs of the hour and posited in law. Law 
thus acquires of necess1ty a positive clement which arises from the 
application of the concept to a finite and given material. This element 
therefore cannot be deduced from the concept and the only justification 
which it can have is a utilitarian one. Hegel's point is that philosophers 
(i.e. rationalists) have based many of their criticisms of law on a failure 
to understand the positive (and so irrational) element \vhich it necessarily 
contains. 
22. 'Favorinus attacks the Twelve Tables, taking his stand on the 
nature of the thing. Caecilius justifies the law by its efficacy' (Hegels 
e. R., p. 6). Both Favorinus, the philosopher of .-\rles, and Caecilius, the 
African jurist, were historical figures, members of Hadrian's circle, hut 
their conversation is rather imagined than reported by Aulus Gellius. 
The Latin quoted by Hegel may be translated as follows: 'You must be 
aware that the advantages and remedies offered by the laws vary and 
fluctuate in accordance with contemporary customs, types of constitu-
tion, considerations of immediate advantage, and the violence of the ills 
to be remedied. Laws do not persist unchangrd in character; on the 
contrary, the storms of circumstance and chance alter them as storms 
change the face of the sea and the sky. Has anything ever seemed more 
salutary than Stolo's proposal ... , more advantageous than the decree 
... carried by \"oconius as tribune? What has been taken to be so 
necessary ... as the Licinian law? Yet, now that the state has grown 
wealthy, all these regulations have been blotted out and buried' (Noctes 
Atticae, xx. i. 22-3). 
23. Vestimentzs instrata. 
24. See Histor.v of Phzlosophy, iii. 329-30. Hegel is contrasting 
the method of mathematics \Yhich lays do\\·n certain axioms, postulates, 
and hypotheses, and deduces what follows from them, '' ith the method 
of philosophy\\ hose subject-matter is actuality and not hypotheses, and 
which develops h;· its own mncr necessity, a necessity lacking, e.g., in 
the ad,·ance from one book of Euclid to the next. Leibniz frequently 
uses the mathematical method in his philosophical work, e.g. in his 
Pri11ciples of ,\'ature and Grace he lays down the supreme perfection of 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
God, and then goes on, in Paragraphs 10 ff., to deduce what follows 
therefrom, e.g. that this is the best of all possible worlds, that the per-
ceptions and desires of each monad must be of a certain character, &c. 
(see The Monadology &c. of Leibniz, translated by R. Latta, Oxford, 
1925, pp. 417 ff.). Hugo,loc. cit., quotes from Leibniz's letters a passage 
comparing the Roman jurisconsults and modern mathematicians in 
respect of ·vis and subtilitas (Leibniz, Opera omnia, Geneva, 1768, vol. iv, 
part iii, p. 267). 
25. callide-'artfully' or 'on the sly' (see Remark to Paragraph 18o). 
The law of inheritance (hereditas), laid down by the Twelve Tables, 
led to much injustice, e.g. children emancipated from patria potestas 
were eo ipso excluded from inheritance. Praetorian edicts allowed 
parties so excluded to obtain their inheritance under another name-
bonorum possessio. Thus, by a legal fiction, the old law of hereditas was 
maintained unimpaired, while its unpalatable consequences were evaded. 
See e.g. Gaius: Institutes, iii. 25 ff. 
26. This example of a legal fiction was withdrawn from later editions 
of Heineccius's book as a mistake. What he says is that by a legal 
fiction the Praetors in certain cases treated a daughter as a son in order 
to give her rights of inheritance from which in strict law she was excluded. 
27. Examples of the trichotomies which Hugo mentions are: 
actio, petitio, persecutio; habes, tenes, possides; auro, argento, aere; do, !ego, 
testor. 
4. 28. At the end of Hegel's Logic, the Absolute Idea, i.e. the 
highest category of thought, 'freely releases itself as nature' (see Note 42 
to Paragraph 10 ). Nature, that is to say, is mind obJectifying itself in the 
inorganic and organic. The whole sphere of right ,rmllarly is mind 
objectifying itself iu institutions (see Note 28 to tht Preface). In 
speaking of a world of mind, Hegel is not using 'world' m the general 
sense of a 'sphere' but in the sense of a world in space and time, a 
mundane world. 
29. The hope of producing an ampler exposition was not fulfilled. 
In the second and third editions of the Encyclopaedia this particular 
section was not much enlarged, though some important changes were 
made, e.g. Paragraph 482 of the third edition, \Yhich describes th~ 
absolutely free will as 'finite', prima facie contradicts P~Fdgraph 22 of 
this book, as Lasson points out (p. xxv). The Zusritze addeJ to§§ ++o-82 
of the Enc. by Hegel's editors in the edition published after !HS death 
no doubt incorporate material which Hegel had meant to work up and 
publish separately, but they have not yet been translated into English. 
5. 30. Hegel has in mind the ideas and actions of the French revolu-
tionaries. Compare, as Lasson says, the section on 'Absolute Freedom 
and Terror' in the Phenomenology, pp. 599-610. 

310 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
6. 31. The phrase 'absolute moment' is a surprising one, because 
what Hegel usually describes as 'absolute' is the synthesis of opposed 
moments, not either of them by itself. But he uses the phrase in 1/egels 
e. R., p. 88, in connexion with Paragraph I 27. He says there that life, 
as the totality of particular interests, is the 'absolute moment' and has a 
true right against the abstract or formal right of property. The 'absolute 
moment', then, is the one which has a content, is concrete, while the first 
moment is a bare form or abstraction. Cf. Philosophy of Religion, ii. 33 I. 
32. 'A = A ... Ego = Ego, or I am I ... The ego is that the being 
whereof consists in positing itself as being' (pp. 63-70)-'0f the under-
standing'-i.e. the abstract universality and abstract identity in terms of 
which the understanding, as distinct from reason, thinks; e.g. 'A thing is 
what it is and not another thing', i.e. is not, as I legel holds, a unity of 
opposites; while the universal is supposed to subsist apart and in abstrac-
tion from particulars, i.e. is not concrete or self-ditfercntiating (see 
Note 63 to Paragraph 24). 
33· 'Not-A = not-A ... A non-ego is absolutely "opposited" to the 
ego' (pp. 75 tf.). The third proposition states that the ego and the non-
ego can be thought together only as limits to each other (pp. 81 ff.). 
See HistO!J! of Philosophy, iii. 486-90. 
34· (i) Jacobi in Hegel's day (like Karl Barth in our own) holds the 
infinite and the finite apart from one another. The infinite transcends 
the finite and is represented as absolutely sundered from it. (ii) Fichte 
attempted to overcome this dualism, because he did at least feel the need 
for a synthesis, as Jacobi did not. The ego for him is in a sense the whole 
of reality and the non-ego is immanent in the ego. But since he con-
ceives the ego abstractly, not as a synthesis of opposites but as the bare 
absence of contradiction, the finite is swallowed up in an abstract infinite 
and his doctrine of immanence is as abstract as Jacobi's doctrine of 
transcendence. (iii) Hegel professes to have gone beyond both these 
abstract points of view by his doctrine that negativity is a moment within 
the infinite, so that the infinite actualizes itself only in positing itself as 
finite. This doctrine might be described both as a concrete transcendence 
and as a concrete immanence, because while in creating the finite the 
infinite transcends it, still what is so created is the realization of what 
is implicit in the infinite and so is in a sense immanent in it. (The trans-
lator owes this note to Professor Richard Kroner.) 
7. 35· 'Itself-i.e. not the ego (as Messineo translates) but nega-
tivity, as the Remark which follows makes clear. Both moments of 
which the ego is a synthesis are negative: the first is abstraction, the 
flight from or the negation of everything determinate; the second is 
determination, the negative of the original abstraction. Hence when the 
ego synthesizes these moments by becoming self-determined, it does so 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
311 
by bringing negativity to bear on negativity. What lives is an individual, 
neither a 'such' nor a 'this', but their synthesis, and life is the process of 
actualizing individuality, i.e the attempt to make explicit the 'such' 
by expressing it in the 'this', to make universal and particular correspond. 
The individual puts away childish things, rejects one achievement after 
another as unsatisfactory, because no imperfect correspondence between 
the universal and particular sides of his nature will satisfy him. And it 
fails to satisfy him because he is self-related negativity, i.e. the synthesis 
(whether explicit or not) of these two sides. Since it is this synthesis 
which is always present as the final cause of his efforts, self-related 
negativity may be described, as it is in the Remark to this Paragraph, 
as the ultimate spring of all activity. 
36. ideelle-'The proposition that the finite is "ideal" constitutes 
idealism .... By" ideal" is meant the finite as it is found in true infinity, 
i.e. as a determination or content, which though distinct does not exist 
independently but only as a moment .... Religion equally with philo-
sophy refuses to recognize in finitude a veritable being or something 
absolute' (Science of Logic, i. 163 and 168). 
37· i.e. you are regarding the will as an ego or a substance whose 
activities or attributes respectively you can enumerate. You have over-
looked the process by which the will develops from potentiality to 
actuality. Once the will as an actuality is before you, you may look biick 
over the process of its development and describe the universal and 
particular moments which have become explicit through that process. 
But from that point of view these moments cannot be abstracted from 
one another without falsification. They are not like the factors of a 
number, indifferent to one another, but are related organically. A 
process is intelligible only in the light of its result, and to this result 
every moment in the process contributes, since each moment is the 
making explicit of what was present in germ at the start. Hence if you 
look at the will organically, you can see that its truth is self-determining 
individuality and that it is therefore aware of its universality only in 
determining itself, while it determines itself only to actualize its uni-
versality. It becomes aware of its universality by means of its particular 
determination, and since this determination is its own work, the will may 
be said to be a 'self-mediating' activity, or concrete individuality. Its 
individuality may be regarded as the conclusion of a syllogism of which 
the major premiss is its universality and its minor premiss-the middle 
term or the means whereby the conclusion is reached-is its particular 
determination. 
8. 38. With this Paragraph compare the references to it in Paragraphs 
25, 28, 108, and 109. Also see Enc., §§ 424-5. The will may be regarded 
as determinate on two different levels: (a) it may be determined as 

312 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
subjective only and not as objective also; i.e. it may be the self-con-
sciousness which distinguishes itself from the external world. As will, 
this self-consciousness seeks to overcome its subjectivity and to give 
objectivity to itself, because to be only subjective is to be restricted, and 
the will's implicitly infinite nature struggles to overcome this restriction. 
This relation of consciousness to an object in which it finds not itself but 
only something other than itself is a mode in which the will appears, but 
it is only an appearance, not actuality. (Actuality is the synthesis of sub-
jective and objective. A cleavage between these is only an appearance.) 
On this point see Paragraph 108 and Note 5 thereto. The first 'form' of 
the will which Hegel distinguishes here is the will determined in form 
as subjective. (b) The second form of the will is the will determined in 
content as well, i.e. the will which strives to satisfy some specific desire 
or to carry out some specific purpose. This form of will-the genuinely 
determinate will which supersedes the abstract or formal will of mere 
self-consciousness-Hegcl proceeds to treat in the following Paragraphs. 
9. 39· The second form of the will is the one whose determinate 
content is in the first instance given; but since it is also determined in 
form (i.e. is conscious of being a will), this content is its purpose or aim. 
A jelly-fish may have impulses, but it lacks self-consciousness and so 
cannot be said to have the purposes which a man can hold before his 
mind and then strive to attain. 
10. 40. 'Object'-i.e. 'content and purpose' (Hegels e. R., p. 12). 
41. 'For itself and in itself'-in itself or in its essential nature a child 
is a man, a rational being. The child exempli.fies the generic essence of 
manhood, and it is only if we know this that we can understand what a 
child is at all. But this generic essence is only implicit in the child; in 
itself the child is a man, but for itself or in its own eyes it is a child and a 
child only. Childhood is the mode of existence correlative to the concept 
of manhood while that concept is still only implicit, or, to use Hegel's 
terminology, in the child, manhood is 'in its concept', or is 'as concept 
only', or is 'in accordance with its concept'. The potentialities of man-
hood are realized only when the child grows up, and then, as man, is for 
itself what it is in itself. Manhood explicit or for itself as the adult is a 
different thing, a different type of existent, from the child, despite the 
inner identity between child and adult in respect of their concept. A man, 
however, is finite and he may fail adequately to embody the concept of 
man; he may be a cripple or a lunatic. Here again then there may be a 
discrepancy between the man's implicit nature and what he explicitly is, 
and it is the occurrence of such a discrepancy which constitutes finitude. 
A lunatic exists, is a phenomenon, but because of this discrepancy, he 
lacks actuality is a 'mere' existent or 'only' a phenomenon. 
42. In Hegel's Encyclopaedia the section on nature succeeds the 
section on logic. Logic describes the movement of pure thought from 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
313 
its most abstract to its most concrete category, from 'pure being' to 
'absolute Idea'. All these categories are inwardly interconnected. No 
thought can be properly described as 'external' to any other. Now the 
inward and subjective are opposed to the external and objective, and the 
'ideality' of thought to the 'reality' of things; and the concept, in order 
to actualize itself as a synthesis of opposites, posits itself, at the end of 
the logic, as its own opposite, i.e. not as abstract inwardness but as an 
external world of objects externally related to one another. This world 
is nature, and its chief characteristic is absolute externality, i.e. it is both 
implicitly and explicitly external. As Hegel puts it, nature is external 
to itself, it is entirely unconscious of its concept (see Addition to Para-
graph .p ). I cannot be external to myself, because I am self-conscious; 
another man may be external to me but he has an inward life or a con-
sciousness of his own and hence externality is not the whole truth about 
him as it is about a stone. The truth of nature is its concept; I can think 
this concept, hut nature cannot, and since therefore it remains outside 
its concept it remains outside its true self, and 'abstractly' external 
because the internality to which that externality is relative is mine and 
not its. Since nature as a whole is thought positing itself as externality 
and so as the opposite of itself, the categories of logic will have their 
analogues in nature. The first category of logic is pure being and its 
analogue in nature is space. Space is thus the first form which the 
'reciprocal externality characteristic of nature' takes. Space is pure 
quantity, parts of space are all external to each other and so each 
'negates' the other. But this reciprocal externality is only implicit in 
space, because the parts of space still remain beside each other and form 
a continuum. This moment of externality is explicit, on the other hand, 
in time, which is 'Chronus, devouring his own childr~n', since, when one 
instant negates its predecessor, that predecessor disappears into the 
past and exists no longer. In the movement of thought, space precedes 
time, just as pure being precedes not-being. In the first stage, that of 
immediacy, the negative moment is implicit, and it becomes explicit at 
the next stage. Space then is the external formation appropriate to 
externality implicit (just as the child is the external formation appropriate 
to manhood implicit), while time is the external formation appropriate 
to externality explicit. The best account in English of Hegel's philosophy 
of nature is an article hy S. Alexander in Mind for October 1886. 
43· The natural or implicit will is treated in Paragraphs I I-IS. The 
will which is explicitly free and is the basis of formal rights is treated in 
Paragraphs 2I ff. The concept of the will is freedom. The natural will 
is irrational and chained by desire and caprice; this irrationality is only 
an appearance (see Paragraphs I I and 19), and the will appears in its 
irrational form because at the immediate level there is a gulf between 
what it is in its inherent nature and what it is explicitly. 

314 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
11. H· 'It is the element of individuality', i.e. the 'self-determining 
concept of the will', 'which first ~xplicitly differentiates the moments of 
the concept. Individuality is the negative reflection of the concept into 
itself and in that way it is the free differentiation of the concept by which 
the specific character of the concept is realized' (Enc., § 165). The self-
determinin~ individual in the process of realizing his individuality gives 
his will a specific content and sets up a difference in the will between its 
universal nature and the particularity of its content. The character of 
this ditTerence varies with the character of the content and that in turn 
varies with the stages in the will's advance from immediacy to its full 
development. 
45· i.e. in Paragraphs 19 and 150 with the Remarks thereto. 
12. 46. The indeterminacy is twofold because none of these desires 
is my desire in particular and each of the desires is itself indeterminate 
(e.g. hunger, which all sorts of different foods might satisfy, is not hunger 
for anything specific). 
47· There is no precise parallel in English to that between beschliessen 
and sich mtschliessen. Both exprcssions mean 'to decide'. Etymologically, 
the former implies simply 'closing the matter', while the latter implies 
that the decision is at the same time the 'unfolding' or 'opening' of the 
character of the person who makes it. 
13. 48. 'In so far as intelligence thinks'-intelligence is either mind 
theoretical or mind practical (sec Paragraph 4). Cf. Enc., § 34, where 
Hegel compares the doctrine of mind as activity to the Scholastic notion 
of God as 'pure act'. 
49· i.e. by abandoning impulse and by determining itself in accordance 
with universal and rational laws. This is what the ethical will does in a 
state with a rational constitution, see Part III. 
so. i.e. Kant and his followers. 
15. 51. The difference between impulse and purpose is that the 
latter is made what it is by thought and so is rational and necessary. 
Impulse is irrational and contingent, though this is only an appearance, 
because in fact impulse is purpose disguised. See Paragraph 19 and the 
Remark thereto, and Note 39 to Paragraph 9· 
52. Because the contingent is what is defined as possible, i.e. its 
definition is that it exists but need not (Hegels e. R., p. 14). Since the 
ego may abstract itself from any content (see Paragraph 5), the content, 
in the face of this power to abstract, is only a possible one at the level 
of the arbitrary will as distinct from the genuinely free will. 
53· Christian J. Wolff, I679-1754• the champion of rationalist meta-
physics. For Hegel's view of him, see History of Philosophy, iii. 348 ff. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
315 
For the arguments used in his day to support the freedom of the will, see 
Remark to Paragraph 4· 
16. 54· i.e. if it renounces choice and determinacy altogether, it 
reverts to the first moment, described in Paragraph 5· 
19. 55· In Paragraphs 18 and 19 where Hegel is considering 
the goodness or badness of human nature and where he mentions the 
'demand for the purification of impulses', he probably has in mind the 
first part of Kant's Religion u:ithin the bounds of reason alone. This part is 
translated in Kant's Theory of Ethics under the title 'Of the indwelling 
of the bad principle along with the good, or on the radical evil in human 
nature'. The demand in question is made there (p. 354). For Hegel's 
view of the natural goodness or evil of man, see Paragraph I 39· 
56. e.g. Remarks to Paragraphs z and -t· 
57· See Paragraphs q.8 ff. and especially Remark to Paragraph ISO. 
20. s8. For happiness as an end, sec Paragraph I23. 'Sum of 
sati~faction', see Kant's Theory of Ethics, p. -~ 5· 'Education', i.e. Bildung, 
a central conception in the work of von Humboldt. 'The state', he says, 
'is nothing hut a means to the furtherance of Bildung, or rather to the 
removal of hindrances which would be in its way in a social state' 
( Werke, Berlin, I903, i. 6g, quoted here from Aris: History of Political 
Thought in Germany from I789-r8I5, p. 144). Hegel regards 'civil 
society' as a sphere of education also (sec Paragraph I8j), while the 
institutions of the state too have an educative force (see Paragraphs 268 
and 3I5)· 'Bildung is a more or less untranslatable term; it means the 
actual process of education and at the same time the cultured state of 
mind arrived at through education' (Aris, loc. cit.). ':\!ental develop-
ment' and 'culture' have occasionally been used to n:nder the word. 
Bildung is used especially of education in the humanities. The phrase 
gebildeter Il1ensch (educated man) originates at the Renaissance and means 
a man of literary attainments, a scholar, not a scientist. 
21. 59· The form of the will, as distinct from its content, is described 
in Paragraph 5· This form Hegel i.'l fond of calling Fiirsichsein, i.e. the 
will's existence for itself or in its own eyes, the ego aware of itself as an 
independent ego and so able to abstract itself from everything. This 
form is infinite because it is purely self-related and free from all restric-
tion, sec Paragraph 5· 
6o. Consciousness of the most rudimentary type, the type which 
precedes sense-perception, let alone intelligence, Hegel calls 'sense-
consciousness' 
(das 
sinnliche 
Bewusstsein)-Enc., §§ 4I8-Ig-the 
abstract pure consciousness of an immediate object, mere sensation, 
e.g. smell, taste, colour. These sensations, like their objects, fall 
into the world of the finite; they are natural, not rational, a temporal 

JI6 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
series and therefore mutually exclusive. Consciousness here then is 
self-external (see Note 42 to Paragraph 10). Doubtless the series of 
externally related sensations implies an enduring self whose sensations 
they are; but so long as they are only externally related, not an organic 
system expressive of the self, the self is outside them, is not conscious of 
itself in them, and hence the ego in sensation ig 'outside itself'. Self-
consciousness, the truth to which consciousness attains when it climbs 
from sensation, through sense-perception, to intelligence (Enc., §§ 420-
3) begins by being immediate and has the form of a desire or an impulse 
directed on an external object in which it hopes to find satisfaction. In 
this experience, self-consciousness is related to an object outside itself; 
and since implicitly it is the synthesis of subject and object (since it is 
self-consciousness), it is divided against itself when i~ is a conscious-
ness of an impulse on the one hand and an external object on the 
other. The implicit unity of subject and object is explicitly realized 
when the impulse (e.g. hunger) is satisfied by devouring and so destroy-
ing the external object (Enc., § 426). 
61. 'Essence'-i.e. he has not risen to the stage of reflection, to 
distinguishing between his essence (manhood, which implies rationality 
and therefore freedom) and what he is (a slave). For the meaning of 
essence see Enc., § I I 2: 'Any mention of essence implies that we 
distinguish it from being. The point of view of essence is in general the 
standpoint of reflection. This word "reflection" is originally applied 
when a ray of light in a straight line, impinging on the surface of a 
mirror, is thrown hack from it. In this phenomenon, we have two 
things: first, an immediate which is, and secondly, the ... derived or 
transmitted phase of the same. Something of this sort takes place when 
we reflect or think upon an object, not in its immediacy, hut as deriva-
tive or mediated. The ... aim of philosophy is often represented as the 
ascertainment of the essence of things .... The immediate being of 
things is thus conceived under the image of a ... curtain behind which 
the essence lies hidden .... There is a permanent in things, and that 
permanent is in the first instance their essence .... The essence subsists 
in independence of its phenomenal embodiment. Thus we say of a 
people that the great thing is not what they do ... but what they are. 
This is correct if it means that a man's conduct should be looked at not 
in its immediacy but only as a revelation of his inner self or essence.' 
Cf. 'We know that the individual is free .... Personal freedom is the 
fundamental thing and there is nothing which can do injury to it .... If 
we imagined a conqueror in Europe who acted on caprice and it struck 
him to make half his subjects slaves, we would realize at once that this 
was impossible, however great the force behind the project. Everyone 
knows that he cannot be a slave, and he knows this as the essence of his 
being. We are so and so old, we live, are officials, but these things we 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
317 
know to be transient, not our essential being; what is essential is that we 
cannot he slaves' (History of Philosophy, Hoffmeister's edition, Leipzig, 
1938, Lief. 2, pp. 233-4). 
22. 6z. The external, objective, organization of the state, described 
in Part III, embodies the inwardness of the will, i.e. its universality, 
particularity, and individuality, in a way appropriate to the concept, 
because these three moments there form an organic unity. The will has 
embodied itself in institutions, and there is thus established there what 
Hegel calls an 'identity' between inward and outward. 
24. 63. The self-identical universal is altogether abstracted from 
and indifferent to wdividuals. 'It is as "all" that the universal is in the 
first instance encountered by reflection. The individuals form for 
reflection the foundation, and it is only our subjective action which 
collects and describes them as "all" (e.g. all metals conduct electricity). 
So far the universal has the aspect of an external fastening holding 
together a number of independent individuals which have not the least 
affinity towards it. This semblance of indifference is however unreal. ... 
If we take Caius, Sempronius, and the other inhabitants of a town, the 
fact that all of them are men is not merely something which they have 
in common; it is their universal or generic essence without which these 
individuals would not be at all. ... The individual man is what he is in 
particular only in so far as he is before all things a man as man and in 
general. And that generality is not something external or in addition to 
other abstract qualities; it is what permeates and includes in it every-
thing particular' (Enc., § 175). 
26. 64. The reference here to the 't·thical will' is smprising. As the 
Addition indicates, a reference to it would ha\ c hcc·n n:pected under 
(a) rather than under ({3). :\1cssineo suggests n:adinc; der kindlich-
sittliclze, which would mean 'the naively ethical mil'. The explana-
tion of Hegel's reference, however, is possibly to he found in the 
Phenomenology, pp. 484 ff., \vhere 'ethical action' is used of action done 
from the unquestioning acceptance of objective la\vs; there Hegel is 
thinking especially of ancient Greece, and of actions like Antigone's. 
In the modern world, however, as described in Part III of this book, the 
ethical will is not merely objective in the sense that it is 'sunk in its 
object'; it is at the same time a subjective and conscientir)us will, though 
its 'objective' character is even then part of the truth about it. 
27. 65. The ultimate dc:stiny of mind which, qua rational, is free, is 
that it shall find in its object nothing hut itself and its own freedom. 
The process \\hereby this goal is achieved is described in Paragraph 28. 
Thereafter, mind is at peace \Vith the world; it has fully developed its 
potentialities and exists as Idea, the unity of subject and object. Such a 
unity is achieved in a sense when 'the free will wills the free will', but 

JI8 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
this is only an abstract identity; a genuine content is lacking. Kant's 
ethics, in Hegel's view, never rises above this abstraction. \\"hat is 
required further is that the object willed shall take a form apparently the 
opposite of freedom itsdf (because the concrete is not an abstract 
idc.:ntitv hut a unity of opposites), i.e. the form ot concrete laws. 
Hence: concrete freedom is the 11·ill willing, not simply itself, but what 
is in accordance with laws embodying the intelligence and so the will 
of the people who live under them, and the Idea of the will is the 
synthesis of the subjective volition 11ith the system of objective 
institutions which give content to that volition. 
29. 66. llq;:cl refers, quoting as u~ual from memory, to Kant's 
statement that 'every action is nght which in itsc:lf or in the maxim on 
which it proceeds, is such that it can co-nist 11·ith the freedom of the 
\I ill of each and all in action, according to a universalla\1' (Philosophy 
of Law, Introduction,§ C, p. 45). The 'law of reason' to 11hich liege! 
refers JUSt below IS a reference to the same section of Kant's work. 
'!-'elf-1\III', i.e. Irtllhzir, the arbitrary will, capnce. 
67. 
~ee e.g. Con/rat Social, i. 6, where the 'fundamental problem' 
is said to he 'to find a form of association 1vhich 11 ill defend and protect 
the person and property of each a,;sociate, and \\herein each member, 
united to all the others, still obeys himself alone, and retains Ius original 
freedom'. 
i.e. what is fundamental is the single individual and his 
natural liberty; the task of the state is mcrdy to protect these. 
68. 
i.e. the French Revolution. 
30. 69. 
Paragraphs 133 tf. 
jO. i.e. the stage at which mind has hccome the state-the mind of 
a nation ohjectified in its rational and organic mstitutions. 
31. 71. i.e. like the deduction of the concept of right-sec Para-
graph 2. 
72. 'Plato'-it is usually the second half of the Parmenides which 
Hegel has in mind. 'Scepticism of the ancicnts'-scc History of Phzlo-
sophy, ii. 328 If. '.-\pproximation'--see :\'ote 39 to the Preface. 
32. 73· :\ caution against the supposition that Hegel is writing a 
history of institutions. It is not until Paragraph I s8 that he hegins to 
deal with the family. The family thus logically presupposes all the 
'determinations of the concept', or catc,gorics, dealt with in the earlier 
Paragraphs, hut it does not follow that these logical prcsuppositiolls arc 
alwa~ s explicit in actual societies. In certain social conditions families 
may exist although pri\·-1te property docs not. 
33. 74· For the presuppositions here mentioned, sec Enc., §§ 237 
43. and Sciena of Logzc, i, 79 If. For 'immediacy or pure being', sec 
Note 1 to Paragraph 34· 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
75· 1\foralitiit and Sittlichkeit. 
For the translation here adopted 
for these words, see Translator's Foreword, § J. For Hegel's distinc-
tion between these sec Paragraph r.p. 111oralitiit is abstract morality; 
it possesses the form of all genuinely moral action, i.e. conscientiousness, 
but it Jacks a content to correspond "ith this form. Sittlichkeit is the 
concrete morality of a rational social order where rational institutions 
and laws provide the content of conscientious conviction. 
P.·lRT I (.·IBSTR.ICT RIGHT) 
34. r. We are trac;n~ the development of the will from concept to 
Idea. The start of a process of development is abstract in comparison 
with its end, and what is developing is at the start 'immediate', not yet 
mediated and made explicit in and through the later stages; e.g. a man's 
character is built up in the course of his life, but it was implicit and 
undeveloped in his childhood. In adult life the hare universal, 'char-
acter', has been given determinacy in and through his particular actions 
and so has become something concrete, mediated through the particular 
instances of actions flowing from that character. In infancy, this 
character has 'being', though it does not 'exist' as something differ-
entiated and determinate. The concept of the free ''Ill begins therefore 
at the level of immediacy, pure bemg, and ahstract10n; and, since it is 
a conapt whose advance we are studying, its abstract phase is the phase 
of pure undifferentiated universality. The pomt of this Paragraph, 
which is amplified and explained in Paragraphs 35~9, is to show that 
although at the start the will is universal and abstract, the other moments 
of the concept, particularity and individuality, arc also present, but, 
because of the ah~tractnrss of this stage, are cxpli~Jtly different from 
the universal and arc not fused with it into a concr-:tc unity. Such a 
fusion is not finally achieved until we come to the state. 
What is immedrate is a unit, \Yhile \\·hat is mediated rs a member of 
a whole. Hence the free will in its immediacy is the mil of a unit, an 
exclusive or abstract indiz·idual, free because it is self-related (see 
Paragraph 5). Persons arc free units in this sense, and, as units merely, 
are not differentiated from one another by special characteristics of 
their own. Thus personality is something formal, a umursal form in 
which all rational beings participate. Form implies content, hut at this 
stage of immediacy, the universal form has not given Itself its own 
content, its 0\' n determinacy; and therefore the content, something 
particular, is something other than the form of the will. Content and 
form must correspond, and hence if the form is immediate, the content 
must be immediate also; and such a content is available at this stage 
(a) in immediate desires-i.e. desires not rationalized into a system-
and (b) in the world of external given objects from which the person 
as a unit distinguishes himself. 

320 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
35. 2. Knowledge of the self in abstraction from all objects and 
determinate experiences is the knowledge that 'I am I'. Here the 
object known, the self, is identical with the knower, the abstract and 
infinite ego of Paragraph 5· The 'infinity' of such a self is 'simple' 
because the self is abstract and self-identical, i.e. not the concrete 
universality of a synthesis of universal and particular, but only the 
bare form of universality. 
3· 'Consciousness' is what Hegel calls the grade of the pheno-
menal mind or mind as 'appearance' (Enc., § 413). Self-consciousness 
is the second stage within that grade. :\Jind fully explicit is the 'truth 
of consciousness' (Enc., § 440), and practical mind, the second stage 
within that higher grade, has for its content and aim its own freedom 
(Enc., § 480 ). 
37. 4· Formal rights belong to all persons qua persons. Ko such 
rights belong to me in respect of my advantage, welfare, or private 
judgement, because these depend on what diF.crentiates me from other 
persons. For the rights of intention and welfare, see Paragraphs r 19 ff.; 
for the right of private judgement (the right of 'insight') see Para-
graph 132. 
40. 5· To be conscious of oneself as a unit implies (a) distinguishing 
between one's self and those determinate characteristics \\·hich dif-
ferentiate one from other people, and (b) abstracting the unitary self 
from these determinate characteristics and ignoring or negating these. 
Hence to be conscious of oneself as a unit is to 'he related to oneself 
negatively' or to 'distinguish oneself from oneself'. The inner self-
distinction is outwardly manifested as a distinction between oneself and 
other units. (Thought, or the concept, a system of internal relations 
is existent or embodied in the world as a system of ntenw/ relations. 
The concept is a synthesis of opposites, but in the world thc opposites 
'appear' as sundered from onc another. See :\otc +" to Paragraph ro 
and cf. :\otes 19 and 23 to Paragraphs r6r and 165.) To he conscious 
of what one is (a self-identical unit) is eo ipso to be conscious of what 
one is not; and since the negative of a unit can only he another unit, 
to be conscious of onesl'lf as a unit is to be conscious that one is d1stinct 
from other umts. That 1S, to be conscious that one is a person co 1pso 
implies that there arc other persons from whom ont.:'s own pnsonality 
is distinct (see Enc., § 97). Hegel uses the same aro;um<.:nt ldtcr in 
connnion \11th the state-sec Paragraphs 323 and 33 r. Further, my 
property is my personality objectified; hence \Vhcn my consuousncss 
of my personahty leads me to distinguish myself from other persons, 
this 1s co ipso to distinguish my property from theirs. Qua persons, 
however, I and other property owners are identiG!l; our personality is 
simply the uni,·crsality of the free will in its immediacy, and our 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
J2I 
identity with each other, implicit in the fact that we are all persons, 
becomes explicit when our property-the embodiment of our person-
ality-changes hands. 
6. The classification adopted in Justinian: Institutes, i. 2. xii. 'Every 
right exercised by us relates either to persons, things, or actions.' The 
translator's authority for this and most of the other notes on Roman 
law is Buckland: Text-book of Roman Law (Cambridge, 1921). A 
reader unfamiliar with Roman Law will find helpful as guides to this 
section of Hegel's work (a) Gibbon, chapter xliv (out of date, but one 
of Hegel's authorities), (b) Maine's Ancient Law, with Pollock's notes 
(London, 1906). 
7· Philosophy of Law, § ro, p. 84. 
8. Jus ad actiones is in the main the law of procedure; but it is 
still a vexed question how exactly jus ad personas is discriminated from 
jus ad res. The difficulty is to define the content of the former. Hegel 
adopts Savigny's view that the law of persons is family law. For 
objections to this view, see Buckland, op. cit., p. 58. 
9· In the passage cited by Hegel, Heineccius says: 'Man and per-
son are quite distinct in law; a man is a being who possesses a human 
hody and a mind endowed with reason; a pfTson is a man regarded as 
having a certain status.' Except in the ven· late Roman law, this is 
not true, because the Roman lawyers generally use persona in the un-
technical sense of the man who plays any part in life. Hence both 
slaves and children are persons. Hegel takes 'person' in a technical 
sense and makes it equivalent to caput, and in respect of caput, or 
status, there was indeed a difference between the sbn: and the free man. 
Caput is a man's civil capacity, his position in reg,nd to family rights 
and consequently to freedom and citizenship. Capitis diminutio is a 
change in caput, amounting to its loss in the case of those sold as 
slaves, and suffered to some extent by those banished and by those 
adopted into a new familia. On the 'slave-status' of children, see 
Remarks to Paragraphs 175, r8o. 
ro. Philosophy of Law, §§ 22 ff., pp. ro8 ff. 'Personal right of a 
real kind is a right to the possession of an external object as a thing 
and to the use of it as a person'-e.g. a man's right over his wife, his 
children, and his domestics. 
r r. Paragraphs r63, r67-8. 
12. Philosophy of Law, §§ r8 ff., pp. roo ff. 
42. IJ. For the externality of nature, see Note 42 to Paragraph 10. 
:\!ere consciousness may take, e.g. my books, as external to me, but 
mind in its freedom recognizes that they embody my personality and 

322 
TRAKSLA TOR'S NOTES 
to that extent they are not external. They are external as natural 
objects, but not as 'mine', and to treat them as purely external, as the 
furniture remover does, is to ignore most of the truth about them. 
43. 14. i.e. the existences just referred to: (a) natural endowments, 
(b) external objects. 
15. See Paragraphs 65 ff. 
16. See Paragraphs 65 ff. 
Hegel has a note on the use of the 
word 'alienation' here: 'It would be better to speak here of a mode of 
externality. Alienation is giving up something which is my property 
and which is already external, it is not to externalize' (Hegels e. R., 
p. 29)-
44. 17. It is (i) the philosophy of common sense, and (ii) the philo-
sophy of Kant, which Hegel has in mind. For a full discussion of 
these see Enc., §§ 26-6o. 
18. The free will by using and destroying 'external' objects shows 
that these have no subsistence of their own but are only 'ideal' (see 
Note 36 to Paragraph 7), not real, while the free will does subsist and 
is their truth because they exist only 'for' it. 
46. 19. i.e. the four elements of early Greek cosmology-earth, air, 
fire, water (see Enc., § 281). 
20. i.e. especially the proposals of the Gracchi and their successors 
in the last century of the Roman Republic to distribute domain lands 
to individual colonists. 
2 r. i.e. fideicommissa; these were originally requests to a regularly 
instituted heir to allow the estate to accrue to the benefit of another 
party, e.g. to chiidrtn debarred from inheriting because they were the 
children of a Roman father hy an exogamous marriage. It is because 
such trusts imply that the ultimate beneficiary suffers from some 
disability in connexion with property ownership that Hegel regards 
them as in part a contravention of the right of personality. 
22. 'Natural persons are such as the God of nature formed us. 
Artificial are such as are created and devised by human laws for the 
purpose of society and government, which are called corporations or 
bodies politic' (Blackstone: Commentaries, vol. i, p. 123). 
23. If Hegel has Plato's Republic in mind, then he fails to notice 
that it is the Guardians only who are there precluded from holding 
private property. But he may be thinking of Laws, v. 739· 
47. 24. :\Iy body differs in form from other bodies and to that 
extent its form is particular; but its content is universal, since ewry-
thing that is mine is grounded in it. 'Real pre-condition '-i.e. reale 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
323 
1\Joglichkeit, a category of Hegel's logic; for its significance see Science 
of Logic, ii. 179 ff. 
48. 25. Mittel. Mind, by taking possession of the body, makes the 
body a means (1'.1ittcl) to or an instrument of its realization. In this 
way, the body ceases to be an immediate existent and becomes 'medi-
ated' through the activity of mind. See Addenda, p. 376. 
26. A plan or purpose is realized when it ceases to be something 
merely inward or subjective and becomes embodied in something, i.e. 
becomes something detenninately existent or objective. Before it is 
realized, my plan is something for me, but it does not exist for others; 
they cannot apprehend it until I embody it, give it determinacy, in 
words or actions. Hence to give it determinacy is eo ipso to give it an 
existence from the point of view of others. In Hegel's language, deter-
minate being and being for others are identical (Scie1zce of Logic, i. 131). 
Hence I am free for others only because I am free in my determinate 
existence, i.e. in my body. 
49. 27. Of the 'philosophy of identity', often attacked by Hegel, 
Bishop Butler's phrase is an example: 'Everything is what it is and not 
another thing.' If this were the whole truth of the matter, Hegel holds, 
then philosophy, and thought generally, would consist of statements 
like 'good is good', 'a plant is a plant', &c. But if everything is simply 
describable as itself, it must also differ from everything else, a self-
identical plant differs from a self-identical good. And this difference is 
just as much a characteristic of the plant as 1ts self-identity. Identity 
and difference, then, are never found apart; what is Identical is also 
different and vice versa. The L' nderstanding. however, refusing to 
contemplate a synthesis of opposites and insistmg 011 an identity which 
excludes difference, has to resort to the category of likei:c-ss, or abstract 
equality, in order to describe the relation between two things which are 
the same yet not the same-the child is 'like' the man; the child and the 
man are 'equally' human. (Sec Enc., §§ 103 and II8. Cf. also Bradley: 
Ethical Studies, Oxford, 1927, p. 167.) 'Reflective thinking' is intel-
lectual mediocrity in two senses. It is mediocre because it is an in-
adequate type of mental activity and must be superseded by reason; 
and it is mediocre because it is midway bet\veen what Hegel calls the 
logic of being on the one hand and the logic of the concept on the other. 
It is the type of thinking which rests in the categories of essence (see 
~ate 5 to Paragraph ro8). 
28. e.g. by ::\Ioravians and Anabaptists in Germany. 
29. An abstract unin1rsal has no organic connexion with its parti-
culars. :\Imd, or reason, as a concrete universal, particularizes itself into 
clifft:rences which are mterconnected by its universality in the same way 
m wh1ch the parts of an organism are held together by the single life 

324 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
which they all share. The parts depend on the whole for their life, but 
on the other hand the persistence of life necessitates the differentiation 
of the parts. 
JO. See Paragraphs 199 If., 230, 237 If. 
50. 31. The technical term for entering into possession of a thing 
otherwise than by contract or inheritance is occupatio, occupancy, and 
it is with occupancy that Hegel is dealing when he speaks of 'taking 
possession' of a thing or 'seizing' it. The principle enunciated in this 
Paragraph is that of Roman law. 
51. 32. 'Relation to others'-i.e. the recognition by others that the 
thing is mine. This recognition depends on my putting my will into the 
thing (see ~ote z6 to Paragraph 49), and I cannot do this (except by 
infringing the rights of others) unless the thing is without an owner (is a 
res nullius) when I do so. 
52. 33· See Kote 6o to Paragraph 21. 
34· Cf. end of the Remark to Paragraph 43· 
53. 35· The relation between these three types of judgement is 
expounded in Enc., §§ 172-3. They represent progressive attempts to 
attach a predicate to a subject; e.g. (i) since the will is embodied in its 
property, we may say that 'the \Viii is a particular thing, its property'-
'this property is my will', 'this and my will are identical'. But the will 
is universal and the thing is particular, and so the thing is the negative 
of the universal or the will, and (ii) the will is therefore not the thing. 
By using it the will negates the thing in order to bring it into accordance 
with itself. Such negation, however, can never completely achieve its 
end, because the will, as universal, can never be adequately embodied in 
any one particular. Hence (iii) the will must be asserted to be the will, 
and the object must be altogether spurned or alienated. This is not a 
mere negative judgement, but a 'negatively infinite judgement' which 
asserts a total incongruity between the subject (the will) and the pre-
dicate (the thing). 
55. 36. Accessio natura/is in Roman law includedfetura (young born 
to animals in my possession) as well as jetsam, alluvial deposits, islands 
formed in rivers, &c. 
37· As fetura is, e.g. by Fichte: Science of Rights, § 19 c, 4, p. 306. 
59. 38. See ~ote 35 to Paragraph 53· 
39· Its Bestimmung, its determinate character as self-less, as a mere 
'thing' (see Paragraph 42). 
60. 40. To use a stream continually to drive a mill-wheel is to claim 
possession not of a restricted amount of water hut of the 'elemental' 
basis of that amount, i.e. of the stream itself. So in stock-breeding, 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
although I limit my use of the animals (e.g. limit the number I slaughter) 
in order to safeguard the renewal of the stock, I claim as mine not merely 
the head of cattle I possess now, but their 'organic' basis, i.e. the 
generic essence which lives in them and their progeny (Hegels e. R., 
P· 39). 
61. 41. i.e. it is only 'ideal'. What is genuinely substantial in Hegel's 
view is mind or reason. l\Iind is its own end and external things are at 
its disposal. Instead of the reference just below to Paragraph 42, a 
reference to Paragraph 44 would be more apposite. 
62. 42. 'Usufruct is the right of using another's property, of en-
joying its fruits short of waste of its substance .... Nevertheless, in 
order that properties should not remain wholly unused through the 
entire cessation of usufruct, the law has been pleased to ordain that in 
certain circumstances the right of usufruct shall be annulled and that 
the owner proper shall resume the land.' 
43· (a) Things transferable by mancipation, a formal ceremony 
before witnesses, and things transferable by simple delivery. (b) Quiri-
tarian ownership was originally the only type recognized in law: when 
the Praetors began to recognize a beneficial ownership in a man whose 
legal title failed simply from defect in the form of his conveyance, this 
was called bonitarian ownership, and quiritarian ownership became 
only a formality which gave its holder no beneficial interest in that over 
which his right extended (see the index to :\luirhead's edition of the 
Institutes of Gaius, Edinburgh, r 88o ). 
44· The distinction is that between ownership in the abstract and 
usufruct. The overlord's interest in property is dunu1num directum, the 
vassal's is dominium utile (Huber: Praelectiones ;uns cz;·;!ts, Leipzig, 
1735, p. 93). Emphyteusis was a grant of imperial land w perpetuum or 
for a long term on condition of cultivating it properly and paying a 
stipulated rent. 
45· Lords of the :\Ianor are eo ipso nobility or gentry, whether their 
lands are being farmed or not. l:"se is a stage further on in the dialectic 
than mere abstract property, or the mere seizure of a possession, and, 
since it is further on, it is 'rational' in contrast wtth the lower stage of 
property in the abstract. 
46. e.g. in France since 1789 (l\lessinco). Feudal tenure 3tilllingered 
in some of the German states in Hegd 's day and was not abolished in 
the two :\Iecklenburgs until 1918. For the 'impatience of opinion', 
compare History of Philosophy, i. 36. 
63. 47· If a thing is comparable with other things, it must possess 
some universal character in common with them in virtue of which the 
comparison may be made. This character is its value; the value of a 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
loaf depends not on the specific quality of this loaf as lhstinct from 
another of the same sort, but simply on the fact that the loaf is a parti-
cular instance of a universal kind. \" alu.: is a concept existing for 
thought, not sensation, and therefore value, not taste, smell, &c., is the 
genuine substance of the thing (see Note .p to Paragraph 6r ). 
64. 48. Positively, prescription is a title or right to the possession 
of property which has been uninterruptedly used or possessed either 
from time immemorial or for a period fixed by law. 
~egatively, it is a 
limitation of the time within which an action or a claim may be raised, 
e.g. to recover possession of property after its usufruct has been given 
to someone else. 
49· Realitiit. In Hegel's terminology, a thing has Realitiit or reality 
when it has objective existence in relation to something subjective. A 
plan is 'real' when it ceases to be merely subjective and becomes deter-
minate in words or acts (see Enc., § 91). Property is 'real' as embodying 
my will, and prescription in Hegel's view is a right because, when I use a 
thing, I embody my will in it and it becomes 'really' mine, while when I 
withdraw my will from it, it becomes a res nullius. Hegel is not here 
speaking of 'real' property in the usual legal sense. 
50. Public memorials become private property through being dis-
regarded and becoming objects of indifference. The content of books 
becomes public property by the opposite process, i.e. by being studied, 
assimilated, and used in the writing of new books. 
5 r. In English law, an Act of Parliament is required before land 
consecrated for a burial ground can be put to any other use. 
66. 52. Spinoza begins his Ethics with this definition: 'By cause of 
itself I understand that whose nature cannot be conceived except as 
existing', and he goes on in Proposition vii to show that substa~ce is 
such a cause. Hegel applies this definition to mind, or, as he would say, 
to that which is both substance and subject as well. :\lind is actualized 
only when it passes over from mere abstract being into existence, i.e. 
into the actualizati 
of its potentialities in a determinate way. 
53· i.e. personality, that in virtue of which I possess rights, as distinct 
from the finite or particular characteristics in virtue of which I may be 
qualified, e.g. for membership of a club. 
67. 5+· Reading an einen Anderen (Hegels e. R., p. +6). 
69. 55· Reading es for er. The only possible antecedent of er is 
Gebrauch, but 'use' could hardly be said to be an accessio natura!ts. For 
the view from which Hegel here dissents, cf. the judgement of King 
Diarmait in the suit brought by St. Finnian against St. Columba who 
had made a copy of a codex of St. Finnian's without leave (St. Finnian 
claimed possession of the copy): 'To every book belongs its son-book 

TRA~SLATOR'S NOTES 
327 
as to every cow her calf.' (J. T. Fowler's edition of Adamnani Vita S. 
Columbac, Oxford, 1894, p. lxii.) 
56. ihrer d. i. jener (Hegels e. R., p. 47). 
57· The question of copyright was much discussed in Germany at 
the end of the eighteenth century. Kant wrote an essay on the subject 
and he refers to it in his Philosophy of Law, pp. 129 ff. A copyright law 
was passed in England in 1709 and in France by the revolutionaries. 
Some ot the German states followed suit, but there was no systematic 
law in Prussia before 1832. 
70. 58. i.e. the state (see Paragraphs 257 and 323 ff.). 
71. 59· In Hegel's view reason is the spring of the life of the whole 
universe, and men arc its instruments, whether they kno\v it or not. This 
point ( cf. Paragraph 3H) he owed both to his conception of the provi-
dence of God and also to his study of Aristotle (see e.g. J\'ic. Eth. 1153b 
25 ff. and De Anima 415a 26 tl:'.). The point of the reference to Para-
graph 45 is that property is there described as a substantive end, and 
what is substantive is reason (see .!'\ote 41 to Paragraph 61). In property 
the will embodies its freedom in an external thing. As a thing, this is 
related to other things; as property, i.e. as my'' til obJectified, it exists for 
or from the point of view of other wills ancl1s related to them. The rela-
tion of will to will implicit in property bccomc·s t:Xf'hut in contract as a 
relation between my will and another's. Here the subjective and ob-
jectiYe sides of the Idea are both of them the free wdl, and hence the 
Idea is here realized less inadequately than it is in property. 
The 
advance from property to contract is thus a 1i<lzonal advance, a step 
forward in the actualization of the Idea. ':\lmd ohit'dtve' is the second 
section of Part Ill of the Encyclopaedw. The '' h<Jk ',f the Philosophy 
of Right (except most of the introduction, '' luch Js 1 n t k sphere of mind 
subjective) falls within it. 
73. 6o. A castaway on a desert island may have a right to appropriate 
and alienate 'things'; but these 'things' are property only if we,' who 
imagine the castaway, imagine ourselves as forming with him the society 
in whtch alone the right of 'property' has meaning. To s~y that I am the 
rightful owner of a property implies that others recognue my right, i.e. 
they recognize that what I call mine is not mcrdy a thing externally 
related to other things, but is my property, the external embodiment of 
my will. The 'thing' I can alienate on my own accoui<t, hut the pro-
perty I cannot alienate without the co-operation of someone else's will, 
because property (and therefore alienation) presupposes recognition 
(e.g. 'rubbish may not be shot here without permission', and if I drop 
something in the street, meaning to get rid of it, the chances arc that 
someone will pick it up and return it to me). Hence in the social context 
of recognized rights, there is an equivalence between my will to alienate 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
and another's will, and my will thus becomes objective to me in the will 
of the other (see Paragraph 71 with the Remark and the Note thereto). 
75. 61. i.e. under feudalism-cf. Paragraphs 277-8 and see e.g. 
Sabine: History of Political Theory (London, 1937), p. 2I7. 
62. i.e. Part III; see especially Paragraphs 258, 278, 294. 
77. 63. Laesio enormis, excessive damage. The principle that if you 
sell, e.g., a farm for less than half its value, you have suffered excessive 
damage, and the contract is voidable, was enunciated in Roman law, 
though it is very exceptional and seems to apply only to land trans-
actions, and there to sales only, not to purchases. 
64. See Paragraph 217. 
65. Roman law recognized four main types of contract: contracts 
re, verbis, litteris, and consensu, giving rise to real, verbal, literal, and 
consensual obligations. Obligations created by verbal and literal con-
tracts are unilateral, those arising out of real and consensual contracts 
are bilateral or mutual (though sometimes imperfectly bilateral). 
Real obligations arise out of traditio rei, the handing over of things by 
way of loan, deposit, &c. (For their types see Note 7I to Paragraph So.) 
Verbal obligations arise out of stipulations made by the parties in set 
terms by word of mouth to each other. Literal obligations arise out of an 
entry made against a debtor (even in his absence, hence the 'unilateral' 
character of such a contract) by a creditor. Consensual obligations arise 
out of sales, purchases, &c. They could be created by a common under-
standing without any formality and so could be contracted by letter, 
messenger, &c. In a verbal contract, the parties are liable only for what 
they have specifically promised in words to perform. In a consensual 
contract, they are reciprocally liable for what each in fairness and equity 
should do for the other. Kant uses the distinction between unilateral 
and bilateral contracts, and includes loans, deposits, and gifts in the 
former (Philosophy of Law,§ 32, p. Izz). A stipulation may be regarded 
as unilateral in that, although I bind myself by it, the other party has not 
yet received anything. Hegel dissents from this view in Paragraph 79· 
79. 66. Pactum is the expression of an intention to make a contJGctus. 
The formula of a pact is 'I am prepared to sell'. Thus contract is en-
forceable at law, while pact is not. So Heineccius: A ntiquitatum 
Romanarum Syntagma (Frankfurt, 184r), iii. q. 4, an earlier edition of 
which was probably Hegel's authority. !\lore recent \\ ritcrs on Roman 
law give a·different account of the matter. 
6;. Beitrag zur Berichtigung der L'rteile des Publicums iiber die franzii-
sische Re·volution, Werke, Berlin, r845, vi. 1 I I ff. (Lasson). 
68. For Hegel's distinction between the false and the true infinite, 
see Enc., §§ 94-5. The true infinite is mind, which returns from its other 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
into itself, which is self-related and self-determined. The false infinite, 
on the other hand, is the eternal sameness of an endless progression; we 
Jay down a limit, then we pass it and lay down another, and so on ad 
infinitum, but without ever leaving the finite behind or reaching true 
infinity. Hegel's point here is that the infinite divisibility of time, &c., 
makes impossible any clear answer to the question: at what precise 
point, in Fichte's view, does the contract become legally, as distinct from 
morally, binding? 
80. 69. 'Real' not in the Roman lawyer's sense mentioned in the pre-
ceding Remark, but in Hegel's sense defined in Paragraph 76. 
70. Transactions in the form: 'I am doing this for you now on the 
understanding that you will do this for me later', were classed with 'real' 
contracts by Roman lawyers, and they have been called 'innominate' by 
modern writers in distinction from the four 'nominate' types enumerated 
in Note 65 to Paragraph 77· 
71. Roman Jaw distinguished four types of 'real' contract, namely 
mutuum, commodatum, depositum, and pignus. (a) l'.Iutuum was a loan not 
for use but for consumption, i.e. a loan of res fungibiles, things return-
able in kind. The borrower of a jar of oil would consume the oil and 
return other oil of the same kind. 1\Iutuum \\as in essence gratuitous, 
but it was generally accompanied by a separate agreement for the pay-
ment of interest. (b) Commodatum was a loan for use only, the thing 
itself being returned, a loan therefore of res nun fungibzles. In this case 
the loan had to be gratuitous; if a fee were charged, the transaction 
became locatio, letting, hiring. (Hence Hegel's apologetic 'even' in 
B (2) ({3).) (c) Depositum was deposit and (d) pzf;nus was pledge. InC 
Hegel uses cautio as a general word to cover pledge, mortgage, bail, 
&c., but there is no warrant, apart from the reasons he gives there, for 
regarding such transactions as specially 'complete'. 
72. See Paragraphs 179 ff. 
82. 73· Hegel distinguishes between Schein (show or semblance) 
and Erscheimmg (appearance). See Enc., § 13r. An appearance is a 
forth-shining of the reality. A show is the inessential masquerading as 
the essential, the denial of the essence in its apparent assertion. Al-
though crime is a denial of rights, it is only in a context of rights that 
there can be a crime at all. Hence crime is a mere 'show', no genuine 
existence; what it denies is its own essential basis, the nght, on which 
the very being of crime depends. Contract is an 'appearance' of the 
right and no more than that, because the will in contract is not the 
universal wtll in its truth as self-mediating but only a common will, 
posited by the arbitrary wills of the parties. Since these wills are 
arbitrary, their correspondence with the rightness whose appearance 
they are is contingent on their arbitrary choice; and hence they may 

33° 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
if they pltase make an arbitrary choice in defiance of the right. The 
right is the essence, the embodiment of the freedom of the universal 
will. When the free will takes the form of a merely arbitrary choice, the 
universality and rationality, which are the essence of the will, are being 
denied, and the choice is therefore self-destructive because it denies its 
own essence and basis. Hence the choice is only a show, a semblance, a 
pretence, and it will be proved to be so by the punishment which follows 
when right reasserts itself (sec Paragraphs 97 ff.). 
85. 7+ If a man breaks his contract with me, he does not deny my 
rights in general or my property as a whole; he only denies that I have 
rightly included this particular property amongst the things called 
'mine'. Hence the judgement which he asserts in wronging me is 'this 
is not yours (although I admit that other things are)'. For the necessity 
of the advance from this type of negative judgement to a positively 
infinite and then to a negatively infinite judgement, see Enc., §§ 172-3. 
88. 75· The 'positively infinite judgement' is the expression of a 
mere identity: the individual is the individual. This, though true, lacks 
the universality of thought. The predicate should be a universal and 
tell us something about the subject, but in this case the subject is 
qualified by itself, and the judgement is bogus, a show, because it pro-
fesses to be a judgement, to tell us something, and it does not. The 
same is true of fraud. Fraud as the sale of this article, e.g. this share 
certificate, which the purchaser voluntarily accepts, is prima facie a 
genuine transaction. But as a sale it should contain a universal element, 
i.e. value. The seller professes to sell this universality of which the printed 
paper is supposed to be only a symbol, and the transaction is fraudulent 
because the universality is absent. 
91. ;6. ::\Iy will is embodied in property only if I have an idea of the 
property as embodying my will. This idea is a 'determination', or a 
'content' of my will. Hence the reference to Paragraph 7· where Hegel 
says that the self-determining will knows its determination to be its own 
and only 'ideal', an idea from which it may withdraw itself if it wills to 
do so. 
93. 77· The concept is actualized by manifesting itself in the world, 
in reality (ste 1\'ote 49 to Paragraph 64). That sphere, however, is the 
sphere of externality, and hence what is inwardly a clash between two 
elements in one thing becomes outwardly (or 'really' as distinct from 
'ideally'-see :\'otc 98 to Paragraph 256) manifest as a clash between two 
different things. (Cf. :\'ote 5 to Paragraph 40.) 
78. Compare Paragraph 350 (:.\Iessineo), and Paragraphs 102 and rso. 
He1ren is a misprint for Heroen (Hegels e. R., p. 6r). 'It is the absolute 
interest of reason that the state should exist, and herein lies the justifica-
tion and the merit of heroes who ha\·e founded states, however rude 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
33 1 
these may have been' (Philosophy of Hist01y, pp. 30, 403); i.e. in ac-
complishing what they did, heroes were the 'unconscious instruments' 
(see Note 59 to Paragraph 71) of reason or of God's purpose. Notice 
Hegel's assertion in the Addition to this Paragraph that the right 
of heroes disappears once civilized and political conditions have been 
introduced-a point which Hegel's critics often overlook. 
95. 79· See l\ote 35 to Paragraph 53· The criminal by wronging 
someone is in effect denying that his victim has any rights, i.e. he 
asserts a total incompatibility beween his victim and rights. Hence 'you 
have no rights' is a 'negatively infinite judgement'. 
96. So. 'The Stoics hold that the virtues accompany each other, and 
if a man has one, he has all' (Diogenes Laertius, vii. 125-Life of Zeno). 
The single virtue is to live in accordance with nature, and vice is the 
converse. 
Sr. See Plutarch's life of Solon, ch. 17: In the early history of Athens, 
Draco prescribed 'one penalty, death, for almost all offences'. 
82. On chivalry and the absurdity of its notion of 'honour', see 
Aesthetzc, vol. ii, pp. 325 ff. 
SJ. Robbery is 'larceny with violence'; theft is larceny without 
violence. The amount stolen makes no dttTen.:nce (Blackstone: Com-
mentaries, val. iv, pp. 241 ff.). 
84. See Paragraph 218 and Remark to Paragraph 319. 
85. See Paragraphs I 13 ff. 
99. 86. Crime exists as a fact, an event, and it 1s 'positive' to that 
extent (see Paragraph 97), but as an e'L·ent 1t is not citrlc>rl'ntiated by any 
criminal character from other events such as accidents 
As a crime it 
exists only for those who understand it from the 1nside, i.e. as a pur-
poseful action, and, so considered, 1t lacks the posltinty of a mere event 
(see Paragraph 99); it is made something genuinely positive, a crime and 
not an accident, by the presence in it of the criminal's \\111, and in this 
sense it is 'positive' only because it carries out his conscious purpose. 
But to the person injured, and to onlookers, it is negative, a wilful 
attack on rights, a denial of them, and therefore something null and self-
destructive (see ::\ote 73 to Paragraph 82). 
87. See Paragraph 220. The references to Klein's book have not been 
checked. 
88. Deleting aber with Hegels e. R., p. 65. 
100. 89. Dei delitti e dei pene (:\Ionaco, 1764). Eng. tr. by J. A. 
Farrer: Crunes and punishments (r88o). See chapter xvi. For a short 
summary of Beccaria's views, see e.g. J. \V. Go•1gh: The Social Contract 

332 
TRANSLATOR'S .1\'0TES 
(Oxford, 1936), pp. 164-5. In saying just below that the state's primary 
duty is not the unconditional protection of the citizens and their pro-
perty, Hegel may again be expressing dissent from Beccaria, as well as 
from Rousseau (see Note 67 to Paragraph 29). 
101. 90. All editions have 'Paragraph 95'. For 'Paragraph 77' just 
preceding, all editions have 'see above'. 
9I. A crime is a particular act with a particular character, e.g. it is a 
theft, and a theft of £r5. But it also has an infinite aspect because it is 
the negation of the right by the free will (see Paragraph 22) and therefore 
it deserves to be punished, i.e. to be negated in its turn. Crime and 
punishment are alike as equal and opposite negations, and in comparison 
with this fact their particular characteristics on any given occasion are of 
no importance. 
102. 92. Blackstone draws the distinction (Commentaries, val. iii, 
p. 2). In English law there are still 'private crimes' which are left to the 
injured party to prosecute. In later Roman law, a process against theft 
was treated as a civil action for damages and not as a criminal action. 
103. 93· The dialectical movement of thought from property through 
contract to wrong. 
104. 94· The will in its truth is self-determination, the concrete 
individuality which is the synthesis of universal and particular (see 
Paragraph 7). At the stage of implicit being or immediacy, with which 
the sphere of abstract right began, the will is universal, its individuality 
is abstract and exclusive, and the particular factor falls outside the will 
altogether as mere irrational desire (see Paragraph 34). The process 
which we have studied up to this point is the process whereby the will 
transcends the immediacy of its starting-point; its universality becomes 
mediated through the particular which has become explicit in the 
process as a moment within the will itself. 
(a) In property, the will embodies its universality in things, the 
things which it calls 'mine'. Here there is no mediation but only the 
direct grasp of immediate objects. 
(b) In contract, the universality of the will is posited, and made 
explicit, as a relation of will to will. Here there is at least the appearance 
of mediation, but there is no more, because the parties to a contract are 
still only 'property owners', immediate persons, and so mere units; the 
content of the contract is due to their arbitrariness, and is not the content 
produced by the self-differentiation of the universal will. 
(c) Contract comes into being as a result of arbitrary choices and there 
is therefore implicit in it the moment of contingency, of particular pre-
ference. This is the moment which becomes explicit in wrong-doing. 
The will of the man who does wrong is at variance with itself; right, the 
embodiment of freedom, is its substance, and in doing wrong it is 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
333 
denying its own substance. In this way, the particular moment of the 
will itself has become explicit; it no longer lies outside the will in the 
form of mere desire, &c., but is present in the volition itself as u·illed 
wrong-doing. The will has become aware of itself as particular and in 
virtue of this awareness is able to oppose itself to, and so to contradict, 
the universal embodied in rights. 
This contradiction is manifest in the world (i.e. in the sphere of 
external relations) as a contradiction between wrong and vengeance, a 
co!ltradiction which leads to an infinite series of subjective and finite 
acts and so to an irrationality which brings us no nearer the infinite, the 
Right, which these finite acts are attempting to reach. Hence the will as 
concept, and so as rational, demands that these contradictions be over-
come, both the contradiction of right by the criminal in his volition, and 
the contradiction between wrong and vengeance in the world. 
The only way to overcome these contradictions is to recognize that 
there is something right in the negation of the universally right. 
(Cf. Preface, p. ro, where Plato is said to have taken a new principle 
as merely corruptive, while he ought to have taken measures against 
it by discovering them in the principle itself.) The universally right 
is abstract and therefore one-sided. \V rong occurs because of this 
one-sidedness; wrong is the particular moment in the will demanding 
satisfaction. Now Hegel's point is that it is essential that it should 
receive such satisfaction, though it must receive it in co-operation with 
the universal and not in defiance of it. The contradiction in the world 
between wrong and vengeance is only resolved when a particular 
subject, the judge, is the mouthpiece of the uni\·ersal law. Otherwise 
the criminal would take the judge's sentence as something merely per-
sonal and so as a new injury. So also the cont radic'tJ()n of right by the 
criminal cannot be annulled by a mere regn::::sioP to hare universality. 
:\1ere denial of the 'corruptive invader' wd! not root It Ollt-tamen usque 
rerurret. The only solution is to recognize the claims of the particular by 
allm\ ing that the universally right must be mediated by the particular 
conscientious convictions of the subject. \Ve go beyond the criminal's 
defiance only by substituting for the abstract conception of personality 
the more concrete conception of suhjectinty .. \'subject is the universal 
will embodied, no longer in universal rights, but in a particular will; 
hence from the; point of view of the subject, the law which the criminal 
breaks is his uu·nlaw; i.e. his crime is not a contradiction d a right outside 
him but a self-contradiction, a defiance of the right embodied in him. 
As soon as the rational agent realizes this he rises above the contradiction 
simply by keepin~ the law, the law which is the law of his own convic-
tion, i.e. he has transcended the sphere of right altogether and become 
a moral agent. 
Wrong is an act of the particubr will opposing itself to the universal. 
It is by reflecting on my wrong act that I become aware of my natw~ c' 

334 
TRANSLATOR'S ~OTES 
a moral agent, that I discover that in defying the universal law, I have 
denied mv own law. To discover this is to discover that the universal 
will is e~bodied in my will-my will wills the universal. I have deter-
mined myself as 'self-related negativity'because in my eyes the opposition 
is now one between the universal and particular elements within me. 
The particular or arbitrary will is will as contingency (see Paragraph 15). 
By reflecting on my crime as the act of a particular will, I have dis-
covered my moral agency, and this is contingency 'reflected into itself'. 
The universal will is one with my private will, and this subjectivity of 
mine which I have discovered is 'infinite' and self-identical just as the 
ego was in Paragraph 5, and for the same reasons. Cf. also Paragraph 
34· The difference here is that these are characteristics which I know 
that I possess. A subject is a person conscious of his own particular 
personality, i.e. contingency reflected into itself is the discovery not 
only of one's own particularity but also of universal laws which one 
ought to obey, and with this discovery we pass to the sphere of morality, 
a sphere where particular and universal are both present though there 
is an explicit difference between them. (See Addition to Paragraph 35 
and Note 5 to Paragraph ro8.) 
PART II (.'VIORALITY) 
106. r. The subject is aware of himself as a single moral agent. 
Hence subjectivity is distinct from the concept of the will in its im-
mediacy, since that was pure universality. But since the subject's aware-
ness is of a single being, the subject is 'immediate', not part of a rational 
system of moral agents acting in accordance with recognized laws, a 
system which we shall later know as ethical life. At the level of property, 
the will was embodied in immediate things. At the level of morality, the 
will is embodied in immediate wills. This is a higher level, because the em-
bodiment or existence of the concept (or the existential aspect of the 
Idea) is now adequate to the concept itself; it is not a 'thing', more or 
less out of control of mind. The will embodied in a thing can be coerced 
(see Paragraph go); but the concept of the will, existent as a will, eludes 
all coercion; inner conviction is beyond the reach of all external forces; 
and hence it is at the moral level that freedom is for the first time actual. 
The defect of this level is that the subject is only fiir sich; he is conscious 
of his subjectivity and independence but is conscious of universality only 
as something different from his subjectivity. We have not yet reached a 
concrete synthesis of these opposites; that is attained only at the level of 
ethical life. 
2. The moral will is aware of itself (jiir sich), hut so long as it is 
aware of itself as only a unit, i.e. before its moral agency is mediated by 
the society in which it lives, it is not aware of the universal as identical 
with itself and so is not aware of what it is an sich or implicitly. At the 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
335 
start, however, there is an implied identity between the universal prin-
ciple of the will and the will of the subject, because the latter does em-
body the former, though without fully realizing it. This identity becomes 
explicit only after the explicit single will has 'sunk deeper and deeper 
into itself', i.e. estranged itself further from the universal, entrenched 
itself more and more deeply, plumbed the recesses of its own moralizing 
-a process which it may carry so far eventually as to defy the universal 
altogether and so be explicitly evil. The occurrence of evil is the transi-
tion to the higher stage of ethical life, just as the occurrence of wrong 
was the transition to morality. 
107. 3· A right is the embodiment of the free will (see Paragraph 29), 
or is the free will determinately existent. Abstract rights embody the 
freedom of personality, the abstract principle of the will. We now come 
to more concrete rights, those of subjectivity, which itself is the higher 
ground in which the free will is now embodied. Just as personality in 
the process of becoming more and more determinate was embodied in a 
series of rights, so the development of subjectivity runs pari passu with 
the development of a series of rights. 
4· The process which we are studying in the field of morality is two-
sided: (a) the subject gradually comes to a realization of his own univer-
sality, i.e. of the objectivity of the universal will which his subjective will 
embodies. (b) The embodiment of the subject in his action-the right of 
the subject-changes in character pari passu with the changes in the 
character of subjectivity. To start with, the will recognizes its sub-
jectivity in something which it has done; the recognition is immediate 
and the action done is immediate too. Next, when the action is seen to 
embody the subject's ~~·elfare, the universality implicit in the subject 
begins to be explicit (Paragraph 125). Finally, the action is seen to 
embody the good, something explicitly universal. The whole process 
may be summed up by saying that the subject gradually determines the 
character of his action further and further until it expresses the universal 
nature, i.e. the concept, of the subject in concrete detail, and he does this 
in the course of discovering v.-hat this concept is. See Addenda, p. 376. 
108. 5· The formula of all wiliing is that I will so-and-so. Hence 
subjectivity is the form which all willing takes. Now the essential 
attitude of morality is that so-and-so ought to be done. What character-
izes morality, in Hegel's view, is always ought, not is. This failure to 
reach is, and the consequent difference between the universal (the law) 
and the particular (what is willed or done), is a badge of finitude, and 
finitude is a mode in which the infinite appears. Hence the field of 
morality is governed by what Hegel calls in his logic the categories of 
'essence'. Each of these is a duality, two terms related but not synthe-
sized, e.g. difference and identity, finite and infinite, appearance and 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
reality, inessential and essential, particular and universal, &c. Truth 
lies in the synthesis of these pairs, but this truth cannot be attained until 
thought rises above the abstractions of this sphere to a concrete synthesis 
of opposites. What Hegel calls the Understanding, or 'reflection', is 
confined to this sphere. In the moral sphere the will is related to the 
good and strives to attain it, to unite itself with it; but it fails to recog-
nize that unity is impossible until the abstraction of mere isolated sub-
jectivity is overcome, i.e. until it realizes that the good is not something 
outside itself to which it can be 'related', or to which it can perennially 
approximate but never reach, but its own implicit concept with which it 
is identical. 'Self-difference': The subject is conscious of himself as a 
unit and so as self-identical; but this is an abstract identity. A concrete 
identity is a differentiated identity; abstract identity holds difference 
outside itself as an 'other' (see Note 27 to Paragraph 49), and hence the 
subject, not realizing its concrete identity with the universal, takes the 
'other' as outside itself, as a law or a fact. Hence while the will is a con-
crete identity (see Paragraph 7), here at the level of morality it appears 
as divided into (a) a subject, and (b) an object to which it relates itself. 
The inner identity is manifested outwardly as difference, just as the Idea 
ofmind 'appears' as consciousness aware of an object 'outside' and other 
than itself. The subject who relates himself to his object as to some-
thing different from him is thus characterized by what is in truth self-
difference. 
109. 6. i.e. the will determined as subject is eo ipso an embodiment 
of the concept of the will. Implicitly, then, subjectivity is a unity of 
objective and subjective; but this unity cannot be made explicit until 
the difference of these moments is made explicit and the will triumphs 
over that difference (sec Remark to Paragraph 32). 
7· ("')The will determines itself as a will by willing something (i.e. it 
ceases to be a self-identical ego and reveals itself as a will); i.e. the will 
negates its original indeterminacy by limiting itself qualitatively, by 
giving itself the quality of a \\·ill, and it does this simply hy willing some-
thing. Such a qualitative limit Hegel calls Grenz e. ({3) The\\ ill is aware 
of itself and therefore is aware of itself as limited in quality, i.e. it is 
aware of itself as only a \\ill, as something subjective. Hence it is aware 
of what it is not, namely objective, and thus the limitation under which 
it suffers then appears not as a self-limitation hut as an other outside 
itself, a barrier (Schranke) of objectivity which the will tries to over-
come by translatmg what it wills into objectivity, so that objectivity 
ceases to he an other to the will and becomes simply the will over again 
(see Addition to Paragraph IIO). (y) The Crenze and the Sc!zranke are 
identical. Both of them are particularizations of the will. In fact they 
are the purpose willed, the end which the will sds before itself and 
attains by transforming objectivity in accordance with its subjective 

-
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
337 
volition. For the distinction between Grenze and Schranke, see Science 
of Logic, i. 144 ff. 
112. 8. Since in carrying out my purposes I objectify my will in 
actions, these various actions give my subjectivity a content, mediate it; 
it ceases to be simply my consciousness of my own abstract single sub-
jectivity. My actions as the embodiment of my subjectivity (and so as 
more than mere events) exist for others (see ~ote 26 to Paragraph 48 
and Note 6o to Paragraph 73); and just as tht: 'other' whose co-opera-
tion I required in order to alienate property was a property owner, so 
here the others without whose co-operation my action cannot be moral 
(cannot be more than an event) are other subjective wills. Now my 
moral purposes are in fact objective to me only in so far as they exist for 
me in the wills of others. The deed in itself is not moral; there is no 
morality in writing on a piece of paper, the morality consists in the fact 
that the cheque is to pay for someone's education, and this fact is not in 
the situation but in someone else's consciousness and will. A moral 
action is something achieved in co-operation with someone else's will 
and its achievement will therefore turn out to be the expression of a 
common will. Hegel is repudiating 'desert island morality'. 
9· All editions read 'I I2 '. 'Universal subjectiYity' -i.e. my fulfilled 
aim ;s objective to me in the sense that it is present not only to me as this 
subject, but to all other subjects as well. 
113. 10. Though I may go to law conscientiously, the essential 
thing is that I shall follow the posit1ve laws determinant of what may 
be a matter at issue in a legal action. Hence a legal action has only 
an incidental connexion with moral responsihilit\·. 
114. I I. The sphere of reflection or oi the categories of essence is a 
sphere of related but unsynthesized terms. The mor,Jl sphere culminates 
in a repeated ought, which claims to be absolute and yet is not (because it 
is not an is), in a universality which remains subjective (see Remark to 
Paragraph I 12) and so no true universality; it is pure self-certitude; the 
objective world ought to correspond with it but does not. 'This pure 
self-certitude appears in the two directly interchanging forms, conscience 
and wickedness. The former is the will of goodness, but a goodness 
which to this pure subjectivity is the non-objective, the non-universal, 
and over \\ hich the agent is conscious that he in his individuality 
has the decision. \Vickedness is the same awareness that the single self 
possesses the decision, so far as the single self does not remain in this 
abstraction but takes up the content of a subjective interest contrary to 
the good .... Here \Ve have a goodness which has no objectivity but is 
only sure of itself and a self-assurance which involves the nullification 
of the universal', i.e. we have the contradiction of a purely 'subjective 
universality' (Enc., §§ SII-!2). 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
115. 12. Schuld. This word may be used in German either with or 
without a moral reference, and hence means either guilt or cause. The 
criminal has Schuld for his crime and the warm wind has Schuld for 
melting the snow. The English word 'responsibility' is perhaps the 
nearest equivalent since it also is sometimes used in a non-moral sense. 
118. 13. From the moral point of view the necessary and the finite 
(or contingent) are related, not synthesized. But opposed categoric~ turn 
into each other when thought tries to hold them apart (see Remark to 
Paragraph 26). Hence what seems necessitated (e.g. the execution of a 
plan) turns out after all to have been contingent on Cleopatra's nose, &c. 
Hence the moral agent, unable to unite necessity with contingency, 
because his exdusive subjectivity excludes him from a rational order, 
must act in a world of both necessary laws and unforeseeable con-
tingencies and can never escape either (see Enc., §§ 142-7). 
119. 14· The meaning seems to be that when we distinguish the 
intention (Absicht) from what is done, we are 'looking away from' 
(abselzen) certain aspects of the concrete event . .My intention is either 
(a) a umversal form under which I have not yet brought any specific 
content (Hegels e. R., p. So), e.g. I intend to satisfy my hunger but have 
not yet decided how to do it; or else (b) that particular aspect of the 
action which gi\·es it worth for me because it satisfies me in some 
specific way, e.g. my intention to eat bread. 
rs. In Hegel's terminology, a proposition contains a statement about 
the subject which does not stand to it in any universal relationship but 
expresses some single action or some state or the like. Hence 'gold is a 
metal' is a judgement, but 'Caesar crossed the Rubicon' is a proposition 
(see Enc., § r67). 
r6. 'The distinction between dolus directus and indirectus, in the sense 
that, in the latter case, the intention of the agent was not to commit the 
wrong which resulted, but only a slighter one, is now quite obsolete, 
although it still obtains in .-\ustria' (Holtzendorlf: Reclztslexikon, Leip-
zig, r875, vol. i, p. 402). 
123. r;. Hegel refers to the conversation between Croesus and 
Solon, reported in Herodotus i. 30-3. 'The stage of reflection that we 
reach in happiness stands midway between mere desire and the other 
extreme, which is right as right and duty as duty. In happiness the 
individual enjoyment has disappeared; the form of universality is there, 
but the universal does not yet come forth on its own account' (HlStmy of 
Philosophy, i. r6r-3). See also Hegel's treatment of Eudaemonism in 
Werke 1, i. ;, a passage translated by \Vallace in a note to Enc., § S+· 
124. rS. This passage is important as casting light on \\hat liege! 
means bi 'suhJectivc freedom'. He does not mean the satisfaction of 
desire or impulse in itself. He means freedom to find satisfactwn of the 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
339 
whole self, i.e. of rationalized desires. The least rational form of this 
satisfaction is love, which is feeling, though not mere instinct, as we shall 
see when Hegel comes to deal with the family. A higher (i.e. a more 
rational) form is the satisfaction to be found in work, the satisfaction of 
the economic needs of life-this is the principle of 'civil society'. A 
higher form still is the political satisfaction obtainable through parlia-
mentary institutions and in public opinion. Of course there are desires 
in the immediate sense which are satisfied incidentally in marriage, 
business, and politics, but to see nothing in rational purpose except the 
satisfaction of an instinct is to deny that there is any difference between 
man and an animal and to make all history unintelligible ( cf. Enc., § 140 ). 
Hegel was far from supposing that subjective freedom is just freedom to 
satisfy what Plato called T<J .?m8vfl7JT<~<ov---desire pure and simple (see 
Paragraphs 120 ff. which make it clear that the 'subject' who is entitled 
to freedom is a thinker). On the contrary, he held that subjective free-
dom never came within the Greek purview at all, since the principle of 
conscience, of self-certainty, on which 'subjective freedom' in all its 
forms depends, came into the world with the Christian revelation. 
rg. mit Abscheu zu tun, was die Pfiicht gebeut. Schiller (Die Philo-
sophen-Gedichte der dritten Periode) actually says: und mit Abscheu 
alsdann tun, u-ie die Pjlicht dir gebeut. 
125. 20. The background of Hegel's thought here is his doctrine of 
reflective judgement in Enc., § I75· The advance of thought from 'this 
metal conducts electricity' to 'all metals conduct electricity' is due to the 
reflection that the reason for the truth of the first JUdgement is the 
presence of some universal quality in this metal in nrtue of which it 
conducts electricity; i.e. it must share the same chaLlctenstic with other 
metals. This universal is made explicit (though in an imperfect form) 
when we group together all the subjects to whtch th1:; >~1me predicate 
can be attached. Reflective thought is characteristic of the logical sphere 
of essence, \\·hich corresponds to the sphere of morality. Reflection on 
my welfare leads to bringing welfare into the orbit of my inward univer-
sality and thrs inward reference to the universal is posited outwardly as 
a reference to the \velfare of others (cf. :\ate 5 to Paragraph 40). 
126. 2r. It is the philosophers of the Illumination (Aufklarung) that 
Hegel has in mind as is evident from his Hrstory of Philosophy, iii. 362 
and 403 ff. l' nder the influ(Once of, e.g., Shaftesbury and Hutcheson, 
they made much of 'bencYolence', affection, &c. For an analysis and 
criticism of the 'law of the heart' (the eighteenth-century doctrine 
exaggerated by Hegel's Romantic contemporaries) see Phenomenology, 
pp. 392 ff. 
22. Hegel refers apparently to the Sturm und Drang dramas, e.g. to 
Schiller's Robbers, a play in which a young man with good intentions is 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
expected to obtain the sympathy of the audience when he organizes a 
band of robbers to fight tyranny. 
23. This has not been said above, but it may be implied, as Lasson 
suggests, in the Remark to Paragraph 29. It is important to notice the 
emphasis which Hegel himself here places on the word 'absolute'. 
127. 24. The beneficium competentiae was the right of an unsuccessful 
defendant in cases of contract and quasi-contract not to be condemned 
to pay more than a sum which would still leave him enough to live on in 
reasonable comfort, having regard to his station in life. 
128. 25. Right, an abstract universal, and my welfare, an abstract 
particular, may collide. Both, therefore, are finite and both are contingent 
on circumstances for their satisfaction. If the contradiction between 
them is to be overcome, each must lose its abstractness and both must be 
welded into a single concrete whole in which the opposites, right and 
welfare, will both be present as subordinate moments 'really' distinct but 
'ideally' one. This is not fully achieved until we reach ethical life, but a 
relative identity between them is reached in the next section. 
132. 26. In Paragraph I I7 Hegel speaks of the right to know. The 
right of insight and the right of the objectivity of action are first men-
tioned in Paragraph I2o.-In the next line, 'the latter' refers to 'action 
as such'. 
27. Sitteu. So elsewhere, as suggested by J. S. Mackenzie in Inter-
national Journal of Ethics, October I 896, though Wallace had anticipated 
the suggestion in Hegel's Philosophy of Mind (Oxford, r894), see, e.g., 
p. 104. For the meaning of Sittcn, see Paragraph IS I and Note I4 ad Zoe. 
28. See Remark to Paragraph 120. 
29. So D. G. Ritchie in Jfind, N.s., vol. vi, p. I2I. All editions read 
'120'. 
30. All editions read 'II9'· 
31. '\Vhen we can recognize what it is that we perceive or when we 
can distinguish it from other perceivable things, then the perception 
which we have is a clear perception' (i.e. idea) ... 'e.g., when we look at 
a tree in daylight, we have a clear idea of the tree' (C. J. Wolff: Psycho-
logia empirica, Frankfurt and Leipzig, I732, Paragraph 3I). 
32. See Paragraph 282. 
133. 33· See Paragraph I3I. The patiicular subject distinguishes 
bet\\ een the essence of hts will and the incssentiality of, e.g., particular 
desires, and emka\'ours to make the latter correspond \\ ith the former. 
He 'ought' to do what the essence of his will enjoins, but never gets 
beyond 'ought' to 'is' or 'does'. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
34 1 
134. 34· Together with Paragraph 125. 
135. 35· See, e.g., Phenomenology, pp. 654-5. Pure duty is only a 
form for action; as an abstract form, it is indifferent to the content given 
to it and hence the agent, convinced that he ought to be cowardly in 
order to save his life, may claim that cowardice is a duty. If duty is mere 
conscientiousness, then any content the agent pleases may be given to it 
without detracting from its formal character as conscientiousness. After 
showing (e.g., Critique of Practical Reason, Analytic, chap. i, sections 1-6) 
that the moral law presupposes a free will, Kant goes on to answer the 
question how I know what my duty is. He then further formulates the 
principle of duty for duty's sake as 'Act so that the maxim of thy will can 
always at the same time hold good as a principle of universal legislation' 
(Kant's Theory of Ethics, p. I19). Hegel's citation of this formula is 
careless or at best elliptical. The citation in the Addition to this Para-
graph is more accurate. The passage which Hegel actually has in mind 
is probably the Introduction to the Metaphysik der Sitten (Kant's Theory 
of Ethics, p. 281 ). 
136. 36. Throughout his treatment of conscience (Gewissen), Hegel 
makes use of its verbal similarity with GeU'lssheit (certainty). This 
similarity is not reproducible in English, but Hegel's argument is not 
intelligible unless the use he makes of it is borne in mind. 
137. 37· What is absolutely good is concrete and therefore systema-
tically determinate and differentiated. 
Hence to will it is to will in 
accordance with determinate rational principles. 
38. This single subjective will, isolated from a ration.1l social order, is 
mere self-certainty, abstraction from content. It may mal,e the content 
of the natural will its content, but desires, &c., do n"t belong to this 
subject qua this subject; they belong to him only qua human being. 
39· In the state, 'true' conscience takes the form of patriotism (see 
Paragraph 268). Note, however, that when Hegel says this, it is the state 
as Idea, the rational state, that he has in mind. Bad states exist, and 
patriotic acceptance, even if conscientious, of their bad la\\s would not 
in Hegel's view be the working of 'true' conscience, which is the con-
scientious acceptance of rational laws only. For the 'religious' con-
science, see Enc., § 552. In Protestantism, Hegel maintains, rhe religious 
conscience and true conscience coincide. Religwn as a whoie is a sphere 
above the state (see Note 3 to Paragraph 2). 
138. 40. The keynote of the teaching of Socrates is the dictum of the 
Delphic oracle: 'Know thyself', and he described himself as a midwife, 
bringing to birth the ideas already present in embryo in men's minds. 
Cf. Paragraphs 279 and 343, and see History of Phzlosophy, i. 397 ff. The 
Stoic precept was 'live according to nature', i.e. in accordance with 

342 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
reason. 'In this quite formal principle of holding oneself in a pure 
harmony with oneself as a merely thinking nature, there rests the power 
of becoming indifferent to every particular enjoyment, passion, and 
interest' (History of Philosophy, ii. 263). 
139. 41. With this rather obscurely expressed Remark, compare the 
fuller treatment of the same topic in Enc., § 24. The argument here is as 
follows: We all begin life on the natural level; and at that level, i.e. in 
infancy, there is neither freedom nor morality. Freedom depends on the 
discovery of the self which is not natural but spiritual, i.e. the inner 
rational self present in germ, even in the infant, as the inner truth of its 
apparently purely impulsive life (see Paragraph II). It is by transcend-
ing that life that we attain to freedom, but since there is no breach of 
continuity, freedom may be said both to arise from the natural life and 
yet to be something opposed to that life, i.e. to be our inner essence, 
there all the time. 
The natural will comes into existence as a genuine will when it takes 
the form of the particular will, i.e. of arbitrariness or self-will (see 
Paragraphs I I-rs). This is a contradiction because of the clash between 
its form and its content. Its 'form' is selfhood, my inner self which 
chooses, and is free, though only abstractly: this is the pure ego or 
abstract subjectivity described in Paragraph 5; its content is gi~·e~z by 
nature and consists of desires, impulses, &c. (see Paragraph II). 
Desires and impulses in themselves are neither good nor evil. The 
infant, whose life is governed by them, is innocent, not yet on the level 
of morality at all. What makes them evil is their choice in opposition to 
the good. ?\ow a choice of this kind is open to the particular will because 
there is an explicit distinction in that will between form and content and 
because the reflection which makes that distinction possible may reflect 
on the ego and so discover the true nature of the ego's essence, i.e. not 
abstract subjectivity but the good, universality (see Remark to Paragraph 
IJ2). Hence it is possible for the abstract subjectivity of arbitrarine§ to 
choose either the good, its own essence, or else a natural desire which 
conflicts with that essence, i.e. it may take as its standard of choice not 
its genuine truth, its universality, but its particularity, its opposition to 
the universal. And when it does this it is evil; its mward freedom has 
made it possible for it to m1l the natural, i.e. to will m contradiction to 
its own essence, and this is just what evil is. 
Hence evil is not nature alone; nor is it reflection alone (evil is not the 
same as error). Evil is the conjunction of nature and reflection, not 
mere nature but the u·illing of the natural which reflection makes 
possible. The precondition of evil is the knov,:ledge of good and evil, i.e. 
of the distinction between the universal essence of the will and what 
opposes that essence. 
42. i.e. the self-will mentioned in Paragraph I39· 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
343 
140. 43· Section (d) of the Remark which follows is an important 
exegesis of this Paragraph. The wrongdoer has a positive reason for 
what he does; his action is bad only as the action of a moral agent, i.e. a 
responsible person who has a reason for what he does. We may describe 
his action as evil if we please, and so attach to it a negative predicate 
such as 'unmerciful', 'disobedient', 'ungrateful', &c., but we shall 
fail to treat the action concretely unless we also ascribe to it some 
positive predicate, if only 'satisfactory'-i.e. satisfactory, not in the 
sense in which animal gratification may be satisfactory to the animal, 
but satisfactory from the point of view of the agent's consciously 
adopted, and so to some extent rational purpose (see Paragraphs 120 ff.). 
I.e. in all bad, and so negative, actions there is some good and therefore 
something positive (see Collingwood: Essay on Philosophical J1fethod, 
Oxford, 1933, chap. iii, Paragraphs 26-9). The conscientious man at the 
level of morality, when duty is a mere abstract universal, can give to it 
any 'positive' content he pleases (see Paragraph 135). The 'profound 
concept' referred to in the first paragraph of the following remark is the 
concept of subjectivity. The modern world has rightly recognized the 
claims of subjectivity, as Plato did not, but the thinkers whom Hegel 
attacks here made such claims for subjective conviction as made no 
allowance for the right of objectivity and so perverted the legitimate 
claims of the subject into hypocrisy, sophistry, &c. 
4+· Aristotle distinguishes between actions done 'through ignorance' 
(8c' ayvowvwhen the agent acts OVK Eibw> ), and actiOns done 'in ignorance' 
(when the agent acts ayvowv). In the first case the ignorance is unavoid-
able; there are external circumstances which the agent (e.g. Oedipus) 
had no means of knowing. In the second case, the ignorance is due to 
circumstances within the control of the agent, e.g. t•j drunkenness. 
45· wirksame Gnade. The problem of the doctrine of grace is to 
reconcile a belief in man's inability to attain salvation independently of 
God's grace with a belief in man's individual freedom. In the seven-
teenth century the J ansenists, who tended to belittle man's freedom, 
carried on a controversy with the Jesuits on this questwn; both parties 
believed in efficacious grace but differed as to how it was obtained. 
Hegel's point is that if grace-God's power, i.e. the objecti\·e-is 
regarded as given to some men and not others-as both parties to the 
controversy agreed that it was-then God's power and human freedom 
are being treated as if they were related only accidentally. For an 
admirable account of the seventeenth-century disputes (which are the 
background of Remarks (a), (b), and (c) to this Paragraph), see :\Iorris 
Bishop: Pascal (London, 1937), chap. x. 
46. Probabilism-a doctrine of Jesuit moral theology-teaches that 
'should there be a solid reason to suppose an action not prohibited, then 
we arc free to follow that opinion, even though the reasons on the other 

344 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
side are more weighty, provided that the difference is not such as to 
render the existence of the law' against the action 'not merely probable 
but morally certain' (Dr. G. H. Joyce in Enc. of Religion and Ethics, 
s.v.). Dr. Joyce explains that 'probable' here means 'very possibly true 
because supported by weighty reasons', not 'mathematically probable', 
and he adds that Pascal's attack on the doctrine in his Lettres Pro'l:in-
ciales (which Hegel is mainly following here) is based on a caricature, 
not on a true interpretation. 
47· Remark(d) is an attack not so much on Kant's doctrine itself (see, 
e.g., Kant's Theory of Ethics, p. 10), but on the perversion of that 
doctrine by the Romantics. 
48. Reading with Hegels e. R., p. I03, auf welche hin. 
49· So Hegel's first edition. All other editions read 'I I I'. Sterrett 
reads 'II9'· A reference to Paragraph I20 would have been more 
apposite than any of these. 
50. 'Cum finis est licitus, etiam media sunt licita (Busenbaum: Medulla 
Theologiae Moralis, iv. 3· 2) (Bolland). This work, published in the first 
half of the seventeenth century, contains the fundamental precepts of 
Jesuit ethics and was still current in Hegel's day. Hegel probably took 
from it the maxim quoted in the text, a maxim in which the principle of 
what is called Machiavellianism is clearly recognizable' (Messineo). 
51. The version here given of (e) is, with a few minor changes, that 
given by Wallace in a note to his translation of Enc. Logic, pp. 388 ff. 
52. In the first twenty years of the nineteenth century there was a 
strong Roman Catholic revival in Germany. It began with the sensational 
conversion of Count Stolberg in I8oo and gathered momentum by the 
accession of the leaders of the Romantic movement. Their change of 
faith antagonized Hegel the Lutheran as much as their elevation of 
emotion above reason disgusted Hegel the philosopher. Bremzus was 
a periodical and this reference has not been checked. The letter in 
question was not reprinted in Jacobi's collected works. 
53· In the quotation from Pascal in Remark (a) to this Paragraph. 
54· 'Socrates's usual irony', of which Thrasymachus speaks in Plato's 
Republic, 337 a, was his profession of ignorance; by questioning Sophists 
like Thrasymachus and probing their answers in the professed attempt 
to find enlightenment for himself, Socrates showed the falsity and 
incoherence of their doctrines although he treated them with an ironical 
respect. 
55· For Hegel, dialectic is the self-creative movement of thought. 
In its dialectical development, the universal gives itself a content. 
Plato on the other hand took his Ideas (or Forms) as self-subsistent, 

----
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
345 
unchanging,and unmoved realities. For him, the dialectical method was 
a method of inquiry and led towards the truth, but the truth was finally 
seen; it was outside thought and dialectic, an object shining in its own 
light like the sun. If the dialectical method ended in the contemplation 
of an unmoved and eternal object, a substance because self-subsistent, 
then dialectic might be said to be submerged at last in this object. The 
process whereby the vision was attained contributed nothing to the 
vision itself. 
56. Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand Solger (r78o-r8r9) was a Professor in 
Berlin from r8r r until his death. Hegel wrote an appreciative review of 
his correspondence and posthumous papers ( Werke 1 , xvi. 436 ff. ). 
Hegel's further views on Schlegel, who is called 'the father of irony' 
in that essay, are contained in History of Philosophy, iii. 507-8. The 
citations in this footnote have not been checked. 
57· Guilt, a play by Adolf Mtillner (1774-1829), (Lasson). The play 
was an immediate success on its production in r813. Hugo, a Nor-
wegian, loves Elvira, the wife of Carlos, a Spaniard. He kills Carlos and 
marries Elvira. Carlos turns out to have been his brother and he and 
Elvira commit suicide because of their guilt. 
58. With modern tragedy (i.e. tragedy written in modern languages), 
which he calls 'romantic tragedy', Hegel deals in Aesthetic, iv. 248 ff. 
In the same volume he discusses in detail the difference between ancient 
and modern tragedy (pp. 308 ff.). For a summary of his views on 
tragedy generally, see A. C. Bradley: Oxford Lectures on Poetry 
(London, 1920), pp. 69-95. 
59· The type of spiritual life cultivated by the l\loravians was an 
instance of the 'beautiful soul'-a conception popular with senti-
mentalists in Hegel's day and expounded, for instance, m the writings of 
Navalis and by Schiller in his tract Ober Anmut und Wurde, published 
in 1793. 'Its activity consists in yearning ... in its transparent purity it 
becomes sorrow-laden ... its light dims and dies within it and it 
vanishes as a shapeless vapour dissolving into thin air' (Phenomenology, 
pp. 666-7). Cf. Aesthetic, i. 322. 
6o. In the Phenomenology, published fourteen years before the 
Philosophy of Right, the transition is direct from conscience to religion, 
not as here and in the third edition of the Encyclopaedia, from sub-
jective morality to a concrete rational order embodying both subjective 
convictions and objective institutions, and then later to religion. 
141. 6r. Right as pure universality and subjectivity as pure parti-
cularity are opposites. 'We can transcend their negation of one another 
only by denying their exclusive independence and making the transi-
tion to a form of experience in which they both take their place as 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
complementary moments. This is ethical life-a subjective disposition 
imbued with an objective, determinate, and rational content. As the 
unity of form and content, this is the Idea, and it is the Idea of freedom, 
since the moments comprised in it, right and subjectivity, are each of 
them embodiments of freedom. This Idea comes before us as the result 
of developing what is implicit in the conceptions of right and subjectivity, 
but since both of them have now been shown to be only moments in a 
concrete whole, each of them is an abstraction apart from the whole and 
each of them therefore presupposes the whole. Therefore the process 
of advance from right through subjectivity to the Idea of ethical life is at 
the same time a movement backwards to the 'true ground' out of which 
right and subjectivity both issue, or, as Hegel sometimes puts it, in 
developing what is implicit in right and subjectivity we have simply 
been plumbing their depths. I.e. the advance which we have been 
studying is a circle which now brings us back to what was implicit at 
the start. 
PART III 
SUB-SECTIONS I AND II (Family and Civil Society) 
142. I. beu•egenden Zweck (cf. Paragraph 258). As is clear from 
Paragraph 152, Hegel is thinking of Aristotle's doctrine that God, him-
self unmoved, is the mover of the universe, its 'final cause', moving it 
not by putting forth powers of his own, but simply by being, just as the 
beloved moves the lover. Hegel, however, is denying that the ethical 
order is purely transcendent; it is not merely a substance of which indi-
viduals are accidents; it is a substance which has risen to self-con-
sciousness in those very individuals and has become actualized only for 
that reason (see Paragraphs 146-7). Sittlichkeit, the title given to 
Part III of the book, means the union of a subjective will with the 
objective order, and it is here generally translated 'ethical life'; but 
sometimes Hegel emphasizes the objective aspect and hence 'ethical 
order' and 'ethical principles' are used to render the word in a few 
places. 
143. 2. The moral attitude was purely subjective, and the moral will 
distinguished itself from a purely objective world confronting it (see 
Paragr?.ph ro9). This distinction is still present in the ethical attitude, 
but with an important difference, because the subjective and the 
objective have uPcl~"r~one modification by each other, so that subjective 
and objective elements are distinguishable within each of them; i.e. each 
of them is a synthesis of object and subject and so is the 'totality' of the 
Idea. The two totalities are described respectively in Paragraphs IH-5 
and I 46-7. The first is ethical life regarded objectively; it is a substance 
(e.g., the state and its institutions) but, unlike Plato's state-we have 
learnt the lesson of the moral attitude and are carrying into the ethical 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
347 
order what was valuable in it-its form is subjective, i.e. the force of 
political institutions depends entirely on the self-consciousness of the 
citizens whose institutions they are, and who retain in the ethical order 
their subjective freedom. The second totality is ethical life regarded 
subjectively, i.e. it is the ethical will of the individual. This is a sub-
jective will, like the moral will, but it is aware of objective duties as 
enshrining its own inner universality and not as something outside 
itself. The two totalities are explicitly identified and unified through the 
political action, as distinct from the knowledge, of the citizens. 
144. 3· We ha\·e seen (Note 6r to Paragraph 141) that right and 
morality were both abstractions; the whole from which they are ab-
stracted is therefore that on which they depend. This whole is a unity 
of universal and particular, of object and subject. Now 'a thing which 
has subsistence in itself, a thing that upholdeth that which else would 
fall' (a phrase of Hobbes, quoted here from Laird: Hobbes, London, 
1934, pp. 92-3) is a substance. And throughout Hegel's account of 
ethical life, it is with substance that we are· dealing; each type of this 
life-family, civil society, state-is a substantiality, but it is a sub-
stantiality of mind, and so one of a special sort. 'In my view', says Hegel 
(Phenomenology, p. So), 'everything depends on grasping and expressing 
the ultimate truth not as substance but as subject as well.' (a) The 
family is a substance (in Hegel's view a single mind-see Paragraph 156) 
of which its members are accidents, but the substantiality is not external 
or visible; it depends solely on the consciousness of its members. The 
family's bond of union, its substance, is love; and love, in Hegel's view, 
is reason in its immediacy, i.e. an immature form of reason. Here there 
is no explicit difference between substance and accident; unity is 
present and the family members are not conscious 1 hat their unity 
is a unity of differences. (b) At the next stage, CIVIl souety, difference 
becomes explicit; the substance (the mind of the nation), 'appears' 
in particulars and it is their essence even though they may not realize it. 
They have risen above love to intelligence, hut this is concc:ntrated on a 
private end. (c) The third stage is the synthesis of the first two. The 
substantial mind of the nation, objectified in the state, rises to con-
sciousness of itself in the minds of the citizens; it particularizes itself 
into rational laws and institutions. It is concrete because, unlike the 
family, it is particularized consciously and because, unlike civil society, 
its particulars are not an 'appearance' of its substantial essence, but the 
differentiation of that essence. It is concrete again because these laws 
and institutions, like the state itself as the unity of these, are actual in 
the minds of the citizens who live under them. They regulate their 
willing deliberately in accordance with rational ends; the members of 
the family pursue an ethical end, but only under the influence of feeling; 
members of civil society are intelligent, but pursue the universal end 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
only under the disguise of the particubr. The state, then, has acquired 
the form of subjectivity, and subjectivity as we have seen, is infinite 
because self-related. Hegel contrasts his state with an oriental des-
potism, i.e. with a substance which is an absolute power over indi-
vidual accidents and alien to them. The essence of his state is that it is 
not only a substance but one which incorporates individual freedom by 
means of the parliamentary and other institutions which he later 
describes. 
4· vVhat is concrete is self-differentiating (see Paragraph 7). The 
substantiality which we are now considering is that of mind and there-
fore of the concept. Hence the institutions and objective duties of the 
ethic'll order are the concept's differentiation of itself (see Paragraphs 
262, 269-70, 272). 
145. 5· ihre Vorstellung, erscheinende Gestalt zmd Wirklichkeit haben. 
(a) Vorstellung-representative thought-is the level of thought charac-
teristic of religion. The worshipper 'represents' the Absolute Idea to 
himself as the God whom he worships. 
Hegel regards this level of 
thought as characteristic of the family; the substantiality of mind and 
the power of ethical principles are 'represented' to the family member 
as, e.g., the Penates, the gods of the household (see Remark to Paragraph 
r63). (b) In civil society, we rise from the immediate to the reflective 
stage of mind and so to the explicit distinction between appearance and 
reality (see :0/ote 5 to Paragraph roS). To all appearance, civil society is 
a riot of self-seeking, but this is only a mode in which the substantiality 
of the ethical order appears, because below appearances lie the laws of 
economics which are universal and which regulate appearances and are 
their essential substance. (c) In the state, the might of the ethical order 
is actualized in and through the conscious and deliberate volition by 
individuals of universal ends; what the state's compulsive power exacts, 
the individual also wills, so that freedom is at the same time a 'circle of 
necessity'. See Addenda, p. 376. 
146. 6. See Note 42 to Paragraph IO. Kature seems to be self-
subsistent; when we use a tool or derive water power from a stream, we 
recognize and do not annul the particular character of the object which 
serves our purpose; i.e. we recognize it as an object and to that extent 
as self-subsistent. In fact, however, nature, as the creation of God, 
embodies his rational purpose, and it is the task first of science and then 
of the philosophy of nature to discover what that purpose is. From that 
point of view, nature is not self-subsistent but depends on mind. It is 
'real' but not 'ideal' (see Note 36 to Paragraph 7 and Addition to Para-
graph 44). Laws and institutions are through and through rational and 
to that extent they are self-subsistent reason. As laws and institutions 
they exist solely for mind and their being is inseparable from the 

·--
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
349 
mentality of those whose laws and institutions they are; hence they 
embody rationality in the medium of reason itself. Their self-subsis-
tence, then, is of a higher order than that of nature. Nevertheless, in 
Hegel's view they are not absolute. The state is the highest of human 
institutions but it is only an institution, the culmination of 'objective 
mind' but subordinate to 'absolute mind'. There is still something 
external about it and therefore something arbitrary and non-rational. 
Art, Religion, and Philosophy all stand above it as the complete and 
perfect synthesis of subject and object (see Enc., the concluding section 
on the Absolute ;\lind). 
148. 7· 'Circle'-see Addition to Paragraph 2. 'Necessity'-i.e. 
necessitated by the concept, by reason, the animating principle of the 
ethical order. 
8. The last part of Kant's 111etaphysik der Sitten is a 'doctrine of 
duties' (i.e. a De Officiis), in contrast with the first part, which is a 
'doctrine of rights', and the second which is a 'doctrine of virtues'. 
The third part of Fichte's System der Sittlichkeit is explicitly styled a 
'doctrine of duties'. For Hegel's view of a 'doctrine of virtues', see 
Remark to Paragraph I so. 
150. 9· Rcchtschaffr:nheit-honcsty. But 'honesty' has too specifi-
cally moral a sense to express Hegel's meaning; 'respectability' would 
be nearer. Hegel thinks of 'virtue', when nrtuc IS distinguished from 
duty, as an element in our natural endowmem, as an ingrained excellence. 
From this point of view, it is something essent1ally mdividual and 
idiosyncratic, and as such has its place mainlY at a time before there were 
rational institutions and an estahlishcd ethical life in v. Inch all men are 
trained to participate. 
IO. See .4esthetic, i. 250, where liege! points out that the 'heroic' 
virtue of Hercules, whcrchy he attained Olympus, is quite compatible 
with his doubtful morals. He was tugendhaft but not nzowlzsch. For the 
deeds and the rights of heroes see :\ote 78 to Paragraph ()J. 
I I. i.e. a history of ingramed or natural excellence. a history of 
genius. 
I 2. For a fuller statement of Hegel's point here, see llistor_v of 
Philosophy, ii. 205-6. For :\ristotle, moral nrtuc consi:;ts lil imposmg a 
mean or lim1t on one's feelings and actions. It theref(,re contains a 
rational or universal element and a particular or natural element. 
:\ature, for Hegel, is the realm of the external and so of the quantitative. 
Hence if virtue as such is the ethical order rcfkctcd 111 the individual's 
natural disposition, then the determination of any specific virtue must 
depend on something in the disposition, i.e. on something natural and 
therefore quantitative; and if a virtue is to be determined quantitatively, 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
the same must be true of a vice. In Aristotle the difference between, 
e.g., rashness and cowardice, as the excess and def.ciency respectively, 
and courage as the mean, is one of quantity of feeling. 
It does not 
follow, however, that Aristotle makes the difference between virtue 
and vice a difference in degree only and not in kind as well, or that 
Hegel thought he did. 
IJ. A certain action may be done either on impulse or from a sense 
of duty. Duty and impulse may thus haYe the same content or object; 
but the object in abstraction from the motive which led to it is a mere 
event in nature and so neither good nor bad. Hence it is impossible to 
say that the excellence of the thing done makes the impulse behind it 
good, for the thing in itself has no excellence at all. 
151. I4. Customs (Sitten) are ethical (sittlich) in the sense that they 
embody the rationality of those whose customs they are. As Hegel 
himself points out (Hegels e. R., p. I I I and Werke 1 , i. 396), the relation 
between Sitte and sittlich is that between ~8os- and ~8<Kos-, and our word 
'ethics' means originally the study of the 'ethos' of a people. For the 
Greeks, observance of ~8os- was sufficient to make a man ~8<Kos-, because 
'the ancients knew nothing of conscience' (Hegels e. R., loc. cit.). 
Hegel's view, on the contrary, is that the highest type of ethical life :s 
that in which individuals consct"entiously conform to rational institutions 
and customs. That the formation of good habits is the foundation of a 
good character is a cardinal doctrine of Aristotle's Ethics, and the view 
that custom is a second nature, superseding man's original nature as a 
result of education, is found, e.g., in Pascal, Pensee 93 (Brunschvicg). 
153. IS. 'Others-i.e. Socrates' (Hegels e. R., p. II2). The answer 
is ascribed to Xenophilus the Pythagorean by Diogenes Laertius (viii. 
i. IS}, but emphasis on the educational value of good laws and institu-
tions is a commonplace of Greek ethics and politics. 
154. I6. The ethical order as appearance is civil society, and it is in 
that sphere that individuals attain their 'particular satisfaction', i.e. 
their livelihood through work. 
157. I7. 'This ldea'-i.e. the union of the independent self-con-
sciousness with its concept. The concept of this Idea is mind, and mind 
ohjectifies itself in the course of its development from one level to 
another of this sphere. I.e. it objectifies its moments, universality, 
particularity, and individuality, and the objectification of each of these 
is a different form of organization-family, civil society, and state. 
I8. 'Brought back to'-i.e. the state is the 'true ground' of both 
family and civil society, the concrete whok from which they are both 
abstractions (see Note 61 to Paragraph I4I ). 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
35 1 
161. rg. From the physical point of view, the individual is made 
what he is by his generic essence (see Note 63 to Paragraph 24), i.e. as 
a human being he is a member of the human race and a moment in the 
process of that race's life. Hence marriage, as a tie affecting the sub-
stance of his whole life, is intrinsic to the life of the race. From this 
point of view, the unity in marriage is only the inner unity of the single 
life-stream of the race, and this unity is external to the married parties, 
for they remain two human beings. :\lind, however, transcends this 
duality by transforming a physical external tie into the spiritual union of 
self-conscious love. Love is reason implicit and this spiritual union is 
thus a union of mind with mind: 
So they loved, as love in twain 
Had the essence but in one; 
Two dis tincts, diviswn none; 
l'."umber there m love was slain. 
162. 20. For Hegel's view of what constitutes genuine dramatic 
interest, see his footnote to Remark (j) to Paragraph qo. Here it is the 
Sturm und Drung drama that he has in mind again (see l'\ote 22 to 
Paragraph r z6 ). 
163. ·31. pietas-dutiful conduct, especiallv to members of one's 
family, 'family piety'. Penates-the guardwn dctties of the Roman 
household, regarded here as representing the mind of the family. See 
Note 3 to Paragraph 144 and ~ote 5 to Paragraph I+S· 
164. 22. See the secon-i footnote to the Remark to Paragraph 270. 
165. 23. !\lind is present in individuals as their £;cneric essence. As 
concrete, mind returns into itself out of Its dtt!crer~::.ltlon of itself, i.e. 
the vitality of the rae.: is concrete because it 1s 2c ncrated out of the 
opposition between the two sexes into wh1ch it 1s d1ticrcntiated. This is 
the rational basis of sex differences, and as a ratuonal bas1s it must have 
some bearing on ethics as a rationally ordered !tfe ( cf. Plzcnamcnology, 
PP· 4s4 ff. ). 
166. '!+ ".J.ntigonc, 11. 450-7. Hegel regarded this pla:-- as the perfect 
and most satisfying exemplar of tragedy ( . ..J.estlzetlc. iv. -~24). Antigone 
kept family law---the la1v of the ancient gods-by hmying her brother in 
defiance of the king 's edict against domg so. On the universal level, 
there IS a confEct between bmily la1v and state Lm·, the L!\v of the heart 
and the law publicly and objectively promulg~ctcd. On \he individual 
level, Hegel holds, there is a similar conflict betlwcn the nature of 
woman (the crc:~ture of intuition and feeling) and the nature of man (the 
creature of reason). 
169. 25. r·nmiigm-'cstate' might be a more suitable rendering but 
in some places it might falsely be taken to mean 'real estate' only. 

352 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
170. 26. See Paragraphs 199 ff. and 253. 
173. 27. i.e. persons immediately existent (as children). For the 
view that the infinity of mind when embodied in the finite leads to the 
false infinite of endless progres~ion, see Enc., §§ 92-4. 
175. 28. For a fuller statement of the point made here see Philosophy 
of History, pp. 286 ff. Also see below, Paragraph r8o. 
29. Cf. Addition to Enc., § 396. The play theory of education was 
popularized in Germany by J. H. Basedow (1723-90) in the years follow-
ing the publication of Rousseau's Emile (I 762 ). Froebel, with whom the 
theory is usually associated in this country, did not publish his Education 
of Man until 1826. 
176. 30. The married parties are the other two. 
178. 31. By Blackstone in his Commentaries, vol. ii, pp. 11-12. 
179. 32. The ethical justification of inheritance in Hegel's view is 
that the family's capital is an embodiment of the family unity; it is 
therefore common property, and when its administrator dies it is dis-
tributed to the members of the family which has now been dissolved in 
the course of nature. Hence bequest& to friends can only be justified 
from the ethical point of view if the testator had cultivated his circle of 
friendships to such an extent that his friends formed a kind of family and 
that his property in his lifetime was theirs as much as his. 
180. 33· Fichte implies such a view in his Science of Rights, § 19, 
pp. 341 ff. 
34· Hegel does not exaggerate the scope of Roman patria potestas. To 
allow to sons private possession even of peculzum castrense was a revolu-
tionary change, introduced by Augustus, and even then, if the son died 
intestate, this peculium passed to the paterfamilias. 
35· In a marriage with manus (the type which Hegel calls 'slavery'), 
the wife passed out of the potestas of her paterfamilias into that of her 
husband. Her status in that event was the same as that of her daughters. 
Divorce in such a marriage was more difficult than in a marnagc without 
manus, and marriages with manus were rare by the enJ of the Republic. 
Hegel's authority for asserting that materfamilias means a wife who is, 
and matrona a wife who is not, in manu is Aulus Gellius, .Yoctes Atticae, 
xviii. 6. 
36. This titbit of legal lore is culled from an earlier edition of Heinec-
cius: Antiquitatum Romanarum Syntagma (Frankfurt, r8.p), III. x. i. 
37· 'Roman history'-in the last century of the Roman Republic the 
individual began to count for more than the family. Cases were known 
of an heir succeeding to the position of pateJfamilias and the family 

---
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
353 
obligations, but to only a fraction of its wealth, the remainder having 
been left to others. This led to attempts to limit the testamentary 
powers to the paterfamilias. 'Lucian'-see, e.g., Bis Abdicatus, a speech 
supposedly delivered in court by a man who was disinherited by his 
father and studied medicine. His father became insane, the son cured 
him and was restored to his will. But he was then disinherited a second 
time on his refusal to treat his stepmother's insanity. He appeals to the 
court against his father. 'Other writings'-Hegel probably has in mind 
the rhetoricians. Disinheritance and preposterous imaginary complica-
tions arising therefrom made one of their most succulent topics. See, e.g., 
the elder Seneca: Controversiae, i. 1, i. 8, ii. I, &c. 
38. Fideicommissa-testamentary trusts, see Note 21 to Paragraph 46. 
Substitutiones-nominations in a will of one or more heirs to inherit as 
substitutes in the event of the failure of the heir instituted to take posses-
sion of the inheritance, whether through death or otherwise. 
39· All editions read '356'. 
181. 40. The transition from family to civil society corresponds on 
a higher level to that from right to morality. In each case the transition 
is the emergence of the particular; in each case we leave behind an 
undifferentiated universality and arrive at a realm of appearance, i.e. 
what is visible and obvious is particularity, though universality is its 
underlying essence. Here, as in the second part, we come upon the 
categories of 'essence' (see Note 5 to Paragraph 108). Universal and 
particular, form and content, appear in civil society to fall apart, the Idea 
appears to be divided, but none the less the pursuit of private ends here 
turns out to be conditioned by universal laws. These are implicit to start 
with (as the laws of economics), but they become explicit later as a 
system of laws and institutions for the protection of private property and 
as barriers against private selfishness. On the meaning of 'show' see 
Note 73 to Paragraph 82. 
182. 41. Civil Society is the sphere of the particular as opposed to 
the universal, of men as particulars, not individuals, of men as men, not 
as Germans, or as David, Jonathan, &c. In other words it is the sphere 
of the concrete person, i.e. not the abstract unit of the sphere of abstract 
right, nor yet the abstract and isolated subject of the sphere of morality, 
but the member of civil society, who is like the abstract person in count-
ing as one unit amongst others, but like the subject in consciously pursu-
ing his own private ends (though the ends in question are the satisfaction 
of the needs common to men as men). He differs from the subject in 
gradually coming to recognize himself as a member of society and to 
realize that to attain his own ends he must work in with others. Through 
working in with others, his particularity is mediated; he ceases to be a 
mere unit and eventually becomes so socially conscious, as a result of 

354 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
the educative force of the institutions of civil society (see Paragraphs 
230 ff.), that he wills his own ends only in willing universal ends and so 
has passed beyond civil society into the state. What we watch in study-
ing civil society is a process of mediation; I gain my ends by your means 
and then by means of a general organization (e.g. the Corporation). In 
this way particularity loses its exclusiveness, and the universal gradually 
asserts itself and becomes explicit in the particular consciousness. If we 
study the process whereby my satisfaction involves yours, we can dis-
cern certain universal principles at work-the laws of political economy. 
These laws are the 'form' or the framework of this sphere; its content is 
the pursuit of selfish ends. Form and content, however, are explicitly 
different; the two principles which govern this sphere are the opposite of 
one another. Hence this is the stage of difference and division; the Idea 
seems to have fallen asunder (Paragraph r84) and it looks as if ethical 
life, which is essentially social, were lost in a riot of self-seeking. For 
the 'mediation' of the particular through the uniYersal, see Hegel's 
doctrine of syllogism in Enc., §§ r83 ff. 
183. 42. See Translator's Foreword, § 5· 
184. 43· 'Moment of reality'-'Ideality', Hegel remarks (Enc., § 96) 
'must be the ideality of something. But this something is not a mere 
indefinite this or that, but existence characterized as a reality which, if 
retained in isolation, has no truth.' In this sense, 'the body is the reality 
of the soul and the law is the reality of freedom' (Enc., § 91 ). 'Relative 
totality'-i.e. the two sides of the Idea as a whole, form and content, are 
merely related to one another, not integrated here in an organic unity. 
Hegel's whole account of civil society, and especially that section of it 
called the 'system of needs', bears traces of his study of Adam Smith and 
the laissez-fairedoctrine that a country best attains commercial prosperity 
all round if it leaves individual entrepreneurs as far as possible free to 
pursue their own selfish aims. 
185. 44· The two sides of the antithesis are the particular and the 
universal. Intuition (e.g. in the family) does not distinguish between 
them but apprehends them only in their immediate unity. 'Reflective 
self-consciousness', i.e. the Understanding, makes the distinction be-
tween them explicit, and, once the distinction is made, intuition by itself 
is powerless to synthesize them. Unity can be restored only by a 
further effort of thought, by reason as distinct from the Understanding. 
The wounds of thought can be healed by thought alone (see Enc., § 24, 
Addition 3). 
45· Hegel regards 'beauty' as the principle of the Greek world. 
Beauty, he holds, is the Idea appearing in a sensuous form; i.e. beauty 
and truth are ultimately identical, but truth is an explicit and known 
synthesis of opposites, while beauty is only a felt unity \Yithout any 

·--
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
355 
explicit difference. The unity of the family is a 'substantial unity' built 
on feeling; the substance has not differentiated itself into self-subsistent 
particulars and then reasserted its unity on a higher and more concrete 
level by incorporating these particulars into itself like the members of an 
organism. Plato's state, which Aristotle criticized on the ground that it 
was too like a family, is substantial in this same sense; its unity, Hegel is 
holding, is a felt unity based on the 'beauty' of the ethical life there por-
trayed. Such a state is explicitly defective because it denies subjective 
freedom, but it is true in essence because it is a genuine unity, not a 
mere collection of self-subsistent particulars, like a civil society. Hegel's 
view of beau tv as the essence of Greek moral life is doubtless due to his 
reflection on the fact that the Greeks drew no clear distinction between 
beauty and goodness, as the meaning of Ka.\os- and alaxpos- shows. 
187. 46. Burger-bourgeois, burgher of a town as distinct from the 
citizen (citoyen) of a state-see Remark to Paragraph 190. Civil society 
(biirgerliche Gesellschaft) is a society of burghers or civilians, men inter· 
ested in civil as distinct from political life. See Addenda, p. 376. 
189. 47· All editions read '6o'. 
48. Three 'classical economists'. Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations 
was published in 1776, }. B. Sf!y's Traitr! d'economie politique in 1803, 
and D. Ricardo's Principles of Political Econumy and Taxation in 1817. 
190. 49· See Remark to Paragraph 209. We speak of the members of 
a state not as 'men' but as 'Englishmen', 'Germans', &c. Political insti-
tutions may differ, but economic needs are everywhere the same. 
192. 50. For the movement of thought in this Paragraph and the 
next, see Paragraphs 48, 49, and 71. Recognition is termed an 'abstract' 
relation because two people who recognize each other still preserve their 
independence. A society bound •ogether by the ties of recognition alone 
is still a society of independent units and their social tie is only a formal 
one, unlike the marriage tie, which links the parties in substance. 
195. 51. Reading gebildetem with Lasson for Hegel's ungebildetem. 
The Remark to the preceding Paragraph is primarily an attack on 
Rousseau. 'Qualitative limit'-(Grenze), i.e. the multiplication of needs 
never reaches '1 point when the quantitative alteration simultaneously 
involves a qualitative change. The savage and Socrates may need differ-
ent things, but need they share in common. The mere multiplication of 
need~ will never lift you out of the sphere of needs (see Enc., § 92). 
52. At the level of morality, the subject had a right of distress. But 
civil society, as a phase of ethical life, is the synthesis of right and welfare, 
and hence the needy man, with no money to make purchases, may not 
steal the property of others. It is the task of society in such an event to 
look after his well-being (see Paragraphs 241-2). 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
199. 53· As Messineo points out, following Bolland, p. 338, the 
words in square brackets, which appear in Hegel's table of contents 
though not in his text, should be supplied here. 'Class-divisions', i.e. 
Stiinde. A Stand is a group of persons with the same status. Hegel uses 
the word in three senses in this book, and all three of them are found 
together in the Remark to Paragraph 326: (i) the status of marriage; (ii) 
the class, or social position, e.g. of business men; (iii) the Estates of the 
realm assembled in parliament. For the connexion between (ii) and (iii) 
in fact as well as in language, see Remark to Paragraph 303. 
54· The dialectical advance here is based on Hegel's doctrine of the 
reflective syllogism, for which see Enc., § 190, and ;\lacran: Hegel's 
Doctrine of Formal Logic (Oxford, 1912), p. 301. 
202. 55· The class divisions are types of social life, and the basis of 
division is the concept itself; i.e. the three classes severally correspond 
to the three main stages in the advance of the concept which is the 
animating principle of the whole of ethical life. At first we have the stage 
of immediacy, when thought is sunk in substance-the life of feeling for 
~hich difference is not explicit. This type of social life is therefore 
based on the family. Secondly, differences are made explicit; we have 
advanced from implicit universality to explicit particularity, from feeliP-g 
to reflection, so that substance now has a particular content and a uni-
versal form apprehended by reflection. Social life here is based on 
reflection, i.e. it is the product of education and so is specially charac-
teristic of civil society-the child of the modern world. Thirdly, the 
synthesis of these; the particular consciously finds himself in the uni-
versal; the original unity has been restored, but on a higher plane. 
Private satisfaction is secured by the deliberate pursuit of uni'L·ersal ends. 
This type of social life prefigures the life of the state. Hegel's point is 
that the distinction between agriculture, industry, and the civil service is 
not a matter of accident or convenience, but is based on logical necessi-
ties. Civil society, as a type of state, has present in it the relics of patri-
archal communities and the promise of the genuinely political life of the 
state proper. See Addenda, p. 376. 
203. 56. G. F. Creuzer, 1771-1858, was appointed Professor at 
Heidelberg in r8o+ and \\'as Hegel's colleague there from r8r6 to r8r8. 
There are frequent references in Hegel's lectures to his Symbolik und 
Mythologie der alten Volker, besonders der Griechen (Symbolism and 
mythology of the ancients, especially the Greeks), 4 vols., Darmstadt, 
I8IO-I2. 
209. 57· If we reflect on the reciprocity characteristic of society, we 
may see it as the mirror image of the conception of personality, that in 
respect of which all men are alike. This conception of personality is 
embodied in abstract rights. ;\ow if we rise from the abstract con-

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
357 
ception of person to the concrete conception of a person related to 
other persons in a society, we must also rise from abstract rights to rights 
known through their embodiment in law. The sphere of civil society is 
that of the education of the particular (see Paragraph 187), the sphere of 
the 'Understanding' as distinct from the 'intuition' of the family and the 
'reason' of the state, and it is here therefore where consciousness of 
man's interrelatedness with other men leads to the creation of positive 
law as the embodiment of a known relatedness. In the Remark to this 
Paragraph, Hegel is translating into the language of his philosophy, 
Galatians iii. 28. 
211. 58. Throughout this section Hegel has in mind the controversy 
in his day between the historical and the rationalist schools of jurists. 
'The former studied customary law with special interest and regarded it 
as the genuine manifestation of the popular consciousness. Law in their 
view could not be treated as dead material to be cast and recast by pro-
fessional jurists and statesmen in accordance with what they took to be 
right in the nature of things.' On the contrary, law-as custom-was 
living, like a language, inextricably intertwined with national tradition. 
The historical study of national traditions and legal requirements was 
thus an indispensable prelude to codification; and proposals in Hegel's 
day to codify were therefore regarded by Savigny, the leader of the 
historical school and Hegel's colleague in Berlin, as premature (Vino-
gradoff: Outlines of Historical Jurisprudence, Oxford, 1920, vol. i, 
pp. !28---<)). 
59· Landrecht oder gemeines Recht. Hegel probably has Blackstone in 
mind: 'The municipal law of England, or the rule of cinl conduct pre-
scribed to the inhabitants of this kingdom, may \\ 1th sufficient propriety 
be divided into two kinds: the lex non scnpta, the umuitt::n or common 
law, and the lex scripta, the written or statute law' (Commentaries, vol. i, 
p. 63). But if gemeznes has here its ordinary meaning of 'common' and is 
not intended as a translation of 'municipal', then Hegel has made a bad 
blunder. 
6o. Hegel may be thinking of Blackstone (val. i, pp. 68fT.) or perhaps 
Bacon: De Aug. Sc. YIII. iii. On the way in which JUdtcature and legis-
lature overlapped in England in the early nineteenth century, see e.g. 
Halevy: Hiftory of the English People in IBIS, Book i, chap. i. 
61. Yalentinian III, Emperor of the \\"est, 425-55. The law in 
questiOn was promulgated in ++6 and is given in the Theodosian Code, 
r. iv. 2. The 'College' consisted of Papinian, Paul, Gaius, L'lpian, and 
:\Iodestin. \'.'hen the 'votes' cast on a given point were equal (as they 
might be, since Judgements by all members were not available on all 
points) Papinian, the 'President', had a 'casting-vote'. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
62. This insult is the burden of Savigny's Vom Beruf unsrer Zeit fiir 
Gesetzgebung und Reclztswissenschajt (Heidelberg, x815 ). (Lasson.) Eng. 
tr. by A. Hayward: On the vocatiOn of our age to legzslation and juris-
prudence. See note s8 to Paragraph 2 I I. 
214. 63. The Jamaica Consolidated Slave Law of xSr6 (57 Geo. III, 
c. 25) provided (s. xxvii) that in no case was a slave to suffer more than 
thirty-nine lashes in one day. Thirty-nine lashes was a not uncommon 
statutory maximum in slavery legislation, and Hegel was a student of the 
English press, where such legislation was a good deal discussed. See 
also Deuteronomy xxv. 3· 
215. 64. The translator has been unal>le to trace this anecdote in any 
writer on Dionysius. 
65. The reformation of Roman jurisprudence was carried out under 
Justinian's instructions between 527 and 533, and its r.:sults were em-
bodied in the Code, the Pandects or Digest, and the Institutes. 
S~:e 
Note 12 to Paragraph 3· 
216. 66. For the difference between the abstr::~ct univers~l of the 
Understanding and the concrete self-differentiating universal of reason, 
see Note 63 to Paragraph 24. 
67. So the first edition. Later editions change meilleur to miwx. 
The proverb is probably Italian in origin. 
68. JUensclzewcerstand. For the significance of this word see Pheno-
menology, pp. 127, r;6-;. In the History of Phdosoplzy, iii. 375 fL, 
Hegel uses it to describe the philosophy of Reid, Oswald, and Beattie, 
and he there translates it sensus communis. Elsewhere in the same work 
he says that 'common sense is a way of thinking which is a repository of 
all the prejudices of the day. It is really controlled by genuine thought 
but is unconscious of the fact' (i. 379), hence a man of 'true', as distinct 
from false, common sense is a man of prejudices and opinions which 
happen to be true, although he does not know their truth. 
217. 6g. e.g. mancipiwn, a taking by the hand, originally meant the 
ceremonial transfer of something from one person to another. The 
ceremony involved an actual transfer by hand and the speaking of certain 
words. Later, when the ceremony was dropped, the \Vord \\as used to 
mt:an not a transfer but the possession of something acquired by formal 
transfer. 
218. 70. Compare Remarks to Par.1graphs g(l and 319. 
71. i.e. Greek tragedy. The chorus sometimes (e.g. in the Agamem-
non, Oedipus Tyrmznus, &c.) corrsrsts of subJects of the royJl house with 
whose misfortune the pby IS concerned. It sympathizes \\ it:1 the mis-
fortunes of its rulers, and utters appropriate moral maxuns, but it does 
not speak JS if their woes were its own. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
359 
72. See Note 79 to Paragraph 95 and Note 91 to Paragraph ror. 
73· 'It is but reasonable that those crimes should be most severely 
punished which are most destructive of the public safety and happiness 
... and those \vhich cannot be so easily guarded against as others .... 
Hence it is that ... to steal a handkerchief ... privately from one's 
person is made capital, but to carry off a load of corn from an open field 
... is punished with transportation only' (Blackstone: Commentaries, 
vol. iv, p. r6). 
219. 74· See footnote to Paragraph 258. 
221. 75· To possess the jus standi in judicio is to be the opposite of 
an 'outlaw'. 
223. ;6. Schicds-Friedensgericht. A Friedensgericht is sometimes a 
court of the first instance, competent in some of the German states to 
try actions where only small amounts are at issue, sometimes an arbitra-
tion tribunal. A Schiedsgericht is a court of arbitration. The details in 
Hegel's text apply only to the judicial organization of some of the German 
states in his day. The principle of providing for recourse to arbitration 
in case of dispute is, however, a commonplace of modern commercial 
contr<1cts, and it is a legal requirement, e.g., in cases where a price is to 
be fixed for land acquired compulsorily hy Act of Parliament. 
225. 77· (a) A jury of laymen finds the facts, and (b) the judge 
declares the law and, in criminal cases, pronounces sentence. 
78. Under the formula system of trial, the praetor heard the parties 
informally and prepared an issue which he sent in '' riting to a panel of 
judias for trial, instructing them to give judgenwnt for.\ orB in accor-
dance with the evidence. Judices were laymen al!d rrot magistrates, 
though they often required and possessed legal knowledge. Greenidge 
(The Legal Procedure of Cicero's Time, Oxford, rgo r, p. 150) says that it 
is a mistake to hold that the work of judices was limited to reaching con-
clusions on points of fact. 
79· Hegel seems to be thinking of the fact that in his r!ay a defendant 
in England was sometimes able to take advantage of technical flaws in 
the indictment to secure his acquittal. Blackstone (Cummentmies, vo!. 
iv, p. 333) cites an instance of a man's being charged \1 ;th feloniously 
stealing a greyhound. By pleading that to steal a greyhound was a civil 
trespass and not a felony, he could claim to be acquitted. By an Act of 
George IY many of these technical pleas v;ere made of none efl'ect. 
227. So. Especially P,:ragraph I 19. 
8 I. The words \1-ere used in the formula of the oath of the Roman 
judex; ·I swear to the best of my belief', or 'on my conscience'. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
82. The jury attempts to determine objectively and absolutely 
whether the prisoner is guilty or not. It reasons sincerely from the 
testimony given on oath, but since this testimony is empirical in content 
and not rigorously provable in the way that a mathematical theorem is, 
inferences from it, however sincere, are formally invalid if they claim to 
be completely and objectively demonstrated. 'Extraordinary punish-
ments'- 'materially, all punishments inflicted as a result of the verdict 
of a jury are what have been called extraordinary punishments-there 
may be a confession here too but that is something accidental in these 
circumstances and outside the essence of the matter' (Enc., edition 2, 
§ 53 I). Ordinary punishments then are those inflicted, by judges who sit 
without juries, on criminals who confess their guilt. 
229. 83. Polizei, translated 'police' here, has a wider sense than that 
conveyed by 'police' in English. Hence in what follows it is generally 
translated 'public authority'. The justification for this is that Hegel 
himself sometimes (e.g. in Paragraph 235) uses offentliche .\1acht as a 
synonym for Polizei; but the disadvantage of this rendering is that it is 
less specific than Hegel's word. 'Corporation'-i.e. Korporation, a term 
which originates with the workmen's corporations in ancient Rome. 
'Trade guild' is Reyburn's translation of this word (e.g. Hegel's Ethical 
Theory, p. 223) and 'guild corporation' is sometimes used here (in 
purely economic contexts) in place of 'Corporation'. 'Incorporated 
trade' would be a suitable rendering in places, since that expression was 
used in the English literature of Hegel's day (e.g. in the Wealth of 
Nations) to express what he means when he is thinking only of economic 
organizations. He is of course not thinking of what we know as Trade 
Unions, since his Korporationen arc societies of which both employers 
and employed are members. 'Corporation' has been generally used here 
to render Hegel's meaning, first, because he is thinking not only of 
economic organizations but also of religious bodies, learned societies, and 
sometimes of town councils; and secondly, because 'Corporation' is now 
used in Hegel's sense of an institution in modern Italy. There, as 
Professor Finer says (Mussolini's Italy, London, 1935, pp. 272-3), 'the 
Corporations are to act as deccntralised administrative bodies, in order to 
achieve an organisation and a morale half-way between the public irre-
sponsibility and tbe technical agility of private enterprise and the public 
responsibility and heavy routine of the ordinary departments of state'. 
This might almost pass as an exegesis of Hegel's own meaning. 
235. 84. i.e. public utility undertakings such as drainage, water 
supply, &c. 
236. 85. Reading with Lasson dass durch das offentliche Ausstellen 
Waren, die, &c. Messineo rejects this emendation, but if it is not 
adopted, the plural verb with which the sentence concludes is left with-
out a subject. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
242. 86. It is curious to find street-lighting enumerated amongst public 
charitable institutions. Perhaps the meaning may be that the wealthy 
could afford servants to carry lanterns to light them through the streets, 
or that only the poor need to walk in the streets at night. At the end of 
the eighteenth century, in Berlin, one of his friends gave Schleiermacher 
a lantern to fasten on his coat to guide him home on dark nights (Schlei-
ermacher and Religious Education, by A. R. Osborn, Oxford, 1934, p. 40). 
243. 87. The outward expansion of civil society is considered in 
Paragraph 246. 
244. 88. Pobel, i.e. th.! plebs or proletariat or riff-raff, but no single 
word is available for a mass of rebellious paupers, recognizing no law but 
their own, and it is this which Hegel means (see the Addition to this 
Paragraph). 
245. 89. This Remark is probably based on Hegel's enthusiastic study 
of English parliamentary debates on poor-law legislation and newspaper 
reports of private philanthropy. In his note-books, written during his 
residence in Frankfurt at the end of the eighteenth century, there were 
numerous extracts from the English press on these topics (Rosenkranz: 
Hegels Leben, Berlin, 184-4, p. 85). The success of the system, or lack of 
system, in Scotland was much disputed, and a Commission of 1843 led 
to poor-law legislation there on systematic lines. 
247. 90. Cf. Kant's Critique of Aesthetic Judgment, translated by 
J. C. Meredith (Oxford, 1911), p. 122. For an amplified statement of 
the view here expressed, see, as Messineo suggests, the section on the 
'Geographical Basis of History' in Philosophy of History (especially 
pp. 90 ff.). Hegel wrote in the days of bad roads and no aircraft. 
251. 91. In this sphere where universal and particular are merely 
relative to one another and not synthesized, the umversal is only an 
abstract universal, a common character of the particulars, and therefore 
something determinate in contrast with other similar abstract universals. 
Hence these universals in turn become particulars with higher universals 
over them. Thus the study of the sphere of the particulars leads to their 
distinction into species, which in turn fall under genera. The truth 
about the particulars is that they are differentiations of the concrete 
universal and so 'identical' with one another, because the life-blood of 
each of them is the same. In this sphere of relatedness, however, this 
truth, their identity, is obscured; it appears as an inner likeness accom-
panied by an explicit difference. This inner likeness is made manifest as 
the common membership of an organization which itself is a specifica-
tion of the labour organization of civil society as a whole. Civil society 
is differentiated by the concept into three classes exhaustive of the 
whole society. The particular, i.e. the business, class-to which Cor-
poratiorn; are appropriate because it is the class which specially needs to 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
be brought back to universality-has the universal appearing in it as its 
classification, i.e. it is a genus divided into species. Reason appears here 
disguised as the Understanding and hence the classification is not the 
differentiation of the concept but that used in empirical science, the field 
where the Understanding is at home. Hence the number of Corpora-
tions, unlike the number of classes, is indeterminate. 
92. Because the universal purpose of the Corporation is at the same 
time the particular purpose of its members. In the system of needs, the 
universal is abstract because the particular in pursuing his end is not 
clearly conscious of the universal which regulates his activity. In the 
Corporation the case is otherwise. The difference between the Corpora-
tion and the state is that the purpose of the Corporation, though uni-
versal for its members, in the sense that it is the same for all of them, is 
still restricted; it is not the purpose of all the members of society but 
that of a section only. 
252. 93· A privilegium (from privus and lex) is a law affecting an 
individual only and hence is something exceptional. But the privileges 
of an order, for example, although peculiar to it, cannot rightly be re-
garded as exceptional or accidental. The order itself is there because it 
is a branch of society; as one special branch (i.e.'as a particular branch) 
it is like other branches in being a branch, but is distinct from them in 
other respects, and its distinction from others is outwardly manifest in 
its privileges. 
253. 94· See Addition to Paragraph 207. 
95· The 'ethical ground' presumably consists in the fact that par-
ticularity has the right in this sphere to seek its own ends (see Paragraph 
184) and this leads inevitably to both luxury and poverty (see, e.g., Para-
graphs rSs, 243). 
255. 96. 111omente. The stability and organic unity of the state are 
foreshadowed in the family and the Corporation. Civil society is 
characterized generally by its ato:nicity, and it is saved from complete 
disintegration only by these fixed and organic institutions. Hegel is here 
using a metaphor drawn from the solar system: the sun is a fixed point 
whose attractive power prevents the dissipation of the heavenly bodies 
which revolve around it and so confers a unity on the system as a whole. 
l\1oreover, the 'fixed points' here arc parallel to the 'moment of central-
ity' in the category of mechanism (see Enc., §§ 196-8). 
256. 97· Reflection, the activity of the l.'nderstanding, sunders the 
unity of intuition, and for feeling substitutes judgement. To judge 
(urteilen) is to partition, and the essential task of reflection is in Hegel's 
view always the making of distinctions \\·hich it is powerless to syn-
thesize. 

, --
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
98. 'ldeal'-i.e. moments divergent in 'reality' (the world of outward 
existence in which the Ideal, the genuinely true, is embodied) but not 
divergent in actuality because they are distinct yet synthesized moments 
in the single unity of the concept or the Idea (see Note 36 to Paragraph 
7). This conception of 'ideality' is frequently used in the section on the 
state (see especi::tlly Paragraph 278). 'True ground'-see ~ote 6r to 
Paragraph q.r. 
Scs-SECTIOc-i Ill (The State) 
257. I. Volksgei.·t-see Kote 83 to Paragraph 340. With this Re-
mark, compare Remarks to Paragraphs 163 and r66. 
258. 2. Hegel's theory of the state has his theory of syllogism for its 
background. 'The syllogism is the rational and everything rational' 
(Enc., § r8r) because it is a concrete unity of explicit differences, and 
these differences are the three moments of the concept, universality, 
particularity, and individuality. 'The state is a system of three syllog-
isms: (i) The individual or person, through his particularity or physical 
or mental needs ... is coupled with the universal, i.e. \\'ith society, law, 
right, government. (ii) The will or action of individuals is the inter-
mediating force which procures for these needs satisfaction in society, 
law, &c., and which gives to society, law, &c., their fulfilment and 
actualization. (iii) But the universal, i.e:. the statt:, goYcrnment, and law, 
is the permanent underlying mean in which the mchYJduals and their 
sati·Jaction have and receive their fulf:llcd realitY, mtermediation, and 
persistence. Each of the moments of the concept, as it is brought by 
intermediation to c0alesce with the other extreme, is brought into union 
with itself and produces itself. ... It is only by tl,i.; t rrad of syllogisms 
with the same terms that the \Vhulc is thorou>:dd'-
understood in its 
organization' (Enc., § 19S). \\'hat esscntlal!y dtrlL'lc-'c<at·_, the state from 
civil society and makes it ration::!l, is the p:ultJmcntJr\' organization 
which mediates between particulars on the one h:EJd and the individual 
monarch on the other (see Paragraphs 302-+). The state is the Idea 
because it is in this \\·ay the unity of universal and p;uiic ular, form and 
content, and smce in the state this is a conscious unm-. lt may be de-
scribed as mind in being, since reason is 'esscnti::!l and actual truth' and 
'truth, a\vare of what it is, is mind' (Enc., §§ uS-9). 
3· For references to speciflc passages of L~ Cuntral Sociu! and a 
slightly longer statement of Hegel's criticism, sec llislrJJ_', rif Philosophy, 
iii . .j.OO ff. 
+· Science of Rights, § 17, pp. 209 ff. See also Htslory of Plulosuplzy, 
iJi. 503 ff .. and Hegel's essay Cber d1e zdssmschajtlichen lJehandlungsarten 
des .Yaturrcclzts (TVerlu 1 , i. 361 ff.). 
5. The extent to which the French revolutionaries derived their ideas 
from Le Contrat Social is now disputed (see, e.g., :\Iornet: Les Origines 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
intellectuelles de Ia revolution franfaise, Paris, 1934, pp. 95-6). See 
further for Hegel's view, the section called' Absolute freedom and terror' 
in Phenomenology, pp. 599 ff. 
6. Restoration of Political Science-a defence of natural law against 
man-made civil law, and of conservatism against liberalism (see :\'ote 13 
to the Preface). It was published at Winterthur in 1816 in four volumes, 
and a second edition appeared at the same pbce from 1820 to 1822. Two 
further volumes were added later. In the footnote at the end of this 
Remark, Hegel quotes from the first edition, a copy of which the trans-
lator has been unable to see, but the citations are identifiable in the 
second edition. In almost every instance, however, although Hegel uses 
von Haller's words and does not misrepresent him, he omits words and 
sentences without indicating omissions and sometimes he inverts the 
order of sentences and paraphrases them, despite his use of quotation 
marks. The translator has inserted references to the second eJition in 
square brackets, both in cases where Hegel gives references and in those 
where ·he gives none. In the translation, quotation marks have been 
used to distinguish von Haller's statements from Hegel's comments, 
some of which appear within quotation marks in Hegel's first edition. 
7· A lawyer who depends on legal technicalities for getting the bettet 
of his opponent. 
261. 8. Religious duties and their bearing on political life are ex-
cluded from consideration for the reason given in the second footnote to 
the Remark to Paragraph 270. In Hegel's view, religious duties coincide 
with ethical duties in the Protestant religion and in a Protestant state 
(see Enc., § 552). 
267. 9· Here and in what follows Hegel adopts from Fichte the 
comparison between the state and a self-reproducing organism. He 
regards the state as an organism in virtue of its constitution, i.e. its 
organization. The etymological connexion between 'organization' and 
'organism' is seldom present to our minds when we speak of the former, 
but it is never absent from Hegel's. 'Strictly political state'-cf. 
Paragraphs 273, 276. Hegel distinguishes between the strictly political 
state, an objective organization, and the state proper (which he calls 
'this actual God', &c.). The latter comprises not only the objective side 
but also the subjective side referred to in Paragraph 267, i.e. it comprises 
not only the constitution but also the subjective life of the whole com-
munity, together with all their moral and legal duties and rights and the 
whole sphere in which these duties are performed and these rights 
enjoyed. Hence the state proper is the totality of human life so far as it 
is the life of moral beings united in a community by tradition, religion, 
moral convictions, &c. Failure to realize this has been responsible fer 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
numerous misrepresentations of Hegel's position and his attitude to 'the 
state'. 
270. 10. Hegel regards ancient states as mere substances-absolute 
undifferentiated powers imposing their will on their subjects without 
the intermediation of the subject's own knowledge and will. In civil 
society, i.e. in the modern world since the Renaissance, particularity is 
explicit, together v,·ith claims made on behalf of private judgement, and 
is at first, in the system of needs, given free rein. The history of civil 
society is the history of the education of this private judgement until the 
particular is brought back to the universal. Corporations and the work-
ing of the judicial system are educative institutions helping to produce 
this result. Hence the modern state which Hegel saw coming into being 
in his own day is substance and power, but a substance which has come 
to self-consciousness in its citizens. They recognize its law as their law 
-if they are educated enough to do so-and hence the state is not an 
arbitrary will or a blind necessity, but the embodiment of the citizens' 
freedom. 
1 1. By Friedrich von Schlegel and other Romantics. 
12. The state in Hegel's view is the highest and most divine of human 
institutions, but it is only an institution. It is mind objectified in the 
way most adequate to mind, but it is still less than, and therefore (see 
Note 6r to Paragraph qr) is grounded on, 'Jbsolutc mine!'. The latter 
is the 'eternally actual truth in which the contemplative reason enjoys 
freedom' (Enc., § 552) and its three forms are art. religion, and philo-
sophy. The content of religion and philosophy is the same, but what 
religion believes, philosophy knows. The thinking of philosophy is 
rational, it knows the concept as the concept, \Yhik the thought of 
religion is only representational (see );ote 5 to 1\HJc;raph 145). Since 
this is the general relation between religwn and philosophY. there should 
be no clash in principle between the church, an embodrmcnt of religion, 
and the state, a 'hieroglyph' of reason. Here Hegel hils hack on his 
Lutheran faith in a co-operation between Protestant churches and a 
Protestant government. But he modifies the Lutheran d•>ctrine of the 
subsen·ience of the church to the state so far as to allow frtcdom of con-
science to dissenting sects (see the third footnote to this Remark). 
13. i.e. the state 'puts up with them' (aushalten, tolewre), endures 
them. :\lennonites were exempt from military sen·ice in Prussia until 
I 868. Prussia granted civil rights to Jews in I 8 I I, but there· was an out-
break of anti-Semitism in r8I9 when Hegel \vas \Hitmg his hook 
(Rosenzweig: Hegel und der Staat, :\Iunich and Berlin, 1920, vol. ii, 
p. r86). 
q. The subject of the debate must have been the slave trade, not 
Sklm-erei, as Hegel says, since Congress had no jurisdiction over slavery 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
as such. Quaker petitions against the trade were presented to Congress 
in 1790 and 1797, and the retort in question may have been made then, 
or perhaps, if the date is not too late, in 1820 during the debates on the 
Missouri Compromise. 
I 5. Hegel's original text as printed reads: fiilzren :::war die imzere 
Durchdringung ... u:elche aher durch die Religion ... erhiilt; indem die 
sittlichen, &c. His list of errata instructs us to delete aher. The transb-
tion here given assumes that the original aber was misplaced and that it 
should have been inserted between indem and die. Zwar (otherwise left 
in the air) and aber \Yill then point the contrast between Gesimzung and 
Vemiinftigkeit which is the burden of the two parts of Hegel's sentence. 
16. Geistige. In English we would say that the 'spiritual' is the domain 
of religion, rather than the 'mental', but Geist means both 'mind' and 
'spirit' and to draw a distinction here between mental and spiritual 
would destroy Hegel's point. 
17. This is a reference to the dictum quoted from Kant in the 
Remark to Paragraph 29 (Messineo). 
18. All editions read '358'. The reference a few sentences below to 
the 'witness of his own spirit and heart' is a reference to the Lutheran 
doctrine mentioned towards the end of the Preface. Cf. Paragraph 147. 
19. Hegel is fond of making the point (e.g. Philosophy of History, 
p. 416) that the distinction between priests and laymen is meaningless in 
Protestantism. He has in mind Luther's dictum that' All Christians are 
really of the priestly class'. 
20. So Laplace, from whose work this note has been translated 
directly. Hegel writes: 'In a man of genius one of the strongest passions 
is the passion for truth', which may be true, but it is not what Laplace 
says. 
21. Wishes for the unity of church and state were characteristic of 
Romantics like Friedrich von Schlegel and Adam :\hiller. In conformity 
with these wishes, many of them became Roman Catholics (see Addi-
tion to Paragraph I 4 r and Nate 52 to Paragraph qo) and longed for the 
days when an Emperor owed his crown to a Pope. 
22. Hegel is thinking of the unity implied by emperor-worship as 
practised in Persia, the semi-oriental kingdoms of the :!'\ear East, and 
the Roman Empire. 
23. See Phifosophy of History, pp. 412 ff. Hegel there traces how the 
denial of the authority of the church at the Reformation led to ecclesi-
astical dissensions; the basis of this change was the disco\'ery uf the 
principle of suh_iccti..-ity and the right of private judgement. This 
gradualiy paved the way for the triumph of the Understanding (univer-

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
sality of thought) in the eighteenth century, and so to the discovery of 
thought as the heart of law as well as of nature. This in turn makes 
possible a transition to the rational state. Thought, the universal essence 
of political life, must come into existence as a rational constitution. For 
the transition of being (or essence) to existence, see Enc., especially 
§§ 122 ff. 
24. It is as a convinced Lutheran-' I am a Lutheran and will remain 
the same' (History of Philosophy, i. i3)-that Hegel condemns the 
Roman Catholic Church as superstitious and so inimical to freedom of 
thought. 
272. 25. The constitution, as rational, is a unity of explicit differ-
ences, i.e. of individuality, particularity, and universality (see Note 2 to 
Paragraph 258), i.e. of the crown, the executive, and the legislative. 
Since thesr form a concrete unity, each one of them has reflected into it 
the characteristics of the other t\Yo. This point Hegel works out for 
monarchy in Paragraph Zi.) and for the legislative in Paragraph 300. 
So far as the executive is concerned, the laws which it administers are 
the universal element and the monarch who appoints civil servants and 
gives final decisions is the individual element. 'These powers'-i.e. the 
differentiations just referred to. Sec Paragraph z69. 
z6. See :!'\otes 8 ami 12 to the Preface. It is no doubt Fries and the 
Romantics whom He~el has in mind as well as von Haller. 
Zi. Kant and his followers. 
z8. A cardinal point in l\Iontesquieu. See Espnt des Lois, xi. 6. 
zq. Las5on reads: Dti'1nme aus::ukliigeln, die Emluzt als eine Wirk-
samkeit nur gegenseiti:;er Diimmc ::m hegrezfen ('tn c•mstmct dikes, to 
apprehend the unity of t:1e state as only an agency of opposed dikes, is 
characteristic of', &c.). The sense of Hegel's text is obscure, but the 
e:nendation is pcrh:~ps hardly justified. The point seems to be that the 
rabble makes distrust of the state its starting-point. It then interprets 
state action as the building of one dike after anotha to stem the 
wishes of the people. And then once state action is so mterpretcd, the 
policy of the rabble i~ to build corresponding dikes against the state, i.e. 
to resist state action as much as possible. Hegel obviously has in mind 
again the phrase quoted from Kant in the Remark to Paragraph z9, which 
implies that society involves mutual restrictions on ind1-, 1dual fredom. 
In that passage he specifically refers to the 'negative' impliorion of 
what Kant says. 
30. The French Revolution. 
273. 31. All editions read 'Sz', but that is probably the perpetuation 
of a misprint in Hegel's first edition. Read: 52 [3rd edn. § 99]. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
32. See, e.g., Aristotle's Politics 1279• 26 ff., where three types of 
constitution are distinguished on the basis of the number of those who 
govern. 
33· In, e.g., Paragraph 214. See also Enc., § 99· 
3+· For Hegel's further criticisms of Fichte's ideas, sec his essay 
Gbcr die wissenschaftlichen Behandlungsarten des Xaturrechts ( Werke 1, i. 
365 ff.). (Lasson.) The 'forms' to which Fichte refers are monarchy, 
aristocracy, and democracy. The name and the idea of the ephorate 
were derived by Fichte from the constitution of Sparta, where the 
power of the two kings, who held office for life, was checked by the five 
ephors, who were elected annually. Fichte distinguished his ephors 
from the Spartan, however, and likened them rather to the Roman 
tribunes, because his ephors were to have a veto only and l'A ~xecutive 
power. 
See Science of Rights, § 16, pp. 259-60. 
35· La urtu (Esprit des Lois, iii. 3· The quotations which follow 
immediately are from the same chapter), i.e. Virtus, 'readiness to 
sacrifice oneself for an Idea realized in one's fatherland' (Hegels Theolo-
gische Jugendsclmften, Tubingen, 1907, p. 223). In chapter i of the same 
book, i\!Iontcsquieu says that the nature of a government differs from its 
principle: 'The former makes it what it is, the latter makes it act. The 
former is its special structure, the latter is the human passion which 
makes it move.' His belief is that while the state is held together by law 
in limited monarchy, and by force in a despotism, democracy will not 
subsist unless the citizens are virtuous, i.e. possessed of a sentiment for 
law and order. Hegel's view is that though the heart of a democracy may 
be sound, sentiment is not strong enough to withstand the onset of 
difference, i.e. the onset of reflection (see Remark to Paragraph 185). 
36. :\'lontesquieu remarks (iii. 5) that, while virtue is not excluded 
from monarchy, it is not its spring. 
37· La moderation (iii. +)· 
38. The constitution of the Roman Republic was still in essence 
aristocratic in the second century B.C., and was tottering into anarchy 
or despotism in the first century B.C. Hegel assumes that this was due 
to a defect in the character of aristocratic government as such, not to 
the inability of the particular form of Roman aristocratic government to 
adapt itself to the rule of an empire. 
· 
39· L'honneur (iii. 7). 
40. i.e. limited or 'constitutional' monarchy, where the moments of 
the concept are objectified in different institutions which yet so inter-
lock as to form a single whole (sec Paragraph 272). 
274. +I. Cf. :'\Iontesquieu (i. 3): 'The most natural government 1s 
that whose p3.rticular chJ.rJ.cter is best related to the character of the 
people for which it has been established.' 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
278. 42. Paragraphs 321 ff. 
279. 43· This must not be misunderstood. Even logic, the most 
abstract philosophical discipline, implies in the philosopher an experience 
of thinking and of past ways of thinking. A fortiori, in his more concrete 
studies, he begins with something given-the investigations of physical 
scientists, the history of political institutions, &c.-and attempts to find 
in this material the development of its concept. This concept is the 
same as that whose early development he has studied in logic, and once 
again its determinations or stages of advance will be found to be a 
necessary sequence. These stages the concept, in virtue of its self-
creati\·e power, gives to itself, and once so created, they can be under-
stood, but the philosopher cannot foresee them any more than he can 
forecast the actions of a political genius before they arc performed, 
ho\\cver intelligible they may be after their performance. It is necessary 
th:Jt the categories of logic should have an embodiment in the stages of 
nature and history-they are not actual without it, not rational, therefore, 
without it-but u·hat embodiment is something which cannot be fore-
cast. Hence the 'derivation of a content of a science from its concept 
alone' is the conclusion of philosophical investigation, the discovery that 
the diverse phenomena investigated are stages in the growth of the 
single concept which is their soul. The philosopher does not begin with 
pure thour;ht and write ethics and politics out of his head. Hegel 
emphatically repudiates apriorism in philosophical studies both in the 
Preface to the Plzilosophy of Right and at the beginnmg of his Philosophy 
of Xature, see Enc., § 2+6. Cf. above, Xote 8 to Pardgraph 3· 
44· If a monarch derives his authority from God, he rules by divine 
right-a claim accompanied with disastrous results ,, ben interpreted, 
as in England for example, as a 'divine right to r.;n,·,rn wrong'. Hegel 
holds, however, that God's will is not inscrutable, but mtelligible, and 
that it is the task of philosophy to understand It both in itself and in its 
results in the world. Hence, philosophy may admit that a monarch 
rules 'by divine right' in the sense that monarchy is a ration.al institution, 
the apex and basis of the state as a rational and so as a divine institution, 
and yet deny that a monarch may be absolute or defy the will of the 
people, because rationality requires a limited and not an absolute 
monarchv. 
45· i.e. at the end of the eighteenth century and the hc::;inning 0f the 
nineteenth, largely as a result of Rousseau's work. 
+6. In the Remark to Paragraph 273. 
+7· See Plato, Apology, 31 ctf. For a discussion of the nature of the 
'divine sign' and whether it is to he regarded as an inner voice (which is 
Hegel's view here-cf. Paragraph 138) or as the voice of God coming 

TRANSLATOR'S ~'OTES 
from without, see Riddell's edition of the Apology (Oxford, r8jj), 
pp. 109-17-
280. 48. The monarch is on a pinnacle above the rest of the state 
(see the end of the Remark to Paragraph 27q). Qua monarch, then, he 
must be considered in abstraction from the rest of the state. Now an 
individual, taken in abstraction, is simply a unit and his individuality 
is immediate, not mediated by his position in society. Further, a man's 
indi,·iduality is immediate in another sense, i.e. when he is a baby-a 
physical organism not yet conscious of its spiritual character-and 
hence an 'immediate' individuality belongs to a man in the course of 
nature before it has become mediated through his consciousness of the 
external world. Thus the monarch reaches his position through his 
natural characteristics, i.e. in virtue of his birth. See Addenda, p. 376. 
49· Kant's rejection of the ontological argument in the Critique of 
Pure Reason was often criticized by Hegel, see, e.g., Enc., § sr. And 
Hegel is here referring to Kant's assertion that though he had dcnic<l 
that there could be any proof or knowledge of God's existence, still he 
had 'found it necessary to deny knowledge to make room for faith' 
(Critique of Pure Reason, B. xxx). 
so. It is of the French Revolution that Hegel is thinking again. If 
kingship is irrational, then the king may be guillotined, anu Terror, the 
breakdown of political life, may follow. Cf. the reference to salut du 
peuple in the Remark to the next Paragraph. 
:.!81. 51. des ·von der TVillkitr Unbezcegten-'unmoved by caprice'. 
But 'unmoved b·-' is ambiguous in English and might mean that the 
monarch was never actuated by caprice of his own, which Hegel denies 
(see, e.g., P •. ragraph 283). He is here thinking again (see Note I to Para-
graph 142) of Aristotle's doctrine of God as the unmoved mover. The 
monarch's 'I will'-le Roi le ~·eult would seem less s~.tisfactory to Hegel, 
because less personal-sets the machinery of government in motion 
though it is not grounded in that machinery, but is its unmoved mover. 
52. See Remark to Paragraph 301. 
53· In the section on Civil Society; see, e.g.,I'Jragraphs r83 and 206. 
54· Wahl-Kapitulation. In the sixteenth century, by compelling the 
man of their choice to accept such a compact as a condition of election, 
the Electors acquired a distinct preliminary control of both the internal 
government of the Holy Roman Empire and its foreign policy, and so 
circumscribed the Emperor's authority. 
55.' In this treatment of elective monarchy, Hegel has in mmd both 
the Holy Roman Empire and the Kingdom of Poland (sec Philosophy 
of History, p. 427). 
--

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
371 
282. 56. Pardon (forgiveness) belongs essentially to the sphere of 
religion. See the end of the Remark to Paragraph 137, and Note 12 to 
Paragraph 270. For the translation of Geist here by 'mind', although 
'spirit' would be more natural English, see Note 16 to Paragraph 270. 
286. 57· See Remarks to Paragmphs 279 and 281. 
58. See Pa:-agraph 28o. 
289. 59· The actions of the players are chosen by the players and 
therefore are free 'in form', but in substance they subscrve universal 
ends, are restricted hy universal laws, and to that extent arc not free. See 
Paragraphs 182 ff. 
290. 6o. The organized body of officials is said to han: an 'abstract' 
task because its main duty is to construct a skeleton org:a•\zation for 
subsuming the particular under the universal (see Paragraph 287). 
The difficulty \\-hich Hegel finds in the construction of a civil service 
organization springs from the fact that he wishes to combine (a) ad-
ministrative efficiency with (b) private freedom. To attain (a), he 
prescribes (i) the division of the civil service into distinct departments, 
Treasury, Post Office, :\Iinistry of Health, 
~>:c., and (ii) the unified 
control of these departments at the top m the person of the Prime 
::\Iinister or other supreme official. To attain (h), be prescribes that 
civil life with its c0ncrete business of buying and scllmg, and the concrete 
individuals who compose it, shall be governed 'from below', i.e. by 
officials elected at least partly by themselves. These are the corporation 
officers (see Remark to Paragraph z8:-l) and prohahh· 'IIayors also (see 
P!zilosoph_v of History, p. 454. where HcgL·l c·riu, · ic·, adversely the 
French svstem where e\·ery :\I2ire is appomtcJ h-. 
~ \ .. • . ntral govern-
ment). These popubrly elected officers arc at the sJinc u:ne the lowest 
rung of the official hierarchy; it is they and not Cl\'11 oe~\-,!nts proper who 
directly control the man in the street; in them again the different branches 
of the civil sef\·in: converge, in the sense that Treasury, Post Office, &c., 
issue their orders not dir~ctly to private indi\·iduals, but to the :\Iayor 
or Corporation official \\·ho is thus at the same time the lrm·est of the 
treasury oftlcials. post office officials, &c. (see Paragraph 295). 
295. 6 r. For a full and entertaining account of thi,; famous case 
\\'hich drag,~cc! on from 1770 to r;So, \\'hen Frederick the Crcat over-
rode the la\\'ycr_; ar.d found in the miller's favour, sec Carl; k 's F1cdenrk 
the Great, boo!; :-.xi, cha;o. 7· The miller in question was sued for 
arrears of rent -,\ hich he could not pay because a nobleman had cut off 
part of his \Vater pm\·er to constmct a fish-pond. 'Barrow loads of 
pleadings' attempted to justify the nobleman's ri::;ht to do so by refer-
ence to Grotius, a law of I ss6, &c. 

372 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
299. 62. i.e. before war breaks out. War-time services are considered 
in Paragraphs 324 ff. 
63. See Paragraphs 42 ff. 
300. 64. das stiindische El.ment, i.e. the States General, or the 
Estates of the Realm. 
~ot simply Parliament but also the Estates or 
classes (Stiinde) assembled therein. The Estates are the classes of civil 
5ociety given a political significance. See Remark to Paragraph 303. 
For the interpretation of Paragraphs 300-13 see ::\'ote 67 to Paragraph 
312. 
305. 65. Landed gentry inherit their estates and so owe their posi-
tion to birth, and since they live from their estates, their choice of what 
they do to satisfy ~heir private interests has no bearing on the life of the 
neighbouring gentry. Per contra, in industry, the actions of one entre-
preneur have a direct bearing on the actions of others, because in that 
sphere no one is independent of his neigh hour (see, e.g., Paragraph r 99). 
308. 66. An abstract individual is what he is because manhood is his 
generic essence. But his manhood, the universal immanent within him, 
is actualized only when the individual loses his abstract individuality 
and becomes a member of a general group, i.e. when he participates in 
the generic essence of, e.g., the class of civil servants. In ~o doing he is 
possessed of a higher generic essence than that of manhood because in 
becoming a civil servant he has actualized what formerly was only a 
potentiality and hence has become more concrete. 
312. 67. See Paragraph 304· If we consider in abstraction the 
monarch and the classes constitutive of civil society, then they are 
opposed to one another as the one and the many, or as the abstract 
individual and the abstract universal. The latter Hegel calls the universal 
of all-ness (sec Remark to Paragraph 24) or 'empirical universality' 
(Paragraphs 301, 304). These opposites become fused into a unity only 
if some middle term comes into existence to mediate between them and 
so to produce the concrete unity of syllogism (see ::\ote 2 to Paragraph 
2 58). The executive is such a middle term from the point of view of the 
crown, because it carries out the cro\vn 's will and so particularizes it in 
the classes of civil society. But the classes do not feel their unity with 
the crown until they acquire political significance as the Estates and 
until one of the Estates, in virtue of its likeness in certain respects to the 
crown, is able to mediate between the crown and c1vil society as a whole. 
The agricultural class, or the nobility, shares certain charactenstics in 
common with the crown (see Paragrarh 305) and is thus in a position 
to he such a mediator. But it can act as such in the constitutirm onlY if 
its political functwn is embodied in an institution sepJ.rate hlth from 
the crown on the one hand and industry (or its embodiment m J lo\\ er 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
373 
house of Parliament) on the other; i.e. it must be embodied in an upper 
house. The upper house then mediates between ciYil society and the 
crown; and if the upper house on any given issue sides with the lower 
house, this helps the lower house and obviates the impression that the 
latter is a mere faction against the crown and not genuinely devoted to 
the interest of the state (see Paragraph 313). 
316. 68. Hegel always regards 'opinion' (1\leimmg) as something 
peculiarly 'mine' (mPin), and this accounts for his general attitude to it . 
.!\one the less, there is no more etymological affinity between llJeinzmg 
and mein than there is between 'mind' and 'mine'. 
317. 6g. Ariosto's lines ('the ignorant vulgar reproves everyone and 
talks most of what it understands least') are from Orlando Furioso, Canto 
xxviii, Stanza i. Goethe's lines are: 
Zuschlagen muss die JVIasse, 
Dann ist sie respektabel; 
Urteilen gelingt ihr miserabel. 
(Sprichwortlich, II. 398-400 ). Hegel substitutes kann for muss and da 
for dann. The translation given here of both quotations is taken from 
Bosanquet: Philosophical Theory of the State (London, 1930 ), p. z66. 
70. Geist-i.e. Frederick the Great, who set as a question for the 
Berlin Academy prize in 1778: S'il peut etre utile de tramper un peuple? 
(Lasson). Hegel misquotes the question both here and m the Pheno-
menology, p. 570. As Lasson remarks, the question was commonly 
raised, and answered affirmatively, in the eighteenth century. 
319. 71. The injury done by libel or by written or ;;po"-en incitations 
to crime or rebellion, is one done to someone 's opunnns There is no 
injury unless someone's thoughts are affected. Hence the injury is a 
subjective one and is committed in a subjective 'field' or 'element'. 
72. These ioci militares were no doubt permitted in order to avert the 
evil eye. Examples of them are given in, e.g., Yelleius Paterculus, ii. 67, 
and Suetonius: Life of Caesar, 49· 
320. 73· So far, the state has been treated, not as a single whole, but 
as a group of parts, each of which has been separately described. \Ve 
now ignore their' real' difference and concentrate on the trut and 'ideal' 
unity of the state as a whole. 
322. 74-
As Rosenzweig points out (Hegel und der Strzat, :\Iunich 
and Berlin, 1920, vol. ii, p. r68), the allusion is to the wishes of Prussians 
in Hegel's day to sacrifice the autonomy of Prussia on the altar of union 
with other German states to form a new whole called 'Germany'. 
323. iS· See Enc., §§ g6-S and ?\ate 5 to Paragraph 40 above. 

374 
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
324. 76. In his essay Ubcr die wissenschaftlichen Behandlungsarten des 
Naturrechts (Werkc', i, p. 373). (Lasson.) 
77· This is an allusion to Kant's proposals which had appeared in 
1795 in his tract On Perpetual Peace. 
~ee an English translation by 
:VI. Campbell Smith (London, 1903). 
78. Paragraphs 334-7 and 343· 
325. 79· Cf. Plato's Republic, where the \Varriors form a special 
class distinguished for their courage, as the Guardians are for their 
wisdom. In war the state is the ideality of the real differences subsistent 
within it, and one aspect of this unity is that all individuals are bound 
to sacrifice themselves to it if need be. This aspect is realized objectively 
in an institution distinct from other institutions, i.e. in a standing army. 
Hegel is here again criticizing Kant who had proposed the abolition of 
standing armies (On Perpetual Peace, preliminary article 3). 
327. So. This Paragraph must be taken with its successor. Courage 
is a virtue (a) because it is an expression of freedom, (b) because the 
courageous man insists on his freedom to such an extent that he evinces 
it by renouncing the achievement of particular aims. But 'in itself' (i.e. 
in abstraction from its intrinsic worth, see Paragraph 328) it is a virtue 
only in form becouse (a) although it negates the material, it remains 
negative to the last; such a negation is the formal character of a virtue 
but there is no intrinsic value in mere negation, even negation of the 
material. Before we can know whether a given act of courage is merely 
physical or is of a mental or 'spiritual' character, we must inquire 
into all the circumstances (see Remark to Paragraph 328). (b) The 
intrinsic \Vorth of courage (see Paragraph 328) is derived from the end 
it subserves, i.e. from the sovereignty of the state. This sovereignty is 
both the animating principle and the goal of courageous action, but this 
may never be present to the courageous man's mind. A courageous 
man's motive may be not the defence of sovereignty hut only devotion 
to a leader or even personal gain; and of what he achieves (the defence 
of sovereignty) he may be unconscious and think that he has only 
captured a particular fort. 
329. Sr. These are the powers which Blackstone ascribes to the King 
of England (Commentaries, vol. i, pp. 252 ff.). 
331. 82. e.g. Paragraph 40. On 'recognition' see Remark to Para-
graph 349· 
340. 83 .. \s :\Iessineo remarks, the conception of Volhs,:?eist, opnt 
d'zme natwn, seems to be ultimately due to :\Iontesquicu (Esp1 it des 
Lois, XIX. +-5 ). It is also used by Kant and Herder and is a common-
p!dce •Jf the h1stoncal school of Jurists. See Brie: Der f "o/ks:;eist bet 
lh;,d zmd 111 da lmtouschen Rahtsschulf (Berlin aPd Lu;.L1g, rqoc;). 
\. 
, I 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
375 
'\Vorld history is the world's court of judgement' is a phrase from 
Schiller's poem 'Resignation' (Gedichte der zweiten Periode). Hegel 
does not insert quotation marks, and it may be for this reason that the 
phrase is sometimes falsely attributed to him. 
341. 84. Paragraphs 341-60 are a very compressed summary of 
Hegel's Philosophy of History, and, without the commentary which that 
work supplies, they are perhaps no less hard to understand in German 
than they are in English. 
343. 85. Hegel is primarily referring to Lessing whose Education 
of the Human Race was published in r78o. 
86. ·yvw8( amvn)v 'know thyself', the keynote of the teaching of 
Socrates (see Note 40 to Paragraph 138). When a man knows his own 
character, then his mind has risen to a higher level than that on which 
it was before that knowledge was attained; e.g. if a man knows that he is 
a sinner, then the very knowledge makes him better than he was when 
he transgressed without realizing the fact. 
87. The reference is probably to Kant, who says (in the first supple-
mentary note to his Perpetual Peace) that the guarantee of the progress 
of man and the eventual end of war lies in ::\aturc, or Providence, 
inscrutable though the plan of Providence is. 
347. 88. All editions read '346'. 
348. 89. The deeds of great men are 'subJective in form' simply as 
being the deeds of self-conscious indi\·iduals. But the substance or 
content of these deeds is the achievement of the worlJ-mind, not of the 
individual agent. An individual reaps his fame hrcatJsc he imposes a 
subjective, personal, form on what the world-mPtd effects. Philo-
sophical history may elicit in detail the genuine sub:otcmc, of actions-a 
substance for which the agent has and deservcs no crcd:t-but public 
opinion and history in the ordinary sense ignore it. 
353. 9~. See l\ote 45 to Paragraph r8s. 
355. 91. On the Decline of Natural States(Bcrlin, r8r2). The book 
was published under the pseudonym of Feodor Eggo. 
356. 92. The reference is presumably to the Elcusinian mysteries. 
93· Greece was divided into a plurality of city-states, ~ach possessed 
of autonomy and so with a 'mind' of its own. 
357. 9+· In the earlier centuries of the Roman Republic. 
95· The end of the Republic from the time of the Gracchi to the 
time of Augustus. 
96. Emperors are deified. 
358. 97. :mendlichm Sclune;;;;: by tl1cse \Ycds he;;; a5 dsc\vherc (e.g. 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
Werke 1, i. 157) Hegel refers to the Crucifixion, 'the feeling that God is 
dead'. 
360. 98. The medieval church and the medieval empire. 
99· i.e. the world of art, religion, and philosophy. See Enc., §§ 553-77. 
ADDENDA 
Preface. 13. Dr. H. Marcuse in Reason and Re'l-·olution (New York, 
194I ), pp. I79-8o, says that the Wartburg demonstrators were anti-
Semitic, while the 'freedom' of which they said so much was to be a 
privilege of Teutons alone. They hoped for a 'saviour' to whom 'the 
people would forgive all sins' and who would achieve German unity. 
The new state was to be built from below, on the sheer enthusiasm 
of the masses. Hegel's opposition to these Wartburg ideas is relevant 
when the relation of his doctrines to National-Socialism is under con-
sideration. 
48. 25. As Dr. Marcuse points out (op. cit., p. I99) the 'sophistical 
reasoning' in the Remark to this Paragraph is Luther's in his tract on 
Christian Liberty. 'How can it affect the liberty of the soul whether 
the body be in health? . . . How can a soul in liberty be brought into 
bondage by ill-health or captivity or hunger or thirst or any external 
evil'? (Luthers Werke, val. vii, Weimar, I897, pp. zr, so). 
107. 4· Gegenstand means 'object' in the seHse of 'what confronts us', 
i.e., in this context, the action done. For the meaning of objektiv, see 
Paragraphs z6 and I I2. 
145. 5· Hegel here adopts Ricardo's belief, abandoned by modern 
economists, that economic laws are not merely observed uniformities 
within a given economic system but universal ao"d inexorable necessities. 
187. 46. Hegel lived in a country where most citizens were simply 
'subjects', without participation in the work of government, and where, 
therefore, a political life and tradition, like the English, was almost 
wholly lacking. His book was an attempt to educate Germans beyond 
'civil' to 'political' life. 
202. 55· In the second half of Paragraph 203, there is no subject for 
behiilt which will give good sense. The translator takes the text to be 
corrupt, and his rendering is simply an attempt to convey what he 
believes Hegel's meaning to be. 
280. 48. For the connexion between 'immediacy' and 'nature', cf. 
Paragraphs II, 3-t. -t3. rs8, and the Additions to Pa;agraphs 10 and r8. 
': 
I 
I i 
I 

INDEX 
The Index supplements the Table of Contents. Where the material of an 
Addition IS Similar to that of the rele\ ant Paragraph, only the latter has been 
mdexed. Those passages in the Translator's Foreword and ~otes which explain 
Hegel's more Important techmcahties have been indexed, but no others. 
absolute mmd, 279, 297, 349· 
accessw natura/is, 4 7, 55. 
actio, 39, 6o, 79· 
act10n, 78-82, 93-101. 
actualitv, nature of, I0-12, 14, 244, 
283. J02. 
agriculture, I3I-2, 219. 
Amenca, 278. 
Amcncan Congress, 1 68. 
Anabaptists, 168. 
ammals, 43, 47, 127, 135, 165, 227, 
229, 2:16, 238, 281. 
Antigone, 114-15, 259. 
appearance, 
mcamng 
of, 
329-30, 
33s-6. 
Arabs, 247. 
arbitration, 142. 
Anosto, quoted, 204. 
aristocracy, 176-8, 183. 
Aristotle, 94-5, 108. 
Arnold the miller, 193· 
arson, 82, 251. 
art, v.orks of, 54· 
artificial person, 42, I 82. 
Athens, 241, 269, 277. 
Aulus Gelhus, quoted, 18-19. 
authors, rights of, 52, 54-{i. 
autonomy, 208, 210, 212-15, 218-19. 
Bacon, quoted, 12. 
barbarians, 21 9· 
'beautiful soul', 103, 230. 
beauty as the pnnciple of Greek life, 
I 24, 220-I. 
Beccana, 70. 
beneficzum competentiae, 86. 
benevolence, 8;. 
Bible, quoted, 2, 5, 12, 177, 226, 247, 
256, 263. 
Bill of Rights, 1 59· 
body and soul, 43, 225, 231-2. 
bonorum possessw, zo, 120-1. 
bourgeots, 124, 127. 
Brahma, 227. 
Brzefe eines Ungenatznten, 263. 
Britain, ISO-I, 182. 
Bnttany, 1 51. 
Brutus, !\I Decunus, 242. 
Caeczlius, Sextus, 1s- 19. 
Campoform10, Peace of, 297. 
capital, 55, I I6-I7, I48, I 53, I99· 
capital punishment, 70-I, 247. 
career, choice of, 124, I 32-4, 162, 201. 
castes, 133, 220, 278. 
Ceylon, 243· 
chanty, I49· 
children, 4I, 82, 88, I I7-18, I48, 229, 
2J7, 248. 
Chinese, the, 272. 
Chnstianity, 51, 84, I24, 231, 284. 
church, the, and marnage, I I3, 265. 
-and the state, I68--'74· 
Cicero, I 2 I. 
'civil' and 'political' distinguished, x, 
376. 
civil society, a battle-field of private 
interests, I 89. 
--a territory of mediation, 267. 
--and the state, ISS, r6I-3, 168, 
196--'7. 201-3, 209, 266, 281. 
--confused With the state, 123, 
IS6. 
-
-
created by the modern world, 
266. 
--defined, 110. 
-
-
Its 
general 
character, 
x-xi, 
353-4. 356. 
civtl war, 210, z8g. 
cockades, 239. 
code, cnmmal, 274· 
codes of law, 135. 138-9, I 59· 
colontzatlon, 1 s I -2 
comfort, 269. · 
common sense, 139, 204, 358. 
Compact of Election, 186. 
compensat10n, 69. 
concept, meaning of the, VIii-Ix. 
concubinage, 262-3. 
confession of guilt, 275. 
conflict of obhgat10ns, Io8. 
-
of rights, 34· 
consciousness, stages in development 
of, 315-16, 320, 336. 
consecrated land, 52. 
consequences of an acuon, So-r. 
Constituent Assembly, 292. 
consntut10n, an orgamc whole, I63-4, 
174, 
18o, 
197, 
210, 
282, 
287, 
290-1, 294· 
-
articulated only m the modern 
world, 288. 
-
embodies self-consc10usness of the 
citizens, 178-9. 

INDEX 
constitution, essence of the, 292. 
-is not made, but grows, 178, 291. 
-pillar of public freedom, 163. 
conventions, 269. 
copyright, 54-6. 
Corporations, their nature, 360. 
-
their relation to the state, 169, 
189-90, 192-3, 197· :zoo, 202, 287, 
290· 
cosmopohtanism, 134. 
counsel's bnef, 63. 
courage, 210-12, 241. 
craftsmanship, 132. 
Creuzer, G. F., 131-2. 
crime, 66-73, 88-9, 140, 146, 186--7, 
207, 250. 
Croesus, 83. 
custom, 108, 215, 271. 
customary law, IJS· 
Cymc1sm, 269. 
De Officiis, 1 :z 1. 
death, 57, 261. 
definitions, 14-15, 71. 
demise of the crown, 185. 
democracy, 176-8, 183. 
Denmark, 151. 
despotisms, 173, 180, 188, 293. 
determinism, 27-8. 
development, Hegel's conception of, 
ix-x. 
dialectic, :z8, 34, 98, 101, 129, 151, 
216. 
Digest, quoted, 14. 
Diogenes, 269. 
Dionysius I, 138. 
discipline, 265. 
distress, right of, 86, 88, 355· 
divination, 184, 221. 
divine right of kings, 182. 
divine sign of Socrates, 184. 
division of labour, 129, I90. 
-of powers, 175, 292. 
divorce, 117-18, 169. 
doctrine, religiOus and political, 169-
72. 
dolus indirectus, 82. 
domest1c servants, 241. 
domtnium, 50-1. 
Draco, 68. 
dramatic mterest, see trageciy. 
duty, 84, 89-92, to6-to, 161-2, 194, 
209-11. 
education, 29, 109, 117-t8, 
124~, 
129, 134, 139, 153, 165, 193, 204, 
26o-1, 277. 
Educatwn of th~ Human Race, "16-17. 
Egypt, s:z, 147, 151, 165, 195. 
elective monarchy, 186. 
electoral representation, :1.01-3. 
Emile, 261. 
empmcal, meaning of, 298. 
empmcal SCiences, method of, ni-vi1i, 
14-15,20,71, 233· 
'end justifies the means', 97-8. 
England, 150, 159, 177, 182, 266, 277, 
28?-8, 292-3. 296. 
English colomes, 278. 
-law, 73, 135, 143, 272. 
entail, 122, 199. 
ephorate, 177· 
Eptcurus, 6, 43· 
equahty, 44, 71-3, IJO, 292. 
equtty, 142. 
Erfurt, 289. 
Esprtt des Lois, 161. 
essence, meanmg of, 316, 329-30, 
335-6. 
Estates, vti, 195-203, 296. 
ethical life, meaning of, 319, 346. 
Eumemdes, 247· 
evil, ongm and nature of, 92-3, 94-
IOJ, 231. 
exchange, 59, 62-3. 
external st~te, Ito, 123. 
extraordinary punishments, 144. 
fable of the belly and the other 
members, 282, 287. 
'facts of consciousne~s·, 15, 21, 29, 71. 
faith, 106, r66, 171, 173, 217, 222. 
family, civil society as a, 148. 
-Corporation as a, I 53· 
-European peoples a, 297· 
-
1ts relation to the state, 154-5, 
161-3, 199, 281. 
-
its connexion with nationality, 122. 
fashions m dress, 269. 
Favorinus of Aries, t8-19. 
fetura, 47, 55· 
feudal mstitutions, 51-2, 59, 121, 139, 
178, t8o, 188, 195, 242, 264, 274, 
288, 290. 
Feuerbach, P. J. A., 246. 
fiat justztta, 87. 
Fichte, J. G., 11, 23, 61, 157, 177, 
237-8, 258. 
fideicommissa, 42, I 2 I, 240. 
fimte and infimte, 23, 25, 26, 30. 
Finland, 151. 
force not the basis of the state, 282. 
form and content, 2-3, 12. 
formal freedom, meaning of, 371. 
formalities, legal, 113-14, 139-40. 
France and the French, 7, 247, 260, 
277. 287' 290, 292, 294. 297. 
Fredenck the Great, 193, 205. 
freedom, actual m the state, 36, 104-
IO, 156, 160, 163, 208, 279. 
-
actuahzed in duty, to]. 
-dies from fear of dymg, 210. 
1·. l 
•.\ 
I 

INDEX 
379 
freedom of property, 50-1,55, I 21, 275· 
-
of the press and of speech, 205-8. 
-of the will, 21-32, 37, 48, I 57· 
-of thought, 172, 207. 
-of trade, 147. 
-
most fundamental m autonomy, 
208. 
-nature of, 21-3, 33-4,48, 1zll, 1JJ, 
156, 160, 206, 208. 
-
subjecttve, 82-4, 109, 112, 123-4, 
132-3, 144-5, '57. t6t, 179, 194-s. 
204, 280, 286, 294, 301-2, 338-9. 
French Revolutton, 22, 33, 79, 157, 
175, t8s-6, 286. 
fnends, 'famtly' of, 119, 266. 
Fnes, J. F., s-6, 2~. 
Galileo, 172. 
general \\tll, I 57· 
Genoa, 182. 
gens, 121-2. 
geography, influence of on history, t6, 
!66, 217. 
German Estates, 159, 291. 
-law, 17, 266, 275. 
-
pnnces, 291. 
-
"nters and scholars, I 39, 1 74· 
Germamc Realm, 221-2. 
Gennany and Germans, 260, 278. 
gtft, 59, 62. 
G10rdano Bruno, 172. 
God's nature, apprehenston of, 282-3. 
(;oethe, quoted, 6, 204, 230, 273· 
goods mspectton, I 4 7. 
grace, efficacious, 95· 
Greece, 151, 220-1, 278, 288. 
gun, mvcntton of the, 212. 
habtt, 26o-r, 282. 
Haller, K. L. von, 141, 157-60. 
happmess, see "elfare. 
Hemccctus, J. G., quoted, 20, 39· 
Hercules, 1 o8, 242. 
heredttary successiOn to the throne, 
t8s-~. 196. 
heroes, and the founding of states, 73, 
115, 245· 
-
COnSCIOUSlleSS of, 8 I. 
-
nght of, 67, 219, 242. 
-
ttmes of, 140. 
-
\ trtue of, 260. 
htstory, m contrast "tth phtlosophy, 
t6-t8, so-t, 136, 141, 156, 176-8, 
188, 210, 279 
-
phtlosophy of, 176,216-23,305,300. 
-
PS! chologtcal ne\\ of, 84. 
Holy Alltance, 279. 295· 
Holy Roman Emptre, 291. 
honour, s6. 6R, 178 
Horace, quoted, 1 ;r. 
ltugo, G., Ritter ,-on, 18-20, 136. 
Hungary, 159· 
hussars, 295. 
hypocnsy, 94-6. 
Idea, meaning of the, IX, 304-5· 
'Ideal', meamng of, 263, 31 I, 354, 363, 
373· 
tmroedtacy, meanmg of, IX, 319, 370, 
376. 
Impulses, 25-9, 70, 88, 108. 
'm Itself' and 'for Itself', 312. 
zn ]Udtcio stare, 141, 145. 
mdectstOn, 229-30. 
Indta, 2z, 133, 151, 165, 296. 
mdnidual and the state, 57, tos-ro, 
IS6, t60-I, 200-I, 209-12, 259. 
261, 281, 28q, 292. 
mdividualtty, nature of, 23, 126, 279, 
314-
-
of the state, 174, 181, r84, 208, 212. 
industry, conu ol and orgamzation of, 
147. 152-4, 1~9-90. 
infimte, Hegel's new of the, 328-9. 
tnfimte and fitute, 23, 25-6, JO. 
mfimte form, meanmg of, 315, 348. 
mfimte gnef, 222. 
tnhentance, 1 ICJ-22 
Institutes of J ustmw.n, quoted, so. 
mternat10nal relattons, 212-16. 
ton nuhtan:>, 207. 
lonta, I =i I 
Ircl,mu: 182. 
1ronv, IOI-1. 
trntabthty, z::-1, 2~5. 
Jacobi, F II, quored. 99· 
jeSUitS, 2_':,j. 
Jesus Chn>t, IO'> c;:. ~('3· 
joseph II, 247 
}e\\tsh law, 73 
-people, I6CJ, 2IJ, 222 
JUdgement, types of, 324, 330-1, 339· 
JUdiciary po\\er, 286. 
jury, tnal by, 143-5· 
Justmtan, 138. 
Kant,20,23,28, 33. 36. ~8,62,89-90, 
I 59, 21J, 253, 262, 295· 
Klem, E. F, quoted, 69, 73· 
kmghts errant, 73, I9I, 290. 
laesio enorrms, 59· 
laity, 171-2. 
language, 6o, 113. 
Laplace, quoted, 172. 
laurels of WII!m!l", 252. 
law, codificatiOn of, tJs-6, 138-9. 
-
histoncal study of, t6-r8. 
-
kmds of, distmguished, r6, 224. 
-
philosophical study of, 306. 
-
posttl\ e ele::aent m, 137-8, 308. 

INDEX 
law, study of positive, 15-16, 136,224. 
-
the ratiOnal form of political life, 
7, 158, x66--7, 171-3. 
Law of Citations, 136. 
lazzaroni, 277. 
League of :Kat10ns, 213-14, 295· 
legal formaltties, 1 IJ-14, 139-40. 
legahty and morality distinguished, 
34, 79, 137, 245-6, 248. 
Leibniz, 20. 
libel, laws agamst, 206-7. 
life, nature of, 57, 85-6, 287. 
livelihood, see subsistence. 
Livonia, 151. 
love, II0-14, 122,228. 
lower classes, see J\1any, the. 
Luc1an, 121. 
Lucinde, 263. 
luck, 251. 
lunacy, 8:z, 88. 
Luther, 12. 
luxury, 128, 153. 
Magna Carta, 159. 
Magna Graecia, 151. 
man, 127, 134. 
manufacture, 132. 
Many, the, 186, 195, 290-1, 293· 
marriage, 58, 154, 169, 219. 
marnage settlements, 116-17. 
masses, the, see J\1any, the. 
mathemat1cs, 20, 240. 
matter and form, 45-6. 
mediation, meanmg of, 311, 323, 354, 
363, 372-3-
memorials, 52. 
men and women, differences between, 
114-15, 263-4· 
Merchant of Vemce, 19. 
Middle Ages, see feudal institutions. 
middle class, 193. 
might distmguished from right, 73, 
141, 158, 171, 180,216, 282, 294· 
military and cn il powers, 28 5. 
military class, 210-11, 296. 
-service, 168, 194, 210-12, 285. 
mind, and body, 43· 
-
and spint. 366. 
-
as the province of religion and the 
state, 16 5-73. 
-
is the Idea actualized, 160, 162-3. 
-nature and powers of, IX, 53, 178, 
186, 208, 216-17. 
-objective, 327, 349· 
-
of the Corporation, 189. 
-
stages m the development of, 20-1, 
37. 48, 57· 
-the ethical, 109-10, II2. 
-
see also absolute mmd, national 
minds, and world mmd. 
:\Iinerva, owl of, 13, 
ministers of state, 187, 189, 294-
moderatiOn, 178. 
1\Iohammedans, 213. 
monarch, and law-courts, 274· 
-conceptiOn of, 182, 289. 
-
h1s right of pardon, 186-7. 
-maJesty of, 185. 
-
po\\ers of, 187, 212, 289. 
monarchy, IrratiOnal types of, 176-8, 
183, 185-6, 188. 
monasteries, 17, 236. 
money, 62-3, 132, 194-5, 240. 
:\Iontesquieu, 16, 161, 177-8, 292. 
morality, and ethical life, 34, 103-4, 
249· 
-and legality, 34, 79, 137,245-6,248. 
-and pohtics, 215, 297· 
-in civil society, 133, 149. 
-
meanmg of, 319. 
mortmam, 42. 
:\loses, :z, 177. 
motives, 70, 84, 251. 
murder, 53, 68, 82, 97, 247, 251. 
Napoleon, 286, 289, 290, 297. 
nat1on and natiOn-state, 37, 122, 208, 
212-13, 217-18. 
national mmds, 36, 
I 10, 155, 178, 
215-r6, 219, 374· 
nature, Hegel's conception of, 25, 40, 
106, 184, 279, 285, 287, 305, 306, 
309, 312-13, 348. 
negati\'Ity, self-related, 310-11, 320, 
334· 
nervous system, 281. 
~orway, 151. 
oath, taking of the, 143, 168-9, 272. 
objectivity and subjectivity, 31-2, 
n-8. 
occupancy, 45· 
Oedipus, 81, 250. 
ontological proof, 184-5. 
op1mon, Hegel's view of, 373· 
oracles, 184. 
organism of the state, 163-4, 174, 
179-81, 187-8, 197, 210, 290-1, 
292-3, 364. 
Orient, the, 147, 173, 195, 220, 280. 
origin of courts and Judges, 141. 
-of monarchy, 188. 
-of the constitution, 178. 
-of the state, 67, 73, 115, 116, 131, 
156, 220-1. 
ongmal sm, 231. 
origmality, 268. 
overseas trade, 151. 
pamters, 173, 225. 
pardon, nght of, 89, 186-7. 
I l 
I 
.~ 

INDEX 
particularitv distinguished from wdi-
vidualit),; 126, 279· 
Pascal, quoted, 94· 
patents, 54-6. 
patrzapotestas. J7, 41,118,120-1. 
patnarchal socteues, 122-4, 141, 156, 
188, 208, 219. 265. 
patnotism, 163-4, 189. 
pecu!tum castrense, 120. 
Penates, 112, 114, 117, 155,216. 
Penelope's \\eb, 1. 
people, the, 182-3, 195-6, 198. 
perfectibility of mankmd, 216. 
perpetual peace, 210, 213-14, 279. 
personality, free 10fimte, 302. 
-nature of, 37, 44, 122, 181-2. 
Pheidms, 230. 
philanthropy, 214-15. 
philosophy, method of, 1-4, I0-15, 
181, 369. 
-proof 10, 21, 104, 143-4, ISS· 
-state's attitude to, 7-9, 173. 
pietas, 112, 114. 155· 
Pitt, the Younger, 296. 
plagwnsm, ss-6. 
Plato, 8, 10, 11. 34, 42, IOI, 124, IJJ, 
195, 267, 28o 
'Platonic lo,e', 112. 
play 10 educatiOn, 118. 
pledge, 63. 
political econom,·, 126-7. 
popular suffrage. 202-3. 
postttYe, n1ean1ng of, 299· 
po,erty. 148-so, 154. 
Praetonan Prefects, 285. 
prescnption, 52-J. 
pnce-fixmg, 147. 
pnmogemture, 121-2, 188, I9'J 
pnvate property, necessity of, 42. 
pnvileges, 153. 
Probabiiism, 95-6. 
proletanat, see rabble. 
promtse, 61. 
proof, 21, 104, 14:1-4, ISS. I<J7· 
PropertiUS, quoted. 252. 
propert~ tr1 
Cl\ tl soctet:, 
I 26, 
I 34, 
I 39-40. 
propert~ quahfi.catwn for office, 202. 
ProtestantiSin, I 2, 172 
Provtdence, 210, 214, 217, 327. 
Prussia, r 59-60 
pS\"ChoiOf!\, 2I, 2j-6, 29, 70, 72, 84, 
kC). 
puhlic op11110n, 201. 204-5 
punishment, 
68-73, 
RS-f), 
13 7-8, 
qo-I, 143. 144, 207, 245 
purp0se, 24, 76-7 
()uakei s, 1 6S. 
CjUJntity, 44, 51, 72, 108, 137, 176. 
rabble of paupers, 150, 153, 175, 196, 
221, 361. 
race, I 17. 
ratiOnality, meaning of, 10-12, 31, 
I 56, 230, 302. 
real;ty, meaning of, 283, 302, 326, 354· 
rebelliOn, 289. 
recognition, 48, 57, 87, IJJ, 153,212-
'4· 2!8-19, 355· 
rectitude, 107-8, 133, I 54· 
refinement, 127. 
reflectiOn, meaning of, 3 I6, 323, 336, 
362. 
Reformation, the, 241. 
religiOn, 53, 68, I62, 165-74,216,223, 
282. 
representative thmking, nature of, 348. 
republican go\ernment, 183. 
res mannpz, 50. 
Restauratwn der 
Staatsn·issemchaft, 
141, I57-60 
re\enge, 73, 141, 247. 
Rhodes, island of, 1 1. 
Ricardo, D., 127. 
Richeheu, quoted, 252. 
nght, distinguished from might, 73, 
141, 158, 171, 180. 216, 282, 294. 
-
meanmg of, 'I, 33-4, 233· 
-
umted \\Ith moraiitv m ethical life, 
103-4 
nl;hts, clashes bet\\PCn, 34· 
-
ciu:::.slflcatwn of, 39· 
-
cnrrelati\e Y\Ith duties, 109-10. 
robber\" and theft. 68. 
Romar; Catholic Church, 172, 258. 
Roman Empire, 2~ 0 
-
hlStOI\, I 2 I. 
-lav., 15, 17~zo. -;r,, ... p,so-I,6I,73t 
I I 8, I 20-2, I .]h. I 1\ ~·<), 143, 264. 
Ron1e, zzo-z. 
Rousseau, ~3. rs6-j, 261. 
Euss1a, 278. 291. 
St. Cnsptn, 252. 
<'liut du pmple, ,s,-6. 
sanctuanes from' engear~ce, 250. 
sa, ages, 67, 12~, 270, 271. 
~ay, J. B., 127. 
~chlegel, F. \on, IOI, zi'>J. 
Schuld. die, 102 
sc1ence, and the statt•, r6h. I/O, 172-3, 
207. See also ernptnc<d science and 
philosophy. 
~cotland, 1 so, 182. 
sea, culturalmtluence of the, 151. 
sectanantsm, advantages of, I 7 3-4-
sen1hlance, see sho\\. 
sex differences, I q-1:;, 263. 
~hakespeare, 1 'J· 
shibboleth, Ia\\ a, 7, 158. 

INDEX 
show, 64-5, 122, 126-7, 137, 197, 233, 
329-30. 
Shylock, 19. 
£kill and clumsiness, 270. 
slave, slavery, 15, 32, 39, 48, 53, 68, 
162, 221,241,261. 
Smith, Adam, 127. 
social contract, 59, 71, 1~7. 186. 
Socrates, 92, 101, 184, 287. 
solar system, 268. 
Solger, K. \V. F., 101-2. 
Solon, !!3. 
sophists, the, 8, 101. 
Sophocles, quoted, 1 q-15, 259. 
soul and body, 43, 225, 231-2. 
sovere1gnty, 179-83, 196, 208-I4, 219. 
Spain, 286-7. 
Spanish colonies, 278. 
Sparta, 133. 
speculative, meanmg of, 298. 
Spmoza, quoted, 53· 
spirit, see mmd. 
splmdor familiae, 12I, 264. 
standing arm1es, 2I 1. 
state, a lueroglyph of reason, 288. 
-
Idea of, d1stmgUJshed from actual 
states, 156, 279. 
-its general nature, 155-74. 
-man's end 1s life m the, 242. 
-
membership of not optiOnal, 242. 
-not absolute, 3.;, 36, 215-17, ZJ4, 
279, 299, 365. 
-
not based on force, 282. 
-
precondition of pnvate welfare, 
280. 
-relation of to indl\·iduals, 57, IOS-
ro, 156, t6o-t, zoo-t, 209-12, 259, 
261, 28I, 289, 292. 
-
syllog1sm as bas1s of Hegel's theory 
of, 363, 372-3. 
-the dtvme on earth, 285. 
-
the ethical unl\ erse, 1 I. 
-the march of God m the \\orld, 279. 
-the stnctly poliucal, 364-5. 
state of nature, 67. 115-16, 128, 130, 
213. 239. 2/<J. 
sttpulatton, 6o-1, I IJ. 
stock-breedmg, 264. 
Stotcs, the, 68, 92. 
Stolberg, Count, 99. 
street-lightmg, I4'), 276. 
Stuhr, P. F., 221. 
subject1nsm m ethics, 94-I03. 
subJeCttYity and object!\ 1ty, 
3 I -2, 
77-8. 
subsistence or livelihood, 44, 123, IJO, 
132, 145-6, I48-s1, ISJ-.f, I'J9· 
substance, meaning of, 347, 365. 
substance and accident, 54, 112. 
substitutiones, 12 I. 
suicide, 43, 57· 
Sweden, 151. 
Tartuffe, 257. 
taxatton and tax-paymg, 194-5, 267, 
292, 293· 
testamentary disposition, 62, 119-22. 
-trusts, 42, 121, 240. 
theft, 68, 140, 252. 
thing, meaning of, 40. 
thing-m-1tself, 42, 43· 
thought, and Will not two faculties, 
21-2, 156, 226-7. 
-
meanmg of, vn-nii. 
town and county contrasted, 154-5, 
270-1. 
trade, 132, 147, 151-2. 
tragedy, 81, xoz, 112, 115, 140. 
treattes, 213-1 5· 
Turkey, 52. 
Understanding, Hegel's conceptiOn of 
the, Vli-VIII, 310, 323, 336. 
umversal mmd, see world mmd. 
um,·ersality, nature of, 3 I, 323-4. 
Untergang der 1\'aturstaatm, 221. 
usufruct, 50-I. 
vaccinatiOn, 277. 
value, 51, 59, 66, 69,71-3, 132, I')+-S· 
Vemce, 182. 
virtue, m democracy, 177-8. 
-
nature of, 107-8. 
-
pohucal, ISS· 
wages, contract for, 63. 
war, 209-11, 214-IS, 2I8-I9, 276. 
"ares of sleep, 5· 
\\'artburg Fcsttval, 6. 
weddmg ceremony, II3. 
welfare, (or happmess) of mdtnduals, 
29, 83-7. 89, lo')-to, I23, qs-6. 
I6I, I94. 2I4, 275-6. 
-of the state, 85, x8o, rSs-6, 196, 
2£4-1,5. 
-the end of the state, 281. 
w1ll, nght to make a, sec testamentary 
disposition. 
\\'olfl, C. J., 27. 89. 
\\omen, thetr dtffcrcncc fro111 men, 
I I 4-I 5, 263-.j.. 
"ork, I 26, 128-g. 
world mmd, 3-J.. 36, I6o, 2I6-2o, 2/'J, 
297· 

